Neural Sequential Phrase Grounding (SeqGROUND)

1

ETH Zürich

Pelin Dogan1 Leonid Sigal2,3 Markus Gross1,4
2
University of British Columbia 3 Vector Institute 4 Disney Research
{pelin.dogan, grossm}@inf.ethz.ch, lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end approach for phrase grounding in images. Unlike prior methods that typically attempt
to ground each phrase independently by building an imagetext embedding, our architecture formulates grounding of
multiple phrases as a sequential and contextual process.
Specifically, we encode region proposals and all phrases
into two stacks of LSTM cells, along with so-far grounded
phrase-region pairs. These LSTM stacks collectively capture context for grounding of the next phrase. The resulting architecture, which we call SeqGROUND, supports
many-to-many matching by allowing an image region to be
matched to multiple phrases and vice versa. We show competitive performance on the Flickr30K benchmark dataset
and, through ablation studies, validate the efficacy of sequential grounding as well as individual design choices in
our model architecture.

1. Introduction
In recent years, computer vision has made significant
progress in standard recognition tasks, such as image classification [24], object detection [35, 36], and segmentation
[4]; as well as in more expressive tasks that combine language and vision. Phrase grounding [33, 48, 49, 58], a
task of localizing a given natural language phrase in an image, has recently gained research attention. This constituent
task, that generalizes object detection/segmentation, has a
breadth of applications that span image captioning [17, 18,
52], image retrieval [12], visual question answering [1, 10,
42], and referential expression generation [16, 21, 26, 27].
While significant progress has been made in phrase
grounding, stemming from release of several benchmark
datasets [21, 23, 27, 34] and various neural algorithmic designs, the problem is far from being solved. Most, if not
all, existing phrase grounding models can be categorized
into two classes: attention-based [49] or region-embeddingbased [32, 58]. In the former, neural attention mechanisms
are used to localize the phrases by, typically, predicting
a course-resolution mask (e.g., over the last convolutional

A man with a hat is playing a guitar behind an open guitar case
while sitting between two men.

two men

an open
guitar case

a guitar

a hat

A man

?

?

Figure 1: Illustration of SeqGROUND. The proposed neural architecture performs phrase grounding sequentially. It
uses the previously grounded phrase-image content to inform the next grounding decision (in reverse lexical order).
layer of VGG [39] or another CNN network [14]). In the
latter, the traditional object detection paradigm is followed
by first detecting proposal regions and then measuring a
(typically learned) similarity of each of these regions to the
given language phrase. Importantly, both of these classes
of models consider grounding of individual phrases individually (or independently), lacking the ability to take into
account visual and, often, lingual context and/or reasoning
that may exist among multiple constituent phrases.
Consider image grounding noun phrases from a given
sentence: “A lady sitting on a colorful decoration with
a bouquet of flowers, that match her hair, in her hand.”
Note that while multiple ladies may be present in the
image, the grounding of “a colorful decoration” uniquely
disambiguates to which of these instances the phrase
“A lady” should be grounded to. While contextual reference in the above example is spatial, other context, including visual maybe useful, e.g., between “her hair” and
“a bouquet of flowers”.

4175

