Learning Context Graph for Person Search
Yichao Yan1,2,3,4∗
Qiang Zhang1∗
Bingbing Ni1†
Wendong Zhang2
Minghao Xu1
Xiaokang Yang2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
4
Tencent YouTu Lab, China
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
{yanyichao, zhangqiang2016, nibingbing, diergent, xuminghao118, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification has achieved great progress with
deep convolutional neural networks. However, most previous methods focus on learning individual appearance feature embedding, and it is hard for the models to handle difficult situations with different illumination, large pose variance and occlusion. In this work, we take a step further and
consider employing context information for person search.
For a probe-gallery pair, we first propose a contextual instance expansion module, which employs a relative attention module to search and filter useful context information
in the scene. We also build a graph learning framework
to effectively employ context pairs to update target similarity. These two modules are built on top of a joint detection
and instance feature learning framework, which improves
the discriminativeness of the learned features. The proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art performance on
two widely used person search datasets.

1. Introduction
Persons re-identification (re-id) is a fundamental and important research topic in computer vision. It aims to reidentify individuals across multi-camera surveillance systems. Person re-identification has great potential in applications related with video surveillance, such as searching for
lost people or suspects. These applications are closely related to public security and safety, therefore person re-id has
been receiving increasing attentions over recent years. For
a typical person re-id pipeline, the re-id system is provided
with a target person as probe and aims to search through a
gallery of known ID recordings to find the matched ones.
Person re-id is extremely challenging due to the following reasons. First, distributions of probe and gallery are
∗ Yichao Yan and Qiang Zhang contribute equally to this paper
† the corresponding author is Bingbing Ni

Instance expansion Relative attention

Graph convolution
Image B

Image A

Graph matching
Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed framework.

multi-modal due to different data sources. For example,
the pedestrians can be captured by surveillance cameras or
smart phones. Second, different illuminations and human
poses will increase intra-class variations. Third, inaccurate
detection/tracking, occlusions and background clutters lead
to heavy appearance changes, which further increases the
difficulty for person re-id.
Traditional person re-id tasks only focus on matching
manually cropped image snapshots or video clips across different cameras. These methods consider learning distance
metrics based on individual features. Therefore, one important prerequisite is that the foreground pedestrian should
be precisely detected or annotated in the scene. Otherwise,
inaccurate detection or annotation will bring heavy noise
to individual appearances, which makes this problem setting impractical in real scenarios. To bridge this gap, some
recent works [43, 42] introduce the person search setting
into this domain. The idea is to simultaneously handle two
tasks (i.e., pedestrian detection and person re-identification)
within a single framework. This setting is closer to real12158

