Diversify and Match: A Domain Adaptive Representation Learning Paradigm
for Object Detection
Taekyung Kim Minki Jeong Seunghyeon Kim Seokeon Choi Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea
{tkkim93, rhm033, seunghyeonkim, seokeon, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We introduce a novel unsupervised domain adaptation
approach for object detection. We aim to alleviate the imperfect translation problem of pixel-level adaptations, and
the source-biased discriminativity problem of feature-level
adaptations simultaneously. Our approach is composed of
two stages, i.e., Domain Diversification (DD) and Multidomain-invariant Representation Learning (MRL). At the
DD stage, we diversify the distribution of the labeled data
by generating various distinctive shifted domains from the
source domain. At the MRL stage, we apply adversarial
learning with a multi-domain discriminator to encourage
feature to be indistinguishable among the domains. DD
addresses the source-biased discriminativity, while MRL
mitigates the imperfect image translation. We construct
a structured domain adaptation framework for our learning paradigm and introduce a practical way of DD for implementation. Our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods by a large margin of 3% ∼ 12% in terms of mean
average precision (mAP) on various datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer
vision as well as machine learning. With the recent advances of the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), CNNbased methods [13, 12, 35, 30, 34, 26, 8, 46, 29] have
achieved significant progress in object detection based on
fine benchmarks [10, 27, 25]. Despite the promising results, all of these object detectors suffer from the degenerative problem when applied beyond these benchmarks.
Building datasets for a specific application can temporarily
resolve this problem, nevertheless, the time and monetary
costs incurred when manually annotating such datasets are
not negligible [40, 33]. Moreover, since the intrinsic causes
of the degenerative problem have been avoided instead of
resolved, another generalization issue arises when extending the same application to different environments. To ad-

Figure 1. Overview of our learning paradigm. We illustrate a conceptual diagram of the distributions of the domains on the right
side. S and T represent for the source and the target domain, respectively, and each Ri represents the ith diversified domain.

dress this issue, an unsupervised domain adaptation method
for object detection [3] was recently proposed.
Unsupervised domain adaptation has been studied to
address the degeneration issue between related domains,
which is closely related to the aforementioned degenerative problem. With the rise of the deep neural networks, recent unsupervised deep domain adaptation methods [31, 11, 42, 2, 36, 1, 17] are mainly based on featurelevel adaptation and pixel-level adaptation. Feature-level
adaptation methods [31, 11, 42, 2] align the distributions
of the source and the target domain toward a cross-domain
feature space. These approaches expect the model supervised by the labeled source domain to infer on the target domain effectively. However, the supervision of the inference
layer mainly relies on the source domain only in the featurelevel adaptation methods. Thus, the feature extractor of the
model is enforced to manufacture the features in a way discriminative for the source domain data, which is not suitable
0
12456

