SDRSAC: Semidefinite-Based Randomized Approach for
Robust Point Cloud Registration without Correspondences
Huu M. Le1 , Thanh-Toan Do2,3 , Tuan Hoang1 , and Ngai-Man Cheung1
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 University of Liverpool 3 AIOZ Pte Ltd

Abstract
This paper presents a novel randomized algorithm for
robust point cloud registration without correspondences.
Most existing registration approaches require a set of putative correspondences obtained by extracting invariant descriptors. However, such descriptors could become unreliable in noisy and contaminated settings. In these settings,
methods that directly handle input point sets are preferable.
Without correspondences, however, conventional randomized techniques require a very large number of samples in
order to reach satisfactory solutions. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to address this problem. In particular, our work enables the use of randomized methods for
point cloud registration without the need of putative correspondences. By considering point cloud alignment as a
special instance of graph matching and employing an efficient semi-definite relaxation, we propose a novel sampling
mechanism, in which the size of the sampled subsets can be
larger-than-minimal. Our tight relaxation scheme enables
fast rejection of the outliers in the sampled sets, resulting
in high quality hypotheses. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that our approach outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods. Importantly, our proposed method
serves as a generic framework which can be extended to
problems with known correspondences. 1

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is important in many computer
vision applications, including range scan alignment [37],
3D object recognition and localization [18, 48], large scale
reconstruction [2, 44]. Given two sets of points in threedimensional (3D) Euclidean space, the objective is to search
for the optimal rigid transformation, which comprises a rotation matrix R∗ ∈ SO(3) and a translation vector t∗ ∈ R3 ,
that optimally aligns the two input point sets. In many
practical applications, the input data contains a significant
amount of noise. Moreover, the overlapping region between
1 Source code is available at: https://github.com/intellhave/SDRSAC.

the two point sets can be small, resulting in a large number
of outliers, i.e., non-overlapping points. Therefore, the registration needs to be conducted in a robust manner so that
the final estimates are not affected by the contamination.
3 Nd
s
Formally, let S = {si ∈ R3 }N
i=1 and D = {dj ∈ R }j=1
denote the source and destination (target) point clouds, respectively, the problem of robust rigid registration can be
formulated as
min

R∈SO(3),t∈R3

Ns
X

ρ (kRsi + t − dj k) ,

(1)

i=1

where the notation k · k represents the ℓ2 norm, dj is a point
in the target set D that is closest to the transformed point
Rsi + t, i.e.,
dj = arg min kRsi + t − dk k,
dk ∈D

(2)

and ρ is a robust loss function. Here, SO(3) denotes the
space of rotation matrices. In order for the registration to be
robust, ρ is typically chosen from a set of robust kernels [27,
1, 33]. In this work, we make use of the popular maximum
consensus criterion [26], in which ρ is defined as
(
0 if x ≤ ǫ,
ρ(x) =
(3)
1 otherwise.
The threshold ǫ > 0 is a user-defined parameter that specifies the maximum allowable distance for a correspondence
pair to be considered as an inlier. Intuitively, by solving (1) with ρ defined as per (3), we search for the optimal
alignment (R∗ , t∗ ) that maximizes the set of overlapping
points, where si ∈ S overlaps dj ∈ D if the transformation (R∗ , t∗ ) brings si to a new location that lies within the
ball (dj , ǫ). The problem (1) is an active research topic in
computer vision due to its computational complexity.
Many existing algorithms need to take as input a set
of putative correspondences, which are usually obtained
(as a pre-processing step) by extracting local invariant features on the given point sets, and executing multiple routines of nearest neighbor search to propose initial key1124

