Generalizable Person Re-identification by Domain-Invariant Mapping Network
Jifei Song1

Yongxin Yang2 Yi-Zhe Song3
1
Queen Mary University of London
3
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey

Tao Xiang3,4 Timothy M. Hospedales2,3
2
The University of Edinburgh
4
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge

j.song@qmul.ac.uk, {y.song, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk, {yongxin.yang, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We aim to learn a domain generalizable person reidentification (ReID) model. When such a model is trained
on a set of source domains (ReID datasets collected from
different camera networks), it can be directly applied to any
new unseen dataset for effective ReID without any model
updating. Despite its practical value in real-world deployments, generalizable ReID has seldom been studied. In this
work, a novel deep ReID model termed Domain-Invariant
Mapping Network (DIMN) is proposed. DIMN is designed
to learn a mapping between a person image and its identity classifier, i.e., it produces a classifier using a single
shot. To make the model domain-invariant, we follow a
meta-learning pipeline and sample a subset of source domain training tasks during each training episode. However, the model is significantly different from conventional
meta-learning methods in that: (1) no model updating is
required for the target domain, (2) different training tasks
share a memory bank for maintaining both scalability and
discrimination ability, and (3) it can be used to match an
arbitrary number of identities in a target domain. Extensive experiments on a newly proposed large-scale ReID domain generalization benchmark show that our DIMN significantly outperforms alternative domain generalization or
meta-learning methods.

1. Introduction
The problem of person re-identification (ReID) has been
studied intensively. A ReID model is used to match people
across non-overlapping camera views. Given image pairs
of the same person across views, most recent ReID models
apply deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn
a feature embedding space where people can be matched
based on feature distances [4, 6, 17, 19, 29, 42, 46, 51,
54, 59]. These models are trained and tested on the same
dataset. In practice, however, if we consider each dataset
as a domain, there are often domaiDIMNn gaps, because
different datasets are often collected in very different vi-

sual scenes (e.g., indoors/outdoors, shopping malls, traffic
junctions and airports). Deep ReID models that are directly
applied to new dataset/domain without model updating are
known to suffer from considerable performance degradation [9, 30, 50, 52, 61], thus suggesting model overfitting
and poor domain generalization.
In this paper, we aim to learn domain generalizable
ReID models. Such a model is trained on a set of source
domains/datasets, and should generalize to any new unseen dataset for effective ReID without any model updating. Such a model thus needs to solve a domain generalization problem with different class (person identity) label spaces for different datasets/domains. A domain generalizable ReID model has great value for real-world largescale deployment. Specifically, when a customer purchases
a ReID system for a specific camera network, the system
is expected to work out-of-the-box, without the need to go
through the tedious process of data collection, annotation
and model updating/fine-tuning.
Surprisingly, there is very little prior study of this topic.
Existing ReID works occasionally evaluate their models’
cross-dataset generalization, but no specific design is made
to make the models more generalizable. Recently, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods for ReID [9,
30, 50, 52, 61] have been studied to adapt a ReID model
from source to target domain. However, UDA models update using unlabeled target domain data, so data collection
and model update are still required. Beyond ReID, the problem of domain generalization (DG) has been investigated
in deep learning, with some recent few-shot meta-learning
approaches also adapted for DG. However, existing DG
methods [20, 34, 23, 39] assume that the source and target domain have the same label space; whilst existing metalearning models [49, 49, 10, 35, 40] assume a fixed number
of classes for target domains and are trained specifically for
that number using source data. They thus have limited efficacy for ReID, where target domains have a different and
variable number of identities.
Our solution to generalizable ReID is based on a novel
Domain-Invariant Mapping Network(DIMN). DIMN is de4321
719

