Adversarial Inference for Multi-Sentence Video Description
Jae Sung Park1 , Marcus Rohrbach2 , Trevor Darrell1 , Anna Rohrbach1
1
University of California, Berkeley, 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
While significant progress has been made in the image
captioning task, video description is still in its infancy due
to the complex nature of video data. Generating multisentence descriptions for long videos is even more challenging. Among the main issues are the fluency and coherence of the generated descriptions, and their relevance to
the video. Recently, reinforcement and adversarial learning
based methods have been explored to improve the image
captioning models; however, both types of methods suffer
from a number of issues, e.g. poor readability and high redundancy for RL and stability issues for GANs. In this work,
we instead propose to apply adversarial techniques during
inference, designing a discriminator which encourages better multi-sentence video description. In addition, we find
that a multi-discriminator “hybrid” design, where each discriminator targets one aspect of a description, leads to the
best results. Specifically, we decouple the discriminator to
evaluate on three criteria: 1) visual relevance to the video,
2) language diversity and fluency, and 3) coherence across
sentences. Our approach results in more accurate, diverse,
and coherent multi-sentence video descriptions, as shown
by automatic as well as human evaluation on the popular
ActivityNet Captions dataset. 1

1. Introduction
Being able to automatically generate a natural language
description for a video has fascinated researchers since the
early 2000s [27]. Despite the high interest in this task and
ongoing emergence of new datasets [13, 29, 75] and approaches [67, 69, 76], it remains a highly challenging problem. Consider the outputs of the three recent video description methods on an example video from the ActivityNet
Captions dataset [3, 29] in Figure 1. We notice that there
are multiple issues with these descriptions, in addition to the
errors with respect to the video content: there are semantic inconsistencies and lack of diversity within sentences,
as well as redundancies across sentences. There are multiple challenges towards more accurate and natural video
1 https://github.com/jamespark3922/adv-inf.

Figure 1: Comparison of the state-of-the-art video description approaches, Transformer [76], VideoStory [13], MoveForwardTell [67], and our proposed Adversarial Inference.
Our approach generates more interesting and accurate descriptions with less redundancy. Video from ActivityNet
Captions [3, 29] with three segments (left to right); red/bold
indicates content errors, blue/italic indicates repetitive patterns, underscore highlights more interesting phrases.
description. One of the issues is the size of the available
training data, which, despite the recent progress, is limited. Besides, video representations are more complex than
e.g. image representations, and require modeling temporal
structure jointly with the semantics of the content. Moreover, describing videos with multiple sentences, requires
correctly recognizing a sequence of events in a video, maintaining linguistic coherence and avoiding redundancy.
Another important factor is the target metric used in the
description models. Most works still exclusively rely on the
automatic metrics, e.g. METEOR [31], despite the evidence
that they are not consistent with human judgments [24, 57].
Further, some recent works propose to explicitly optimize
for the sentence metrics using reinforcement learning based
methods [35, 46]. These techniques have become quite
widespread, both for image and video description [1, 67].
16598

