ECC: Platform-Independent Energy-Constrained Deep Neural Network
Compression via a Bilinear Regression Model
Haichuan Yang1 , Yuhao Zhu1 , and Ji Liu2,1
1

University of Rochester, Rochester, USA
2
Kwai Seattle AI Lab, Seattle, USA

Abstract
Many DNN-enabled vision applications constantly operate under severe energy constraints such as unmanned
aerial vehicles, Augmented Reality headsets, and smartphones. Designing DNNs that can meet a stringent energy
budget is becoming increasingly important. This paper proposes ECC, a framework that compresses DNNs to meet
a given energy constraint while minimizing accuracy loss.
The key idea of ECC is to model the DNN energy consumption via a novel bilinear regression function. The energy
estimate model allows us to formulate DNN compression
as a constrained optimization that minimizes the DNN loss
function over the energy constraint. The optimization problem, however, has nontrivial constraints. Therefore, existing deep learning solvers do not apply directly. We propose an optimization algorithm that combines the essence
of the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM)
framework with gradient-based learning algorithms. The
algorithm decomposes the original constrained optimization into several subproblems that are solved iteratively and
efficiently. ECC is also portable across different hardware
platforms without requiring hardware knowledge. Experiments show that ECC achieves higher accuracy under the
same or lower energy budget compared to state-of-the-art
resource-constrained DNN compression techniques.

1. Introduction
Computer vision tasks are increasingly relying on deep
neural networks (DNNs). DNNs have demonstrated superior results compared to classic methods that rely on handcrafted features. However, neural networks are often several orders of magnitude more computation intensive than
conventional methods [34, 45]. As a result, DNN-based
vision algorithms incur high latency and consume excessive energy, posing significant challenges to many latency-

sensitive and energy-constrained scenarios in the real-world
such as Augmented Reality (AR), autonomous drones, and
mobile robots. For instance, running face detection continuously on a mobile AR device exhausts the battery in
less than 45 minutes [20]. Reducing the latency and energy
consumption of DNN-based vision algorithms not only improves the user satisfaction of today’s vision applications,
but also fuels the next-generation vision applications that
require ever higher resolution and frame rate.
Both the computer vision and hardware architecture
communities have been actively engaged in improving the
compute-efficiency of DNNs, of which a prominent technique is compression (e.g., pruning). Network compression removes unimportant network weights, and thus reduces the amount of arithmetic operations. However, prior
work [38, 39, 41] has shown that the number of non-zero
weights in a network, or the network sparsity, does not directly correlate with execution latency and energy consumption. Thus, improving the network sparsity does not necessarily lead to latency and energy reduction.
Recognizing that sparsity is a poor, indirect metric for
the actual metrics such as latency and energy consumption,
lots of recent compression work has started directly optimizing for network latency [39, 11] and energy consumption [38], and achieve lower latency and/or energy consumption compare to the indirect approaches. Although
different in algorithms and implementation details, these efforts share one common idea: they try to search the sparsity
bound of each DNN layer in a way that the whole model
satisfies the energy/latency constraint while minimizing the
loss. In other words, they iteratively search the layer sparsity, layer by layer, until a given latency/energy goal is met.
We refer to them as search-based approaches.
The effectiveness of the search-based approaches rests
on how close to optimal they can find the per-layer sparsity combination. Different methods differ in how they
search for the optimal sparsity combination. For instance,

11206

