CRAVES: Controlling Robotic Arm with a Vision-based Economic System
Yiming Zuo1∗, Weichao Qiu2∗, Lingxi Xie2,4 , Fangwei Zhong3 , Yizhou Wang3,5,6 , Alan L. Yuille2
1
2
3
Tsinghua University
Johns Hopkins University
Peking University
4
5
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc. Peng Cheng Laboratory 6 DeepWise AI Lab
{zuoyiming17,qiuwch,198808xc,zfw1226,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com,

Abstract
Training a robotic arm to accomplish real-world tasks
has been attracting increasing attention in both academia
and industry. This work discusses the role of computer vision algorithms in this field. We focus on low-cost arms on
which no sensors are equipped and thus all decisions are
made upon visual recognition, e.g., real-time 3D pose estimation. This requires annotating a lot of training data,
which is not only time-consuming but also laborious.
In this paper, we present an alternative solution, which
uses a 3D model to create a large number of synthetic data,
trains a vision model in this virtual domain, and applies it
to real-world images after domain adaptation. To this end,
we design a semi-supervised approach, which fully leverages the geometric constraints among keypoints. We apply
an iterative algorithm for optimization. Without any annotations on real images, our algorithm generalizes well and
produces satisfying results on 3D pose estimation, which is
evaluated on two real-world datasets. We also construct
a vision-based control system for task accomplishment, for
which we train a reinforcement learning agent in a virtual
environment and apply it to the real-world. Moreover, our
approach, with merely a 3D model being required, has the
potential to generalize to other types of multi-rigid-body dynamic systems.

1. Introduction
Precise and agile robotic arms have been widely used
in the assembly industry for decades, but the adaptation
of robots to domestic use is still a challenging topic. This
task can be made much easier if vision input are provided
and well utilized by the robots. A typical example lies
in autonomous driving [8]. In the area of robotics, researchers have paid more and more attentions to visionbased robots and collected large-scale datasets, e.g., for object grasping [19][29] and block stacking [12]. However,
∗ This work was done when the first author was an intern at the Johns

Hopkins University. The first two authors contributed equally.

yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn

the high cost of configuring a robotic system largely limits
researchers from accessing these interesting topics.
This work aims at equipping a robotic system with computer vision algorithms, e.g., predicting its real-time status
using an external camera, so that researchers can control
them with a high flexibility, e.g., mimicking the behavior of
human operators. In particular, we build our platform upon
a low-cost robotic arm named OWI-535 which can be purchased from Amazon1 for less than $40. The downside is
that this arm has no sensors and thus it totally relies on vision inputs2 – on the other hand, we can expect vision inputs
to provide complementary information in sensor-equipped
robotic systems. We chose this arm for two reasons. (i)
Accessibility: the cheap price reduces experimental budgets and makes our results easy to be reproduced by lab researchers (poor vision people :( ). (ii) Popularity: users
around the world uploaded videos to YouTube recording
how this arm was manually controlled to complete various tasks, e.g., picking up tools, stacking up dices, etc.
These videos were captured under substantial environmental changes including viewpoint, lighting condition, occlusion and blur. This raises real-world challenges which are
very different from research done in a lab environment.
Hence, the major technical challenge is to train a vision
algorithm to estimate the 3D pose of the robotic arm.
Mathematically, given an input image x, a vision model
M : p = h(x; θ) is used to predict p, the real-time 3D
pose of the arm, where θ denotes the learnable parameters,
e.g., in the context of deep learning [17], network weights.
Training such a vision model often requires a considerable
amount of labeled data. One option is to collect a large
number of images under different environments and annotate them using crowd-sourcing, but we note a significant
limitation as these efforts, which take hundreds of hours, are
often not transferable from one robotic system to another.
In this paper, we suggest an alternative solution which bor1 https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0017OFRCY/
2 Even when the initialized status of the arm is provided and each action
is recorded, we cannot accurately compute its real-time status because each
order is executed with large variation – even the battery level can affect.

14214

