Progressive Pose Attention Transfer for Person Image Generation
Zhen Zhu1∗, Tengteng Huang1∗, Baoguang Shi2 , Miao Yu1 , Bofei Wang3 , Xiang Bai1†
1
Huazhong Univ. Sci. and Tech., 2 Microsoft, Redmond, 3 ZTE Corporation
{zzhu, huangtengtng, xbai}@hust.edu.cn
shibaoguang@gmail.com, zealyu@qq.com, wang.bofei@zte.com.cn

Target poses

Abstract
This paper proposes a new generative adversarial network for pose transfer, i.e., transferring the pose of a
given person to a target pose. The generator of the network comprises a sequence of Pose-Attentional Transfer
Blocks that each transfers certain regions it attends to, generating the person image progressively. Compared with
those in previous works, our generated person images possess better appearance consistency and shape consistency
with the input images, thus significantly more realisticlooking. The efficacy and efficiency of the proposed network are validated both qualitatively and quantitatively
on Market-1501 and DeepFashion. Furthermore, the proposed architecture can generate training images for person re-identification, alleviating data insufficiency. Codes
and models are available at: https://github.com/
tengteng95/Pose-Transfer.git.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in generating images of
non-rigid objects that often possess a large variation of deformation and articulation. Specifically, we focus on transferring a person from one pose to another as depicted in
Fig.1. The problem, first introduced by [21] as pose transfer, is valuable in many tasks such as video generation with
a sequence of poses [38] and data augmentation for person
re-identification [47].
Pose transfer can be exceptionally challenging, particularly when given only the partial observation of the person.
As exemplified in Fig. 1, the generator needs to infer the
unobserved body parts in order to generate the target poses
and views. Adding to the challenge, images of different
poses under different views can be drastically different in
appearance. This inevitably demands the generator to capture the large variations possessed by the image distribution.
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Condition
image

Generated images

Figure 1: Generated examples by our method based on different target
poses. Zoom in for better details.

Therefore, even with the strong learning capabilities of deep
neural networks, recent methods [21, 34, 22, 5] often fail to
produce robust results.
We start with the perspective that the images of all the
possible poses and views of a certain person constitute a
manifold, which is also suggested in previous works [4, 24].
To transfer pose is to go from point px on the manifold to
another point py , both indexed by their respective poses.
In this perspective, the aforementioned challenges can be
attributed to the complex structure of the manifold on the
global level. However, the structure manifold becomes simpler on a local level. This transition happens when we restrict the variation of pose to a small range. For example, it
is hard to transfer pose from sitting to standing, but much
simpler to only raise a straight arm to a different angle.
This insight motivates us to take a progressive pose transfer scheme. In contrast to the one-step transfer scheme
adopted in many previous works [5, 34], we propose to
transfer a condition pose by transferring through a sequence
of intermediate pose representations before reaching the target. The transfer is carried out by a sequence of PoseAttentional Transfer Blocks (PATBs), implemented by neural networks. This scheme allows each transfer block to
perform a local transfer on the manifold, therefore avoiding the challenge of capturing the complex structure of the
global manifold.
Each PATB performs the transfer in a pose-attentional

2347

