Blind Geometric Distortion Correction on Images Through Deep Learning
Xiaoyu Li1
1

Bo Zhang1

Pedro V. Sander1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Jing Liao2

City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
We propose the first general framework to automatically
correct different types of geometric distortion in a single
input image. Our proposed method employs convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) trained by using a large synthetic
distortion dataset to predict the displacement field between
distorted images and corrected images. A model fitting
method uses the CNN output to estimate the distortion parameters, achieving a more accurate prediction. The final
corrected image is generated based on the predicted flow
using an efficient, high-quality resampling method. Experimental results demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms
traditional correction methods, and allows for interesting
applications such as distortion transfer, distortion exaggeration, and co-occurring distortion correction.

1. Introduction
Geometric distortion is a common problem in digital imagery and occurs in a wide range of applications. It can be
caused by the acquisition system (e.g., optical lens, imaging
sensor), imaging environment (e.g., motions of the platform
or target, viewing geometry) and image processing operations (e.g., image warping). For example, camera lenses
often suffer from optical aberrations, causing barrel distortion (B), common in wide angle lenses, where the image
magnification decreases with distance from the optical axis,
and pincushion distortion (Pi), where it increases. While
lens distortions are intrinsic to the camera, extrinsic geometric distortions like rotation (R), shear (S) and perspective distortion (P) may also arise from the improper pose
or the movement of cameras. Furthermore, a wide number
of distortion effects, such as wave distortion (W), can be
generated by image processing tools. We aim to design an
algorithm that can automatically correct images with these
distortions and can be generalized to a wide range of distortions easily (see Figure 2).
Geometric distortion correction is highly desired in both
photography and computer vision applications. For exam-

Figure 1. Our proposed learning-based method can blindly correct
images with different types of geometric distortion (first row) providing high-quality results (second row).

ple, lens distortion violates the pin-hole camera model assumption which many algorithms rely on. Second, remote
sensing images usually contain geometric distortions that
cannot be used with maps directly before correction [34].
Third, skew detection and correction is an important preprocessing step in document analysis and has a direct effect on the reliability and efficiency of the segmentation
and feature extraction stages [1]. Finally, photos often contain slanted buildings, walls, and horizon lines due to improper camera rotation. Our visual system expects manmade structures to be straight, and horizon lines to be horizontal [24].
Completely blind geometric distortion correction is a
challenging problem, which is under-constrained given that
the input is only a single distorted image. Therefore, many
correction methods have been proposed by using multiple
images or additional information. Multiple views methods [4, 15, 23] for radial lens distortion use point correspondences of two or more images. These methods can achieve
impressive results. However, they cannot be applied when
multiple images under camera motion are unavailable.
To address these limitations, distortion correction from
a single image has also been explored. Methods for radial
lens distortion based on the plumb line approach [39, 5, 33]
assume that straight lines are projected to circular arcs in
the image plane caused by radial lens distortion. Therefore, accurate line detection is a very important aspect for
the robustness and flexibility of these methods. Correction
methods for other distortions [13, 24, 7, 31] also rely on

4855

