Generalising Fine-Grained Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Kaiyue Pang1,2∗
Ke Li1,3∗
Yongxin Yang1
Honggang Zhang3
Timothy M. Hospedales1,4
Tao Xiang1
Yi-Zhe Song1
2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey
Queen Mary University of London
3
4
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
The University of Edinburgh
kaiyue.pang@qmul.ac.uk, {yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
{like1990, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR)
addresses matching specific photo instance using free-hand
sketch as a query modality. Existing models aim to learn
an embedding space in which sketch and photo can be directly compared. While successful, they require instancelevel pairing within each coarse-grained category as annotated training data. Since the learned embedding space is
domain-specific, these models do not generalise well across
categories. This limits the practical applicability of FGSBIR. In this paper, we identify cross-category generalisation for FG-SBIR as a domain generalisation problem,
and propose the first solution. Our key contribution is a
novel unsupervised learning approach to model a universal manifold of prototypical visual sketch traits. This manifold can then be used to paramaterise the learning of a
sketch/photo representation. Model adaptation to novel categories then becomes automatic via embedding the novel
sketch in the manifold and updating the representation and
retrieval function accordingly. Experiments on the two
largest FG-SBIR datasets, Sketchy and QMUL-Shoe-V2,
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in enabling crosscategory generalisation of FG-SBIR.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR)
aims to find a specific photo instance given a human freehand sketch input. This has been actively studied in recent years due to its challenge as a vision problem, and
commercial relevance [19, 36, 24, 20, 41]. The key challenge is the sketch/photo domain gap. Photos are perspective projections of visual objects represented as dense pixels, while sketches are subjectively and abstractly rendered
iconic line-drawings.
∗ Equal Contribution

Recent FG-SBIR methods [24, 36, 28, 22] address this
issue by learning a deep network embedding of sketch and
photo that makes them directly comparable. This embedding is often trained by a triplet ranking loss to ensure
that the network embeds positive pairs nearby, and negative pairs farther apart. This line of work has made great
progress, with state-of-the-art approaching human performance [22] on the Sketchy benchmark [24].
Nevertheless, existing work has thus far implicitly assumed that instance-level annotations of positive and negative pairs are available for every coarse category to be evaluated. This assumption limits the practical applicability of
FG-SBIR. More specifically, as we shall show in this paper, in practice FG-SBIR generalises very poorly if training
and testing categories are disjoint. This is of course unsatisfactory for potential users of FG-SBIR such as e-commerce,
where it would be desirable to train a FG-SBIR system once
on an initial set of product categories, and then have it deployed directly to newly added product categories – without needing to collect and annotate new data and retrain the
FG-SBIR model. Compared to other category-level tasks
such as object recognition in photo images, this annotation
barrier is particularly high for FG-SBIR as instance-specific
sketches are expensive and slow to collect.
To understand why the existing FG-SBIR models have
limited cross-category generalisation ability, consider that
the task of FG-SBIR as essentially binary classification – to
differentiate corresponding and non-corresponding sketchphoto tuples. In this sense, a change of category is a
domain-shift [8] from the perspective of the machine learning model trained to perform matching. For example, a
model trained on fine-grained matching of car photos and
sketches, would struggle to perform fine-grained matching
of bicycle images, due to inexperience with handlebars and
saddles. Exposed to such out-of-sample data, the triplettrained sketch/photo embedding networks may no longer
place matching images nearby and vice-versa. Having identified the challenge as one as domain-shift, this suggests two

677

