Instance Segmentation by Jointly Optimizing Spatial Embeddings and
Clustering Bandwidth
Davy Neven Bert De Brabandere Marc Proesmans Luc Van Gool
Dept. ESAT, Center for Processing Speech and Images
KU Leuven, Belgium
{firstname.lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods
are not suited for real-time applications like autonomous
driving, which require fast execution times at high accuracy. Although the currently dominant proposal-based
methods have high accuracy, they are slow and generate
masks at a fixed and low resolution. Proposal-free methods, by contrast, can generate masks at high resolution and
are often faster, but fail to reach the same accuracy as the
proposal-based methods. In this work we propose a new
clustering loss function for proposal-free instance segmentation. The loss function pulls the spatial embeddings of
pixels belonging to the same instance together and jointly
learns an instance-specific clustering bandwidth, maximizing the intersection-over-union of the resulting instance
mask. When combined with a fast architecture, the network
can perform instance segmentation in real-time while maintaining a high accuracy. We evaluate our method on the
challenging Cityscapes benchmark and achieve top results
(5% improvement over Mask R-CNN) at more than 10 fps
on 2MP images.1

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our loss function encourages pixels to point into an optimal, object-specific region around the object’s center, maximizing
the intersection-over-union of each object’s mask. For big objects,
this region will be bigger, relaxing the loss for edge-pixels, which
are further away from the center. Bottom left displays the learned
offset vectors, encoded in color. Bottom right displays the displaced pixels, displaced with the learned offset vectors. Instances
are recovered by clustering around each center with the learned,
optimal clustering region.

Semantic instance segmentation is the task of locating
all objects in an image, assigning each object to a specific class and generating a pixel-perfect mask for each one,
perfectly delineating their shape. This contrasts with the
standard bounding-box detection methods, where each object is represented by a crude rectangular box. Since having a binary mask for each object is desired (and necessary) in many applications, ranging from autonomous driving and robotics applications to photo-editing/analyzing applications, instance segmentation remains an important research topic.

Currently, the dominant method for instance segmentation is based on a detect-and-segment approach, where objects are detected using a bounding-box detection method
and then a binary mask is generated for each one. Despite
many attempts in the past, the Mask R-CNN framework was
the first one to achieve outstanding results on many benchmarks, and is still the most used method for instance segmentation to date. While this method provides good results in terms of accuracy, it generates low resolution masks
which are not always desirable (e.g. for photo-editing applications) and operates at a low frame rate, making it impractical for real-time applications such as autonomous driving.

1 For experiments on additional datasets we refer to the arXiv version
of this paper.

Another popular branch of instance segmentation methods are proposal-free methods, which are mostly based on
18837

