AdaFrame: Adaptive Frame Selection for Fast Video Recognition
Zuxuan Wu1∗ , Caiming Xiong2† , Chih-Yao Ma3 , Richard Socher2 , Larry S. Davis1
1
University of Maryland, 2 Salesforce Research, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Birthday

We present AdaFrame, a framework that adaptively
selects relevant frames on a per-input basis for fast video
recognition. AdaFrame contains a Long Short-Term Memory network augmented with a global memory that provides context information for searching which frames to use
over time. Trained with policy gradient methods, AdaFrame
generates a prediction, determines which frame to observe
next, and computes the utility, i.e., expected future rewards,
of seeing more frames at each time step. At testing time,
AdaFrame exploits predicted utilities to achieve adaptive
lookahead inference such that the overall computational
costs are reduced without incurring a decrease in accuracy.
Extensive experiments are conducted on two large-scale
video benchmarks, FCVID and ActivityNet. AdaFrame
matches the performance of using all frames with only 8.21
and 8.65 frames on FCVID and ActivityNet, respectively.
We further qualitatively demonstrate learned frame usage
can indicate the difficulty of making classification decisions; easier samples need fewer frames while harder ones
require more, both at instance-level within the same class
and at class-level among different categories.

1. Introduction
The explosive increase of Internet videos, driven by the
ubiquity of mobile devices and sharing activities on social
networks, is phenomenal: around 300 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every minute of every day! Such growth
demands effective and scalable approaches that can recognize actions and events in videos automatically for tasks like
indexing, summarization, recommendation, etc. Most existing work focuses on learning robust video representations
to boost accuracy [24, 29, 19, 28], while limited effort has
been devoted to improving efficiency [31, 38].
State-of-the-art video recognition frameworks rely on
the aggregation of prediction scores from uniformly sam∗ Most of the work is done when the author was an intern at Sales-

force.
† Corresponding author.

Pitching
Tent

Making
Cake

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of our approach.
AdaFrame aims to select a small number of frames to make
correct predictions conditioned on different input videos so
as to reduce the overall computational cost.
pled frames 1 , if not every single frame [16], during inference. While uniform sampling has been shown to be effective [19, 28, 29], the analysis of even a single frame is still
computationally expensive due to the use of high-capacity
backbone networks such as ResNet [7], ResNext [34], InceptionNet [22], etc. On the other hand, uniform sampling
assumes information is evenly distributed over time, which
could therefore incorporate noisy background frames that
are not relevant to the class of interest.
It is also worth noting that the difficulty of making recognition decisions relates to the category to be classified—
one frame might be sufficient to recognize most static objects (e.g., “dogs” and “cats”) or scenes (e.g., “forests” or
“sea”) while more frames are required to differentiate subtle actions like “drinking coffee” and “drinking beer”. This
also holds for samples even within the same category due
to large intra-class variations. For example, a “playing basketball” event can be captured from multiple view points
(e.g., different locations of a gymnasium), occur at different
locations (e.g., indoor or outdoor), with different players
(e.g., professionals or amateurs). As a result, the number of
frames required to recognize the same event are different.
With this in mind, to achieve efficient video recognition,
we explore how to automatically adjust computation within
a network on a per-video basis such that—conditioned on
different input videos, a small number of informative frames
1 Here, we use frame as a general term, and it can be in the forms of
a single RGB image, stacked RGB images (snippets), and stacked optical
flow images.

11278

