DM-GAN: Dynamic Memory Generative Adversarial Networks for
Text-to-Image Synthesis

1

Minfeng Zhu1,3∗
Pingbo Pan3
Wei Chen1
Yi Yang2,3†
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Baidu Research
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney

{minfeng zhu@, chenwei@cad}zju.edu.cn

{pingbo.pan@student,Yi.Yang@}uts.edu.au

This small bird has This bird has a
People at the park The bathroom with
a yellow crown
blue crown with
flying kites and
the white tile has
and a white belly. white throat and
walking.
been cleaned.
brown secondaries.

1. Introduction
The last few years have seen remarkable growth in the
use of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [4] for
image and video generation. Recently, GANs have been
∗ This work was done when Minfeng Zhu was visiting the University of
Technology Sydney.
† Part of this work was done when Yi Yang was visiting Baidu Research
during his Professional Experience Program.

Synthesized images

In this paper, we focus on generating realistic images
from text descriptions. Current methods first generate an
initial image with rough shape and color, and then refine
the initial image to a high-resolution one. Most existing
text-to-image synthesis methods have two main problems.
(1) These methods depend heavily on the quality of the
initial images. If the initial image is not well initialized,
the following processes can hardly refine the image to a
satisfactory quality. (2) Each word contributes a different level of importance when depicting different image contents, however, unchanged text representation is used in existing image refinement processes. In this paper, we propose the Dynamic Memory Generative Adversarial Network
(DM-GAN) to generate high-quality images. The proposed
method introduces a dynamic memory module to refine fuzzy
image contents, when the initial images are not well generated. A memory writing gate is designed to select the important text information based on the initial image content,
which enables our method to accurately generate images
from the text description. We also utilize a response gate
to adaptively fuse the information read from the memories
and the image features. We evaluate the DM-GAN model
on the Caltech-UCSD Birds 200 dataset and the Microsoft
Common Objects in Context dataset. Experimental results
demonstrate that our DM-GAN model performs favorably
against the state-of-the-art approaches.

Real images

Abstract

Figure 1. Examples of text-to-image synthesis by our DM-GAN.

widely used to generate photo-realistic images according to
text descriptions (see Figure 1). Fully understanding the relationship between visual contents and natural languages is
an essential step towards artificial intelligence, e.g., image
search and video understanding [33]. Multi-stage methods
[28, 30, 31] first generate low-resolution initial images and
then refine the initial images to high-resolution ones.
Although these multi-stage methods achieve remarkable
progress, there remain two problems. First, the generation
result depends heavily on the quality of initial images. The
image refinement process cannot generate high-quality images, if the initial images are badly generated. Second, each
word in an input sentence has a different level of information depicting the image content. Current models utilize
the same word representations in different image refinement
processes, which makes the refinement process ineffective.
The image information should be taken into account to determine the importance of every word for refinement.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Dynamic Memory
Generative Adversarial Network (DM-GAN) to address the
aforementioned issues. For the first issue, we propose to
add a memory mechanism to cope with badly-generated initial images. Recent work [27] has shown the memory network’s ability to encode knowledge sources. Inspired by
15802

