3D Hand Shape and Pose from Images in the Wild
Adnane Boukhayma1 , Rodrigo de Bem1,2 , Philip H.S. Torr1
1

2

University of Oxford, UK
Federal University of Rio Grande, Brazil

{adnane.boukhayma, rodrigo.andradedebem, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present in this work the first end-to-end deep learning based method that predicts both 3D hand shape and
pose from RGB images in the wild. Our network consists
of the concatenation of a deep convolutional encoder, and a
fixed model-based decoder. Given an input image, and optionally 2D joint detections obtained from an independent
CNN, the encoder predicts a set of hand and view parameters. The decoder has two components: A pre-computed
articulated mesh deformation hand model that generates
a 3D mesh from the hand parameters, and a re-projection
module controlled by the view parameters that projects the
generated hand into the image domain. We show that using the shape and pose prior knowledge encoded in the
hand model within a deep learning framework yields stateof-the-art performance in 3D pose prediction from images
on standard benchmarks, and produces geometrically valid
and plausible 3D reconstructions. Additionally, we show
that training with weak supervision in the form of 2D joint
annotations on datasets of images in the wild, in conjunction with full supervision in the form of 3D joint annotations
on limited available datasets allows for good generalization
to 3D shape and pose predictions on images in the wild.

1. Introduction
Human hand pose estimation and reconstruction in 3D
is a long standing problem in the computer vision and
graphics communities that has applications in various domains such as virtual and augmented reality and humanmachine interaction [35, 15, 46, 13]. With the abundance
of affordable commodity depth cameras, the research literature focused naturally more on estimating 3D hand pose
through depth observations (e.g. [62, 66, 10, 36, 61]), and
many works also explored this problem in multi-view setups
[33, 65, 41, 8, 31, 50]. When it comes to a monocular color

input, the problem becomes inherently ill posed due to the
increased depth and scale ambiguities, but that did not prevent several researchers [4, 9, 51, 57, 63, 39] from attempting to solve it in the past albeit with limited results. More
recently, the unprecedented success of deep learning on
similar tasks motivated new work with encouraging results
for 3D hand pose from single images [68, 27, 7, 47, 14].
Nevertheless, this task remains particularly difficult: Unlike clothed human bodies or faces, hands have an almost
uniform appearance and lack characteristic local features
such as eyes and mouths in faces. Unlike bodies, they
can have more complex pose configurations and they can
be captured from a much wider range of views. Furthermore when observed in the wild, as in dataset M PII +N ZSL
[44] (Figure 9), their images usually contain external occlusion, self-occlusion, clutter and blur due to their motion.
Besides, hands are often small in size compared to the scene
so cropped patches around them have low resolutions.
The main obstacles for 3D hand pose estimation from
images with deep learning include: (i) The lack of large
datasets annotated with reliable 3D ground-truth and (ii) the
incapability of the current 3D annotated datasets to make
networks generalize greatly to challenging images in the
wild.
The first point is tackled by the literature through training with synthetic images [68], populating datasets by transforming synthetic images into real looking ones [27], or
leveraging auxiliary types of data in training like depth
[7, 47]. We propose a different and simple yet efficient
approach to alleviate both challenges (i) and (ii) by circumventing heavy dependence of 3D data in training: Instead of relying on images paired with 3D joint annotations
to learn a prior on hand geometry, we exploit a recently
proposed differentiable articulated mesh deformation hand
model [40] built with linear blend skinning [18], and we
reformulate the prediction problem into a learning-based
model fitting, that can be trained using both 3D and 2D
joint annotations. Training with 2D annotated images al110843

