Polynomial Representation for Persistence Diagram
Zhichao Wang1∗
1

Qian Li2∗

Gang Li3

Guandong Xu2

School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Australia
2
3

Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia

School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3216, Australia

zhichao.wang2@unsw.edu.au

{qian.li, guandong.xu}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Persistence diagram (PD) has been considered as a compact descriptor for topological data analysis (TDA). Unfortunately, PD cannot be directly used in machine learning
methods since it is a multiset of points. Recent efforts have
been devoted to transforming PDs into vectors to accommodate machine learning methods. However, they share
one common shortcoming: the mapping of PDs to a feature
representation depends on a pre-defined polynomial. To address this limitation, this paper proposes an algebraic representation for PDs, i.e., polynomial representation. In this
work, we discover a set of general polynomials that vanish on vectorized PDs and extract the task-adapted feature
representation from these polynomials. We also prove two
attractive properties of the proposed polynomial representation, i.e., stability and linear separability. Experiments
also show that our method compares favorably with stateof-the-art TDA methods.

1. Introduction
As a bridge between algebraic topology and statistical
methods, topological data analysis (TDA) extracts the topological features that are complementary to statistical quantities [33, 36]. In the past several years, TDA has found many
applications in areas including bioinformatics [6, 31, 38],
computer vision [5, 14, 25, 28], audio signals [4, 29] and
natural language processing [18, 40]. As one common
approach to TDA, persistent homology captures the characteristics of data by the scales at which topological features (connected component, cycle, void, etc.) are born and
the scales at which they die. A standard way to represent
the persistent homology is through the persistence diagram
(PD), which encodes the lifespan of every topological feature [13, 36]. However, PD cannot be straightforwardly
∗ Equal contribution

gang.li@deakin.edu.au

adopted in standard machine learning methods, because it
is not in the vector space [1, 7].
Related work. To address this issue, considerable efforts have been devoted to mapping PDs into a vector space,
and existing work can be categorized into three classes.
Methods in the first class express PDs in the Hilbert space
via kernel functions [7, 10, 26, 35]. For instance, a multiscale heat kernel is defined for PDs through a L2 -valued
feature mapping, which thus can be used with the support
vector machine (SVM) [35]. Alternately, a weighted Gaussian kernel is proposed to treat a PD as a discrete measure,
and to control the effect of persistence in the PD [26]. The
sliced Wasserstein kernel is also a Gaussian-type kernel defined by a modified Wasserstein distance between PDs [7].
Methods in the second class directly vectorize PDs in the
Euclidean space [1, 2, 11, 15]. For instance, the persistence image [1] constructs Rn representation by integrating
a weighted density estimate of the PD into a persistence surface. Persistence square-root representation [2] models the
PD as a 2D probability density function on the tangent vector space of Riemannian manifold. Deep neural networks is
adopted to vectorizes PDs by defining input layer with stable property [24]. Methods in the third class represent PDs
in the function space. For example, persistence landscapes
(PLs) [11] are developed to construct the piecewise linear
functions on PDs for further data analysis tasks. Another
work [15] transforms PDs into complex polynomials of the
function space.
Above vectorization methods consider the resulting vectors of PDs as the feature inputs for machine learning, and
some of them achieve provable stability under the perturbations in PDs. However, most existing works focus on
defining the polynomials with specific form (e.g. kernel
map) for PDs, which may be suboptimum. Instead of predefined polynomials, how to extract more flexible or preferable polynomials from PDs for constructing discriminative
features remains largely unexplored.

6123

