ScratchDet: Training Single-Shot Object Detectors from Scratch
Rui Zhu1,4∗, Shifeng Zhang2∗ , Xiaobo Wang1 , Longyin Wen3 , Hailin Shi1†, Liefeng Bo3 , Tao Mei1
1
JD AI Research, China; 2 CASIA, UCAS, China; 3 JD Digits, USA; 4 Sun Yat-sen University, China
{zhurui10,wangxiaobo8,longyin.wen,shihailin,liefeng.bo,tmei}@jd.com, shifeng.zhang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art object objectors are fine-tuned
from the off-the-shelf networks pretrained on large-scale
classification dataset ImageNet, which incurs some additional problems: 1) The classification and detection have
different degrees of sensitivity to translation, resulting in the
learning objective bias; 2) The architecture is limited by the
classification network, leading to the inconvenience of modification. To cope with these problems, training detectors
from scratch is a feasible solution. However, the detectors
trained from scratch generally perform worse than the pretrained ones, even suffer from the convergence issue in training. In this paper, we explore to train object detectors from
scratch robustly. By analysing the previous work on optimization landscape, we find that one of the overlooked points
in current trained-from-scratch detector is the BatchNorm.
Resorting to the stable and predictable gradient brought
by BatchNorm, detectors can be trained from scratch stably
while keeping the favourable performance independent to the
network architecture. Taking this advantage, we are able to
explore various types of networks for object detection, without suffering from the poor convergence. By extensive experiments and analyses on downsampling factor, we propose the
Root-ResNet backbone network, which makes full use of the
information from original images. Our ScratchDet achieves
the state-of-the-art accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2007, 2012
and MS COCO among all the train-from-scratch detectors
and even performs better than several one-stage pretrained
methods. Codes will be made publicly available at https:
//github.com/KimSoybean/ScratchDet.

1. Introduction
Object detection has made great progress in the framework of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The current state-of-the-art detectors are generally fine-tuned from
high accuracy classification networks, e.g., VGGNet [36],
ResNet [12] and GoogLeNet [37] pretrained on ImageNet
∗ Equally-contributed and this work was done at JD AI Research.
† Corresponding author.

[29] dataset. The fine-tuning transfers the classification
knowledge learned from the source domain to handle the
object detection task. In general, fine-tuning from pretrained
networks can achieve better performance than training from
scratch.
However, there is no such thing as a free lunch. Finetuning pretrained networks to object detection has some
critical limitations. On the one hand, the classification and
detection tasks have different degrees of sensitivity to translation. The classification task prefers to translation invariance,
and thus needs downsampling operations (e.g., max-pooling
and convolution with stride 2) for better performance. In
contrast, the local texture information is more critical for
object detection, making the usage of translation-invariant
operations (e.g., downsampling operations) with caution. On
the other hand, it is inconvenient to change the architecture
of networks (even small changes) in fine-tuning process. If
we employ a new architecture, the pretraining should be
re-conducted on the large-scale dataset (e.g., ImageNet), requiring high computational cost.
Fortunately, training detectors from scratch is able to
eliminate the aforementioned limitations. DSOD [32] is the
first to train CNN detectors from scratch, in which the deep
supervision plays a critical role. Deep supervision is introduced in DenseNet [13] as the dense layer-wise connection.
However, DSOD is also limited by the predefined architecture of DenseNet. If DSOD employs other types of network
(e.g., VGGNet and ResNet), the performance decreases dramatically (sometimes even crashes in training). Besides, the
currently best performance of trained-from-scratch detectors
still remains in a lower place compared with the pretrained
ones. Therefore, if we hope to take advantage of training
detectors from scratch, it needs to achieve two improvement:
(1) free the architecture limitations for any type of network
while guarantee the training convergence, (2) give performance as good as pretrained networks (or even better).
To this end, we study the elements that make major impact
to the optimization of detector given the randomly initialized
network. As pointed out in [30], BatchNorm reparameterizes
the optimization problem to make its landscape significantly
smoother instead of reducing the internal covariate shift.

2268

