Joint Face Detection and Facial Motion Retargeting for Multiple Faces
Bindita Chaudhuri1∗ , Noranart Vesdapunt2 , Baoyuan Wang2
1
University of Washington, 2 Microsoft Corporation
1
bindita@cs.washington.edu, 2 {noves,baoyuanw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Facial motion retargeting is an important problem in
both computer graphics and vision, which involves capturing the performance of a human face and transferring it
to another 3D character. Learning 3D morphable model
(3DMM) parameters from 2D face images using convolutional neural networks is common in 2D face alignment,
3D face reconstruction etc. However, existing methods either require an additional face detection step before retargeting or use a cascade of separate networks to perform
detection followed by retargeting in a sequence. In this paper, we present a single end-to-end network to jointly predict the bounding box locations and 3DMM parameters for
multiple faces. First, we design a novel multitask learning framework that learns a disentangled representation of
3DMM parameters for a single face. Then, we leverage the
trained single face model to generate ground truth 3DMM
parameters for multiple faces to train another network that
performs joint face detection and motion retargeting for images with multiple faces. Experimental results show that
our joint detection and retargeting network has high face
detection accuracy and is robust to extreme expressions and
poses while being faster than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Facial gestures are an effective medium of non-verbal
communication, and communication becomes more appealing through 3D animated characters. This has led to extensive research [8, 3, 20] in developing techniques to retarget
human facial motion to 3D animated characters. The standard approach is to model human face by a 3D morphable
model (3DMM)[5] and learn the weights of a linear combination of blendshapes that fits to the input face image.
The learned “expression” weights and “head pose” angles
are then directly mapped to semantically equivalent blendshapes of the target 3D character rig to drive the desired
facial animation. Previous methods, such as [8], formulate 3DMM fitting as an optimization problem of regressing the 3DMM parameters from the input image. However,
∗ Work primarily done during an internship at Microsoft.

these methods require significant pre-processing or postprocessing operations to get the final output.
Using deep convolution neural networks, recent works
have shown remarkable accuracy in regressing 3DMM parameters from a 2D image. However, while 3DMM fitting
with deep learning is frequently used in related domains
like 2D face alignment[61, 7], 3D face reconstruction[38,
16, 25, 13] etc., it hasn’t been proven yet as an effective
approach for facial motion retargeting. This is because 1)
face alignment methods focus more on accurate facial landmark localization while face reconstruction methods focus
more on accurate 3D shape and texture reconstruction to
capture the fine geometric details. In contrast, facial retargeting to an arbitrary 3D character only requires accurate
transfer of facial expression and head pose. However, due to
the ambiguous nature of this ill-posed problem of extracting
3D face information from 2D image, both facial expression
and head pose learned by those methods are generally suboptimal as they are not well decoupled from other information like identity. 2) Unlike alignment and reconstruction,
retargeting often requires real-time tracking and transfer of
the facial motion. However, existing methods for alignment
and reconstruction are highly memory intensive and often
involve complex rendering of the 3DMM as intermediate
steps, thereby making these methods difficult to deploy on
light-weight hardware like mobile phones.
It is important to note that all previous deep learning
based 3DMM fitting methods work on a single face image
assuming face is already detected and cropped. To support
multiple faces in a single image, a straightforward approach
is to run a face detector on the image first to detect the all
face regions and then perform the retargeting operations on
each face individually. Such an approach, however, requires
additional execution time for face detection and the computational complexity increases linearly with the number
of faces in the input image. Additionally, tracking multiple faces with this approach becomes difficult when people
move in and out from the frame or occlude each other. In
the literature of joint face detection and alignment, existing
methods [12, 55, 15] either use a random forest to predict
the face bounding boxes and landmarks or adopt an iterative

9719

