Rules of the Road:
Predicting Driving Behavior with a Convolutional Model of Semantic
Interactions
Joey Hong∗
Caltech

Benjamin Sapp∗
benjamin.sapp@gmail.com

James Philbin
Zoox
james@zoox.com

jhhong@caltech.edu

Abstract
We focus on the problem of predicting future states of
entities in complex, real-world driving scenarios. Previous
research has used low-level signals to predict short time
horizons, and has not addressed how to leverage key assets relied upon heavily by industry self-driving systems:
(1) large 3D perception efforts which provide highly accurate 3D states of agents with rich attributes, and (2) detailed
and accurate semantic maps of the environment (lanes, traffic lights, crosswalks, etc). We present a unified representation which encodes such high-level semantic information in
a spatial grid, allowing the use of deep convolutional models to fuse complex scene context. This enables learning
entity-entity and entity-environment interactions with simple, feed-forward computations in each timestep within an
overall temporal model of an agent’s behavior. We propose
different ways of modelling the future as a distribution over
future states using standard supervised learning. We introduce a novel dataset providing industry-grade rich perception and semantic inputs, and empirically show we can effectively learn fundamentals of driving behavior.

1. Introduction
A crucial component of real-world robotic systems is
predicting future states of other actors in the environment.
In the general setting, other actors’ intents are unobserved,
thus the challenge is to produce a likely distribution over
possible futures, given current and past observations. A
motivating application for this work is a self-driving robot
operating in an unconstrained urban environment; one of
the most impactful yet challenging real-world robotics applications today. It requires a deep understanding of the
∗ Work done while at Zoox. The authors would also like to thank and

acknowledge Kai Wang (kai@zoox.com) for his work on this project. Kai
has been instrumental in coordinating the final version of the paper and
preparing the dataset for release.

Figure 1: Entity future state prediction task on a top-down
scene: A target entity of interest is shown in red, with a
real future trajectory shown in pink. The most likely predicted trajectory is shown in cyan, with alternate trajectories
shown in green. Uncertainty ellipses showing 1 standard deviation of uncertainty are displayed for the most likely trajectory only. Other entities are rendered in magenta (pedestrians), blue (vehicles) and orange (bicycles). The ego vehicle which captured the scene is shown in green. Velocities
are shown as orange lines scaled proportional to 1m/s. Examples of underlying semantic map information shown are
lane lines, crosswalks and stop lines.
semantics of the static and dynamic environment, including
understanding traffic laws, unspecified driving conventions,
and interactions between human and robot actors.
While there is a large amount of research dedicated to
real-world perception in this domain [15, 25, 26, 12, 35,
29, 13, 9], there is a surprising lack of work on entity state
prediction in the same domain (see Section 2), which we
attribute to two main causes:
One, most previous research [25, 22] takes as input only
raw sensor information (a combination of camera, lidar or
18454

