Robustness via curvature regularization, and vice versa
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli∗†

Alhussein Fawzi∗‡

seyed.moosavi@epfl.ch

afawzi@google.com

Jonathan Uesato‡

Pascal Frossard†

juesato@google.com

pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
State-of-the-art classifiers have been shown to be largely
vulnerable to adversarial perturbations. One of the most effective strategies to improve robustness is adversarial training. In this paper, we investigate the effect of adversarial
training on the geometry of the classification landscape and
decision boundaries. We show in particular that adversarial training leads to a significant decrease in the curvature
of the loss surface with respect to inputs, leading to a drastically more “linear” behaviour of the network. Using a
locally quadratic approximation, we provide theoretical evidence on the existence of a strong relation between large
robustness and small curvature. To further show the importance of reduced curvature for improving the robustness, we
propose a new regularizer that directly minimizes curvature
of the loss surface, and leads to adversarial robustness that
is on par with adversarial training. Besides being a more
efficient and principled alternative to adversarial training,
the proposed regularizer confirms our claims on the importance of exhibiting quasi-linear behavior in the vicinity of
data points in order to achieve robustness.

derstood. In particular, how do the decision boundaries and
loss landscapes of adversarially trained models compare to
the ones trained on the original dataset?
In this paper, we analyze such properties and show that
one of the main effects of adversarial training is to induce
a significant decrease in the curvature of the loss function
and decision boundaries of the classifier. More than that, we
show that such a geometric implication of adversarial training allows us to explain the high robustness of adversarially
trained models. To support this claim, we follow a synthesis approach, where a new regularization strategy, Curvature Regularization (CURE), encouraging small curvature
is proposed and shown to achieve robustness levels that are
comparable to that of adversarial training. This highlights
the importance of small curvature for improved robustness.
In more detail, our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We empirically show that adversarial training induces
a significant decrease in the curvature of the decision
boundary and loss landscape in the input space.
• Using a quadratic approximation of the loss function,
we establish upper and lower bounds on the robustness
to adversarial perturbations with respect to the curvature of the loss. These bounds confirm the existence of
a relation between low curvature and high robustness.
• Inspired by the implications of adversarially trained
networks on the curvature of the loss function and our
theoretical bounds, we propose an efficient regularizer
that encourages small curvatures. On standard datasets
(CIFAR-10 and SVHN), we show that the proposed
regularizer leads to a significant boost of the robustness of neural networks, comparable to that of adversarial training.

1. Introduction
Adversarial training has recently been shown to be one
of the most successful methods for increasing the robustness to adversarial perturbations of deep neural networks
[9, 17, 16]. This approach consists in training the classifier on perturbed samples, with the aim of achieving higher
robustness than a network trained on the original training
set. Despite the importance and popularity of this training
mechanism, the effect of adversarial training on the geometric properties of the classifier – its loss landscape with
respect to the input and decision boundaries – is not well un∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
‡ DeepMind

The latter step shows that the proposed regularizer can be
seen as a more efficient alternative to adversarial training.
More importantly, it shows that the effect of adversarial
training on the curvature reduction is not a mere by-product,
but rather a driving effect that causes the robustness to increase. We stress here that the main focus of this paper is

9078

