Listen to the Image
Di Hu, Dong Wang, Xuelong Li, Feiping Nie∗, Qi Wang
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University
hdui831@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, nwpuwangdong@gmail.com,
xuelong li@ieee.org, feipingnie@gmail.com, crabwq@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
There are millions of blind people all over the world,
how to help them to “re-see” the outside world is a significant but challenging task. In general, the main causes of
blindness come from various eye diseases [35]. That is to
say, the visual cortex should be largely unwounded. Hence,
it becomes possible to use other organs (e.g., ears) as the
sensor to “visually” perceive the environment according to
the theory of cross-modal plasticity [4]. In the past decades,
there have been several projects attempting to help the disabled to recover their lost senses via other sensory channels,

High
Frequency

Visual-to-auditory sensory substitution devices can assist the blind in sensing the visual environment by translating the visual information into a sound pattern. To improve the translation quality, the task performances of the
blind are usually employed to evaluate different encoding
schemes. In contrast to the toilsome human-based assessment, we argue that machine model can be also developed for evaluation, and more efficient. To this end, we firstly propose two distinct cross-modal perception model w.r.t.
the late-blind and congenitally-blind cases, which aim to
generate concrete visual contents based on the translated
sound. To validate the functionality of proposed models, two novel optimization strategies w.r.t. the primary encoding
scheme are presented. Further, we conduct sets of humanbased experiments to evaluate and compare them with the
conducted machine-based assessments in the cross-modal
generation task. Their highly consistent results w.r.t. different encoding schemes indicate that using machine model to
accelerate optimization evaluation and reduce experimental cost is feasible to some extent, which could dramatically
promote the upgrading of encoding scheme then help the
blind to improve their visual perception ability.

Brighter pixels
are louder

Scan

Low

Left

Scan time

Right

Figure 1. An illustration of the vOICe device. A camera mounted
on forehead captures the scene in front of the blind, which is then
converted to sound and transmitted to headphones. After 10-15
hours of training, the regions of visual cortex become active due
to cross-modal plasticity. Best viewed in color.

and the relevant equipments are usually named as Sensory
Substitution (SS) devices. In this paper, we mainly focus on
the visual-to-auditory SS device of vOICe1 (The upper case
of OIC means “Oh! I See!”).
The vOICe is an auditory sensory substitution device that
encodes 2D gray image into 1D audio signal. Concretely, it
translates vertical position to frequency, left-right position
to scan time, and brightness to sound loudness, as shown
in Fig. 1. After training with the device, both blindfolded
sighted and blind participants can identify different objects
just via the encoded audio signal [33]. More surprisingly,
neural imaging studies (e.g., fMRI and PET) show that the
visual cortex of trained participants are activated when listening to the vOICe audio [1, 28]. Some participants, especially the late-bind, report that they can “see” the shown objects, even the colorful appearance [18]. As a consequence,
the vOICe device is considered to provide a novel and effective way to assist the blind in “visually” sensing the world
via hearing [36].
However, the current vOICe encoding scheme is identi1 www.seeingwithsound.com

∗ Corresponding author.

7972

