Balanced Self-Paced Learning for Generative Adversarial Clustering Network
Kamran Ghasedi Dizaji1 , Xiaoqian Wang1 , Cheng Deng2 , and Heng Huang∗1,3
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
3
JD Digits

kamran.ghasedi@gmail.com, xiaoqian.wang@pitt.edu, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Clustering is an important problem in various machine
learning applications, but still a challenging task when
dealing with complex real data. The existing clustering algorithms utilize either shallow models with insufficient capacity for capturing the non-linear nature of data, or deep
models with large number of parameters prone to overfitting. In this paper, we propose a deep Generative Adversarial Clustering Network (ClusterGAN), which tackles the problems of training of deep clustering models in
unsupervised manner. ClusterGAN consists of three networks, a discriminator, a generator and a clusterer (i.e. a
clustering network). We employ an adversarial game between these three players to synthesize realistic samples
given discriminative latent variables via the generator, and
learn the inverse mapping of the real samples to the discriminative embedding space via the clusterer. Moreover,
we utilize a conditional entropy minimization loss to increase/decrease the similarity of intra/inter cluster samples.
Since the ground-truth similarities are unknown in clustering task, we propose a novel balanced self-paced learning algorithm to gradually include samples into training
from easy to difficult, while considering the diversity of selected samples from all clusters. Our unsupervised learning
framework makes it possible to efficiently train clusterers
with large depth. Experimental results indicate that ClusterGAN achieves competitive results compared to the stateof-the-art models on several datasets.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the essential active research topics in computer vision and machine learning communities
∗ Corresponding Author. K. Ghasedi, X. Wang, H. Huang were partially supported by U.S. NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, DBI 1836866,
IIS 1845666, IIS 1852606, IIS 1838627, IIS 1837956.

with various applications. Clustering problem has been extensively studied in the literature by introducing numerous
algorithms with unsupervised learning frameworks [51].
However, the existing methods that employ shallow or deep
models suffer from different issues. The shallow clustering
models may not capture the nonlinear nature of data due to
their shallow and linear embedding functions, adversely affect their performance by using inflexible hand-crafted features, and have difficulties in scaling to large datasets. In
contrast, the deep clustering methods have enough capacity to model the non-linear and complex data, and are able
to deal with large-scale datasets. But they are prone to the
overfitting issue leading to get stuck in bad local minima,
since there is no reliable supervisory signal for training their
large number of parameters.
In this paper, we propose a generative adversarial clustering network, called ClusterGAN, as a novel deep clustering
model to address the aforementioned issues. ClusterGAN
adopts the adversarial game in GAN for the clustering task,
and employs an efficient self-paced learning algorithm to
boost its performance. The standard GAN is formulated as
an adversarial game between two networks, a discriminator and a generator [19]. In particular, the generator G is
supposed to synthesize realistic images to fool the discriminator D by mapping the random input z into the data space,
and the discriminator aims to distinguish the real data from
the generated samples. The objective function in this twoplayer adversarial game between D and G is:


min max Ex∼P (x) log D(x)
(1)
G
D


+ Ez∼P (z) log 1 − D(G(z)) ,

where P (x) is the real data distribution, and P (z) is the
generator random input distribution. In this adversarial loss,
G is trained to learn the conditional distribution of real data
given the random variables, and D is trained to find the
boundaries between samples drawn from the real and gen-

14391

