FOCNet: A Fractional Optimal Control Network for Image Denoising
Xixi Jia1,2 , Sanyang Liu1 , Xiangchu Feng1 and Lei Zhang∗2,3
1

2

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
hsijiaxidian@gmail.com, liusanyang@126.com, xcfeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) have been
successfully used in many low-level vision problems such as
image denoising. Recent studies on the mathematical foundation of DCNN has revealed that the forward propagation
of DCNN corresponds to a dynamic system, which can be
described by an ordinary differential equation (ODE) and
solved by the optimal control method. However, most of
these methods employ integer-order differential equation,
which has local connectivity in time space and cannot describe the long-term memory of the system. Inspired by the
fact that the fractional-order differential equation has longterm memory, in this paper we develop an advanced image denoising network, namely FOCNet, by solving a fractional optimal control (FOC) problem. Specifically, the network structure is designed based on the discretization of
a fractional-order differential equation, which enjoys longterm memory in both forward and backward passes. Besides, multi-scale feature interactions are introduced into
the FOCNet to strengthen the control of the dynamic system. Extensive experiments demonstrate the leading performance of the proposed FOCNet on image denoising. Code
will be made available.

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to estimate the underlying clean
image from its noisy observation. As an indispensable step
in many digital imaging and computer vision systems, image denoising has been investigated for decades, while it
is still an active research topic. A vast amount of methods
∗ Corresponding author. This work is partially supported by Hong Kong
RGC GRF grant (PolyU 152216/18E) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 61772389, 61877406, 61871260).

have been developed by using different mathematical tools
and models, including partial differential equations (PDE)
[39, 32], sparse coding [28, 13], low-rank approximation
[16, 22], and others [6, 9, 38]. Most of these methods rely
on very limited human knowledge or assumptions about the
image prior, limiting their capability in recovering complex
image structures.
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNN) have achieved a great success in many low-level
vision problems, including image denoising. In particular, Zhang et al. [45] proposed an effective image denoising network called DnCNN by integrating batch normalization into the residual learning framework, which outperforms traditional denoising algorithms by a noticeable margin. By adding symmetric skip connections, Mao et al. [29]
constructed an improved encoder-decoder network for image denoising. Bae et al. [4] suggested to learn CNN on
the wavelets sub-bands for image denoising. Based on the
wavelet decomposition, Liu et al. [26] put forward a multilevel wavelet based denoising DCNN. Tai et al. [42] constructed a densely connected denoising network to enable
memory of the network. Zhang et al. [46] introduced a fast
and flexible network (FFDNet) which can process images
with nonuniform noise corruption. To exploit the nonlocal
property of the image features in DCNN, Plötz et al. [35]
presented an N3 Net by employing the k-nearest neighbor
matching in the denoising network.
Although various DCNN methods have been proposed
for image denoising, the network design is mostly empirical without clear mathematical bases. Recently, some studies [34, 44, 27, 40, 17, 25] on the mathematical foundation of DCNN have revealed that the forward propagation
of DCNN corresponds to a dynamic system, which can be
characterized by an ODE and solved by optimal control
methods [44, 25]. For example, Pineda [34] studied the

6054

