Task-Free Continual Learning
Rahaf Aljundi ∗ Klaas Kelchtermans∗ Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, Belgium
firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Methods proposed in the literature towards continual
deep learning typically operate in a task-based sequential
learning setup. A sequence of tasks is learned, one at a time,
with all data of current task available but not of previous or
future tasks. Task boundaries and identities are known at all
times. This setup, however, is rarely encountered in practical applications. Therefore we investigate how to transform
continual learning to an online setup. We develop a system that keeps on learning over time in a streaming fashion, with data distributions gradually changing and without the notion of separate tasks. To this end, we build on
the work on Memory Aware Synapses, and show how this
method can be made online by providing a protocol to decide i) when to update the importance weights, ii) which
data to use to update them, and iii) how to accumulate the
importance weights at each update step. Experimental results show the validity of the approach in the context of two
applications: (self-)supervised learning of a face recognition model by watching soap series and learning a robot to
avoid collisions.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, one of the most basic paradigms is
to clearly distinguish between a training and testing phase.
Once a model is trained and validated, it switches to a test
mode: the model gets frozen and deployed for inference
on previously unseen data, without ever making changes to
the model parameters again. This setup assumes a static
world, with no distribution shifts over time. Further, it assumes a static task specification, so no new requirements in
terms of output (e.g. novel category labels) or new tasks
added over time. Such strong division between training and
testing makes it easier to develop novel machine learning
algorithms, yet is also very restrictive.
Inspired by biological systems, the field of incremental
learning, also referred to as continual learning or lifelong
∗ Rahaf Aljundi and Klaas Kelchtermans contributed equally to this

work and are listed in alphabetical order.

learning [24, 34, 37], aims at breaking this strong barrier
between the training and testing phase. The goal is to develop algorithms that do not stop learning, but rather keep
updating the model parameters over time. This holds the
promise of a system that gradually accumulates knowledge,
reaching increasingly better accuracy and better coverage as
time passes. However, it is practically not possible to store
all previous data - be it due to storage constraints or for privacy reasons. Yet updating parameters based only on recent
data introduces a bias towards that data and a phenomenon
known as catastrophic interference, in other words degrading performance on older data [8, 30].
To make progress in this direction, several works have
opted for a specific experimental setup, consisting of a sequence of distinct tasks, learned one after the other. Each
time, only the data for the ‘current’ task is available for
training. We refer to this as task-based sequential learning.
Training a shared model one task at a time has led to significant progress and new insights towards continual learning,
such as different strategies for preserving the knowledge of
previous tasks [19, 13, 1, 17]. However, the methods developed in this specific setup all too often depend on knowing the task boundaries. These boundaries indicate good
moments to consolidate knowledge, namely after learning a
task. Moreover, data can be shuffled within a task so as to
guarantee i.i.d. data. In an online setting, on the other hand,
data needs to be processed in a streaming fashion and data
distributions might change gradually.
In this work, we aim at overcoming this requirement
of hard task boundaries. In particular, we investigate how
methods proposed for task-based sequential learning can be
generalized to an online setting. This requires a protocol to
determine when to consolidate knowledge. Moreover, we
investigate the effect of keeping a small buffer with difficult
samples. For the latter, we take inspiration from the field
of reinforcement learning, namely experience replay [22],
although using much smaller replay buffers, unlike very recent work of Rolnick et al. [31].
Task-based sequential learning has mostly been studied
for image classification [19, 2, 17, 39, 28]. Whenever the
learner arrives at a new task, that is when learning on the
111254

