Learning to Calibrate Straight Lines for Fisheye Image Rectification
Zhucun Xue, Nan Xue, Gui-Song Xia∗, Weiming Shen
CAPTAIN-LIESMARS, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430079, China
{zhucun.xue, xuenan, guisong.xia, shenwm}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a new deep-learning based method
to simultaneously calibrate the intrinsic parameters of fisheye lens and rectify the distorted images. Assuming that
the distorted lines generated by fisheye projection should be
straight after rectification, we propose a novel deep neural network to impose explicit geometry constraints onto
processes of the fisheye lens calibration and the distorted
image rectification. In addition, considering the nonlinearity of distortion distribution in fisheye images, the proposed
network fully exploits multi-scale perception to equalize
the rectification effects on the whole image. To train and
evaluate the proposed model, we also create a new largescale dataset labeled with corresponding distortion parameters and well-annotated distorted lines. Compared with the
state-of-the-art methods, our model achieves the best published rectification quality and the most accurate estimation
of distortion parameters on a large set of synthetic and real
fisheye images.

1. Introduction
Fisheye cameras have been widely used in many computer vision tasks [31, 34, 9, 16, 2] because of their large
field of view (FOV), however, the images taken by fisheye
cameras always suffer from severe geometric distortion simultaneously. When processing the geometric toward vision systems equipped with fisheye lens, calibrating the intrinsic parameters is usually the first step we should do to
rectify the distorted images.

1.1. Motivation and Objective
Early work viewed the calibration of fisheye cameras
as an optimization problem by fitting the relationship between 2D/3D calibration patterns from images with different viewpoints [19, 14, 30, 28]. But these methods usually
demand pre-prepared calibration patterns and extra manual
operations, and even often involve heavy off-line estimations, which seriously limit their usage scenarios in real applications. To overcome these limitations and toward an au∗ Corresponding author: guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Learning to calibrate straight lines for fisheye image rectification. 1st -Row: original fisheye images overlaid by detected
distorted lines which should be straight after calibration; 2nd Row: rectified straight lines; 3rd -Row: rectified image.

tomatic self-calibration solution, subsequent investigations
were proposed to detect geometric objects (e.g., conics and
lines) from a single image and further exploit their correspondences in 3D world [13, 36, 4, 22, 12, 1]. These approaches have reported promising performances on fisheye
camera calibrations only when specified geometric objects
in fisheye images can be accurately detected. Nevertheless,
it is worth noticing that the involved detection of geometric
objects in fisheye images itself is another challenging problem in computer vision. Recently, alternative approaches
have been proposed based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [27, 35]. Avoiding the difficult to directly
detect the geometric objects, these methods tried to learn
more discriminative visual features with CNNs to rectify the
distorted image. Although aforementioned methods have
reported the state-of-the-art performances on fisheye image
rectifications, as well as avert the difficulties of detecting
geometric objects, the geometry characteristics in fisheye
calibration task are not fully exploited using CNNs.
Regardless of the difficulties to detect geometric objects
in fisheye images, one should observe that the explicit scene
geometries are still the strong constrains to rectify distorted
images. It is of great interest to investigate how to apply the
fundamental geometric property under the pinhole camera
11643

