A Structured Model For Action Detection
Yubo Zhang, Pavel Tokmakov, Martial Hebert
Carnegie Mellon University

Cordelia Schmid
Google Research

yuboz,ptokmako,hebert@andrew.cmu.edu

cordelias@google.com

Abstract
A dominant paradigm for learning-based approaches in
computer vision is training generic models, such as ResNet
for image recognition, or I3D for video understanding, on
large datasets and allowing them to discover the optimal
representation for the problem at hand. While this is an obviously attractive approach, it is not applicable in all scenarios. We claim that action detection is one such challenging problem - the models that need to be trained are large,
and the labeled data is expensive to obtain. To address
this limitation, we propose to incorporate domain knowledge into the structure of the model to simplify optimization.
In particular, we augment a standard I3D network with a
tracking module to aggregate long term motion patterns,
and use a graph convolutional network to reason about interactions between actors and objects. Evaluated on the
challenging AVA dataset, the proposed approach improves
over the I3D baseline by 5.5% mAP and over the state-ofthe-art by 4.8% mAP.

1. Introduction
Consider the video sequence from the AVA dataset [15]
shown in Figure 1. It shows a person getting up and then
receiving a letter from another person, who is seated behind
a table. Out of the 2359296 pixels in the 36 frames of this
clip, what information is actually important for recognizing
and localizing this action? Key cues include the location
of the actor, his motion, and his interactions with the other
actor and the letter. The rest of the video content, such as
the color of the walls or the lamp on the table are irrelevant
and should be marginalized over. We use these intuitive
observations to design a new method for action detection.
State-of-the-art action detection approaches put a lot of
emphasis on actor localization [15, 21, 24, 48], but other
cues are largely ignored. For instance, Gu et al. [15] detect
humans and model their actions with an I3D [4] representation that is capable of capturing short-term motion patterns.
This allows them to achieve a significant improvement on
the challenging AVA dataset, but the performance on activities with large temporal extent remains poor. In our method,

Video Sequence

Figure 1. For action detection, it is critical to capture both the longterm temporal information and spatial relationships between actors
and objects. We propose to incorporate this domain knowledge
into the architecture of deep learning models for action detection.

we aggregate local I3D features over actor tracks, which results in a significant gain in performance.
A few recent approaches model human-object interaction. Gkioxari et al. [13] use a state-of-the-art 2D-object detection framework [17] to detect action specific objects and
model human-object interactions in static images. Their approach assumes the object categories given and does not integrate any temporal information. Sun et al. [50] addressed
the problem of modeling human-human and human-object
interaction, by applying relational networks to explicitly
capture interactions between actors and objects in a scene.
Their method, however, does not directly model objects,
but instead considers every pixel in the frame to be an
object proxy. While this approach is indeed generic and
object-category agnostic, we argue that the lack of proper
object modeling hinders its performance. In a concurrent
work to [50], Wang et al. [56] use object proposals to localize the regions of interest and then employ graph convolutional networks [27] to combine the actor and object
representations and produce video-level action classification. However, their approach does not address the action
detection problem. In our method we also model activities with actor-object graphs, but instead of aggregating
features over all the objects and actors in a scene we propose to structurally modeling actor-object and actor-actor
separately during both training and testing. Other works
that propose to capture action recognition with actor-object
graphs include [22, 40]. These methods, however, require
ground truth annotations of both actors and objects during

9975

