Phase-only Image Based Kernel Estimation for Single Image Blind Deblurring
Liyuan Pan1,2 , Richard Hartley1,2 , Miaomiao Liu1,2 , and Yuchao Dai3
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
3
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{liyuan.pan, Richard.Hartley, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
The image motion blurring process is generally modelled as the convolution of a blur kernel with a latent image. Therefore, the estimation of the blur kernel is essentially important for blind image deblurring. Unlike existing
approaches which focus on approaching the problem by enforcing various priors on the blur kernel and the latent image, we are aiming at obtaining a high quality blur kernel
directly by studying the problem in the frequency domain.
We show that the auto-correlation of the absolute phaseonly image1 can provide faithful information about the motion (e.g., the motion direction and magnitude, we call it
the motion pattern in this paper.) that caused the blur,
leading to a new and efficient blur kernel estimation approach. The blur kernel is then refined and the sharp image
is estimated by solving an optimization problem by enforcing a regularization on the blur kernel and the latent image. We further extend our approach to handle non-uniform
blur, which involves spatially varying blur kernels. Our approach is evaluated extensively on synthetic and real data
and shows good results compared to the state-of-the-art deblurring approaches.

1. Introduction
Blind image deblurring aims at estimating the blur kernel and the latent image from an input blurry image. This
is an ill-posed problem as there are infinitely many pairs of
blur kernels and images that could generate the same blurry
image. Blind image deblurring has been extensively studied in computer vision and is still a very active research
area [10, 28, 6, 25, 19, 34], where blur kernel estimation is
essentially important in obtaining a high quality sharp image.
Existing blind image deblurring methods tend to formu1 Phase-only image means the image is reconstructed only from the
phase information of the blurry image.

late the problem within the Maximum A Posteriori (MAP)
framework, where the blur kernel and the latent sharp image
are optimized jointly. To resolve the ill-posed underlining
optimization problem, various assumptions, or regularizations, have been proposed for the blur kernel and the desired
latent image, such as the dark channel prior [23], extreme
channel prior [43], l0 regularized prior [22, 41], learned image prior using a CNN [18], uniform blur [17, 42], nonuniform blur from multiple homographies [8, 21], constant
depth [7, 39], in-plane rotation [32], and forward motion
[45]. The resultant optimization problem is non-convex in
general. The blur kernel and the latent image are usually
solved in an alternating fashion. Thus, a proper and effective initialization is demanded to achieve a good local optimum solution and makes the algorithm converge quickly.
In this paper, we aim at estimating a high-quality blur
kernel directly from the input image with motion blur by
studying the problem in the frequency domain. We exploit the phase-only image of the input blurry image, which
is reconstructed from the Fourier transformed image using
the phase information only. The phase-only image contains edge and texture information about the image structure [20, 27]. The motion (either camera or object motion) information is encoded as repeated image edges in
the phase-only image (see Fig. 1 for an example). We show
that the auto-correlation of the absolute phase-only image
reveals the motion information including the motion direction and motion magnitude, which is referred to as the motion pattern in this paper. It provides information about the
blur kernel, thereby leading to a new approach to estimating
the blur kernel.
We further improve the blur kernel and latent image estimation by enforcing a spatial sparsity prior on the kernel
as well as the latent image gradient in a simple optimization framework. Furthermore, our blur kernel estimation
approach can be naturally extended to handle non-uniform
blur in order to deal with the spatially-variant blur kernels
that arise in complex image deblurring problems. Extensive experiment on both synthetic and real images demon-

6034

