Context and Attribute Grounded Dense Captioning
Guojun Yin1 , Lu Sheng2,4 , Bin Liu1∗, Nenghai Yu1 , Xiaogang Wang2 , Jing Shao3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information,
The Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
SenseTime Research, 4 College of Software, Beihang University
gjyin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lsheng@buaa.edu.cn,
{flowice,ynh}@ustc.edu.cn, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, shaojing@sensetime.com

Abstract
…

Dense captioning aims at simultaneously localizing semantic regions and describing these regions-of-interest
(ROIs) with short phrases or sentences in natural language.
Previous studies have shown remarkable progresses, but
they are often vulnerable to the aperture problem that a caption generated by the features inside one ROI lacks contextual coherence with its surrounding context in the input image. In this work, we investigate contextual reasoning based
on multi-scale message propagations from the neighboring
contents to the target ROIs. To this end, we design a novel
end-to-end context and attribute grounded dense captioning
framework consisting of 1) a contextual visual mining module and 2) a multi-level attribute grounded description generation module. Knowing that captions often co-occur with
the linguistic attributes (such as who, what and where), we
also incorporate an auxiliary supervision from hierarchical linguistic attributes to augment the distinctiveness of the
learned captions. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on Visual Genome dataset demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed model in comparison to the state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Dense captioning, which was first introduced by [20],
is to parse semantic contents in an input image and describe
them with captions in natural languages. It can benefit other
tasks, including image captioning [38], segmentation [28],
visual question answering [14] and etc. In this paper, we
mainly focus on the caption generation and adopt Faster
RCNN [29] for semantic instances localization, following
recent advances [20, 34].
Differing from subjective image descriptions for highlevel abstraction of an entire image, captions of semantic
∗ Bin Liu is the corresponding author.

(a)

(i) yellow balloons
target [20]

(ii) a yellow kite in the sky
target + global [34]

(iii) yellow pants of the skier
target + global + neighboring

…
(b)

(i) a white stone
target [20]

(ii) a lamp on the wall

(iii) a mirror of a motorcycle

target + global [34]

target + global + neighboring

Figure 1. Dense captioning with different levels of contextual interactions: (i) without any contextual cues (marked by blue) [20],
(ii) with guidance from the global cue (marked by red) [34], and
(iii) with mutual interactions from neighboring (marked by orange) and global visual information. (Best viewed in color.)

instances in compact bounding boxes are far more objective
and less affected by ambiguities raised by subjective annotations. That is, incorrect captions may be generated when
the target regions are visually ambiguous without contextual reasoning. For example, it may falsely caption the target ROIs marked in blue-box as “yellow balloons” rather
than “yellow pants” in Fig. 1(a-i), if not aware of their contextual visual contents [20]. An alternative solution proposed in [34] try to exploit the global feature from the entire
image as the contextual cue to improve the region captioning. However, the descriptions sometimes are corrupted by
global appearance, especially for small and unusual objects
against dominant global contents. The “yellow pants” in
Fig. 1 (a-ii) is mistakenly described as “yellow kite in the
sky”. The similar phenomenon happens in Fig. 1 (a-ii) that
it mistakenly generates “a mirror” rather than “a lamp”.
In contrast to the prior arts, in this study, we show
that the innovative model, named as Context and Attribute
Grounded Network (CAG-Net), designed with contextual
correlated visual cues (i.e., local, neighboring, global) permits multi-scale contextual message passing to reinforce regional description generation. For example, the neighbor4321
6241

