Cyclic Guidance for Weakly Supervised Joint Detection and Segmentation
Yunhang Shen1 , Rongrong Ji1,2∗, Yan Wang3 , Yongjian Wu4 , Liujuan Cao1
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Information Science
and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China, 2 Peng Cheng Laborotory, China
3
Microsoft, Redmond, USA
4
BestImage, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, China
shenyunhang01@gmail.com, {rrji, caoliujuan}@xmu.edu.cn, wanyan@microsoft.com, littlekenwu@tencent.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised learning has attracted growing research attention due to the significant saving in annotation
cost for tasks that require intra-image annotations, such as
object detection and semantic segmentation. To this end, existing weakly supervised object detection and semantic segmentation approaches follow an iterative label mining and
model training pipeline. However, such a self-enforcement
pipeline makes both tasks easy to be trapped in local minimums. In this paper, we join weakly supervised object detection and segmentation tasks with a multi-task learning
scheme for the first time, which uses their respective failure
patterns to complement each other’s learning. Such crosstask enforcement helps both tasks to leap out of their respective local minimums. In particular, we present an efficient and effective framework termed Weakly Supervised
Joint Detection and Segmentation (WS-JDS). WS-JDS has
two branches for the above two tasks, which share the same
backbone network. In the learning stage, it uses the same
cyclic training paradigm but with a specific loss function
such that the two branches benefit each other. Extensive
experiments have been conducted on the widely-used Pascal VOC and COCO benchmarks, which demonstrate that
our model has achieved competitive performance with the
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNNs) have demonstrated outstanding capability in various computer vision tasks, such as image classification [2,
63, 37, 33], object detection [26, 54, 53, 45] and semantic
segmentation [46, 13, 12, 81]. The core of the success lies
in the decade-long effort to construct large-scale annotated
datasets, such as ImageNet [17], PASCAL VOC [20], and
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The core idea of the proposd cyclic guidance learning
framework. Individually trained object detectors and semantic
segmenters often fail on challenging cases, like the bottom-left
figure shows. However, we found the failure patterns of object
detection and semantic segmentation are complementary, and thus
propose to train a multi-task model to allow them to benefit each
other in a cyclic way. This figure is best viewed in color.

COCO [43]. However, along with the great potential and
flexibility in tasks like classification, the heavy dependency
on the large-scale annotations had two drawbacks. First, human labeling can be expensive even with crowd sourcing. It
is especially true for tasks that require pixel-level labeling
such as instance segmentation. Although the community
are aware that an ImageNet-like dataset for those tasks will
be of great benefit, it is still absent, and may be prohibitively
expensive even in the near future. Second, compared with
fully annotated datasets, weakly annotated datasets (i.e.,
only image-level labels are annotated) may be much more
widely available and have much larger scale. And recent experiments show that models trained on these datasets with
noisy and incomplete annotations may perform comparable
or even better than models trained on fully annotated but
smaller datasets [47]. Therefore, weakly supervised learn-

697

