ChamNet: Towards Efficient Network Design through Platform-Aware Model
Adaptation
Xiaoliang Dai1∗ , Peizhao Zhang2 , Bichen Wu3∗ , Hongxu Yin1 , Fei Sun2 , Yanghan Wang2 , Marat Dukhan2 ,
Yunqing Hu2 , Yiming Wu2 , Yangqing Jia2 , Peter Vajda2 , Matt Uyttendaele2 , Niraj K. Jha1
1
Princeton University, 2 Facebook Inc., 3 University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
This paper proposes an efficient neural network (NN)
architecture design methodology called Chameleon that
honors given resource constraints. Instead of developing
new building blocks or using computationally-intensive reinforcement learning algorithms, our approach leverages
existing efficient network building blocks and focuses on
exploiting hardware traits and adapting computation resources to fit target latency and/or energy constraints. We
formulate platform-aware NN architecture search in an optimization framework and propose a novel algorithm to
search for optimal architectures aided by efficient accuracy and resource (latency and/or energy) predictors. At
the core of our algorithm lies an accuracy predictor built
atop Gaussian Process with Bayesian optimization for iterative sampling. With a one-time building cost for the predictors, our algorithm produces state-of-the-art model architectures on different platforms under given constraints
in just minutes. Our results show that adapting computation resources to building blocks is critical to model performance. Without the addition of any special features, our
models achieve significant accuracy improvements relative
to state-of-the-art handcrafted and automatically designed
architectures. We achieve 73.8% and 75.3% top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet at 20ms latency on a mobile CPU and DSP. At
reduced latency, our models achieve up to 8.2% (4.8%) and
6.7% (9.3%) absolute top-1 accuracy improvements compared to MobileNetV2 and MnasNet, respectively, on a mobile CPU (DSP), and 2.7% (4.6%) and 5.6% (2.6%) accuracy gains over ResNet-101 and ResNet-152, respectively,
on an Nvidia GPU (Intel CPU).

1. Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) have led to state-of-the-art performance in myriad areas, such as computer vision, speech
recognition, and machine translation. Due to the pres∗ This work was supported in part by a summer internship at Facebook
and in part by NSF under Grant No. CNS-1617640.

ence of millions of parameters and floating-point operations
(FLOPs), NNs are typically too computationally intensive
to be deployed on resource-constrained platforms. Many efforts have been made to design compact NN architectures.
Examples include NNs presented in [24, 21], which have
significantly cut down the computation cost and achieved a
more favorable trade-off between accuracy and efficiency.
However, a compact model design still faces challenges
upon deployment in real-world applications [33]:
• Different platforms have diverging hardware characteristics. It is hard for a single NN architecture to run
optimally on all the different platforms. For example, a
Hexagon v62 DSP prefers convolution operators with
a channel size that is a multiple of 32, as shown later,
whereas this may not be the case on another platform.
• Real-world applications may face very different constraints. For example, real-time video frame analysis
may have a strict latency constraint, whereas Internetof-Things (IoT) edge device designers may care more
about run-time energy for longer battery life. It is infeasible to have one NN that can meet all these constraints simultaneously. This makes it necessary to
adapt the NN architecture to the specific use scenarios.
There are two common practices for tackling these challenges. The first practice is to manually craft the architectures based on the characteristics of a given platform.
However, such a trial-and-error methodology might be too
time-consuming for large-scale cross-platform NN deployment and may not be able to effectively explore the design
space. Moreover, it also requires substantial knowledge of
the hardware details and driver libraries. The other practice
focuses on platform-aware neural architecture search (NAS)
and sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) [37].
Both NAS and SMBO require computationally-expensive
network training and measurement of network performance
metrics (e.g., latency and energy) throughout the entire
search and optimization process. For example, the latencydriven mobile NAS (MNAS) architecture requires hundreds

11398

