Bringing Alive Blurred Moments
Kuldeep Purohit1
Anshul Shah2∗
A. N. Rajagopalan1
1
2
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
University of Maryland, College Park
kuldeeppurohit3@gmail.com, anshulb@cs.umd.edu, raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
We present a solution for the goal of extracting a video
from a single motion blurred image to sequentially reconstruct the clear views of a scene as beheld by the camera during the time of exposure. We first learn motion
representation from sharp videos in an unsupervised manner through training of a convolutional recurrent video autoencoder network that performs a surrogate task of video
reconstruction. Once trained, it is employed for guided
training of a motion encoder for blurred images. This
network extracts embedded motion information from the
blurred image to generate a sharp video in conjunction with
the trained recurrent video decoder. As an intermediate
step, we also design an efficient architecture that enables
real-time single image deblurring and outperforms competing methods across all factors: accuracy, speed, and
compactness. Experiments on real scenes and standard
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our framework over
the state-of-the-art and its ability to generate a plausible
sequence of temporally consistent sharp frames.

1. Introduction
When shown a motion blurred image, humans can mentally reconstruct (sometimes ambiguously perhaps) a temporally coherent account of the scene that represents what
transpired during exposure time. However, in computer vision, natural video modeling and extraction has remained
a challenging problem due to the complexity and ambiguity inherent in video data. With the success of deep neural
networks in solving complex vision tasks, end-to-end deep
networks have emerged as incredibly powerful tools.
Recent works on future frame prediction reveal that direct intensity estimation leads to blurred predictions. Instead, if a frame is reconstructed based on the original image and corresponding transformations, both scene dynamics and invariant appearance can be preserved well. Based
on this premise, [6, 45] and [21] model the task as a flow
∗ Work done while at Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India.

of image pixels. The methods [38, 43] generate a video
from a single sharp image, but have a severe limitation in
that they work only on the specific scene for which they are
trained. All of these approaches work only on sharp images
and videos. However, motion during exposure is known
to cause severe degradation in the captured image quality
due to the blur it induces. This is usually the case in lowlight situations where the exposure time of each frame is
high and in scenes where significant motion happens within
the exposure time. In [35], it has been shown that standard
network models used for vision tasks and trained only on
high-quality images suffer a significant degradation in performance when applied to images degraded by blur.
Motion deblurring is a challenging problem in computer
vision due to its ill-posed nature. Recent years have witnessed significant advances in deblurring [36, 27, 25]. Several methods [41, 26, 5, 31, 3, 14, 16, 17, 41] have been proposed to address this problem using hand-designed priors as
well as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [2, 29, 30]
for recovering the latent image. A few methods [33, 7] have
been proposed to remove heterogeneous blur but they are
limited in their capability to handle general dynamic scenes.
Most of these methods strongly rely on the accuracy of the
assumed image degradation model and include intensive,
sometimes heuristic, parameter-tuning and expensive computations, factors which severely restrict their accuracy and
applicability in real-world scenarios. The recent works of
[23, 24, 18, 34] overcome these limitations to some extent
by learning to directly generate the latent sharp image, without the need for blur kernel estimation.
We wish to highlight here that until recently, all existing
methods were limited to the task of generating only ‘a’ deblurred image. In this paper, we address the task of reviving
and reliving all the sharp views of a scene as seen by the
camera during its flight within the exposure time. Recovering sharp content and motion from motion blurred images
can be valuable for uncovering the underlying dynamics of
a scene (e.g., in sports, traffic surveillance monitoring, entertainment etc.). The problem of extracting a video from
a single blurred observation is challenging due to the fact
that a blurred image can only reveal aggregate information

6830

