Learning to Detect Human-Object Interactions with Knowledge
Bingjie Xu1 , Yongkang Wong1 , Junnan Li1 , Qi Zhao2 , Mohan S. Kankanhalli1
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of Minnesota
bingjiexu@u.nus.edu, yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg, lijunnan@u.nus.edu
qzhao@cs.umn.edu, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Training Image Set

The recent advances in instance-level detection tasks
lay a strong foundation for automated visual scenes understanding. However, the ability to fully comprehend a social
scene still eludes us. In this work, we focus on detecting
human-object interactions (HOIs) in images, an essential
step towards deeper scene understanding. HOI detection
aims to localize human and objects, as well as to identify
the complex interactions between them. Innate in practical
problems with large label space, HOI categories exhibit a
long-tail distribution, i.e., there exist some rare categories
with very few training samples. Given the key observation
that HOIs contain intrinsic semantic regularities despite
they are visually diverse, we tackle the challenge of longtail HOI categories by modeling the underlying regularities
among verbs and objects in HOIs as well as general relationships. In particular, we construct a knowledge graph
based on the ground-truth annotations of training dataset
and external source. In contrast to direct knowledge incorporation, we address the necessity of dynamic imagespecific knowledge retrieval by multi-modal learning, which
leads to an enhanced semantic embedding space for HOI
comprehension. The proposed method shows improved performance on V-COCO and HICO-DET benchmarks, especially when predicting the rare HOI categories.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapid progress towards visual scene understanding, from object detection [25] to action recognition [23]. However, understanding a scene requires not only detecting individual object instances but
also recognizing the visual relationships between object
pairs [18, 22, 28]. One particularly important facet of visual relationships is human-centric interaction detection,
known as human-object interaction (HOI) detection [5, 10,
13, 15, 33]. Given an input image, it aims to localize
all humans and objects, and to identify all the triplets
hhuman, verb, objecti (see Figure 1). HOI detection under-

Verb Embeddings
drink_with
brush_with

…
sip

Multi-modal Joint Embedding

Abstract

Knowledge Graph

< person, drink with, bowl >

Figure 1:

Conceptual illustration of our proposed multimodal joint embedding learning. In HOI detection task, the
label space is often large and intrinsically having long-tail
distribution issue where some categories have few samples
(e.g. hhuman, drink with, bowli). The proposed model learns a
semantic structure aware embedding space compared to original
word embeddings, such that it can leverage semantic similarity to
retrieve the verb(s) best describing the detected hhuman, objecti
pair. The underlying semantic regularities of verbs and objects are
modeled with graph.

pins a variety of AI tasks such as visual Q&A [30], robotic
task manipulation [3], surveillance event detection [2] and
human-centered computing [27]. However, HOI detection
is still far from settled due to a large label space of verbs
and their interactions with a wide range of object types.
Innate in many problems of practical interest, the label
space of HOIs that are compositions of humans, verbs and
objects exhibits a long-tail distribution, meaning that some
categories possess very few training examples. For example, the number of training examples “person riding a bike”
is much more than “person riding an elephant”. This is
a fundamental problem for the standard deep learning approach, which relies on amount of data for each category to
obtain an effective discriminative pattern. Though HOIs are

2019

