Explainability Methods for Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
Phillip E. Pope*
HRL Laboratories, LLC

Soheil Kolouri*
HRL Laboratories, LLC

Mohammad Rostami
HRL Laboratories, LLC

pepope@hrl.com

skolouri@hrl.com

mrostami@hrl.com

Charles E. Martin
HRL Laboratories, LLC

Heiko Hoffmann
HRL Laboratories, LLC

cemartin@hrl.com

hhoffmann@hrl.com

Abstract

these networks [42, 31, 39, 40]. Zhang et al. [41] provide a
good survey on methods for explainability of CNNs.

With the growing use of graph convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) comes the need for explainability. In this
paper, we introduce explainability methods for GCNNs. We
develop the graph analogues of three prominent explainability methods for convolutional neural networks: contrastive gradient-based (CG) saliency maps, Class Activation Mapping (CAM), and Excitation Backpropagation (EB)
and their variants, gradient-weighted CAM (Grad-CAM)
and contrastive EB (c-EB). We show a proof-of-concept of
these methods on classification problems in two application
domains: visual scene graphs and molecular graphs. To
compare the methods, we identify three desirable properties
of explanations: (1) their importance to classification, as
measured by the impact of occlusions, (2) their contrastivity with respect to different classes, and (3) their sparseness
on a graph. We call the corresponding quantitative metrics fidelity, contrastivity, and sparsity and evaluate them
for each method. Lastly, we analyze the salient subgraphs
obtained from explanations and report frequently occurring
patterns.

Deep CNNs, however, are designed for grid structured
data, e.g. images, in Euclidean spaces, as convolution is
an operation defined on Euclidean space for inputs with ordered elements. Nonetheless, in many applications we need
to deal with data defined on different structures, e.g. graphs
and manifolds, where CNNs cannot be directly used. Such
non-Euclidean spaces appear in various applications including scene graph analysis [15], 3D-shape analysis [25], social networks [37], and chemistry [35]. Geometric deep
learning [6, 1] is a recent emerging field to overcome limitations of CNNs and broaden their application. In particular, CNNs could be generalized to be applicable on graphstructured data by extending the convolution operation onto
graphs and in general onto non-Euclidean spaces. The extension of CNNs to non-Euclidean spaces leads to graph
convolution neural networks (GCNNs) [7, 9, 19].

1. Introduction
Recent success in computer vision is mainly due to emergence of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21].
This has led to state-of-the-art performances on various
computer vision tasks including object recognition [11, 13],
object detection [27], and semantic segmentation [26]. The
end-to-end nature of learning in CNNs have turned them
into powerful data-driven tools for learning from a large corpus of visual data. At the same time, this end-to-end learning strategy hinders the explainability and interpretability
of decisions made by CNNs. Recently, there has been an
increasing number of works studying the inner workings of
CNNs [38, 23, 22] and explaining the decisions made by

In addition to superior performance of a model, we need
techniques to explain why a model predicts what it predicts.
This explanation can help to identify and localize parts of
the input data relevant to the model’s decisions in a particular task. Inspired by the explainability work on CNNs [42],
we introduce explainability methods for decisions by GCNNs. Explainability can be particularly helpful for graphs,
even more than for images, because non-expert humans
cannot intuitively determine the relevant context within a
graph, for example, when identifying groups of atoms (a
sub-graph structure on a molecular graph) that contribute to
a particular property of a molecule.
We adapt three common explainability methods, originally designed for CNNs, and extend them to GCNNs.
These three methods are gradient-based saliency maps [32],
Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [39], and Excitation
Backpropagation (EB) [39]. In addition, we adapt two variants: gradient-weighted CAM (Grad-CAM) [31] and contrastive EB. We evaluate the adapted methods on two differ-

10772

