Single-frame Regularization for Temporally Stable CNNs
Gabriel Eilertsen1
Rafał K. Mantiuk2
Jonas Unger1
1
Dept. of Science and Technology, Linköping University, Sweden
2
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
{gabriel.eilertsen, jonas.unger}@liu.se

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can model complicated non-linear relations between images. However,
they are notoriously sensitive to small changes in the input. Most CNNs trained to describe image-to-image mappings generate temporally unstable results when applied to
video sequences, leading to flickering artifacts and other
inconsistencies over time. In order to use CNNs for video
material, previous methods have relied on estimating dense
frame-to-frame motion information (optical flow) in the
training and/or the inference phase, or by exploring recurrent learning structures. We take a different approach to the
problem, posing temporal stability as a regularization of the
cost function. The regularization is formulated to account
for different types of motion that can occur between frames,
so that temporally stable CNNs can be trained without the
need for video material or expensive motion estimation. The
training can be performed as a fine-tuning operation, without architectural modifications of the CNN. Our evaluation
shows that the training strategy leads to large improvements
in temporal smoothness. Moreover, for small datasets the
regularization can help in boosting the generalization performance to a much larger extent than what is possible with
naı̈ve augmentation strategies.

rafal.mantiuk@cl.cam.ac.uk

frame. Such changes are seen as flickering, or unnatural
movements of local features. Previous methods for applying CNNs to video material most often use dense motion
information between frames in order to enforce temporal
coherence [29, 13, 6, 24]. This requires ground truth optical flow for training, modifications to the CNN architecture,
and computationally expensive training and/or prediction.
Moreover, there are many situations where reliable correspondences between frames cannot be estimated, e.g. due
to occlusion or lack of texture.
Instead of relying on custom architectures, we take a
simple, efficient, and general approach to the problem of
CNN temporal stability. We pose the stability as a regularizing term in the loss function, which potentially can be
applied to any CNN. We formulate two different regularizations based on observations of the expected behavior of
temporally varying processing. The result is a light-weight
method for stabilizing CNNs in the temporal domain. It can
be applied through fine-tuning of pre-trained CNN weights
and requires no special-purpose training data or CNN architecture. Through extensive experimentation for the application in colorization and single-exposure high dynamic
range (HDR) reconstruction, we show the efficiency of the
regularization strategies.
In summary, this paper explores regularization for the
purpose of stabilizing CNNs in the temporal domain and
presents the following main contributions:

1. Introduction

• Two novel regularization formulations for temporal
stabilization of CNNs, which both model the dynamics
of consecutive frames in video sequences.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) can represent complex
non-linear functions but tend to be very sensitive to the
input. For image data, this is manifested in sensitivity to
small changes in pixel values. For example, techniques
for generating adversarial examples have demonstrated that
there exists images that are visually indistinguishable from
each other, while generating widely different predictions
[32]. It is also possible to find naturally occurring image
operations that can cause a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to fail in the learned task [2, 9, 39]. For imageto-image CNNs applied on video sequences, this sensitivity results in abrupt and incoherent changes from frame to

• A novel perceptually motivated smoothness metric for
evaluation of the temporal stability.
• An evaluation showing that the proposed training technique improves temporal stability significantly while
maintaining or even increasing the CNN performance.
• For scenarios with limited training data, the generalization performance of the regularization strategies is
significantly better than traditional data augmentation.
111176

