Edge-Labeling Graph Neural Network for Few-shot Learning
Jongmin Kim∗1,3 , Taesup Kim2,3 , Sungwoong Kim3 , and Chang D.Yoo1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
2
MILA, Université de Montréal
3
Kakao Brain

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel edge-labeling graph
neural network (EGNN), which adapts a deep neural network on the edge-labeling graph, for few-shot learning.
The previous graph neural network (GNN) approaches in
few-shot learning have been based on the node-labeling
framework, which implicitly models the intra-cluster similarity and the inter-cluster dissimilarity. In contrast, the
proposed EGNN learns to predict the edge-labels rather
than the node-labels on the graph that enables the evolution
of an explicit clustering by iteratively updating the edgelabels with direct exploitation of both intra-cluster similarity and the inter-cluster dissimilarity. It is also well suited
for performing on various numbers of classes without retraining, and can be easily extended to perform a transductive inference. The parameters of the EGNN are learned
by episodic training with an edge-labeling loss to obtain a
well-generalizable model for unseen low-data problem. On
both of the supervised and semi-supervised few-shot image
classification tasks with two benchmark datasets, the proposed EGNN significantly improves the performances over
the existing GNNs.

1. Introduction
A lot of interest in meta-learning [1] has been recently arisen in various areas including especially taskgeneralization problems such as few-shot learning [2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], learn-to-learn [16, 17,
18], non-stationary reinforcement learning[19, 20, 21], and
continual learning [22, 23]. Among these meta-learning
problems, few-shot leaning aims to automatically and efficiently solve new tasks with few labeled data based on
knowledge obtained from previous experiences. This is in
∗ Work done during an internship at Kakao Brain. Correspondence to
kimjm0309@gmail.com

Figure 1: Alternative node and edge feature update in
EGNN with edge-labeling for few-shot learning

contrast to traditional (deep) learning methods that highly
rely on large amounts of labeled data and cumbersome manual tuning to solve a single task.
Recently, there has also been growing interest in graph
neural networks (GNNs) to handle rich relational structures
on data with deep neural networks [24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34]. GNNs iteratively perform a feature aggregation from neighbors by message passing, and
therefore can express complex interactions among data instances. Since few-shot learning algorithms have shown
to require full exploitation of the relationships between a
support set and a query [2, 3, 5, 10, 11], the use of GNNs
can naturally have the great potential to solve the few-shot
learning problem. A few approaches that have explored
GNNs for few-shot learning have been recently proposed
[6, 12]. Specifically, given a new task with its few-shot support set, Garcia and Bruna [6] proposed to first construct a
graph where all examples of the support set and a query are
densely connected. Each input node is represented by the
embedding feature (e.g. an output of a convolutional neural
network) and the given label information (e.g. one-hot encoded label). Then, it classifies the unlabeled query by iteratively updating node features from neighborhood aggregation. Liu et al. [12] proposed a transductive propagation network (TPN) on the node features obtained from a deep neu-

11

