Mitigating Information Leakage in Image Representations: A Maximum
Entropy Approach
Proteek Chandan Roy and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{royprote, vishnu}@msu.edu
Abstract
Image recognition systems have demonstrated tremendous progress over the past few decades thanks, in part,
to our ability of learning compact and robust representations of images. As we witness the wide spread adoption of
these systems, it is imperative to consider the problem of unintended leakage of information from an image representation, which might compromise the privacy of the data owner.
This paper investigates the problem of learning an image
representation that minimizes such leakage of user information. We formulate the problem as an adversarial non-zero
sum game of finding a good embedding function with two
competing goals: to retain as much task dependent discriminative image information as possible, while simultaneously
minimizing the amount of information, as measured by entropy, about other sensitive attributes of the user. We analyze the stability and convergence dynamics of the proposed
formulation using tools from non-linear systems theory and
compare to that of the corresponding adversarial zero-sum
game formulation that optimizes likelihood as a measure of
information content. Numerical experiments on UCI, Extended Yale B, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets indicate
that our proposed approach is able to learn image representations that exhibit high task performance while mitigating
leakage of predefined sensitive information.

1. Introduction
Current day machine learning algorithms based on deep
neural networks have demonstrated impressive progress
across multiple domains such as image classification,
speech recognition etc. By stacking together multiple layers of linear and non-linear operations deep neural networks
have been able to learn and identify complex patterns in
data. As a by-product of these capabilities, deep neural networks have also become powerful enough to inadvertently
identify sensitive information or features of data even in the

absence of any additional side information. For example,
consider a scenario where a user enrolls their facial image
in a face recognition system for the purpose of access control. During enrollment, a feature vector is extracted from
the image and stored in a database. Apart from the identity
of the user, this feature vector potentially contains information that is sensitive to the user, such as the age, information that the user may never have expressly consented to
provide. More generally, learned data representations could
leak auxiliary information that the participants may never
have intended to release. Information obtained in this manner can be used to compromise the privacy of the user or to
be biased and unfair to the user. Therefore, it is imperative
to develop representation learning algorithms that can intentionally and permanently obscure sensitive information
while retaining task dependent information. Addressing this
problem is the central aim of this paper.
A few recent attempts have been made to study related
problems, such as learning censored [3], fair [14], or invariant [18] representations of data. The central idea of these
approaches, collectively referred to as Adversarial Representation Learning (ARL), is to learn a representation of
data in an adversarial setting. These approaches couple together (i) an adversarial network that seeks to classify and
extract sensitive information from a given representation,
and (ii) an embedding network that is tasked with extracting a compact representation of data while preventing the
adversarial network from succeeding at leaking sensitive information. To achieve their respective goals, the adversary
is optimized to maximize the likelihood of the sensitive information, while the encoder is optimized to minimize the
same likelihood i.e., adversary’s likelihood of the sensitive
information, thereby leading to a zero-sum game. We will
henceforth refer to this formulation as Maximum Likelihood
Adversarial Representation Learning (ML-ARL).
The zero-sum game formulation of optimizing the likelihood, however, is practically sub-optimal from the perspective of preventing information leakage. As an illustration
consider a problem where the sensitive attribute has three

2586

