Deep Rigid Instance Scene Flow
Wei-Chiu Ma1,2

Shenlong Wang1,3 Rui Hu1 Yuwen Xiong1,3
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
University of Toronto

Raquel Urtasun1,3

KITTI Scene Flow (Test)
16

In this paper we tackle the problem of scene flow estimation in the context of self-driving. We leverage deep learning techniques as well as strong priors as in our application
domain the motion of the scene can be composed by the
motion of the robot and the 3D motion of the actors in the
scene. We formulate the problem as energy minimization in
a deep structured model, which can be solved efficiently in
the GPU by unrolling a Gaussian-Newton solver. Our experiments in the challenging KITTI scene flow dataset show
that we outperform the state-of-the-art by a very large margin, while being 800 times faster.

1. Introduction
Scene flow refers to the problem of estimating a threedimenional motion field from a set of two consecutive (in
time) stereo pairs. It was first introduced in [40] to describe
the 3D motion of each point in the scene. Through scene
flow, we can gain insights into the geometry as well as the
overall composition and motion of the scene. It is of particular importance for robotics systems, such as self-driving
cars, as knowing the 3D motion of other objects in the scene
can not only help the autonomous systems avoid collision
while planing its own future movements, but also improve
the understanding of the scene and predict the intent of others. In this work, we focus on estimating the 3D scene flow
in autonomous driving scenarios.
In the world of self-driving, the motion of the scene can
be mostly explained by the motion of the ego-car. The presence of dynamic objects which typically move rigidly can
also be utilized as strong priors. Previous structure prediction approaches often exploit these facts and fit a piece-wise
rigid representations of motion [41, 44, 27, 3]. While these
methods achieve impressive results on scene flow estimation, they require minutes to process each frame, and thus
cannot be employed in real-world robotics systems.
On the other hand, deep learning based methods have
achieved state-of-the-art performance in real time on a va-

SF-All Outliers (%)

Abstract

FSF+MS

SceneFFields
CSF

14
12

SSF

OSF
OSF 2018
PRSM
ISF

10
8
6

Ours
100

101

102

Runtime (sec)

103

Figure 1: Performance vs runtime on KITTI SceneFlow
dataset: Our approach is much faster and more accurate.
riety of low level tasks, such as optical flow prediction
[11, 32, 38] and stereo estimation [46, 26, 24]. While they
produce ‘accurate’ results, their output is not structured and
cannot capture the relationships between estimated variables. For instance, they lack the ability to guarantee that
pixels on a given object produce consistent estimates. While
this phenomenon may have little impact in photography
editing applications, this can cathastrophic in the context
of self-driving cars, where the motion of the full object is
more important than the motion of each individual pixel.
With these problems in mind, we develop a novel deep
rigid instance scene flow (DRISF) model that takes the best
of both worlds. The idea behind is that the motion of the
scene can be composed by estimating the 3D rigid motion
of each actor. The static background can also be modeled as
a rigidly moving object, as its 3D motion can be described
by the ‘ego-car’ motion. The problem is thus reduced to estimating the 3D motion of each traffic participant. Towards
this gaol, we first capitalize on deep neural networks to estimate optical flow, disparity and instance segmentation. We
then exploit multiple geometry based energy functions to
encode the structural geometric relationship between these
visual cues. Through optimizing the energy function, we
can effectively reason about the 3D motion of each traffic
participant. As the energy takes the form of weighted sum
of squares, it can be efficiently minimized via GaussianNewton (GN) algorithm [5]. We implement the GN solver

3614

