Snapshot Distillation: Teacher-Student Optimization in One Generation
Chenglin Yang1 , Lingxi Xie1,2( ) , Chi Su3 , Alan L. Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Inc. 3 Kingsoft Cloud
{chenglin.yangw,198808xc,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

suchi@kingsoft.com

Abstract
Optimizing a deep neural network is a fundamental task
in computer vision, yet direct training methods often suffer from over-fitting. Teacher-student optimization aims at
providing complementary cues from a model trained previously, but these approaches are often considerably slow due
to the pipeline of training a few generations in sequence,
i.e., time complexity is increased by several times.
This paper presents snapshot distillation (SD), the first
framework which enables teacher-student optimization in
one generation. The idea of SD is very simple: instead of
borrowing supervision signals from previous generations,
we extract such information from earlier epochs in the same
generation, meanwhile make sure that the difference between teacher and student is sufficiently large so as to prevent under-fitting. To achieve this goal, we implement SD in
a cyclic learning rate policy, in which the last snapshot of
each cycle is used as the teacher for all iterations in the next
cycle, and the teacher signal is smoothed to provide richer
information. In standard image classification benchmarks
such as CIFAR100 and ILSVRC2012, SD achieves consistent accuracy gain without heavy computational overheads.
We also verify that models pre-trained with SD transfers
well to object detection and semantic segmentation in the
PascalVOC dataset.

1. Introduction
A large portion of recent advances in computer vision
have been built upon deep learning, in particular training
very deep neural networks. With the depth increasing
from tens [25, 37, 40] to hundreds [18, 22], the issue of
the network optimization becomes more and more important yet challenging. As such, researchers proposed various approaches to deal with both under-fitting [30], overfitting [39] and numerical instability [23].
As an alternative approach to assist training, teacherstudent (T-S) optimization was originally designed for training a smaller network to approximate the behavior of a
larger one, i.e., model compression [19], but later re-

SA?
Knowledge Distillation (2015) [19]
FitNet (2015) [35]
Net2Net (2016) [5]
A Gift from KD (2017) [50]
Label Refinery (2018) [2]
Born-Again Network (2018) [11]
Tolerant Teacher (2018) [49]
Snapshot Distillation (this work)

IN?

1G?

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X

Table 1. The attributes of different teacher-student optimization
approaches, where SA indicates that teacher and student have the
same architecture, IN indicates being evaluated on ImageNet, and
1G indicates that the entire process is done within one generation.
See Section 2 for a detailed survey.

searchers found its effectiveness in providing complementary cues to training the same network [11, 2]. These
approaches require a teacher model which is often obtained
from a standalone training process. Then, an extra loss
term which measures the similarity between the teacher and
the student is added to the existing cross-entropy loss term.
It was believed that such an optimization process benefits
from so-called secondary information [49], i.e., class-level
similarity that allows the student not to fit the one-hot class
distribution. Despite their success in improving recognition
accuracy, these approaches often suffer much heavier computational overheads, because a sequence of models need
to be optimized one by one. A training process with one
teacher and K students requires K× more training time
compared to a single model.
This paper presents an algorithm named snapshot distillation (SD) to perform T-S optimization in one generation
which, to the best of our knowledge, was not achieved in
prior research. The differences between SD and previous
methods are summarized in Table 1. The key idea of SD is
straightforward: taking extra supervision (a.k.a. the teacher
signal) from the prior iterations (in the same generation)
instead of the prior generations. Based on this framework, we investigate several factors that impact the performance of T-S optimization, and summarize three principles,
namely, (i) the teacher model has been well optimized; (ii)
12859

