Towards Rich Feature Discovery with Class Activation Maps Augmentation for
Person Re-Identification
Wenjie Yang 1,2 , Houjing Huang 1,2 , Zhang Zhang 3 , Xiaotang Chen 1,2 , Kaiqi Huang 1,2,5 , Shu Zhang 4
1
CRISE, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 4 Deepwise AI Lab
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{wenjie.yang,houjing.huang,zzhang,xtchen,kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,zhangshu@deepwise.com

(a)

Baseline

(b)

aggregate

The fundamental challenge of small inter-person variation requires Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) models to
capture sufficient fine-grained features. This paper proposes to discover diverse discriminative visual cues without extra assistance, e.g., pose estimation, human parsing.
Specifically, a Class Activation Maps (CAM) augmentation model is proposed to expand the activation scope of
baseline Re-ID model to explore rich visual cues, where
the backbone network is extended by a series of ordered
branches which share the same input but output complementary CAM. A novel Overlapped Activation Penalty is
proposed to force the current branch to pay more attention to the image regions less activated by the previous
ones, such that spatial diverse visual features can be discovered. The proposed model achieves state-of-the-art results on three Re-ID datasets. Moreover, a visualization approach termed ranking activation map (RAM) is proposed
to explicitly interpret the ranking results in the test stage,
which gives qualitative validations of the proposed method.

Ours

Abstract

query

top 5 in ranking list

(c)

Figure 1: (a) and (b) show the proposed RAMs. The maps
highlight the discriminative visual cues used by the baseline and the proposed model to rank the gallery images, respectively. Images with green and red boundary denote true
positive and false positive. In (c), the 1st row shows images
of the same ID and the CAM in the 2nd row highlights the
image regions, i.e., handbag, used by the baseline model to
identify this person. The CAM in 3rd-4th rows show the
proposed method further discover more visual cues.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) aims to identify a particular person across multiple non-overlapping cameras. It
has important application prospects, e.g., large-scale person
tracking and person search in video surveillance. Although
significant progress has been achieved in the last decade, it
is still confronted with many challenges, e.g., various background clutters, large variations of illuminations and camera
views and articulated deformations of the human pose.
Moreover, the small inter-person variation makes it difficult for the Re-ID models to distinguish persons with similar appearance based on a small number of visual cues. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(a), all the top 5 images are not the same
identity with the queried one, as the baseline model mainly

pays attention to the black shorts, but neglects the other
key discriminative visual cues, e.g., white shoes and bag
strap. To further illustrate the point, a diagnostic analysis
is conducted on the baseline model. The analysis is based
on a recently proposed visualization analytical tool, i.e.,
CAM [55]. The 2nd row in Fig. 1(c) presents the CAM of
the person in Market1501 [49], which shows that the baseline model tends to identify this person based on a small
number but discriminative cues, i.e., handbag. The small
number of cues may be sufficient for distinguishing person
IDs in the training set, however, it is essential for a Re-ID
model to discover abundant discriminative visual cues so as
to form a full-scale characteristic of each identity.
11389

