BASNet: Boundary-Aware Salient Object Detection
Xuebin Qin, Zichen Zhang, Chenyang Huang, Chao Gao, Masood Dehghan and Martin Jagersand
University of Alberta, Canada
{xuebin,vincent.zhang,chuang8,cgao3,masood1,mj7}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks have been adopted
for salient object detection and achieved the state-of-the-art
performance. Most of the previous works however focus on
region accuracy but not on the boundary quality. In this paper, we propose a predict-refine architecture, BASNet, and
a new hybrid loss for Boundary-Aware Salient object detection. Specifically, the architecture is composed of a densely
supervised Encoder-Decoder network and a residual refinement module, which are respectively in charge of saliency
prediction and saliency map refinement. The hybrid loss
guides the network to learn the transformation between the
input image and the ground truth in a three-level hierarchy
– pixel-, patch- and map- level – by fusing Binary Cross Entropy (BCE), Structural SIMilarity (SSIM) and Intersectionover-Union (IoU) losses. Equipped with the hybrid loss,
the proposed predict-refine architecture is able to effectively
segment the salient object regions and accurately predict
the fine structures with clear boundaries. Experimental results on six public datasets show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods both in terms of regional
and boundary evaluation measures. Our method runs at
over 25 fps on a single GPU. The code is available at:
https://github.com/NathanUA/BASNet.

1. Introduction
The human vision system has an effective attention
mechanism for choosing the most important information
from visual scenes. Computer vision aims at modeling this
mechanism in two research branches: eye-fixation detection
[20] and salient object detection [3]. Our work focuses on
the second branch and aims at accurately segmenting the
pixels of salient objects in an input image. The results have
immediate applications in e.g. image segmentation/editing
[53, 25, 11, 54] and manipulation [24, 43], visual tracking
[32, 52, 55] and user interface optimization [12].
Recently, Fully Convolutional Neural Networks (FCN)
[63], have been adopted for salient object detection. Although these methods achieve significant results compared

(a) im/GT

(b) Ours

(c) PiCANetR

(d) PiCANetRC

Figure 1. Sample result of our method (BASNet) compared to PiCANetR [39]. Column (a) shows the input image, zoom-in view of ground truth (GT) and the boundary map, respectively. (b), (c) and (d) are results of ours,
PiCANetR and PiCANetRC (PiCANetR with CRF [27]
post-processing). For each method, the three rows respectively show the predicted saliency map, the zoom-in view
of saliency map and the zoom-in view of boundary map.

to traditional methods, their predicted saliency maps are
still defective in fine structures and/or boundaries (see Figs.
1(c)-1(d)).
There are two main challenges in accurate salient object
detection: (i) the saliency is mainly defined over the global
contrast of the whole image rather than local or pixel-wise
features. To achieve accurate results, the developed saliency
detection methods have to understand the global meaning
of the whole image as well as the detailed structures of the
objects [6]. To address this problem, networks that aggregate multi-level deep features are needed; (ii) Most of the
salient object detection methods use Cross Entropy (CE) as
their training loss. But models trained with CE loss usually have low confidence in differentiating boundary pixels,
leading to blurry boundaries. Other losses such as Intersection over Union (IoU) loss [56, 42, 47], F-measure loss [78]
and Dice-score loss [8] were proposed for biased training
sets but they are not specifically designed for capturing fine

7479

