Actor-Critic Instance Segmentation
Nikita Araslanov∗
∗
Dept. of Computer Science

Constantin A. Rothkopf †,§
Stefan Roth∗,§
†
Institute of Psychology § Centre for Cognitive Science
TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Most approaches to visual scene analysis have emphasised parallel processing of the image elements. However,
one area in which the sequential nature of vision is apparent, is that of segmenting multiple, potentially similar and
partially occluded objects in a scene. In this work, we revisit the recurrent formulation of this challenging problem
in the context of reinforcement learning. Motivated by the
limitations of the global max-matching assignment of the
ground-truth segments to the recurrent states, we develop
an actor-critic approach in which the actor recurrently predicts one instance mask at a time and utilises the gradient
from a concurrently trained critic network. We formulate
the state, action, and the reward such as to let the critic
model long-term effects of the current prediction and incorporate this information into the gradient signal. Furthermore, to enable effective exploration in the inherently
high-dimensional action space of instance masks, we learn
a compact representation using a conditional variational
auto-encoder. We show that our actor-critic model consistently provides accuracy benefits over the recurrent baseline
on standard instance segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Methods for instance segmentation have for the most
part relied on the idea of parallel processing of the image elements and features within images [13]. However,
previous work [31, 32] suggests that instance segmentation can be formulated as a sequential visual task, akin
to human vision, for which substantial evidence has revealed that many vision tasks beyond eye movements are
solved sequentially [36]. While the segmentation accuracy
of feed-forward pipelines hinges on a large number of object proposals, proposal-free recurrent models have a particular appeal for instance segmentation where the number
of instances is unknown. Also, the temporal context can
facilitate a certain order of prediction: segmenting “hard”
instances can be improved by conditioning on the masks
of “easy” instances segmented first (e.g., due to occlusions,

ambiguities in spatial context etc.; [20]).
A pivotal question of a recurrent formulation for instance
segmentation is the assignment of the ground-truth segments to timesteps, since the order in which they have to
be predicted is unknown. Previously this was addressed using the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm [18], computing the maxmatching assignment. We provide some insight, however,
that the final prediction ordering depends on the initial assignment. Furthermore, the loss for every timestep is not
informative in terms of its effect on future predictions. Intuitively, considering the future loss for the predictions early
on should improve the segmentation accuracy at the later
timesteps. Although this can be achieved by unrolling the
recurrent states for gradient backpropagation, such an approach quickly becomes infeasible for segmentation networks due to high memory demands.
In the past years, reinforcement learning (RL) has been
showing promise in solving increasingly complex tasks [23,
26, 27]. However, relatively little work has explored applications of RL outside its conventional domain, which we
attribute to two main factors: (1) computer vision problems often lack the notion of the environment, which provides the interacting agent with the reward feedback; (2)
actions in the space of images are often prohibitively highdimensional, leading to tough computational challenges.
Here, we use an actor-critic (AC) model [5] to make
progress regarding both technical issues of a recurrent approach to instance segmentation. We use exploration noise
to reduce the influence of the initial assignments on the
segmentation ordering. Furthermore, we design a reward
function that accounts for the future reward in the objective function for every timestep. Our model does not use
bounding boxes – often criticised due to their coarse representation of the objects’ shape. Instead, we built on an
encoder-decoder baseline that makes pixelwise predictions
directly at the scale of the input image. To enable the use
of RL for instance segmentation with its associated highdimensional output space, we propose to learn a compact
action-space representation through the latent variables of
a conditional variational auto-encoder [16], which we integrate into a recurrent prediction pipeline.

8237

