Content-Aware Multi-Level Guidance for Interactive Instance Segmentation
Soumajit Majumder
Institute of Computer Science II
University of Bonn, Germany

Angela Yao
School of Computing
National University of Singapore

majumder@cs.uni-bonn.de

yaoa@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In interactive instance segmentation, users give feedback
to iteratively refine segmentation masks. The user-provided
clicks are transformed into guidance maps which provide
the network with necessary cues on the whereabouts of the
object of interest. Guidance maps used in current systems
are purely distance-based and are either too localized or
non-informative. We propose a novel transformation of
user clicks to generate content-aware guidance maps that
leverage the hierarchical structural information present in
an image. Using our guidance maps, even the most basic
FCNs are able to outperform existing approaches that require state-of-the-art segmentation networks pre-trained on
large scale segmentation datasets. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed transformation strategy through
comprehensive experimentation in which we significantly
raise state-of-the-art on four standard interactive segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Interactive object selection and segmentation allows
users to interactively select objects of interest down to
the pixel level by providing inputs such as clicks, scribbles, or bounding boxes. The segmented results are useful for downstream applications such as image/video editing [6, 30], image-based medical diagnosis [50, 51], humanmachine collaborative annotation [2], etc. GrabCut [45] is a
pioneering example of interactive segmentation which segments objects from a user-provided bounding box by iteratively updating a colour-based Gaussian mixture model.
Other methods include Graph Cuts [7], Random Walk [18]
and GeoS [13] though more recent methods [32, 35, 36, 52,
53] approach the problem with deep learning architectures
such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
In standard, non-interactive instance segmentation [4,
15, 21, 22, 23], the RGB image is given as input and segmentation masks for each object instance are predicted. In
an interactive setting, however, the input consists of the

Figure 1. Existing interactive instance segmentation [26, 31, 32,
53] techniques do not utilize any image information when generating guidance maps (second column). In contrast, our proposed
technique exploits image structures such as superpixels and object proposals, allowing us to generate more informative guidance
maps (first column, bottom row).

RGB image as well as ‘guidance’ maps based on userprovided supervision. The guidance map helps to select the
specific instance to segment; when working in an iterative
setting, it can also help correct errors from previous segmentations [6, 32, 35, 53].
User feedback is typically given as clicks [26, 31, 32, 35,
36, 53] or bounding boxes [52] and are then transformed
into guidance signals fed as inputs into the CNN. By working with high-level representations encoded in pre-trained
CNNs, the number of user interactions required to generate quality segments have been greatly reduced. However, there is still a large incongruence between the image encoding versus the guidance signal, as user interactions are transformed into simplistic primitives such as Euclidean [53, 31, 26] or Gaussian distance maps [6, 35, 36],
the latter being the preferred choice in more recent works
due to their ability to localize user clicks [35]. Examples of
such guidance maps can be found in Fig. 1 second column,
first row and second row respectively.

11602

