Photo Wake-Up: 3D Character Animation from a Single Photo
Chung-Yi Weng,

Brian Curless,

Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman

UW Reality Lab
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington

Figure 1: Given a single photo as input (far left), we create a 3D animatable version of the subject, which can now walk
towards the viewer (middle). The 3D result can be experienced in augmented reality (right); in the result above the user has
virtually hung the artwork with a HoloLens headset and can watch the character run out of the painting from different views.
Please see all results in the supplementary video: https://youtu.be/G63goXc5MyU. Photo credit: wikiart.org.

Abstract
We present a method and application for animating a
human subject from a single photo. E.g., the character
can walk out, run, sit, or jump in 3D. The key contributions of this paper are: 1) an application of viewing and
animating humans in single photos in 3D, 2) a novel 2D
warping method to deform a posable template body model
to fit the person’s complex silhouette to create an animatable mesh, and 3) a method for handling partial self
occlusions. We compare to state-of-the-art related methods and evaluate results with human studies. Further, we
present an interactive interface that allows re-posing the
person in 3D, and an augmented reality setup where the
animated 3D person can emerge from the photo into the
real world. We demonstrate the method on photos, posters,
and art. The project page is at https://grail.cs.
washington.edu/projects/wakeup/.

1. Introduction
Whether you come back by page or by the big screen,
Hogwarts will always be there to welcome you home.

In this paper, we propose to “wake up a photo” by bringing the foreground character to life, so that it can be animated in 3D and emerge from the photo. Related to our
application are cinemagraphs and GIFs1 where a small motion is introduced to a photo to visualize dominant dynamic
areas. Unlike a cinemagraph, which is a 2D experience created from video, our method takes a single photo as input
and results in a fully 3D experience. The output animation
can be played as a video, viewed interactively on a monitor,
and as an augmented or virtual reality experience, where a
user with an headset can enjoy the central figure of a photo
coming out into the real world.
A central challenge in delivering a compelling experience is to have the reconstructed subject closely match the
silhouette of the clothed person in the photo, including selfocclusion of, e.g., the subject’s arm against the torso. Our
approach begins with existing methods for segmenting a
person from an image, 2D skeleton estimation, and fitting
a (semi-nude) morphable, posable 3D model. The result of
this first stage, while animatable, does not conform to the
silhouette and does not look natural.
Our key technical contribution, then, is a method for constructing an animatable 3D model that matches the silhouette in a single photo and handles self-occlusion. Rather
1 Artistic cinemagraphs: http://cinemagraphs.com/

J.K. Rowling

15908

