STEP: Spatio-Temporal Progressive Learning for Video Action Detection
Xitong Yang1∗ Xiaodong Yang2 Ming-Yu Liu2
Fanyi Xiao3∗ Larry Davis1 Jan Kautz2
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 NVIDIA 3 University of California, Davis

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Spatio-TEmporal Progressive
(STEP) action detector—a progressive learning framework
for spatio-temporal action detection in videos. Starting
from a handful of coarse-scale proposal cuboids, our approach progressively refines the proposals towards actions
over a few steps. In this way, high-quality proposals (i.e.,
adhere to action movements) can be gradually obtained at
later steps by leveraging the regression outputs from previous steps. At each step, we adaptively extend the proposals in time to incorporate more related temporal context. Compared to the prior work that performs action detection in one run, our progressive learning framework is
able to naturally handle the spatial displacement within action tubes and therefore provides a more effective way for
spatio-temporal modeling. We extensively evaluate our approach on UCF101 and AVA, and demonstrate superior detection results. Remarkably, we achieve mAP of 75.0% and
18.6% on the two datasets with 3 progressive steps and using respectively only 11 and 34 initial proposals.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal action detection aims to recognize the
actions of interest that present in a video and localize them
in both space and time. Inspired by the advances in the
field of object detection in images [8, 21], most recent work
approaches this task based on the standard two-stage framework: in the first stage action proposals are produced by a
region proposal algorithm or densely sampled anchors, and
in the second stage the proposals are used for action classification and localization refinement.
Compared to object detection in images, spatio-temporal
action detection in videos is however a more challenging
problem. New challenges arise from both of the above
two stages when the temporal characteristic of videos is
taken into account. First, an action tube (i.e., a sequence of
bounding boxes of action) usually involves spatial displace∗ Work done during an internship at NVIDIA Research.

Figure 1: A schematic overview of spatio-temporal progressive learning for action detection. Starting with a coarsescale proposal cuboid, it progressively refines the proposal
towards the action, and adaptively extends the proposal to
incorporate more related temporal context at each step.

ment over time, which introduces extra complexity for proposal generation and refinement. Second, effective temporal modeling becomes imperative for accurate action classification, as a number of actions are only identifiable when
temporal context information is available.
Previous work usually exploits temporal information by
performing action detection at the clip (i.e., a short video
snippet) level. For instance, [12, 17] take as input a sequence of frames and output the action categories and regressed tubelets of each clip. In order to generate action
proposals, they extend 2D region proposals to 3D by replicating them over time, assuming that the spatial extent is
fixed within a clip. However, this assumption would be violated for the action tubes with large spatial displacement,
in particular when the clip is long or involves rapid movement of actors or camera. Thus, using long cuboids directly
as action proposals is not optimal, since they introduce extra noise for action classification and make action localization more challenging, if not hopeless. Recently, there are
some attempts to use adaptive proposals for action detection
[16, 20]. However, these methods require an offline linking
process to generate the proposals.

264

