Text Guided Person Image Synthesis
Xingran Zhou1 Siyu Huang1∗ Bin Li1 Yingming Li1 Jiachen Li2 Zhongfei Zhang1
1

Zhejiang University

2

Nanjing University

{xingranzh, siyuhuang, bin li, yingming, zhongfei}@zju.edu.cn, jiachen li nju@163.com

An Asian man in [a white shirt], black pants, and carrying
a jug of water. He is walking forward to the camera.
input

yellow

blue

pink

purple

green

A woman in a yellow shirt, [a pair of gray pants] and a pair
of pink and white shoes. She has head inclined forward.
input

green

black

blue

pink

white

Figure 1: Samples of text guided person image synthesis. Given the reference images and the natural language descriptions,
our algorithm correspondingly generates pose and attribute transferred person images. As shown in the left, our algorithm
transfers the person pose based on ‘He is walking forward to the camera’, and also synthesizes shirts of various different
colors. Similarly for the right example.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method to manipulate the
visual appearance (pose and attribute) of a person image
according to natural language descriptions. Our method
can be boiled down to two stages: 1) text guided pose generation and 2) visual appearance transferred image synthesis. In the first stage, our method infers a reasonable target
human pose based on the text. In the second stage, our
method synthesizes a realistic and appearance transferred
person image according to the text in conjunction with the
target pose. Our method extracts sufficient information from
the text and establishes a mapping between the image space
and the language space, making generating and editing images corresponding to the description possible. We conduct extensive experiments to reveal the effectiveness of our
method, as well as using the VQA Perceptual Score as a
metric for evaluating the method. It shows for the first time
that we can automatically edit the person image from the
natural language descriptions.

1. Introduction
Person images are produced in any time today due to the
popularization of visual capturing devices such as mobile
phones, wearable cameras, and surveillance systems. The
* Corresponding author

demand for a user-friendly algorithm to manipulate person
images is growing rapidly. In practice, people usually represent the concept about a person’s appearance and status
in a very flexible form, i.e., the natural languages. It is our
understanding that the guidance through text description for
generating and editing images is a friendly and convenient
way for person image synthesis.
In this paper, we propose a new task of editing a person
image according to natural language descriptions. Two examples of this task are shown in Fig. 1. Given an image of
a person, the goal is to transfer the visual appearance of the
person under the guidance of text description, while keeping the invariance of person identity. Specifically, the pose,
attributes (e.g., cloth color), and the other properties of the
identity are simultaneously edited to satisfy the description.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have offered a
solution to conditioned realistic image generation. The textto-image approaches [28, 22, 32, 30, 29] synthesize images
with given texts without the reference images, where the
semantic features extracted from texts are converted to the
visual representations to constitute the generated images.
However, most of these approaches only succeed in flower
or bird image generation. In regard to person editing, the
pose guided generation methods [18, 17, 5, 1] transfer the
person pose by taking the target pose as input to instruct the
generation process, while the editing of person image under the guidance of natural language descriptions has rarely

3663

