Learning to Learn from Noisy Labeled Data
Junnan Li1 , Yongkang Wong1 , Qi Zhao2 , Mohan S. Kankanhalli1
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of Minnesota
lijunnan@u.nus.edu, yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg, qzhao@cs.umn.edu, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in
image classification tasks, the human-level performance relies on massive training data with high-quality manual annotations, which are expensive and time-consuming to collect. There exist many inexpensive data sources on the web,
but they tend to contain inaccurate labels. Training on noisy
labeled datasets causes performance degradation because
DNNs can easily overfit to the label noise. To overcome this
problem, we propose a noise-tolerant training algorithm,
where a meta-learning update is performed prior to conventional gradient update. The proposed meta-learning method
simulates actual training by generating synthetic noisy labels, and train the model such that after one gradient update
using each set of synthetic noisy labels, the model does not
overfit to the specific noise. We conduct extensive experiments on the noisy CIFAR-10 dataset and the Clothing1M
dataset. The results demonstrate the advantageous performance of the proposed method compared to state-of-the-art
baselines.

1. Introduction
One of the key reasons why deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been so successful in image classification is
the collections of massive labeled datasets such as COCO
[14] and ImageNet [20]. However, it is time-consuming
and expensive to collect such high-quality manual annotations. A single image often requires agreement from multiple annotators to reduce label error. On the other hand,
there exist other less expensive sources to collect labeled
data, such as search engines, social media websites, or reducing the number of annotators per image. However, those
low-cost approaches introduce low-quality annotations with
label noise. Many studies have shown that label noise
can significantly affect the accuracy of the learned classifiers [2, 23, 32]. In this work, we address the following
problem: how to effectively train on noisy labeled datasets?
Some methods learn with label noise by relying on human supervision to verify seed images [11, 29] or estimate

label confusion [16, 31]. However, those methods exhibit a
disadvantage in scalability for large datasets. On the other
hand, methods without human supervision (e.g. label correction [18, 24] and noise correction layers [5, 23]) are
scalable but less effective and more heuristic. In this work
we propose a meta-learning based noise-tolerant (MLNT)
training to learn from noisy labeled data without human supervision or access to any clean labels. Rather than designing a specific model, we propose a model-agnostic training
algorithm, which is applicable to any model that is trained
with gradient-based learning rule.
The prominent issue in training DNNs on noisy labeled
data is that DNNs often overfit to the noise, which leads to
performance degradation. Our method addresses this issue
by optimizing for a model’s parameters that are less prone
to overfitting and more robust against label noise. Specifically, for each mini-batch, we propose a meta-objective to
train the model, such that after the model goes through conventional gradient update, it does not overfit to the label
noise. The proposed meta-objective encourages the model
to produce consistent predictions after it is trained on a variety of synthetic noisy labels. The key idea of our method is:
a noise-tolerant model should be able to consistently learn
the underlying knowledge from data despite different label
noise. The main contribution of this work are as follows.
• We propose a noise-tolerant training algorithm, where
a meta-objective is optimized before conventional
training. Our method can be theoretically applied to
any model trained with gradient-based rule. We aim
to optimize for a model that does not overfit to a wide
spectrum of artificially generated label noise.
• We formulate our meta-objective as: train the model
such that after it learns from various synthetic noisy
labels using gradient update, the updated models give
consistent predictions with a teacher model. We adapt
a self-ensembling method to construct the teacher
model, which gives more reliable predictions unaffected by the synthetic noise.
• We perform experiments on two datasets with synthetic and real-world label noise, and demonstrate the
15051

