Stochastic Class-based Hard Example Mining for Deep Metric Learning
Yumin Suh1
Bohyung Han1
Wonsik Kim2
Kyoung Mu Lee1
1
ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea 2 Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics
{n12345, bhhan, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Performance of deep metric learning depends heavily
on the capability of mining hard negative examples during training. However, many metric learning algorithms often require intractable computational cost due to frequent
feature computations and nearest neighbor searches in a
large-scale dataset. As a result, existing approaches often
suffer from trade-off between training speed and prediction accuracy. To alleviate this limitation, we propose a
stochastic hard negative mining method. Our key idea is
to adopt class signatures that keep track of feature embedding online with minor additional cost during training, and
identify hard negative example candidates using the signatures. Given an anchor instance, our algorithm first selects
a few hard negative classes based on the class-to-sample
distances and then performs a refined search in an instancelevel only from the selected classes. As most of the classes
are discarded at the first step, it is much more efficient than
exhaustive search while effectively mining a large number
of hard examples. Our experiment shows that the proposed
technique improves image retrieval accuracy substantially;
it achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the several
standard benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning is a fundamental problem applicable to various tasks in computer vision including image
retrieval [14, 23, 24, 6, 35], person re-identification [38, 7],
face recognition [20, 30], and many others. The goal of deep
metric learning is to approximate a feature embedding function that maps data—images in our domain—onto a common feature space. After learning, visually similar images
are supposed to be clustered while the ones with heterogeneous contents are expected to be located apart from each
other. To meet this requirement, one can consider a triplet
loss [20], which is defined on all the triplets of images in
the training set. The triplet loss penalizes the cases that the
distances between the images in the same classes are larger
than the ones between images with different labels.

wonsik16.kim@samsung.com

Batch Constructor
Step1:

Class-level stochastic mining
Step2:

Instance-level stochastic mining

Trainable
Parameters

Loss

Feature
Extractor

Class
Signatures

Figure 1. Overview of the training procedure with our stochastic
hard example mining

A critical drawback of the triplet loss is the high computational cost in identifying hard negative examples for
training, which is partly because embedding functions are
changing throughout training procedure and one needs to
search for the new triplets violating the desired constraints
in each iteration [23, 6, 30, 21, 3, 39]. A naı̈ve implementation of a metric learning algorithm based on triplet loss requires a forward propagation of the whole training dataset
through feature extractor and distance computation between
every pair of examples in each iteration, which is computationally infeasible in a large-scale datasets.
Existing approaches have explored two directions to reduce computational overhead while maintaining accuracy.
One is to search for hard negative examples only within individual mini-batches [20, 7] constructed by random sampling; this strategy requires a large mini-batch size, e.g., a
few thousands in case of [20], to ensure to have a sufficient
number of hard examples. The other is to exploit a fixed approximate global structure of dataset by using precomputed
features [18, 6]. However, this approach is problematic because the representation of each example changes during
training procedure and, consequently, the global structure is
updated as well.
We propose a stochastic hard example mining technique
to tackle the limitations in the existing approaches. Specif17251

