Iterative Residual Refinement for Joint Optical Flow and Occlusion Estimation
Junhwa Hur
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract

1. Introduction
Akin to many areas of computer vision, deep learning
has had a significant impact on optical flow estimation. But
in contrast to, e.g., object detection [19] or human pose
estimation [55], the accuracy of deep learning-based flow
methods on public benchmarks [10, 17, 41] had initially not
surpassed that of classical approaches. Still, the efficient
test-time inference has led to their widespread adoption as
a sub-module in applications requiring to process temporal information, including video object segmentation [13],
video recognition [15, 43, 64], and video style transfer [11].
FlowNet [14] pioneered the use of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for estimating optical flow and relied on a
– by now standard – encoder-decoder architecture with skip
connections, similar to semantic segmentation [36], among
others. Since the flow accuracy remained behind that of
classical methods based on energy minimization, later work
has focused on designing more powerful CNN architectures
for optical flow. FlowNet2 [26] remedied the accuracy limitations of FlowNet and started to outperform classical approaches. Its main principle is to stack multiple FlowNet-

4.5
AEPE on Sintel Train Clean

Deep learning approaches to optical flow estimation
have seen rapid progress over the recent years. One common trait of many networks is that they refine an initial
flow estimate either through multiple stages or across the
levels of a coarse-to-fine representation. While leading to
more accurate results, the downside of this is an increased
number of parameters. Taking inspiration from both classical energy minimization approaches as well as residual
networks, we propose an iterative residual refinement (IRR)
scheme based on weight sharing that can be combined with
several backbone networks. It reduces the number of parameters, improves the accuracy, or even achieves both.
Moreover, we show that integrating occlusion prediction
and bi-directional flow estimation into our IRR scheme can
further boost the accuracy. Our full network achieves stateof-the-art results for both optical flow and occlusion estimation across several standard datasets.

5
FlowNetS
SpyNet

4

FlowNetC

3.5

PWC-Net
Ours (PWC-Net + Occ)

3

Ours (PWC-Net + Bi)

LiteFlowNet
Ours (PWC-Net + IRR)

2.5

Ours (IRR-PWC)

2
0

10

20

30

40

50

Number of parameters (million)

Figure 1. Accuracy / network size tradeoff of CNNs for optical flow: Combining our iterative residual refinement (IRR), as
well as bi-directional (Bi) and occlusion estimation (Occ) with
PWC-Net [52] in comparison to previous work. Our full model
(IRR-PWC), combining all three components, yields significant
accuracy gains over [52] while having many fewer parameters.

family networks [14], such that later stages effectively refine the output from the previous ones. However, one of the
side effects of this stacking is the linearly and strongly increasing number of parameters, being a burden for the adoption in other applications. Also, stacked networks require
training the stages sequentially rather than jointly, resulting
in a complex training procedure in practice.
More recently, SpyNet [45], PWC-Net [52], and LiteFlowNet [24] proposed lightweight networks that still
achieve competitive accuracy (cf . Fig. 1). SpyNet adopts
coarse-to-fine estimation in the network design, a wellknown principle in classical approaches. It residually updates the flow across the levels of a spatial pyramid with individual trainable weights and demonstrates better accuracy
than FlowNet but with far fewer model parameters. LiteFlowNet and PWC-Net further combine the coarse-to-fine
strategy with multiple ideas from both classical methods
and recent deep learning approaches. Particularly PWC-Net
outperformed all published methods on the common public
benchmarks [10, 17, 41].
Interestingly, many recent deep learning approaches for
flow [24, 26, 45, 52] have a common structure: From a
rough first flow estimate, later modules or networks re-

5754

