Bilateral Cyclic Constraint and Adaptive Regularization
for Unsupervised Monocular Depth Prediction
Alex Wong, Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{alexw, soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Supervised learning methods to infer (hypothesize) depth
of a scene from a single image require costly per-pixel
ground-truth. We follow a geometric approach that exploits
abundant stereo imagery to learn a model to hypothesize
scene structure without direct supervision. Although we
train a network with stereo pairs, we only require a single image at test time to hypothesize disparity or depth. We
propose a novel objective function that exploits the bilateral
cyclic relationship between the left and right disparities and
we introduce an adaptive regularization scheme that allows
the network to handle both the co-visible and occluded regions in a stereo pair. This process ultimately produces a
model to generate hypotheses for the 3-dimensional structure of the scene as viewed in a single image. When used
to generate a single (most probable) estimate of depth, our
method outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised monocular depth prediction methods on the KITTI benchmarks.
We show that our method generalizes well by applying our
models trained on KITTI to the Make3d dataset.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3-dimensional geometry of a scene is a
fundamental problem in machine perception with a wide
range of applications, including autonomous driving [24],
robotics [32, 43], pose-estimation [41], localization [18],
and scene object composition [17, 26]. It is well-known that
3-d scene geometry can be recovered from multiple images
of a scene taken from different viewpoints, including stereo,
under suitable conditions. Under no conditions, however, is
a single image sufficient to recover 3-d scene structure, unless prior knowledge is available on the shape of objects
populating the scene. Even in such cases, metric information is lost in the projection, so at best we can use a single
image to generate hypotheses, as opposed to estimates, of
scene geometry.
Recent works [3, 6, 31, 33, 34, 50, 51] sought to exploit
such strong scene priors by using pixel-level depth anno-

tation captured with a range sensor (e.g. depth camera, lidar) to regress depth from the RGB image. Cognizant of
the intrinsic limitations of this endeavor, we exploit stereo
imagery to train a network without ground-truth supervision for generating depth hypotheses, to be used as a reference for 3-d reconstruction. We evaluate our method against
ground-truth depths via two benchmarks from the KITTI
dataset [13] and show that it generalizes well by applying
models trained on KITTI to Make3d [40].
Rather than attempting to learn a prior by associating the
raw-pixel values with depth, we recast depth estimation as
an image reconstruction problem [12, 14] and exploit the
epipolar geometry between images in a rectified stereo pair
to train a deep fully convolutional network. Our network
learns to predict the dense pixel correspondences (disparity
field) between the stereo pair, despite only having seen one
of them. Hence, our network implicitly learns the relative
pose of the cameras used in training and hallucinates the existence of a second image taken from the same relative pose
when given a single image during testing. From the disparity predictions, we can synthesize depth using the known
focal length and baseline of the cameras used in training.
While [12, 14, 49] follow a similar training scheme,
[49] does not scale to high resolution, and [12] uses a
non-differentiable objectives. [14] proposed using two
uni-directional edge-aware disparity gradients and left-right
disparity consistency as regularizers. However, edgeawareness should inform bidirectionally and left-right consistency suffers from occlusions and dis-occlusions. Moreover, regularity should not only be data-driven, but also
model-driven.
Our contributions are three-fold: (i) A model-driven adaptive weighting scheme that is both space- and training-time
varying and can be applied generically to regularizers. (ii) A
bilateral consistency constraint that enforces the cyclic application of left and right disparity to be the identity. (iii) A
two-branch decoder that specifically learns the features necessary to maximize data fidelity and utilizes such features to
refine an initial prediction by enforcing regularity. We for15644

