Monocular 3D Object Detection Leveraging Accurate Proposals
and Shape Reconstruction
Jason Ku∗ Alex D. Pon∗ Steven L. Waslander
University of Toronto
{kujason.ku, alex.pon}@mail.utoronto.ca, stevenw@utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We present MonoPSR, a monocular 3D object detection
method that leverages proposals and shape reconstruction.
First, using the fundamental relations of a pinhole camera model, detections from a mature 2D object detector are
used to generate a 3D proposal per object in a scene. The
3D location of these proposals prove to be quite accurate,
which greatly reduces the difficulty of regressing the final
3D bounding box detection. Simultaneously, a point cloud
is predicted in an object centered coordinate system to learn
local scale and shape information. However, the key challenge is how to exploit shape information to guide 3D localization. As such, we devise aggregate losses, including
a novel projection alignment loss, to jointly optimize these
tasks in the neural network to improve 3D localization accuracy. We validate our method on the KITTI benchmark
where we set new state-of-the-art results among published
monocular methods, including the harder pedestrian and
cyclist classes, while maintaining efficient run-time.

1. Introduction
A cornerstone of 3D scene understanding in computer
vision is 3D object detection—the task where objects of interest within a scene are classified and identified by their
6 DoF pose and dimensions. Existing methods vary in the
data they use, which include LiDAR [20, 25, 42, 43, 44],
stereo images [5], and monocular images [2, 16, 21, 24, 40].
Monocular methods are attractive as they have the lowest
cost and the simplest setup, relying on only a single camera. These methods are therefore attractive for applications where resources are limited, or for companies wanting to bring 3D object detection to mass markets such as
autonomous navigation and virtual reality.
Monocular 3D object detection methods are also the
most disadvantaged; the problem formulation is underconstrained because depth information is lost when a 3D
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Pipeline for 3D Object Detection and Instance Point
Cloud Estimation: Our network takes an image with 2D bounding boxes and regresses instance-centric 3D proposals to produce
3D bounding boxes. Simultaneously, instance point clouds are estimated to recover local shape and scale, and to enforce 2D-3D
consistency. The proposal regression and point cloud estimation
are trained jointly in the network.

scene is projected onto an image plane. The difficulty of
the problem is highlighted on the KITTI 3D Object Detection benchmark [12] in the car category where the best published monocular method [16] has an AP value 67% lower
than the best published method using LiDAR [42]. Results
for the more challenging pedestrian and cyclist classes are
rarely reported for monocular methods, likely due to even
poorer performance.
To deal with the under-constrained monocular object detection problem, recent methods have typically used deep
learning with well-informed priors. One such prior is that
the predicted 3D bounding box should fit tightly within its
corresponding 2D bounding box [24]. This assumption,
however, leads to localization inaccuracies because it causes
2D bounding box, orientation, and dimension estimation
errors to propagate to the final 3D box prediction. Other
methods [2, 21] match objects to CAD models to determine
shape and pose. Unfortunately, these methods are restricted
to the shape space covered by the selected CAD models, and
do not easily extend to applications where models are un111867

