Composing Text and Image for Image Retrieval - An Empirical Odyssey
Nam Vo1∗, Lu Jiang2 , Chen Sun2 , Kevin Murphy2
Li-Jia Li2,3 , Li Fei-Fei2,3 , James Hays1
1
Georgia Tech, 2 Google AI, 3 Stanford University

Abstract
In this paper, we study the task of image retrieval, where
the input query is specified in the form of an image plus
some text that describes desired modifications to the input
image. For example, we may present an image of the Eiffel
tower, and ask the system to find images which are visually
similar, but are modified in small ways, such as being taken
at nighttime instead of during the day. To tackle this task,
we embed the query (reference image plus modification text)
and the target (images). The encoding function of the image
text query learns a representation, such that the similarity
with the target image representation is high iff it is a “positive match”. We propose a new way to combine image and
text through residual connection, that is designed for this retrieval task. We show this outperforms existing approaches
on 3 different datasets, namely Fashion-200k, MIT-States
and a new synthetic dataset we create based on CLEVR.
We also show that our approach can be used to perform image classification with compositionally novel labels, and we
outperform previous methods on MIT-States on this task.

1. Introduction
A core problem in image retrieval is that the user has
a “concept” in mind, which they want to find images of,
but they need to somehow convey that concept to the system. There are several ways of formulating the concept as a
search query, such as a text string, a similar image, or even a
sketch, or some combination of the above. In this work, we
consider the case where queries are formulated as an input
image plus a text string that describes some desired modification to the image. This represents a typical scenario in
session search: users can use an already found image as a
reference, and then express the difference in text, with the
aim of retrieving a relevant image. This problem is closely
related to attribute-based product retrieval (see e.g., [12]),
but differs in that the text can be multi-word, rather than a
single attribute.
∗ Work done during an internship at Google AI.

Figure 1. Example of image retrieval using text and image query.
The text states the desired modification to the image and is expressive in conveying the information need to the system.

We can use standard deep metric learning methods such
as triplet loss (e.g., [15]) for computing similarity between
a search query and candidate images. The main research
question we study is how to represent the query when we
have two different input modalities, namely the input image
and the text. In other words, how to learn a meaningful
cross-modal feature composition for the query in order to
find the target image.
Feature composition between text and image has been
extensively studied in the field of vision and language, especially in Visual Question Answering (VQA) [2]. After
encoding an image (e.g., using a convolutional neural network, or CNN) and the text (e.g., using a recurrent neural network, or RNN), various methods for feature composition have been used. These range from simple techniques (e.g., concatenation or shallow feed-forward networks) to advanced mechanisms (e.g., relation [43], or parameter hashing [35]). These approaches have also been
successfully used in related problems such as query classification, compositional learning, etc. (See Section 2 for
more discussion of related work.)
The question of which image/text feature composition
to use for image retrieval has not been studied, to the best
of our knowledge. In this paper, we compare several existing methods, and propose a new one, which often gives
16439

