CrowdPose: Efficient Crowded Scenes Pose Estimation and A New Benchmark
Jiefeng Li1 , Can Wang1 , Hao Zhu1 , Yihuan Mao2 , Hao-Shu Fang1 , Cewu Lu1†∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Tsinghua University
{ljf likit,wangcan123,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
haozhu@zju.edu.cn maoyh16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn fhaoshu@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation is fundamental to many
computer vision tasks and has made significant progress
in recent years. However, few previous methods explored
the problem of pose estimation in crowded scenes while
it remains challenging and inevitable in many scenarios.
Moreover, current benchmarks cannot provide an appropriate evaluation for such cases. In this paper, we propose a novel and efficient method to tackle the problem
of pose estimation in the crowd and a new dataset to better evaluate algorithms. Our model consists of two key
components: joint-candidate single person pose estimation
(SPPE) and global maximum joints association. With multipeak prediction for each joint and global association using the graph model, our method is robust to inevitable
interference in crowded scenes and very efficient in inference. The proposed method surpasses the state-of-the-art
methods on CrowdPose dataset by 5.2 mAP and results on
MSCOCO dataset demonstrate the generalization ability
of our method. Source code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/CrowdPose

1. Introduction
Estimating multi-person poses in images plays an important role in the area of computer vision. It has attracted tremendous interest for its wide applications in activity understanding [14, 11], human-object interaction detection [41, 37], human parsing [18, 42] etc. Some works
focus on 3D human pose estimation [33, 34, 31]. Currently,
most of the 2D methods can be roughly divided into two
categories: i) top-down approaches that firstly detect each
person and then perform single person pose estimation, or
ii) bottom-up approaches which detect each joint and then
associate them into a whole person.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
∗ Cewu Lu is a member of Department of Computer Science and Engi-

neering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and SJTU-SenseTime
AI Lab.

Mask R-CNN

Ours

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of Mask R-CNN and our CrowdPose method in crowded scenes. Though current methods achieve
good performance in public benchmarks [13, 15, 20], they fail in
crowded cases. There are mainly two types of errors: i) assemble
wrong joints into a pose; ii) predict redundant poses in crowded
scenes.

To evaluate the performance of multi-person pose estimation algorithms, several public benchmarks were established, such as MSCOCO [15], MPII [13] and AI Challenger [20]. In these benchmarks, the images are usually
collected from daily life where crowded scenes appear less
frequently. As a result, most of the images in these benchmarks have few mutual occlusion among humans. For example, in MSCOCO dataset (persons subset), 67.01% of the
images have no overlapped person. Current methods have
obtained encouraging success on these datasets.
However, despite the good performance that current
methods have achieved on previous benchmarks, we observe an obvious degradation of their performance in
crowded cases. As shown in Figure 1, for the current stateof-the-art methods [40, 27, 23, 26] of both bottom-up and

10863

