Robust Point Cloud Based Reconstruction of Large-Scale Outdoor Scenes
Ziquan Lan
Zi Jian Yew
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{ziquan, zijian.yew, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

1. Introduction
Point cloud reconstruction of outdoor scenes has many
important applications such as 3D architectural modeling,
terrestrial surveying, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) for autonomous vehicles, etc. Compared to
images, point clouds from 3D scanners exhibit less variation
under different weather or lighting conditions, e.g., summer
and winter (Fig. 1), or day and night (Fig. 5). Furthermore, the depths of point clouds from 3D scanners are more
accurate than image-based reconstructions. Consequently,
point clouds from 3D scanners are preferred for large-scale
outdoor 3D reconstructions. Most existing methods for 3D
reconstruction are solved via a two-step approach: a frontend data association step and a back-end optimization step.
More specifically, data association is used to establish fea1

https://github.com/ziquan111/RobustPCLReconstruction

Scene during ﬁrst pass

Scene during second pass

Detected loop-closures

Ours (Sec. 4) Choi et al. [5] Choi et al. [5],
Identity cov.

Outlier feature matches and loop-closures that survived
front-end data association can lead to catastrophic failures in the back-end optimization of large-scale point cloud
based 3D reconstruction. To alleviate this problem, we propose a probabilistic approach for robust back-end optimization in the presence of outliers. More specifically, we model
the problem as a Bayesian network and solve it using the
Expectation-Maximization algorithm. Our approach leverages on a long-tail Cauchy distribution to suppress outlier
feature matches in the odometry constraints, and a CauchyUniform mixture model with a set of binary latent variables
to simultaneously suppress outlier loop-closure constraints
and outlier feature matches in the inlier loop-closure constraints. Furthermore, we show that by using a GaussianUniform mixture model, our approach degenerates to the
formulation of a state-of-the-art approach for robust indoor
reconstruction. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach has comparable performance with the state-ofthe-art on a benchmark indoor dataset, and outperforms it
on a large-scale outdoor dataset. Our source code can be
found on the project website 1 .

Odometry

Abstract

Figure 1. Reconstruction of a 1km route traversed in two different seasons: summer (orange) and winter (blue). The outlier
(red links) loop-closures significantly outnumber the inliers (green
links). Four zoomed-in point clouds on the right are reconstructed
from different methods.

ture matches [30] in point cloud fragments for registration,
and loop-closures [26] between point cloud fragments for
pose-graph [21] optimization. Unfortunately, no existing
algorithm for feature matching and loop-closure detection
guarantees complete elimination of outliers. Although outlier feature matches are usually handled with RANSACbased geometric verification [16, 30], such pairwise checks
do not consider global consistency. In addition, the numerous efforts on improving the accuracy in loop-closure detection [6, 8, 20, 26] are not completely free from false positives. Many back-end optimization algorithms [13, 14, 21]
are based on non-linear least-squares that lack the robustness to cope with outliers. A small number of outliers
would consequently lead to catastrophic failures in the 3D
reconstructions. Several prior works focus on disabling outlier loop-closures in the back-end optimization [5, 15, 25].
However, these methods do not consider the effect from
the outlier feature matches with the exception of [34] that
solves global geometric registration in a very small-scale
problem setting.
The main contribution of this paper is a probabilistic

9690

