Hierarchical Discrete Distribution Decomposition for Match Density Estimation
Zhichao Yin

Trevor Darrell

Fisher Yu

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Explicit representations of the global match distributions
of pixel-wise correspondences between pairs of images are
desirable for uncertainty estimation and downstream applications. However, the computation of the match density for each pixel may be prohibitively expensive due to
the large number of candidates. In this paper, we propose
Hierarchical Discrete Distribution Decomposition (HD3 ),
a framework suitable for learning probabilistic pixel correspondences in both optical flow and stereo matching. We
decompose the full match density into multiple scales hierarchically, and estimate the local matching distributions
at each scale conditioned on the matching and warping at
coarser scales. The local distributions can then be composed together to form the global match density. Despite
its simplicity, our probabilistic method achieves state-ofthe-art results for both optical flow and stereo matching on
established benchmarks. We also find the estimated uncertainty is a good indication of the reliability of the predicted
correspondences.

1. Introduction
Finding dense pixel correspondences between two images, typically for stereo matching or optical flow, is one of
the earliest problems studied in the computer vision literature. Dense correspondences have wide application including for activity recognition [36], video interpolation [23],
scene geometry perception [13], and many others. Challenges when solving this problem include texture ambiguity, complex object motion, illumination change, and entangled occlusion estimation.
Classic approaches jointly optimize local texture matching and neighbor affinity on images [17] possibly in a
coarse-to-fine fashion [6, 20, 42]. While these methods can
achieve impressive correspondence accuracy, the optimization step may be too slow for downstream applications. Recent works using deep convolutional networks (ConvNets)
have achieved similar or even better matching results without an optimization step [10, 21, 40]. Pixel features learned
directly from correspondence supervision can capture both
local appearance and global context information due to the

large network receptive fields. With GPU acceleration, it is
possible to use these networks to regress the pixel displacements in real time [10, 40].
However, the estimation uncertainty inherent in correspondence estimation is neglected by displacement regression approaches. Though post-hoc confidence measures [27, 29] can recover the uncertainty to some degree, they are independent of model training; uncertainty
is ignored in the training process. Recognizing the missing uncertainty measures in optical flow methods, some
works [12, 43] propose probabilistic frameworks for joint
correspondence and uncertainty estimation. Due to constraints on computation and parameter number, they rely on
the local Gaussian noise assumption to represent the match
distribution. Consequently, they cannot model complicated
distributions on a large image area. Early works in stereo
matching show that we can build a complete match cost volume as a proxy to estimate the match density, but were not
applicable for high-resolution stereo matching nor general
optical flow due to the excessive amount of computation
needed for the complete cost volume.
In this work, we propose Hierarchical Discrete Distribution Decomposition (HD3 ), a general probabilistic framework for match density estimation. We aim to find the discrete distribution of possible correspondences with a large
support defined on the image grids for each pixel. We adopt
a general model to represent pixel-level match probability without any parametric distribution assumption. The
model-inherent uncertainty measures can be naturally derived from our estimated match densities.
HD3 decomposes the full match density into multiple
levels of local distributions similar to quadtrees. To extract
discriminative features for matching, we use networks with
Deep Layer Aggregation (DLA) [50] to build the multiscale feature pyramid. The DLA framework provides us
with feature networks of different computation-accuracy
trade-offs, which can be easily integrated with other recognition tasks in complex applications. We estimate the match
density of the residual motion in each scale, conditioned on
match densities at coarser scales. We can propagate the conditional information from previous levels to the prediction
at the current level through iterative feature warping and
16044

