VRSTC: Occlusion-Free Video Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Ruibing Hou1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Xinqian Gu1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
{ruibing.hou, xinqian.gu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Video person re-identification (re-ID) plays an important
role in surveillance video analysis. However, the performance of video re-ID degenerates severely under partial occlusion. In this paper, we propose a novel network, called
Spatio-Temporal Completion network (STCnet), to explicitly handle partial occlusion problem. Different from most
previous works that discard the occluded frames, STCnet
can recover the appearance of the occluded parts. For one
thing, the spatial structure of a pedestrian frame can be
used to predict the occluded body parts from the unoccluded
body parts of this frame. For another, the temporal patterns
of pedestrian sequence provide important clues to generate
the contents of occluded parts. With the spatio-temporal information, STCnet can recover the appearance for the occluded parts, which could be leveraged with those unoccluded parts for more accurate video re-ID. By combining a
re-ID network with STCnet, a video re-ID framework robust
to partial occlusion (VRSTC) is proposed. Experiments on
three challenging video re-ID databases demonstrate that
the proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Video person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) aims at matching
the same person across multiple non-overlapping cameras,
which has gained increasing attention in recent years. However, it remains a very challenging problem due to large
variations of appearance caused by camera viewpoints,
background clutter, and especially partial occlusion. The
performance of video re-ID usually degenerates severely
under partial occlusion. This problem is difﬁcult to tackle as
any part of the person may be occluded by other pedestrians
and environmental objects (e.g. bicycles and indicators).
Typical video re-ID methods [21, 30, 32] do not take into
account the effect of partial occlusion. They represent each

frame of a video as a feature vector and compute an aggregate representation across time with average or maximum
pooling. In the presence of partial occlusion, the video feature is usually corrupted due to the equal treatment of all
frames, leading to severe performance degeneration.
Recently, the attention mechanism has been introduced
to video re-ID in order to deal with partial occlusion
[18, 43, 33, 15, 3]. They select discriminative frames from
video sequences and generate informative video representation. Although these approaches have a certain tolerance
to partial occlusion, it is not ideal to discard the occluded
frames. On one hand, the remaining visible portions of
the discarded frames may provide strong cues for re-ID.
So these methods lost too much appearance information in
video features, making them difﬁcult to identify the person.
On the other hand, the discarded frames interrupt the temporal information of video. The works [21, 30, 32] have
veriﬁed that the temporal information of video can help to
identify the person. For instance, if different persons have
similar appearance, we can disambiguate them from their
gaits. Therefore, these methods may still fail when the partial occlusion occurs.
In this work, we propose Spatial-Temporal Completion
network (STCnet) to explicitly tackle the partial occlusion
problem by recovering the appearance of the occluded parts.
For one thing, according to the spatial structure of pedestrian frame, the visible (unoccluded) body parts can be used
to predict the missing (occluded) body part of a person. For
another, because of the temporal patterns of pedestrian sequence, the information from adjacent frames is helpful for
recovering the appearance of the current frame. Motivated
by the two facts, we design the spatial structure generator
and temporal attention generator in STCnet. The spatial
structure generator exploits the spatial information of the
frame to predict the appearance of the occluded parts. The
temporal attention generator exploits the temporal information of the video with a novel temporal attention layer to
reﬁne the parts generated by the spatial generator. With the

7183

