3DN: 3D Deformation Network
Weiyue Wang1
Duygu Ceylan2
Radomir Mech2
Ulrich Neumann1
1
2
University of Southern California
Adobe
Los Angeles, California
San Jose, California
{weiyuewa,uneumann}@usc.edu

{ceylan,rmech}@adobe.com

Abstract
Applications in virtual and augmented reality create a
demand for rapid creation and easy access to large sets
of 3D models. An effective way to address this demand is
to edit or deform existing 3D models based on a reference,
e.g., a 2D image which is very easy to acquire. Given such a
source 3D model and a target which can be a 2D image, 3D
model, or a point cloud acquired as a depth scan, we introduce 3DN, an end-to-end network that deforms the source
model to resemble the target. Our method infers per-vertex
offset displacements while keeping the mesh connectivity of
the source model fixed. We present a training strategy which
uses a novel differentiable operation, mesh sampling operator, to generalize our method across source and target
models with varying mesh densities. Mesh sampling operator can be seamlessly integrated into the network to handle
meshes with different topologies. Qualitative and quantitative results show that our method generates higher quality results compared to the state-of-the art learning-based
methods for 3D shape generation.

1. Introduction
Applications in virtual and augmented reality and
robotics require rapid creation and access to a large number of 3D models. Even with the increasing availability of
large 3D model databases [1], the size and growth of such
databases pale when compared to the vast size of 2D image databases. As a result, the idea of editing or deforming
existing 3D models based on a reference image or another
source of input such as an RGBD scan is pursued by the
research community.
Traditional approaches for editing 3D models to match
a reference target rely on optimization-based pipelines
which either require user interaction [32] or rely on the
existence of a database of segmented 3D model components [9]. The development of 3D deep learning methods [17, 2, 31, 28, 10] inspire more efficient alternative ways
to handle 3D data. In fact, a multitude of approaches have

Target Image
Target Point
Cloud

Source Mesh

Deformed Mesh with 3DN

Source Mesh

Deformed Mesh with 3DN

Figure 1: 3DN deforms a given a source mesh to a new
mesh based on a reference target. The target can be a 2D
image or a 3D point cloud.
been presented over the past few years for 3D shape generation using deep learning. Many of these, however, utilize
voxel [33, 5, 37, 29, 24, 30, 34, 27] or point based representations [3] since the representation of meshes and mesh
connectivity in a neural network is still an open problem.
The few recent methods which do use mesh representations
make assumptions about fixed topology [7, 25] which limits
the flexibility of their approach.
This paper describes 3DN, a 3D deformation network
that deforms a source 3D mesh based on a target 2D image,
3D mesh, or a 3D point cloud (e.g., acquired with a depth
sensor). Unlike previous work which assume a fixed topology mesh for all examples, we utilize the mesh structure
of the source model. This means we can use any existing
high-quality mesh model to generate new models. Specifically, given any source mesh and a target, our network estimates vertex displacement vectors (3D offsets) to deform
the source model while maintaining its mesh connectivity.
In addition, the global geometric constraints exhibited by
many man-made objects are explicitly preserved during deformation to enhance the plausibility of the output model.
Our network first extracts global features from both the
source and target inputs. These are input to an offset decoder to estimate per-vertex offsets. Since acquiring ground
truth correspondences between the source and target is
very challenging, we use unsupervised loss functions (e.g.,
Chamfer and Earth Mover’s distances) to compute the similarity of the deformed source model and the target. A dif11038

