Student Becoming the Master: Knowledge Amalgamation for Joint Scene
Parsing, Depth Estimation, and More
Jingwen Ye1 , Yixin Ji1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Kairi Ou3 , Dapeng Tao4 , Mingli Song1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, New Jersey, United States
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
{yejingwen, jiyixin, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao.w@gmail.com,
suzhe.okr@taobao.com, dptao@ynu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a novel deep-model reusing
task. Our goal is to train a lightweight and versatile student
model, without human-labelled annotations, that amalgamates the knowledge and masters the expertise of two pretrained teacher models working on heterogeneous problems, one on scene parsing and the other on depth estimation. To this end, we propose an innovative training strategy that learns the parameters of the student intertwined
with the teachers, achieved by “projecting” its amalgamated features onto each teacher’s domain and computing the loss. We also introduce two options to generalize the proposed training strategy to handle three or more
tasks simultaneously. The proposed scheme yields very encouraging results. As demonstrated on several benchmarks,
the trained student model achieves results even superior to
those of the teachers in their own expertise domains and on
par with the state-of-the-art fully supervised models relying
on human-labelled annotations.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has accomplished unprecedentedly encouraging results in almost every dimension of computer vision applications. The state-of-the-art performances, however, often come at the price of the huge amount of annotated data trained on clusters for days or even weeks. In
many cases, it is extremely cumbersome to conduct the
training on personal workstations with one or two GPU
cards, not to mention the infeasibility in the absence of
training annotations.
This dilemma has been in part alleviated by the fact that
many trained deep models have been released online by developers, enabling their direct deployment by the commu-

nity. As such, a series of work has been conducted to investigate reusing pre-trained deep models. Examples include
the seminal work of knowledge distilling [11], which learns
a compact student model using the soft targets obtained
from the teachers. The more recent work of [39] makes one
step further by training a student with faster optimization
and enhanced performance. Despite the very promising results achieved, existing knowledge distilling methods focus
on training a student to handle the same task as a teacher
does or a group of homogeneous teachers do.
We propose in this paper to study a related yet new and
more challenging model reusing task. Unlike the conventional setup of knowledge distilling where one teacher or
an ensemble of teachers working in the same domain, like
classification, are provided as input, the proposed task assumes that we are given a number of task-wise heterogeneous teachers, each of which works on a different problem.
Our goal is then to train a versatile student model, with a
size smaller than the ensemble of the teachers, that amalgamates the knowledge and learns the expertise of all teachers,
again without accessing human-labelled annotations.
Towards this end, we look into two vital pixel-prediction
applications, scene parsing and depth estimation. We attempt to learn a light student model that simultaneously
handle both tasks from two pre-trained teachers, each of
which specializes in one task only. Such a compact and
dual-task student model finds its crucial importance in autonomous driving and robotics, where the model to be deployed should, on the one hand, be sufficiently lightweight
to run on the edge side, and on the other hand, produce accurate segmentation and depth estimation for self-navigation.
To amalgamate knowledge from the two teachers in
different domains, we introduce an innovative block-wise
training strategy. By feeding unlabelled images to the teachers and the student, we learn the amalgamated features

2829

