Dissecting Person Re-identification from the Viewpoint of Viewpoint
Xiaoxiao Sun Liang Zheng
Australian National University
xxsunzrt@gmail.com

liang.zheng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
viewpoint

Variations in visual factors such as viewpoint, pose, illumination and background, are usually viewed as important challenges in person re-identification (re-ID). In spite
of acknowledging these factors to be influential, quantitative studies on how they affect a re-ID system are still lacking. To derive insights in this scientific campaign, this paper
makes an early attempt in studying a particular factor, viewpoint. We narrow the viewpoint problem down to the pedestrian rotation angle to obtain focused conclusions. In this
regard, this paper makes two contributions to the community. First, we introduce a large-scale synthetic data engine,
PersonX. Composed of hand-crafted 3D person models, the
salient characteristic of this engine is “controllable”. That
is, we are able to synthesize pedestrians by setting the visual variables to arbitrary values. Second, on the 3D data
engine, we quantitatively analyze the influence of pedestrian rotation angle on re-ID accuracy. Comprehensively,
the person rotation angles are precisely customized from 0◦
to 360◦ , allowing us to investigate its effect on the training, query, and gallery sets. Extensive experiment helps us
have a deeper understanding of the fundamental problems
in person re-ID. Our research also provides useful insights
for dataset building and future practical usage, e.g., a person of a side view makes a better query.

00

camera
FoV
viewpoint of 0o
facial direction

*birdview

(A) illustration of viewpoint

(B) examples

Figure 1. (A) Illustration of viewpoint of the birdview. Viewpoint
is defined as the rotation angle of a person relative to a manually defined degree of 0◦ . The field of view (FoV) of a camera is
shown. (B) Examples of persons under different viewpoints.

1. Introduction

ferent views of a person contain different details, the viewpoint of a person influences the underlying visual data of
an image, and thus the learning algorithm. Therefore, we
aim to investigate the exact influence of viewpoint on the
system. This study will benefit the community from two
aspects. (1) The conclusions of this research can guide for
building the training set effectively. For example, finding
that certain angles are more important for learning models
of identifying pedestrians. (2) It will advise for designing
of query and gallery sets. By discovering viewpoints that
are effective for re-ID accuracy, our research can potentially
benefit the practical usage of re-ID systems.

Viewpoint, pose of person, illumination, background and
resolution are a few visual factors that are generally considered as influential problems in person re-identification
(re-ID). Currently, major endeavor is devoted to algorithm
design to mitigate their impact on the recognition system.
Therefore, despite qualitatively acknowledging the factors
as influential, it remains largely unknown how these factors
affect the performance quantitatively.
In this paper, we study one of the most important factors,
i.e., viewpoint. Here, we denote viewpoint as the pedestrian
rotation angle (Fig. 1). In what follows, we use viewpoint to
replace pedestrian rotation angle unless specified. Since dif-

In our attempt to reveal the influence of viewpoint, a
notable obstacle is the lack of data. Existing datasets
might have a biased and fixed distribution of environmental factors. In pedestrian viewpoint, for example, some angles might only have a few or even zero samples. In another example, when studying illumination on a real-world
dataset, conclusions are less convincing because the dataset
might only has a specific illumination condition. Further, a
fixed/static data distribution forbids us from exploring how
the impact of viewpoint relates to other visual factors. For
example, the impact of viewpoint could be conditioned on
the background, because background also affects feature

608

