A Relation-Augmented Fully Convolutional Network for Semantic Segmentation
in Aerial Scenes
Lichao Mou1,2∗ , Yuansheng Hua1,2 *, Xiao Xiang Zhu1,2
Remote Sensing Technology Institute (IMF), German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany
2
Signal Processing in Earth Observation (SiPEO), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany
1

{lichao.mou, yuansheng.hua, xiaoxiang.zhu}@dlr.de

Abstract
Most current semantic segmentation approaches fall
back on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, their use of convolution operations with local receptive fields causes failures in modeling contextual spatial relations. Prior works have sought to address this issue by
using graphical models or spatial propagation modules in
networks. But such models often fail to capture long-range
spatial relationships between entities, which leads to spatially fragmented predictions. Moreover, recent works have
demonstrated that channel-wise information also acts a pivotal part in CNNs. In this work, we introduce two simple yet effective network units, the spatial relation module
and the channel relation module, to learn and reason about
global relationships between any two spatial positions or
feature maps, and then produce relation-augmented feature
representations. The spatial and channel relation modules
are general and extensible, and can be used in a plug-andplay fashion with the existing fully convolutional network
(FCN) framework. We evaluate relation module-equipped
networks on semantic segmentation tasks using two aerial
image datasets, which fundamentally depend on long-range
spatial relational reasoning. The networks achieve very
competitive results, bringing signicant improvements over
baselines.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of an image involves a problem of inferring every pixel in the image with the semantic category of the object to which it belongs. The
emergence of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[19, 33, 12, 16, 1, 40] and massive amounts of labeled data
has brought signiﬁcant progress in this direction. However, although with more complicated and deeper networks
and more labeled samples, there is a technical hurdle in
* Equal contribution

short-range
similarity relation
long-range
similarity relation
short-range
compatibility relation
long-range
compatibility relation

Figure 1: Illustration of long-range spatial relations in an
aerial image. Appearance similarity or semantic compatibility between patches within a local region (red–red and
red–green) and patches in remote regions (red–yellow and
red–blue) underlines our global relation modeling.

the application of CNNs to semantic image segmentation—
contextual information.
It has been well recognized in the computer vision community for years that contextual information, or relation, is
capable of offering important cues for semantic segmentation tasks [11, 39]. For instance, spatial relations can be
considered semantic similarity relationships among regions
in an image. In addition, spatial relations also involve compatibility and incompatibility relationships, i.e., a vehicle is
likely to be driven or parked on pavements, and a piece of
lawn is unlikely to appear on the roof of a building. Unfortunately, only convolution layers cannot model such spatial
relations due to their local valid receptive ﬁeld1 .
Nevertheless, under some circumstances, spatial rela1 Feature maps from deep CNNs like ResNet usually have large recep-

tive ﬁelds due to deep architectures, whereas the study of [43] has shown
that CNNs are apt to extract information mainly from smaller regions in
receptive ﬁelds, which are called valid receptive ﬁelds.

112416

