Pose2Seg: Detection Free Human Instance Segmentation
Song-Hai Zhang1,2 , Ruilong Li1,2 , Xin Dong1 , Paul Rosin3 , Zixi Cai1 , Xi Han1 , Dingcheng Yang1 ,
Haozhi Huang4 and Shi-Min Hu1,2
1

Tsinghua University

2

BNRist

3

Cardiff University

4

Tencent AI Lab

{shz, shimin}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {li-rl16, dong-x16, caizx15, x-han15, ydc15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
RosinPL@cardiff.ac.uk, matthzhuang@tencent.com

Abstract
The standard approach to image instance segmentation
is to perform the object detection first, and then segment
the object from the detection bounding-box. More recently,
deep learning methods like Mask R-CNN [14] perform them
jointly. However, little research takes into account the
uniqueness of the “human” category, which can be well
defined by the pose skeleton. Moreover, the human pose
skeleton can be used to better distinguish instances with
heavy occlusion than using bounding-boxes. In this paper, we present a brand new pose-based instance segmentation framework1 for humans which separates instances
based on human pose, rather than proposal region detection. We demonstrate that our pose-based framework
can achieve better accuracy than the state-of-art detectionbased approach on the human instance segmentation problem, and can moreover better handle occlusion. Furthermore, there are few public datasets containing many heavily
occluded humans along with comprehensive annotations,
which makes this a challenging problem seldom noticed by
researchers. Therefore, in this paper we introduce a new
benchmark “Occluded Human (OCHuman)”2 , which focuses on occluded humans with comprehensive annotations
including bounding-box, human pose and instance masks.
This dataset contains 8110 detailed annotated human instances within 4731 images. With an average 0.67 MaxIoU for each person, OCHuman is the most complex and
challenging dataset related to human instance segmentation. Through this dataset, we want to emphasize occlusion
as a challenging problem for researchers to study.

1 Codes are available: https://github.com/liruilong940607/Pose2Seg
2 Dataset is available: https://github.com/liruilong940607/OCHumanApi

Figure 1: Heavily occluded people are better separated using human pose than using bounding-box.

1. Introduction
In recent years, research related to “humans” in the
computer vision community has become increasingly active because of the high demand for real-life applications.
There has been much good research in the fields of human
pose estimation [1, 2, 6, 14, 20, 26, 40], pedestrian detection [25, 41, 42], portrait segmentation [35, 36, 37], and face
recognition [18, 23, 24, 27, 39, 43, 44], much of which has
already produced practical value in real life. This paper focuses on multi-person pose estimation and human instance
segmentation, and proposes a pose-based human instance
segmentation framework.
General Object Instance Segmentation is a challenging
problem which aims to predict pixel-level labels for each
object instance in the image. Currently, those instance segmentation methods with highest accuracy [3, 14, 19, 30]
are all based on powerful object detection baseline methods, such as Fast/Faster R-CNN [9, 33], YOLO [32], which
mostly follow a basic rule: first generate a large number of
proposal regions, then remove the redundant regions using
Non-maximum Suppression (NMS). However, when two objects of the same category have a large overlap, NMS will
treat one of them as a redundant proposal region and eliminates it. This means that almost all the object detection
methods cannot deal with the situation of large overlaps.
Moreover, even if the detection methods sometimes successfully detect two instances, the bounding-box is not suitable for instance segmentation in occluded cases. If two in1889

