SOSNet: Second Order Similarity Regularization for
Local Descriptor Learning
Yurun Tian∗,1,2 Xin Yu3 Bin Fan†,1 Fuchao Wu1 Huub Heijnen4 Vassileios Balntas†,4
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
3
Australian Center for Robotic Vision, Australian National University
4
Scape Technologies
{yurun.tian,bfan,fcwu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn xin.yu@anu.edu.au {huub,vassileios}@scape.io

Abstract
Despite the fact that Second Order Similarity (SOS) has
been used with significant success in tasks such as graph
matching and clustering, it has not been exploited for learning local descriptors. In this work, we explore the potential of SOS in the field of descriptor learning by building
upon the intuition that a positive pair of matching points
should exhibit similar distances with respect to other points
in the embedding space. Thus, we propose a novel regularization term, named Second Order Similarity Regularization (SOSR), that follows this principle. By incorporating SOSR into training, our learned descriptor achieves
state-of-the-art performance on several challenging benchmarks containing distinct tasks ranging from local patch retrieval to structure from motion. Furthermore, by designing
a von Mises-Fischer distribution based evaluation method,
we link the utilization of the descriptor space to the matching performance, thus demonstrating the effectiveness of
our proposed SOSR. Extensive experimental results, empirical evidence and in-depth analysis are provided, indicating that SOSR can significantly boost the matching performance of the learned descriptor.

1. Introduction
The process of describing local patches is a fundamental component in many computer vision tasks such as 3D
reconstruction [31, 33], large scale image localization [30]
and image retrieval [29]. Early efforts mainly focused on
the heuristic design of hand-crafted descriptors, by applying a set of filters to the input patches. In recent years,
∗ Research conducted while Yurun and Xin were interns at Scape Technologies
† Corresponding authors

(a) Triplet Loss

(b) Triplet Loss + SOSR

Figure 1. Qualitative results of our proposed SOSR on features
learned for the 10 digits of the MNIST [19] dataset. Each digit is
represented by a different colour on the unit sphere. We can observe that by using our SOSR method that encourages second order similarity, more compact individual clusters are learned compared to standard triplet loss.

large datasets with corresponding ground truths have led
to the development of large scale learning methods, which
stimulated a wave of works on descriptor learning. Recent work has shown that these learning based methods are
able to significantly outperform their hand-crafted counterparts [1, 22].
One of the most important challenges of learning based
methods is the design of suitable loss functions for the training stage. Since nearest neighbour matching is done directly using Euclidean distances, most of the recent methods focus on optimizing objectives related to First Order Similarity (FOS) by forcing descriptors from matching
pairs to have smaller L2 distance than non-matching ones
[34, 2, 26, 17, 36, 15].
Second Order Similarity (SOS) has been used for graph
matching and clustering tasks [10, 11, 43], due to the fact
that it can capture more structural information such as shape
and scale, while at the same time being robust to deforma111016

