Generating Multiple Hypotheses for 3D Human Pose Estimation
with Mixture Density Network
Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{lic, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
3D human pose estimation from a monocular image or
2D joints is an ill-posed problem because of depth ambiguity and occluded joints. We argue that 3D human pose
estimation from a monocular input is an inverse problem
where multiple feasible solutions can exist. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach to generate multiple feasible
hypotheses of the 3D pose from 2D joints. In contrast to
existing deep learning approaches which minimize a mean
square error based on an unimodal Gaussian distribution,
our method is able to generate multiple feasible hypotheses of 3D pose based on a multimodal mixture density networks. Our experiments show that the 3D poses estimated
by our approach from an input of 2D joints are consistent
in 2D reprojections, which supports our argument that multiple solutions exist for the 2D-to-3D inverse problem. Furthermore, we show state-of-the-art performance on the Human3.6M dataset in both best hypothesis and multi-view
settings, and we demonstrate the generalization capacity
of our model by testing on the MPII and MPI-INF-3DHP
datasets. Our code is available at the project website1 .

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation from a single RGB image is
an extensively studied problem in computer vision because
of many potential useful real world applications such as
forensic science, sports analysis and surveillance etc. Significant progress in 3D human pose estimation has been
made with deep learning in the recent years. One of the
commonly used and effective deep learning based methods
for 3D human pose estimation is the two-stage approach,
where the 2D joints are first detected from the image input
[18, 24] followed by the 3D joint estimations from the detected 2D joints [1, 29, 4, 15, 10, 6, 25, 17]. The advantage
1 https://github.com/chaneyddtt/GeneratingMultiple-Hypotheses-for-3D-Human-PoseEstimation-with-Mixture-Density-Network

Hypothesis 1

Hypothesis 2

Hypothesis 3

z

z

z

y

y
x

x
Hypothesis 4

y
x
Hypothesis 5

2D Reprojections
x

y
z

z

y

y
x

x

Figure 1: An example of multiple feasible 3D pose hypotheses generated from our network reprojecting into similar 2D
joint locations. (Best view in color)
of the two-stage approach is that it decouples the harder
problem of 3D depth estimation from the easier 2D pose
estimation. In particular, variations in background scene,
lighting, clothing shape, skin color etc. are removed before
the 3D joint estimation stage. Furthermore, the model can
be trained on different domains, e.g. indoor and outdoor,
with 2D annotations that are readily available.
Despite the significant progress with deep learning, 3D
human pose estimation remains as a very challenging task
due to the ambiguity in recovering 3D information from a
single RGB image. More specifically, recovering 3D information from a single RGB image or 2D joint locations is
an inverse problem [3] where multiple solutions may exist for the depth of a 3D joint along the light ray that reprojects onto the same 2D joint location, as illustrated in
Figure 1. The problem is further aggravated by the nonrigidity of the human pose and joint occlusions on the 2D
image. Consequently, there could be many solutions of the
3D pose that satisfy the same 2D pose on an image, even
after eliminating the infeasible 3D pose solutions by en-

9887

