QATM: Quality-Aware Template Matching For Deep Learning
Jiaxin Cheng Yue Wu Wael Abd-Almageed Premkumar Natarajan
USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA, USA
chengjia@{usc/isi}.edu {yue wu,wamageed,pnataraj}@isi.edu

Abstract
Finding a template in a search image is one of the core
problems many computer vision, such as semantic image semantic, image-to-GPS verification etc. We propose a novel
quality-aware template matching method, QATM, which is
not only used as a standalone template matching algorithm,
but also a trainable layer that can be easily embedded into
any deep neural network. Here, our quality can be interpreted as the distinctiveness of matching pairs. Specifically,
we assess the quality of a matching pair using soft-ranking
among all matching pairs, and thus different matching scenarios such as 1-to-1, 1-to-many, and many-to-many will
be all reflected to different values. Our extensive evaluation on classic template matching benchmarks and deep
learning tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of QATM. It not
only outperforms state-of-the-art template matching methods when used alone, but also largely improves existing
deep network solutions.

1. Introduction and Review
Template matching is one of the most frequently used
techniques in computer vision applications, such as video
tracking[35, 36, 1, 9], image mosaicing [25, 6], object detection [12, 10, 34], character recognition [29, 2, 21, 5], and
3D reconstruction [22, 23, 16]. Classic template matching methods often use sum-of-squared-differences (SSD)
or normalized cross correlation (NCC) to calculate a similarity score between the template and the underlying image. These approaches work well when the transformation
between the template and the target search image is simple. However, these methods start to fail when the transformation is complex or non-rigid, which is common in reallife. In addition, other factors, such as occlusions and color
shifts, make these methods even more fragile.
Numerous approaches have been proposed to overcome these real-life difficulties applying standard template matching. Dekel et al. [11] introduced the BestBuddies-Similarity (BBS) measure, which focuses on the
nearest-neighbor (NN) matches to exclude potential and bad

matches caused by the background pixels. Deformable Diversity Similarity (DDIS) was introduced in [26], which explicitly considers possible template deformation and uses
the diversity of NN feature matches between a template
and a potential matching region in the search image. Cooccurrence based template matching (CoTM) was introduced in [14] to quantify the dissimilarity between a template and a potential matched region in the search image.
These methods indeed improve the performance of template
matching. However, these methods cannot be used in deep
neural networks (DNN) because of two limitations — (1)
using non-differentiable operations, such as thresholding,
counting, etc. and (2) using operations that are not efficient
with DNNs, such as loops and other non-batch operations.
Existing DNN-based methods use simple methods to
mimic the functionality of template matching [15, 30, 28,
27, 4], such as computing the tensor dot-product [18]1 between two batch tensors of sizes B × H × W × L and
B × H ′ × W ′ × L along the feature dimension (i.e., L here),
and producing a batch tensor of size B ×H ×W ×H ′ ×W ′
containing all pairwise feature dot-product results. Of
course, additional operations like max-pooling may also be
applied [30, 31, 18, 7].
In this paper, we propose the quality-aware template
matching (QATM) method, which can be used as a standalone template matching algorithm, or in a deep neural
network as a trainable layer with learnable parameters. It
takes the uniqueness of pairs into consideration rather than
simply evaluating matching score. QATM is composed of
differentiable and batch-friendly operations and, therefore,
is efficient during DNN training. More importantly, QATM
is inspired by assessing the matching quality of source and
target templates, and thus is able handle different matching
scenarios including 1-to-1, 1-to-many, many-to-many and
no-matching. Among different matching cases, only the 1to-1 matching is considered to be high quality due to it’s
more distinctive than 1-to-many and many-to-many cases.
The remainder of paper is organized as follows. Section
2 discusses motivations and introduces QATM . In Section
3, the performance of QATM is studied in classic template
1 See numpy.tensordot and tensorflow.tensordot.

11553

