Unsupervised Image Matching and Object Discovery as Optimization
Huy V. Vo1,2,3 , Francis Bach1,2 , Minsu Cho4 , Kai Han5 , Yann LeCun6 , Patrick Pérez3 and Jean Ponce1,2
1
2

Département d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France

INRIA, Paris, France

3

Valeo.ai

4

POSTECH

5

University of Oxford

6

New York University

Figure 1: The proposed optimization-based method automatically discovers links between images that depict similar objects. This figure
shows two image clusters that emerge as a by-product of this approach on the VOC 6x2 object recognition dataset that mixes 6 classes
under two viewpoints. See text for details.

Abstract

can launch the corresponding massive annotation efforts for
specific projects that may involve millions images [40].

Learning with complete or partial supervision is powerful but relies on ever-growing human annotation efforts. As
a way to mitigate this serious problem, as well as to serve
specific applications, unsupervised learning has emerged as
an important field of research. In computer vision, unsupervised learning comes in various guises. We focus here
on the unsupervised discovery and matching of object categories among images in a collection, following the work of
Cho et al. [12]. We show that the original approach can be
reformulated and solved as a proper optimization problem.
Experiments on several benchmarks establish the merit of
our approach.

1. Introduction

But handling Internet-scale image (or video) repositories
or the continuous learning scenarios associated with personal assistants or autonomous cars demands approaches
less hungry for manual annotation. Several alternatives
are possible, including weakly supervised approaches that
rely on readily available meta-data [2, 9] or image-level labels [14, 23, 24, 25, 39, 45] instead of more complex annotations such as bounding boxes [17, 38] or object masks [20]
as supervisory signal; semi supervised methods [6, 26] that
exploit a relatively small number of fully annotated pictures, together with a larger set of unlabelled images; and
self supervised algorithms that take advantage of the internal regularities of image parts [15, 37] or video subsequences [1, 34, 48] to construct image models that can be
further fine-tuned in fully supervised settings.

Remarkable progress has been achieved in visual tasks
such as image categorization, object detection, or semantic
segmentation, typically using fully supervised algorithms
and vast amount of manually annotated data (e.g., [17, 20,
21, 27, 29, 38, 40]). With the advent of crowd-sourcing,
large corporations and, to a lesser extent, academic units

We address here the even more challenging problem of
discovering both the structure of image collections – that
is, which images depict similar objects (or textures, scenes,
actions, etc.), and the objects in question, in a fully unsupervised setting [8, 11, 16, 30, 39, 41, 43]. Although
weakly, semi, and self supervised methods may provide a

8287

