BAD SLAM: Bundle Adjusted Direct RGB-D SLAM
Thomas Schöps1
Torsten Sattler2
Marc Pollefeys1,3
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 2 Chalmers University of Technology

3

Microsoft

Abstract
A key component of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) systems is the joint optimization of the estimated 3D map and camera trajectory. Bundle adjustment
(BA) is the gold standard for this. Due to the large number of variables in dense RGB-D SLAM, previous work has
focused on approximating BA. In contrast, in this paper we
present a novel, fast direct BA formulation which we implement in a real-time dense RGB-D SLAM algorithm.
In addition, we show that direct RGB-D SLAM systems
are highly sensitive to rolling shutter, RGB and depth sensor
synchronization, and calibration errors. In order to facilitate state-of-the-art research on direct RGB-D SLAM, we
propose a novel, well-calibrated benchmark for this task
that uses synchronized global shutter RGB and depth cameras. It includes a training set, a test set without public
ground truth, and an online evaluation service. We observe
that the ranking of methods changes on this dataset compared to existing ones, and our proposed algorithm outperforms all other evaluated SLAM methods. Our benchmark and our open source SLAM algorithm are available
at: www.eth3d.net

1. Introduction
SLAM is the problem of simultaneously building a 3D
model of a scene and determining the pose of a camera in
the scene. This for example enables augmented reality [32]
and perception for self-driving cars [64]. Modern SLAM
systems consist of two parts [32]: A front-end that tracks
the camera pose in real-time, and a back-end that jointly
optimizes the 3D map and the previous camera poses. The
gold standard for the back-end optimization is bundle adjustment (BA) [62]: optimization of all parameters of the
reconstructed model and the cameras.
BA algorithms are widely used with sparse features, e.g.,
[7, 44, 54]. These however discard most of the image information. Direct [10, 45, 46, 69] approaches can make use of
all data. For a dense reconstruction, this introduces many
variables that need to be optimized. Thus, a common assumption is that full BA is infeasible in real-time for direct and dense methods [27]. Instead, approximations are

Figure 1. Scene from our benchmark reconstructed in real-time
with ca. 335’000 surfels, with keyframes and estimated trajectory.

common such as pose graph optimization [11, 30, 34, 60] or
deformable geometry [67–69] (c.f . Sec. 2). In this paper,
we demonstrate that direct alternating BA on dense RGB-D
data is feasible in real-time, using a single GPU. We propose a novel, practical BA algorithm, carefully designed to
run in real-time in scenes such as the one in Fig. 1.
Experiments on the TUM RGB-D benchmark [61] show
the benefit of direct BA over approximate methods. However, the feature-based ORB-SLAM2 [44] outperforms all
direct methods. This is likely caused by effects such as
rolling shutter [10], asynchronous RGB and depth frames,
and depth distortion. We believe that such problems are
better solved in hardware than in software. For example,
handling rolling shutter is computationally complex [53,56]
and introduces degenerate cases [1]. We thus introduce a
novel benchmark for RGB-D SLAM that was recorded with
accurately calibrated, synchronized global shutter cameras.
On this dataset, ORB-SLAM2 is outperformed by our direct BA approach, while DVO-SLAM [30] performs on a
similar level as ORB-SLAM2. Our benchmark is available
online with public leaderboards for a training and a test set.
In summary, our contributions are: i) A novel, fast algorithm for direct BA, implemented in an RGB-D SLAM
system which outperforms existing approaches. ii) A wellcalibrated benchmark dataset for RGB-D SLAM, but also
monocular and stereo visual-inertial SLAM. In contrast to
previous datasets, ours uses synchronized global shutter
cameras, removing the need to model effects such as rolling

134

