Guaranteed Matrix Completion under Multiple Linear Transformations
Chao Li† , Wei He† , Longhao Yuan‡† , Zhun Sun† , Qibin Zhao†§*
†
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
‡
Saitama Institute of Technology, Japan
§
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, China
{chao.li, wei.he, longhao.yuan, zhun.sun, qibin.zhao}@riken.jp

Abstract
Low-rank matrix completion (LRMC) is a classical
model in both computer vision (CV) and machine learning, and has been successfully applied to various real applications. In the recent CV tasks, the completion is usually
employed on the variants of data, such as “non-local” or
filtered, rather than their original forms. This fact makes
that the theoretical analysis of the conventional LRMC is no
longer suitable in these applications. To tackle this problem, we propose a more general framework for LRMC, in
which the linear transformations of the data are taken into
account. We rigorously prove the identifiability of the proposed model and show an upper bound of the reconstruction error. Furthermore, we derive an efficient completion
algorithm by using augmented Lagrangian multipliers and
the sketching trick. In the experiments, we apply the proposed method to the classical image inpainting problem and
achieve the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix completion (LRMC) is a classical
model to utlize the low-rank structure of the matrix to
recover the missing entries given a small number of observations [5], and has many applications in different
fields [17]. Especially in computer vision (CV), LRMC has
been widely applied to image/video inpainting [45], reflection removal [14] and occlusion removal [40] and so on.
Although the black-box methods like generative adversarial nets (GANs) become popular recently and also achieve
good performance in these tasks [30, 42], one of the advantage of LRMC is that the completion precision is theoretically guaranteed, which is of importance in practical
applications.
*Q. Zhao is the corresponding author. This work is partially supported
by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No. 17K00326) and NSFC China (Grant No.
61773129).

One well known LRMC method is to perform nuclear
norm minimization (NNM) on the incomplete matrix [32,
41]. Due to the fact that nuclear norm is the convex envelope of the matrix rank [32], solving NNM is equivalent to
searching the optimal low-rank approximation of the observations. Furthermore, it has been proved that, under mild
conditions,
the reconstruction
error of NNM is bounded by
q

n(p+2)
O
δ + 2δ where p denotes a constant w.r.t. the
p

rank of the n × n matrix and δ denotes the strength of the
noise. Although there exist many studies on more efficient
algorithms for NNM [15, 34], NNM cannot give satisfactory performance when the matrix is of high rank or several
whole rows or columns are missing, and such situations often happen in practice.
On the other hand, recent CV-driven studies show that
we can obtain better performance than NNM if exploiting the low-rank structure on a “transformed” variant of
the matrix. For example, in low-level CV tasks, the “nonlocal” methods are popularly used for image inpainting and
denoising [6, 8], in which the observations are split into
“non-local” groups, and the low-rank approximation is then
applied to each group. Likewise, in the problem of image occlusion removal, the low-rank structure of the obscured part of the images is used to regularize the regression model [40], implying that the low-rank approximation
is employed on the down-sampled data rather than the original ones in the applications. In addition, the low-rank structures of the filtered or transformed data are also studied for
different problems [10, 26, 33, 43]. Although these methods have achieved the state-of-the-art performance in their
fields, the existing theoretical results for the conventional
LRMC are no longer suitable for them.
To fill the gap of the theoretical study on the aforementioned CV applications, we derive a new upper bound of the
reconstruction error for matrix completion by imposing the
linear transformations into the conventional NNM framework. In contrast to the conventional NNM model, we minimize a sum of nuclear norms of the linearly transformed
111136

