Mixture Density Generative Adversarial Networks
Hamid Eghbal-zadeh1

Werner Zellinger2,3

Gerhard Widmer1

1

LIT AI Lab & Institute of Computational Perception, Johannes Kepler University Linz
Department of Knowledge-Based Mathematical Systems, Johannes Kepler University Linz
3
Software Compenetce Center Hagenberg GmbH
{hamid.eghbal-zadeh, werner.zellinger, gerhard.widmer}@jku.at

2

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks have a surprising ability to generate sharp and realistic images, but they are
known to suffer from the so-called mode collapse problem.
In this paper, we propose a new GAN variant called Mixture Density GAN that overcomes this problem by encouraging the Discriminator to form clusters in its embedding
space, which in turn leads the Generator to exploit these
and discover different modes in the data. This is achieved
by positioning Gaussian density functions in the corners of
a simplex, using the resulting Gaussian mixture as a likelihood function over discriminator embeddings, and formulating an objective function for GAN training that is
based on these likelihoods. We show how formation of
these clusters changes the probability landscape of the discriminator and improves the mode discovery of the GAN.
We also show that the optimum of our training objective
is attained if and only if the generated and the real distribution match exactly. We support our theoretical results with empirical evaluations on three mode discovery
benchmark datasets (Stacked-MNIST, Ring of Gaussians
and Grid of Gaussians), and four image datasets (CIFAR10, CelebA, MNIST, and Fashion-MNIST). Furthermore, we
demonstrate (1) the ability to avoid mode collapse and discover all the modes and (2) superior quality of the generated images (as measured by the Fréchet Inception Distance
(FID)), achieving the lowest FID compared to all baselines.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] learn an
implicit estimate of the Probability Density Function (PDF)
underlying a set of training data, and can learn to generate
realistic new samples. One of the known issues in GANs is
the so-called mode collapse [1, 10, 22], where the generator

misses many modes when trained on a multi-modal dataset,
and achieves a low diversity in generating samples.
In this paper, we propose Mixture Density GAN (MDGAN), which is capable of generating high-quality samples, and in addition copes with the mode collapse problem and enables the GAN to generate samples with a high
variety. The central idea of MD-GAN is to enable the discriminator to create several clusters in its output embedding
space for real images, and therefore provide better means
for distinguishing not only real and fake, but also between
different kinds of real images.
The discriminator in MD-GAN forms a number of clusters1 over embeddings of real images which represent clusters in the real data. To fool the discriminator, the generator
then has to generate images that the discriminator has to
embed close to the center of these clusters to increase the
likelihood of the generated images using the mixture density function. As there are multiple clusters, the generator
can discover various modes by generating images that end
up in various clusters in the discriminator embedding space.
MD-GAN’s Discriminator uses a d-dimensional embedding space and is provided with an objective function that
pushes it towards forming clusters in this space that are arranged in the form of a Simplex2 : each cluster center is located in one of the vertices of this simplex.
In our experiments, we use seven benchmark datasets to
demonstrate the ability of MD-GAN to generate samples
with good quality and high variety, and to avoid mode collapse. We show that MD-GAN outperforms the state of the
art, discovering the most number of modes in three benchmark datasets designed for evaluating mode collapse. Comparing our results to state-of-the-art methods in terms of the
Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [14] using only the basic
DCGAN [28] architecture, we will demonstrate that MDGAN also achieves state-of-the-art image quality.
1 The number of clusters is a parameter that can be set.
2 A simplex is a generalization of the notion of a tetrahedron with d
dimensions and d+1 vertices [25]. The cluster centers are thus equidistant.

5820

