EIGEN: Ecologically-Inspired GENetic Approach for Neural Network Structure
Searching from Scratch

1

Jian Ren1 , Zhe Li2 , Jianchao Yang3 , Ning Xu4 , Tianbao Yang2 , David J. Foran1
Rutgers University 2 The University of Iowa 3 Bytedance AI Lab 4 Amazon Go

Abstract
Designing the structure of neural networks is considered
one of the most challenging tasks in deep learning, especially when there is few prior knowledge about the task domain. In this paper, we propose an Ecologically-Inspired
GENetic (EIGEN) approach that uses the concept of succession, extinction, mimicry, and gene duplication to search
neural network structure from scratch with poorly initialized simple network and few constraints forced during the
evolution, as we assume no prior knowledge about the task
domain. Specifically, we first use primary succession to
rapidly evolve a population of poorly initialized neural network structures into a more diverse population, followed
by a secondary succession stage for fine-grained searching
based on the networks from the primary succession. Extinction is applied in both stages to reduce computational cost.
Mimicry is employed during the entire evolution process to
help the inferior networks imitate the behavior of a superior
network and gene duplication is utilized to duplicate the
learned blocks of novel structures, both of which help to find
better network structures. Experimental results show that
our proposed approach can achieve similar or better performance compared to the existing genetic approaches with
dramatically reduced computation cost. For example, the
network discovered by our approach on CIFAR-100 dataset
achieves 78.1% test accuracy under 120 GPU hours, compared to 77.0% test accuracy in more than 65, 536 GPU
hours in [36].

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have
achieved tremendous success among many computer vision
tasks [14, 25, 39]. However, a hand-crafted network structure tailored to one task may perform poorly on another
task. Therefore, it usually requires extensive amount of human efforts to design an appropriate network structure for a
certain task.
Recently, there are emerging research works [2, 3, 6,
22, 32, 51] on automatically searching neural network struc-

tures for image recognition tasks. In this paper, we focus on
optimizing the evolution-based algorithms [30, 33, 42, 44]
for searching networks from scratch with poorly-initialized
networks, such as a network with one global pooling layer,
and with few constraints forced during the evolution [36]
as we assume no prior knowledge about the task domain.
Existing work along this line of research suffers from either
prohibitive computational cost or unsatisfied performance
compared with hand-crafted network structures. In [36],
it costs more than 256 hours on 250 GPU for searching
neural network structures, which is not affordable for general users. In [44], the final learned network structure by
their genetic approach achieves about 77% test accuracy on
CIFAR-10, even though better performance as 92.9% could
be obtained after fine-tuning certain parameters and modifying some structures on the discovered network. In [27], they
firstly aim to achieve better performance with the reduced
computational cost by the proposed aggressive selection
strategy in genetic approach and more mutations operation
to increase diversity which is decreased by the proposed
selection strategy. In their work, they reduce computational cost dramatically from more than 64, 000 GPU hours
(GPUH) to few hundreds GPUH. However, their approach
still suffers performance sacrifice, for example, 90.5% test
accuracy compared to 94.6% test accuracy from [36] on
CIFAR-10 dataset.
Inspired by a few key concepts in ecological system, in
this paper, we try to improve the genetic approach to achieve
better test performance compared to [36] or competitive
performance to hand-crafted network structures [18] under
limited computation cost [27], but without utilizing predesigned architectures [29, 30, 31, 51]. Inspired by primary, secondary succession from ecological system [38],
we enforce a poorly initialized population of neural network
structures to rapidly evolve to a population containing network structures with dramatically improved performance.
After the first stage of primary succession, we perform finegrained search for better networks in a population during the
secondary succession stage. During the succession stages,
we also introduce an accelerated extinction algorithm to improve the search efficiency. In our approach, we apply the
19059

