Multi-adversarial Discriminative Deep Domain Generalization for Face
Presentation Attack Detection
Rui Shao
Xiangyuan Lan
Jiawei Li
Pong C. Yuen
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{ruishao, jwli, pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, xiangyuanlan@life.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Face presentation attacks have become an increasingly critical issue in the face recognition community. Many
face anti-spoofing methods have been proposed, but they
cannot generalize well on ”unseen” attacks. This work focuses on improving the generalization ability of face antispoofing methods from the perspective of the domain generalization. We propose to learn a generalized feature space via a novel multi-adversarial discriminative deep domain generalization framework. In this framework, a multiadversarial deep domain generalization is performed under
a dual-force triplet-mining constraint. This ensures that the
learned feature space is discriminative and shared by multiple source domains, and thus is more generalized to new
face presentation attacks. An auxiliary face depth supervision is incorporated to further enhance the generalization
ability. Extensive experiments on four public datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Face recognition technique has been successfully applied
in a variety of applications in the real life, such as automated teller machines (ATMs), mobile phones, and entrance
guard systems. The easy-access to the human face brings
the convenience of face recognition, but also the presentation attacks (PA). As simple as a printed photo paper (i.e.,
print attack) or a digital image/video (i.e., video replay attack) could easily hack a face recognition system deployed
in a mobile phone or a laptop when those spoofs are visually close to the genuine faces. Thus, how to cope with these
presentation attacks prior to the step of face recognition has
become an increasingly critical concern in the face recognition community.
Various face anti-spoofing methods have been proposed.
Appearance-based methods aim to differentiate real and
fake faces based on various appearance cues, such as color textures [5], image distortion cues [31] or deep fea-

Training

Seen Domains

Unseen Domain

Domain
1
Oulu

Generalized
Feature Space

Domain
2
CASIA

MSU

Domain
3
Idiap

Testing

Figure 1. This paper aims to learn a feature space that is discriminative and shared by multiple source domains, and thus more generalized to new face presentation attacks.

tures [32]. Temporal-based methods are proposed to extract
various temporal cues, such as facial motions [23, 28, 26]
or rPPG [16, 18]. Although these methods obtain promising performance in intra-dataset experiments where training and testing data are from the same dataset, the performance dramatically degrades in cross-dataset experiments
where training and testing data are from different datasets.
This is because existing face anti-spoofing methods capture
the differentiation cues that are dataset biased [1], and thus
cannot generalize well to testing data with different feature
distribution compared to training data (caused by different
materials of attacks or recording environments).
The straightforward way to solve this problem is to exploit the domain adaptation technique [27, 12, 25, 20, 34,
7, 24, 29, 6, 30, 33, 3] to align the feature distribution between training and testing data so that the trained model
with source data can be adapted on the target data. However, in the scenario of face anti-spoofing, we have no clue
on test data (target domain) when we train our model. It is
also difficult or impossible to collect attacks with all possible materials and in all possible environments to train and

10023

