Cross Domain Model Compression by Structurally Weight Sharing
Shangqian Gao1 , Cheng Deng2 , and Heng Huang∗1,3
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
3
JD Digits
shg84@pitt.edu, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Regular model compression methods focus on RGB input. While cross domain tasks demand more DNN models,
each domain often needs its own model. Consequently, for
such tasks, the storage cost, memory footprint and computation cost increase dramatically compared to single RGB
input. Moreover, the distinct appearance and special structure in cross domain tasks make it difficult to directly apply regular compression methods on it. In this paper, thus,
we propose a new robust cross domain model compression
method. Specifically, the proposed method compress cross
domain models by structurally weight sharing, which is
achieved by regularizing the models with graph embedding
at training time. Due to the channel wise weights sharing,
the proposed method can reduce computation cost without
specially designed algorithm. In the experiments, the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results on two diverse tasks: action recognition and RGB-D scene recognition.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs)
have become very popular in many related fields, for instance, image classification [3, 23] , action recognition [37,
4] , self-driving cars [1], and so on. However, as CNNs go
deeper and deeper [10, 14], the memory footprint and computational cost have increased dramatically, making it impractical to deploy on platform with limited resources such
as mobile phone and embedded device. To resolve such
problem, countless efforts have been made [8, 43, 7, 17].
These methods for CNN model compression can be separated to four categories: pruning [8], sparsity induced reg∗ Corresponding Author. S. Gao, H. Huang were partially supported
by U.S. NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, DBI 1836866, IIS 1845666, IIS
1852606, IIS 1838627, IIS 1837956.

Single domain
compression

Performance

Single domain
compression

Compression
rate

Performance

Cross domain
weights sharing
Compression
rate

Figure 1: A demonstration of difference between our
method and single domain compression method. Upper figure shows that when it comes to cross domain compression,
simply using regular compression method won’t achieve
satisfactory trade-off between performance and compression rate. Lower figure shows that sharing weights across
domain can achieve good result.

ularization [43], weight quantization [7], and low rank factorization [17].
Although compression techniques have been widely developed for RGB input. Cross domain applications are seldom considered for applying compression algorithms. Despite little attention is given on cross domain tasks, the
memory cost and computation demand are even higher than
single RGB domain. Popular cross domain applications
like RGB-D scenes recognition [6], action recognition [37],
cross domain retrieval [20, 25] etc, usually use two or more
DNN models to collect domain specific information from
different sources. Thus the storage cost, memory footprint
and computation cost are at least two times higher than single RGB task. As a result, it is worthy to explore how to get
compact models for cross domain tasks.

8973

