InverseRenderNet: Learning single image inverse rendering
Ye Yu and William A. P. Smith
Department of Computer Science, University of York, UK
{yy1571,william.smith}@york.ac.uk

Input
Diffuse albedo
Illumination
NM prediction NM from MVS Frontal shading
Shading
Figure 1: From a single image (col. 1), we estimate albedo and normal maps and illumination (col. 2-4); comparison multiview stereo result from several hundred images (col. 5); re-rendering of our shape with frontal/estimated lighting (col. 6-7).

Abstract
We show how to train a fully convolutional neural network to perform inverse rendering from a single, uncontrolled image. The network takes an RGB image as input,
regresses albedo and normal maps from which we compute
lighting coefficients. Our network is trained using large uncontrolled image collections without ground truth. By incorporating a differentiable renderer, our network can learn
from self-supervision. Since the problem is ill-posed we
introduce additional supervision: 1. We learn a statistical
natural illumination prior, 2. Our key insight is to perform
offline multiview stereo (MVS) on images containing rich illumination variation. From the MVS pose and depth maps,
we can cross project between overlapping views such that
Siamese training can be used to ensure consistent estimation of photometric invariants. MVS depth also provides
direct coarse supervision for normal map estimation. We
believe this is the first attempt to use MVS supervision for
learning inverse rendering.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is the problem of estimating one or
more of illumination, reflectance properties and shape from
observed appearance (i.e. one or more images). In this paper, we tackle the most challenging setting of this problem;
we seek to estimate all three quantities from only a single, uncontrolled image. Specifically, we estimate a normal
map, diffuse albedo map and spherical harmonic lighting
coefficients. This subsumes two classical computer vision
problems: (uncalibrated) shape-from-shading and intrinsic
image decomposition.
Classical approaches [4,29] cast these problems in terms
of energy minimisation. Here, a data term measures the difference between the input image and the synthesised image
that arises from the estimated quantities. We approach the
problem as one of image to image translation and solve it
using a deep, fully convolutional neural network. However,
inverse rendering of uncontrolled, outdoor scenes is itself
an unsolved problem and so labels for supervised learning

3155

