Learning to Reduce Dual-level Discrepancy for Infrared-Visible Person
Re-identification
Zhixiang Wang1 Zheng Wang2∗ Yinqiang Zheng2 Yung-Yu Chuang1 Shin’ichi Satoh2,3
1
National Taiwan University 2 National Institute of Informatics 3 The University of Tokyo
1.0

Abstract

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) has recently received increasing attention in the computer vision community [18,
17, 6, 7, 20, 28] because of its great importance in video
surveillance. Most current re-ID methods rely on person’s
appearance under good visible light conditions. Under poor
illumination conditions, due to poor appearance, conventional re-ID models could become “blind in dark”. In prac∗ Corresponding Author

0.8

Left Gap

Initial Gap

0.6

Initial Gap

𝛿𝑎

mAP

Infrared-Visible person RE-IDentification (IV-REID) is
a rising task. Compared to conventional person reidentification (re-ID), IV-REID concerns the additional
modality discrepancy originated from the different imaging
processes of spectrum cameras, in addition to the person’s
appearance discrepancy caused by viewpoint changes, pose
variations and deformations presented in the conventional
re-ID task. The co-existed discrepancies make IV-REID
more difficult to solve. Previous methods attempt to reduce
the appearance and modality discrepancies simultaneously
using feature-level constraints. It is however difficult to
eliminate the mixed discrepancies using only feature-level
constraints. To address the problem, this paper introduces a
novel Dual-level Discrepancy Reduction Learning (D2 RL)
scheme which handles the two discrepancies separately.
For reducing the modality discrepancy, an image-level subnetwork is trained to translate an infrared image into its
visible counterpart and a visible image to its infrared version. With the image-level sub-network, we can unify the
representations for images with different modalities. With
the help of the unified multi-spectral images, a feature-level
sub-network is trained to reduce the remaining appearance
discrepancy through feature embedding. By cascading the
two sub-networks and training them jointly, the dual-level
reductions take their responsibilities cooperatively and attentively. Extensive experiments demonstrate the proposed
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

𝛿𝑚

Left Gap

0.4

0.2
0.0
1

Visible domain

Intra person

Infrared domain

Inter person

V–V

10
2500
Training steps

5000

IR–IR

IV-REID

Figure 1. Illustration of the difficulty in the IV-REID task. (Left)
The modality discrepancy δm is much larger than δa , the appearance discrepancy. Thus, the modality discrepancy could result in the intra-person distance D( , ) being larger than the
inter-person distance D( , ). (Right) The performance obtained
by [23] on the RegDB dataset using only the feature-level constraints. “V-V” and “IR-IR” respectively denote the performance
of visible-visible and infrared-infrared re-ID. The red gap indicates the performance gap between visible-visible and infraredinfrared single-modality re-ID. The black gap denotes the performance gap between cross-modality re-ID and single-modality reID. It is clear that the re-ID problem across modalities is much
more difficult than the one with the same modality.

tice, for dealing with poor illumination, most surveillance
cameras automatically switch from the visible mode to the
infrared mode in the dark [21]. Consequently, this raises
a new task in which, given a visible (or infrared) image of
a specific person, the goal is to find the corresponding infrared (or visible) images of the person captured by other
spectrum cameras [21, 22, 23, 2]. This cross-modality image matching task is named Infrared-Visible person REIDentification (IV-REID).
Compared to the conventional re-ID task, IV-REID encounters additional modality discrepancy resulting from the
differences between imaging processes of different spectrum cameras, in addition to the person’s appearance discrepancy caused by viewpoint changes, pose variations,
scale changes and deformations. The modality discrepancy
is often more significant than the appearance discrepancy.

618

