Destruction and Construction Learning for Fine-grained Image Recognition
Yue Chen1∗
1

Yalong Bai2∗ Wei Zhang3
JD AI Research, Beijing, China

Tao Mei4

chenyue21@jd.com, 2 ylbai@outlook.com, 3 wzhang.cu@gmail.com, 4 tmei@live.com

Abstract
Delicate feature representation about object parts plays
a critical role in fine-grained recognition. For example, experts can even distinguish fine-grained objects relying only
on object parts according to professional knowledge. In this
paper, we propose a novel “Destruction and Construction
Learning” (DCL) method to enhance the difficulty of finegrained recognition and exercise the classification model to
acquire expert knowledge. Besides the standard classification backbone network, another “destruction and construction” stream is introduced to carefully “destruct” and then
“reconstruct” the input image, for learning discriminative
regions and features. More specifically, for “destruction”,
we first partition the input image into local regions and then
shuffle them by a Region Confusion Mechanism (RCM). To
correctly recognize these destructed images, the classification network has to pay more attention to discriminative regions for spotting the differences. To compensate the
noises introduced by RCM, an adversarial loss, which distinguishes original images from destructed ones, is applied
to reject noisy patterns introduced by RCM. For “construction”, a region alignment network, which tries to restore the
original spatial layout of local regions, is followed to model
the semantic correlation among local regions. By jointly
training with parameter sharing, our proposed DCL injects
more discriminative local details to the classification network. Experimental results show that our proposed framework achieves state-of-the-art performance on three standard benchmarks. Moreover, our proposed method does not
need any external knowledge during training, and there is
no computation overhead at inference time except the standard classification network feed-forwarding. Source code:
https://github.com/JDAI-CV/DCL.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, generic object recognition has
achieved steady progress with efforts from both large-scale
∗ Equal contribution.

annotated dataset and sophisticated model design. However, recognizing fine-grained object categories (e.g., bird
species [3], car models [14] and aircraft [18]) is still a
challenging task, which attracts extensive research attention. Although fine-grained objects are visually similar by a
rough glimpse, they can be correctly recognized by details
in discriminative local regions.
Learning discriminative feature representations from
discriminative parts plays the key role in fine-grained image
recognition. Existing fine-grained recognition methods can
be roughly grouped into two categories, as illustrated in Figure 1. One group (a) first locates the discriminative object
parts and then classifies based on the discriminative regions.
These two-steps methods [21, 11, 1] mostly need additional
bounding box annotations on objects or parts, which are expensive to collect. The other group (b) tries to automatically
localize discriminative regions by attention mechanism in
an unsupervised manner, and thus does not needs extra annotations. However, these methods [7, 42, 41, 22] usually
need additional network structure (e.g., attention mechanism), and thus introduce extra computation overhead for
both training and inference stages.
In this paper, we propose a novel fine-grained image
recognition framework named “Destruction and Construction Learning” (DCL), as shown in Figure 1 (c). Besides
the standard classification backbone network, we introduce
a DCL stream to learn from discriminative regions automatically. An input image is first carefully destructed to emphasize discriminative local details, and then reconstructed
to model the semantic correlation among local regions. On
one hand, DCL automatically localizes discriminative regions, and thus does not need any extra knowledge while
training. On the other hand, the DCL structure is only
adopted at the training stage, and thus introduces no computational overhead at inference time.
For “Destruction”, we propose a Region Confusion
Mechanism (RCM) to deliberately “confuse” the global
structure, which partitions the input image into local
patches and then shuffles them randomly (Figure 3). For
fine-grained recognition, local details play a more important
role than global structures, since images from different fine4321
5157

