Large Scale High-Resolution Land Cover Mapping with Multi-Resolution Data
Caleb Robinson
Georgia Institute of Technology
Rachel Soobitsky
Chesapeake Conservancy

Le Hou
Stony Brook University

Jacob Czawlytko
Chesapeake Conservancy

Kolya Malkin
Yale University

Bistra Dilkina
University of Southern California

Nebojsa Jojic∗
Microsoft Research

Abstract
In this paper we propose multi-resolution data fusion methods for deep learning-based high-resolution land cover mapping from aerial imagery. The land cover mapping problem, at
country-level scales, is challenging for common deep learning
methods due to the scarcity of high-resolution labels, as well
as variation in geography and quality of input images. On the
other hand, multiple satellite imagery and low-resolution ground
truth label sources are widely available, and can be used to
improve model training efforts. Our methods include: introducing low-resolution satellite data to smooth quality differences
in high-resolution input, exploiting low-resolution labels with
a dual loss function, and pairing scarce high-resolution labels
with inputs from several points in time. We train models that are
able to generalize from a portion of the Northeast United States,
where we have high-resolution land cover labels, to the rest of
the US. With these models, we produce the first high-resolution
(1-meter) land cover map of the contiguous US, consisting of
over 8 trillion pixels. We demonstrate the robustness and potential applications of this data in a case study with domain experts
and develop a web application to share our results. This work is
practically useful, and can be applied to other locations over the
earth as high-resolution imagery becomes more widely available even as high-resolution labeled land cover data remains
sparse.

1. Introduction
Land cover mapping is a semantic segmentation problem:
each pixel in an aerial or satellite image must be classified into
one of several land cover classes. These classes describe the
surface of the earth and are typically broad categories such
as “forest” or “field”. High-resolution land cover data (≤1m /
pixel) is essential in many sustainability-related applications. Its
∗ jojic@microsoft.com

uses include informing agricultural best management practices,
monitoring forest change over time [10] and measuring urban
sprawl [31]. However, land cover maps quickly fall out of
date and must be updated as construction, erosion, and other
processes act on the landscape.
In this work we identify the challenges in automatic
large-scale high-resolution land cover mapping and develop methods to overcome them. As an application of
our methods, we produce the first high-resolution (1m)
land cover map of the contiguous United States. We have
released code used for training and testing our models at
https://github.com/calebrob6/land-cover.
Scale and cost of existing data: Manual and semi-manual
land cover mapping of aerial imagery is currently expensive and
scales poorly over large areas. For example, the Chesapeake
Conservancy spent 10 months and $1.3 million to produce a
high-resolution (1m) land cover map of the Chesapeake Bay
watershed in the Northeast US. This project, the largest of its
kind, labeled only ∼160,000 km2, or 2% of the US [5]. Existing
benchmark land cover segmentation datasets and studies are
limited to even smaller scales. The DeepGlobe challenge
dataset [6, 24] covers a total area of 1,717 km2, the Dstl
satellite imagery dataset [2] covers ∼400 km2, the UC Merced
land use dataset [30, 4] covers just 7 km2, and the ISPRS
Vaihingen and Potsdam dataset [1] contains fewer than 36 km2
of labeled data. In comparison, a single layer of aerial imagery
of the contiguous US covers 8 million km2 (8 trillion pixels
at 1m resolution), occupying 55 TB on disk – two orders of
magnitude larger than ImageNet, a standard corpus for training
computer vision models. Deep learning-based approaches
for land cover mapping have shown to be effective, however,
in limited-size studies: [19] compare common CNN image
classification architectures at a 6.5m spatial resolution in a small
part of Newfoundland, Canada, while [7] use a multi-resolution
approach for handling panchromatic and multispectral bands
separately at a 1.5m spatial resolution in a ∼4000 km2 area.

12726

