Attribute-Driven Feature Disentangling and Temporal Aggregation for Video
Person Re-Identification

1

Yiru Zhao1,2∗, Xu Shen2 , Zhongming Jin2 , Hongtao Lu1†, Xian-sheng Hua2‡
Key Lab of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction and Cognitive Engineering,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Alibaba Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
{yiru.zhao,htlu}@sjtu.edu.cn, {shenxu.sx,zhongming.jinzm,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Video-based person re-identification plays an important
role in surveillance video analysis, expanding image-based
methods by learning features of multiple frames. Most existing methods fuse features by temporal average-pooling,
without exploring the different frame weights caused by various viewpoints, poses, and occlusions. In this paper, we
propose an attribute-driven method for feature disentangling and frame re-weighting. The features of single frames
are disentangled into groups of sub-features, each corresponds to specific semantic attributes. The sub-features are
re-weighted by the confidence of attribute recognition and
then aggregated at the temporal dimension as the final representation. By means of this strategy, the most informative regions of each frame are enhanced and contributes to
a more discriminative sequence representation. Extensive
ablation studies verify the effectiveness of feature disentangling as well as temporal re-weighting. The experimental
results on the iLIDS-VID, PRID-2011 and MARS datasets
demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is at the core of intelligent video surveillance systems because of a wide range of
potential applications. Given a query person, the task aims
at matching the same person from multiple non-overlapping
cameras. It remains a very challenging task due to the large
variations of human poses, occlusions, viewpoints, illuminations and background clutter.
∗ This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Corresponding author.

Image-based single-query re-id task has been widely
investigated in recent years, including feature representation [15, 21, 44] and distance metric learning [19, 38, 27].
Deep learning methods have shown significant advantages
in feature learning and have been proven highly effective in person re-id tasks [18, 5, 32, 35, 30]. Existing
works have shown that multi-query strategy obviously outperforms single-query by simply pooling features across a
track-let [43, 48, 13]. This improvement is almost cost-free
because multi-frame context is easily available by visual
tracking in real-world surveillance applications.
The video informations are further explored to extract
temporal features, nourishing a series of video-based re-id
approaches. Some works [26, 40, 4] involve optical flow
to provide motion features. Recurrent neural networks are
applied in [49, 40, 4] to explore the temporal structure of
input image sequences. Temporal Attention models are also
utilized in [49, 40, 17] to replace temporal average pooling,
motivated by the assumption that the frames with higher
quality and less occlusions ought to have larger weights
in aggregation. Local features of body regions have been
used in previous works [43, 42, 39] and have shown superior for fine-grained identification. While in the videobased re-id task, it is suboptimal for local features of the
same body region from different frames to share equal temporal weights due to the various human poses and occlusions within the image sequences. Our proposed method
is motivated mainly by this observation and is designed to
enhance the more informative frames of each regions.
An example of our proposed method is shown in Fig. 1.
The feature of one frame is disentangled into several subfeatures corresponding to specific semantic attribute groups.
In the displayed image sequences, frame-1 captured clear
frontal face so it has higher weight in Head group. While
the bag is invisible in frame-1, the weights of Bag groups
are mainly concentrated on frame-2 and frame-3. Frame-2
14913

