Learning Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation through Visual Attention
Wenguan Wang ∗1,2 , Hongmei Song ∗1 , Shuyang Zhao 1 ,
Jianbing Shen †1,2 , Sanyuan Zhao 1 , Steven C. H. Hoi 3,4 , Haibin Ling 5
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
4

3

Singapore Management University, Singapore

Salesforce Research Asia, Singapore

5

Temple University, USA

wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, shenjianbingcg@gmail.com
https://github.com/wenguanwang/AGS

Abstract
This paper conducts a systematic study on the role of
visual attention in the Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation (UVOS) task. By elaborately annotating three popular video segmentation datasets (DAVIS16 , Youtube-Objects
and SegTrackV 2 ) with dynamic eye-tracking data in the
UVOS setting, for the first time, we quantitatively verified
the high consistency of visual attention behavior among human observers, and found strong correlation between human attention and explicit primary object judgements during dynamic, task-driven viewing. Such novel observations provide an in-depth insight into the underlying rationale behind UVOS. Inspired by these findings, we decouple UVOS into two sub-tasks: UVOS-driven Dynamic
Visual Attention Prediction (DVAP) in spatiotemporal domain, and Attention-Guided Object Segmentation (AGOS)
in spatial domain. Our UVOS solution enjoys three major merits: 1) modular training without using expensive
video segmentation annotations, instead, using more affordable dynamic fixation data to train the initial video attention module and using existing fixation-segmentation paired
static/image data to train the subsequent segmentation module; 2) comprehensive foreground understanding through
multi-source learning; and 3) additional interpretability
from the biologically-inspired and assessable attention. Experiments on popular benchmarks show that, even without
using expensive video object mask annotations, our model
achieves compelling performance in comparison with stateof-the-arts.

∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This work was supported in
part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4182056, the
Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation under Grant 141067, and the Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education
Commission.

Figure 1. Our UVOS solution has two key steps: Dynamic Visual
Attention Prediction (DVAP, §5.2) cascaded by Attention-Guided
Object Segmentation (AGOS, §5.3). The UVOS-aware attention
from DVAP acts as an intermediate video object representation,
freeing our method from the dependency of expensive video object
annotations and bringing better interpretability.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation (UVOS), i.e.,
automatically segmenting primary object regions from the
background in videos, has been a long standing research
challenge in computer vision [29, 30, 12, 23], and has
shown potential benefits for numerous applications, e.g., action recognition [62] and object tracking [50]. Due to the
lack of user interactions in UVOS, it is very challenging
to automatically determine the primary foreground objects
from the complex background in real-world scenarios.
Deep learning has been actively explored for solving
UVOS recently. Despite having achieved promising results,
current deep learning based UVOS models [64, 45, 33, 67]
often rely on expensive pixel-wise video segmentation annotation data [86] to directly map input video frames into
corresponding segmentation masks, which are restricted
and generally lack of an explicit interpretation about the ra-

3064

