Adaptive Transfer Network for Cross-Domain Person Re-Identification
Jiawei Liu1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1* , Di Chen1 , Richang Hong2 , Meng Wang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
HeFei University of Technology, China
{ljw368,cdrom000}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, {hongrc,wangmeng}@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent deep learning based person re-identification
approaches have steadily improved the performance for
benchmarks, however they often fail to generalize well
from one domain to another. In this work, we propose a
novel adaptive transfer network (ATNet) for effective crossdomain person re-identification. ATNet looks into the essential causes of domain gap and addresses it following
the principle of “divide-and-conquer”. It decomposes the
complicated cross-domain transfer into a set of factor-wise
sub-transfers, each of which concentrates on style transfer with respect to a certain imaging factor, e.g., illumination, resolution and camera view etc. An adaptive ensemble strategy is proposed to fuse factor-wise transfers by perceiving the affect magnitudes of various factors on images.
Such “decomposition-and-ensemble” strategy gives ATNet
the capability of precise style transfer at factor level and
eventually effective transfer across domains. In particular,
ATNet consists of a transfer network composed by multiple factor-wise CycleGANs and an ensemble CycleGAN as
well as a selection network that infers the affects of different factors on transferring each image. Extensive experimental results on three widely-used datasets, i.e., Market1501, DukeMTMC-reID and PRID2011 have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed ATNet with significant performance improvements over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is the task of matching a probe
pedestrian image from a large-scale gallery collected by
non-overlapping camera networks at diverse locations [17,
35, 18]. It has been widely investigated due to its importance for many practical applications, such as automated
surveillance, content-based retrieval and behavior analysis
etc. [20, 38, 43, 36]. Recently, deep learning technique has
been applied for person re-identification, leading to steady
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the domain disparity among Market1501,
DukeMTMC-reID and PRID2011 benchmarks, presenting significant variances in illumination, resolution and camera viewpoint
etc.

performance improvement on popular benchmarks [34, 41].
Despite remarkable progress on person re-identification
[26, 31, 11], it still remains a challenging task due to
dramatic variances in imaging device, condition and environment among different surveillance cameras/camera networks. In practice, visual appearance of a pedestrian observed by different cameras at various locations and times
varies drastically due to different camera configuration,
lighting condition and viewing angles etc. This results in intensive disparities across pedestrian image galleries known
as the challenge of domain gap in literatures [23, 16], hindering the application of exiting person re-identification
systems. Existing re-identification models trained on one
domain often fail to generalize well to another and suffer
from severe performance drop. For example, GoogleNet
[29] trained on Market-1501 dataset achieves rank-1 recognition rate of only 5.0% on PRID2011. Figure 1 illustrates
the domain disparity among three popular benchmarks for
person re-identification. They are collected at different
places (e.g., supermarket, campus and street) and present
17202

