Single-Image Piece-wise Planar 3D Reconstruction via Associative Embedding
Zehao Yu1∗

Jia Zheng1∗
Dongze Lian1
1
ShanghaiTech University

Zihan Zhou2
Shenghua Gao1†
2
The Pennsylvania State University

{yuzh,zhengjia,liandz,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

zzhou@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
Single-image piece-wise planar 3D reconstruction aims
to simultaneously segment plane instances and recover
3D plane parameters from an image. Most recent approaches leverage convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and achieve promising results. However, these methods are
limited to detecting a fixed number of planes with certain
learned order. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel
two-stage method based on associative embedding, inspired
by its recent success in instance segmentation. In the first
stage, we train a CNN to map each pixel to an embedding
space where pixels from the same plane instance have similar embeddings. Then, the plane instances are obtained
by grouping the embedding vectors in planar regions via
an efficient mean shift clustering algorithm. In the second stage, we estimate the parameter for each plane instance by considering both pixel-level and instance-level
consistencies. With the proposed method, we are able to
detect an arbitrary number of planes. Extensive experiments on public datasets validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. Furthermore, our method runs at 30
fps at the testing time, thus could facilitate many real-time
applications such as visual SLAM and human-robot interaction. Code is available at https://github.com/
svip-lab/PlanarReconstruction.

1. Introduction
Single-image 3D reconstruction is a fundamental problem in computer vision, with many applications in emerging domains such as virtual and augmented reality, robotics,
and social media. In this paper, we address this challenging problem by recovering a piece-wise planar 3D model of
a scene, that is, to find all the plane instances in a single
RGB image and estimate their 3D parameters, as shown in
Figure 1. The piece-wise planar model provides a compact
representation of the 3D scene, which could benefit many
applications such as SLAM and human-robot interaction.
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Input image

Plane instance segmentation

Depth map

Piece-wise planar 3D model

Figure 1: Piece-wise planar 3D reconstruction.
In the literature, most existing methods tackle this problem in a bottom-up manner [6, 2, 24, 31, 15, 10, 12].
They first extract geometric primitives such as straight line
segments, vanishing points, corners, junctions, and image
patches from the image. These primitives are then grouped
into planar regions based on their geometric relationships.
However, in practice, detecting the constituent geometric
primitives itself is highly challenging, often resulting in a
large number of missed detections (e.g., due to poorly textured surfaces, lighting conditions) and outliers (e.g., due
to the presence of non-planar objects). As a result, statistical techniques such as RANSAC or Markov Random Field
(MRF) are commonly employed to produce the final 3D
models. But such techniques often break down when the
percentage of missed and irrelevant detections is high, and
are only applicable to restrictive scenarios (e.g., Manhattan
world scenes). Further, the optimization of the statistical
model is time-consuming, which greatly limits their application in real-time tasks.
Different from bottom-up methods, a top-down approach [13] overcomes the aforementioned difficulties by
analyzing the image in a holistic fashion, without resorting

1029

