Learning Implicit Fields for Generative Shape Modeling
Zhiqin Chen
Simon Fraser University

Hao Zhang
Simon Fraser University

zhiqinc@sfu.ca

haoz@sfu.ca

Abstract
We advocate the use of implicit fields for learning generative models of shapes and introduce an implicit field decoder, called IM-NET, for shape generation, aimed at improving the visual quality of the generated shapes. An implicit field assigns a value to each point in 3D space, so
that a shape can be extracted as an iso-surface. IM-NET
is trained to perform this assignment by means of a binary
classifier. Specifically, it takes a point coordinate, along
with a feature vector encoding a shape, and outputs a value
which indicates whether the point is outside the shape or
not. By replacing conventional decoders by our implicit decoder for representation learning (via IM-AE) and shape
generation (via IM-GAN), we demonstrate superior results
for tasks such as generative shape modeling, interpolation,
and single-view 3D reconstruction, particularly in terms of
visual quality. Code and supplementary material are available at https://github.com/czq142857/implicit-decoder.

1. Introduction
Unlike images and video, 3D shapes are not confined to
one standard representation. Up to date, deep neural networks for 3D shape analysis and synthesis have been developed for voxel grids [18, 45], multi-view images [39], point
clouds [1, 32], and integrated surface patches [16]. Specific
to generative modeling of 3D shapes, despite the many progresses made, the shapes produced by state-of-the-art methods still fall far short in terms of visual quality. This is reflected by a combination of issues including low-resolution
outputs, overly smoothed or discontinuous surfaces, as well
as a variety of topological noise and irregularities.
In this paper, we explore the use of implicit fields for
learning deep models of shapes and introduce an implicit
field decoder for shape generation, aimed at improving the
visual quality of the generated models, as shown in Figure 1. An implicit field assigns a value to each point
(x, y, z). A shape is represented by all points assigned to
a specific value and is typically rendered via iso-surface
extraction such as Marching Cubes. Our implicit field de-

Figure 1: 3D shapes generated by IM-GAN, our implicit
field generative adversarial network, which was trained on
643 or 1283 voxelized shapes. The output shapes are sampled at 5123 resolution and rendered after Marching Cubes.
coder, or simply implicit encoder, is trained to perform this
assignment task, by means of a binary classifier, and it has a
very simple architecture; see Figure 2. Specifically, it takes
a point coordinate (x, y, z), along with a feature vector encoding a shape, and outputs a value which indicates whether
the point is outside the shape or not. In a typical application
setup, our decoder, which is coined IM-NET, would follow
an encoder which outputs the shape feature vectors and then
return an implicit field to define an output shape.
Several novel features of IM-NET impact the visual
quality of the generated shapes. First, the decoder output
can be sampled at any resolution and is not limited by the
resolution of the training shapes; see Figure 1. More importantly, we concatenate point coordinates with shape features, feeding both as input to our implicit decoder, which
learns the inside/outside status of any point relative to a
shape. In contrast, a classical convolution/deconvolutionbased neural network (CNN) operating on voxelized shapes
is typically trained to predict voxels relative to the extent
of the bounding volume of a shape. Such a network learns

5939

