LiFF: Light Field Features in Scale and Depth
Donald G. Dansereau1,2 , Bernd Girod1 , and Gordon Wetzstein1
1
Stanford University, 2 The University of Sydney
donald.dansereau@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Feature detectors and descriptors are key low-level vision tools that many higher-level tasks build on. Unfortunately these fail in the presence of challenging light transport effects including partial occlusion, low contrast, and
reflective or refractive surfaces. Building on spatio-angular
imaging modalities offered by emerging light field cameras,
we introduce a new and computationally efficient 4D light
field feature detector and descriptor: LiFF. LiFF is scale
invariant and utilizes the full 4D light field to detect features that are robust to changes in perspective. This is particularly useful for structure from motion (SfM) and other
tasks that match features across viewpoints of a scene. We
demonstrate significantly improved 3D reconstructions via
SfM when using LiFF instead of the leading 2D or 4D features, and show that LiFF runs an order of magnitude faster
than the leading 4D approach. Finally, LiFF inherently estimates depth for each feature, opening a path for future
research in light field-based SfM.

1. Introduction
Feature detection and matching are the basis for a broad
range of tasks in computer vision. Image registration, pose
estimation, 3D reconstruction, place recognition, combinations of these, e.g. structure from motion (SfM) and simultaneous localisation and mapping (SLAM), along with a vast
body of related tasks, rely directly on being able to identify
and match features across images. While these approaches
work relatively robustly over a range of applications, some
remain out of reach due to poor performance in challenging
conditions. Even infrequent failures can be unacceptable,
as in the case of autonomous driving.
State-of-the-art features fail in challenging conditions
including self-similar, occlusion-rich, and non-Lambertian
scenes, as well as in low-contrast scenarios including low
light and scattering media. For example, the high rate of
self-similarity and occlusion in the scene in Fig. 1 cause the
COLMAP [35] SfM solution to fail. There is also an inherent tradeoff between computational burden and robustness:

Figure 1. (left) One of ﬁve views of a scene that COLMAP’s
structure-from-motion (SfM) solution fails to reconstruct using
SIFT, but successfully reconstructs using LiFF; (right) LiFF
features have well-deﬁned scale and depth, measured as light
ﬁeld slope, revealing the 3D structure of the scene – note we do
not employ depth in the SfM solution. Code and dataset are at
http://dgd.vision/Tools/LiFF, see the supplementary
information for dataset details.

given sufﬁcient computation it may be possible to make
sense of an outlier-rich set of features, but it is more desirable to begin with higher-quality features, reducing computational burden, probability of failure, power consumption,
and latency.
Light ﬁeld (LF) imaging is an established tool in computer vision offering advantages in computational complexity and robustness to challenging scenarios [7,10,29,38,48].
This is due both to a more favourable signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) / depth of ﬁeld tradeoff than for conventional
cameras, and to the rich depth, occlusion, and native nonLambertian surface capture inherently supported by LFs.
In this work we propose to detect and describe blobs
directly from 4D LFs to deliver more informative features
compared with the leading 2D and 4D alternatives. Just as
the scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) detects blobs
with well-deﬁned scale, the proposed light ﬁeld feature
(LiFF) identiﬁes blobs with both well-deﬁned scale and
well-deﬁned depth in the scene. Structures that change their
appearance with viewpoint, for example those refracted
through or reﬂected off curved surfaces, and those formed
by occluding edges, will not satisfy these criteria. At the
same time, well-deﬁned features that are partially occluded
are not normally detected by 2D methods, but can be detected by LiFF via focusing around partial occluders.

8042

