Learning Multi-Class Segmentations From Single-Class Datasets
Konstantin Dmitriev and Arie E. Kaufman
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
kdmitriev@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Multi-class segmentation has recently achieved significant performance in natural images and videos. This
achievement is due primarily to the public availability of
large multi-class datasets. However, there are certain domains, such as biomedical images, where obtaining sufficient multi-class annotations is a laborious and often impossible task and only single-class datasets are available.
While existing segmentation research in such domains use
private multi-class datasets or focus on single-class segmentations, we propose a unified highly efficient framework for robust simultaneous learning of multi-class segmentations by combining single-class datasets and utilizing
a novel way of conditioning a convolutional network for the
purpose of segmentation. We demonstrate various ways of
incorporating the conditional information, perform an extensive evaluation, and show compelling multi-class segmentation performance on biomedical images, which outperforms current state-of-the-art solutions (up to 2.7 %).
Unlike current solutions, which are meticulously tailored
for particular single-class datasets, we utilize datasets from
a variety of sources. Furthermore, we show the applicability of our method also to natural images and evaluate it on
the Cityscapes dataset. We further discuss other possible
applications of our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress has been made in deep learning for
semantic segmentation, and one of the major factors of such
advances is the public availability of large-scale multi-class
datasets, such as ImageNet [7], COCO [24], PASCAL
VOC [12], and others. Such variety of available datasets
not only provides the means to train and evaluate different segmentation models but also to exhibit diverse labels.
However, in contrast to natural images, there are certain domains, where despite the critical importance of segmentation research, the generation of ground truth annotations
and labeling is extremely costly and remains a bottleneck
in advancing research.

Biomedical images is one such domain where the accurate segmentation of various structures is a fundamental problem, especially in clinical research. In traditional
clinical practice, segmentation is often omitted during the
diagnostic process. However, manual analysis of biomedical images, including measurements, is subject to large
variability, as it depends on different factors, including the
structure of interest, image quality, and the clinician’s experience. Moreover, segmentation is an essential component
in various medical systems that support computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) [9, 14] and surgery and treatment planning.
Furthermore, early cancer detection and staging often depend on the results of segmentation.
Remarkable progress has been made in the segmentation
of radiological images, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) 3D scans. Radiological images exhibit various objects, such as abdominal
organs (Fig. 1a), within a single image. However, creating expert annotations for such images is a time consuming and intensive task, and thus multi-class datasets are difficult to generate. A limited number of segmentation algorithms have been proposed and evaluated on multi-class
datasets. These include private or public datasets, such as
VISCERAL [20], which has been unavailable due to a lack
of funding. Apart from often being private, these multiclass datasets are frequently limited in size (less than 30
volumes) and come from a single institution, where they
were generated using the same imaging protocols and imaging devices, leading to the developed segmentation algorithms being sensitive to such imaging parameters. On the
other hand, generation of single-class datasets requires less
time and effort, and they are often publicly available as part
of challenges, such as, Sliver07 [15] (Fig. 1b) and NIH
Pancreas [16] (Fig. 1c). Additionally, these single-class
datasets come from different institutions and exhibit variability in factors, such as the presence of malignancy, imaging protocols, and reconstruction algorithms.
However, while single-class datasets often contain the
same objects within a single image, the ground truth annotations are provided for only a particular class of objects
in the form of binary masks, and the sets of images from

9501

