Texture Mixer: A Network for Controllable Synthesis
and Interpolation of Texture
Ning Yu 1,2,4

Connelly Barnes 3,4
Eli Shechtman 3
Sohrab Amirghodsi 3
Michal Lukáč 3
1
2
University of Maryland
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
4
Adobe Research
University of Virginia

ningyu@mpi-inf.mpg.de

connelly@cs.virginia.edu

{elishe, tamirgho, lukac}@adobe.com

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of interpolating visual
textures. We formulate this problem by requiring (1) byexample controllability and (2) realistic and smooth interpolation among an arbitrary number of texture samples. To
solve it we propose a neural network trained simultaneously
on a reconstruction task and a generation task, which can
project texture examples onto a latent space where they can
be linearly interpolated and projected back onto the image
domain, thus ensuring both intuitive control and realistic
results. We show our method outperforms a number of baselines according to a comprehensive suite of metrics as well
as a user study. We further show several applications based
on our technique, which include texture brush, texture dissolve, and animal hybridization 1 .

1. Introduction
Many materials exhibit variation in local appearance,
as well as complex transitions between different materials.
Editing materials in an image, however, can be highly challenging due to the rich, spatially-varying material combinations as we see in the natural world. One general research
challenge then is to attempt to enable these kinds of edits.
In particular, in this paper, we focus on textures. We define
“texture” as being an image-space representation of a statistically homogeneous material, captured from a top-down
view. We further focus on allowing a user to both be able
to accurately control the placement of textures, as well as
create plausible transitions between them.
Because of the complex appearance of textures, creating transitions by interpolating between them on the pixel
domain is difficult. Doing so naı̈vely results in unpleasant artifacts such as ghosting, visible seams, and obvious
repetitions. Researchers in texture synthesis have therefore
1 Demos, videos, code, data, models, and supplemental material are
available at GitHub.

Figure 1. Texture interpolation and texture painting using our
network on the animal texture dataset. The top part shows a
1024 × 1024 palette created by interpolating four source textures at the corners outside the palette. The bottom part shows
a 512 × 2048 painting of letters with different textures sampled
from the palette. The letters are interpolated by our method with
the background, also generated by our interpolation.

developed sophisticated algorithms to address this problem. These may be divided to two families: non-parametric
methods such as patch-based synthesis (e.g. [10, 9, 2]) and
parametric methods (e.g. [15, 32]), including neural network synthesis approaches (e.g. [11, 37, 20, 26, 27]). Previously, researchers used sophisticated patch-based interpolation methods [7, 8] with carefully crafted objective functions. However, such approaches are extremely slow. Moreover, due to the hand-crafted nature of their objectives, they
cannot learn from a large variety of textures in the natural
world, and as we show in our comparisons are often brittle and frequently result in less pleasing transitions. Further, we are not aware of any existing feedforward neural network approaches that offer both fine-grained controllable synthesis and interpolation between multiple textures. User-controllable texture interpolation is substan-

12164

