GFrames: Gradient-Based Local Reference Frame
for 3D Shape Matching
Simone Melzi
University of Verona

Riccardo Spezialetti
University of Bologna

Federico Tombari
TU Munich

simone.melzi@univr.it

riccardo.spezialetti@unibo.it

tombari@in.tum.de

Michael M. Bronstein
Imperial College London / USI

Luigi Di Stefano
University of Bologna

Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza University of Rome

m.bronstein@imperial.ac.uk

luigi.distefano@unibo.it

rodola@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract

SHOT

0

We introduce GFrames, a novel local reference frame
(LRF) construction for 3D meshes and point clouds.
GFrames are based on the computation of the intrinsic gradient of a scalar field defined on top of the input shape. The
resulting tangent vector field defines a repeatable tangent
direction of the local frame at each point; importantly, it directly inherits the properties and invariance classes of the
underlying scalar function, making it remarkably robust under strong sampling artifacts, vertex noise, as well as nonrigid deformations. Existing local descriptors can directly
benefit from our repeatable frames, as we showcase in a selection of 3D vision and shape analysis applications where
we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in a variety of
challenging settings.

1. Introduction
Computing correspondence between 3D shapes (in particular, meshes and point clouds) is a key task in computer graphics and vision, recently becoming increasingly
relevant due to the availability of off-the-shelf depth sensors such as Microsoft Kinect or Intel RealSense and largescale 3D datasets. 3D shape matching underlies applications such as robotic grasping and manipulation, scene understanding for augmented reality, obstacle avoidance and
path planning for driver-less cars, to mention a few. Effective pipelines addressing this task rely upon the definition of a compact representation of the local geometry of
the objects involved. Such point descriptors are expected
to be compact, local, and distinctive. While point descriptors have been traditionally hand-crafted, recent proposals
attempted to learn them by leveraging recent advances in
deep learning [7, 20, 3, 24].
At the heart of most descriptors typically lies the con-

1

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of LRF repeatability measured as mean cosine error on two non-rigid poses of the dog shape. We compare
with the de-facto standard SHOT [34]. Left: The heat map encodes
local frame alignment growing from red (gross misalignment) to
white (perfectly aligned LRFs). Right: The computed LRFs; we
only show the x axes for visualization purposes.

struction of a local reference frame (LRF), a local system
of Cartesian coordinates at each point, with respect to which
the local geometric structure around that point is encoded.
The effectiveness of the descriptor directly depends on the
reliability of its underlying LRF; in turn, the quality of the
latter is determined by its invariance to transformations that
can be observed in the data. Most LRFs exploit some geometric properties of the local neighbors, such as the covariance matrix of the 3D coordinates of the neighborhood.
In this paper, we propose GFrames, a novel LRF that
is demonstrably robust to severe sampling artifacts, vertex
noise, and object deformation. Key to our method is the
definition of the tangent component as the intrinsic gradient
4321
4629

