Second-order Attention Network for Single Image Super-Resolution
Tao Dai1,2,∗,‡ , Jianrui Cai3,∗ , Yongbing Zhang1 , Shu-Tao Xia1,2 , Lei Zhang3,4,§
1
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{dait14, zhang.yongbing, xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, {csjcai, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been widely explored in single image super-resolution
(SISR) and obtained remarkable performance. However,
most of the existing CNN-based SISR methods mainly focus
on wider or deeper architecture design, neglecting to explore the feature correlations of intermediate layers, hence
hindering the representational power of CNNs. To address
this issue, in this paper, we propose a second-order attention network (SAN) for more powerful feature expression
and feature correlation learning. Specifically, a novel trainable second-order channel attention (SOCA) module is developed to adaptively rescale the channel-wise features by
using second-order feature statistics for more discriminative representations. Furthermore, we present a non-locally
enhanced residual group (NLRG) structure, which not only
incorporates non-local operations to capture long-distance
spatial contextual information, but also contains repeated
local-source residual attention groups (LSRAG) to learn increasingly abstract feature representations. Experimental
results demonstrate the superiority of our SAN network over
state-of-the-art SISR methods in terms of both quantitative
metrics and visual quality.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) [5] has recently received much attention. In general, the purpose of SISR is
to produce a visually high-resolution (HR) output from its
low-resolution (LR) input. However, this inverse problem
∗ The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work.
§ Corresponding author: Lei Zhang
‡ This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61771273, the R&D Program of Shenzhen under Grant JCYJ20180508152204044, and the research fund of PCL Future
Regional Network Facilities for Large-scale Experiments and Applications
(PCL2018KP001).

is ill-posed since multiple HR solutions can map to any LR
input. Therefore, a great number of SR methods have been
proposed, ranging from early interpolation-based [37] and
model-based [4], to recent learning-based methods [32, 39].
The early developed interpolated-based methods (e.g.,
bilinear and bicubic methods) are simple and efﬁcient but
limited in applications. For more ﬂexible SR methods, more
advanced model-based methods are proposed by exploiting
powerful image priors, such as non-local similarity prior
[34] and sparsity prior [4]. Although such model-based
methods are ﬂexible to produce relative high-quality HR
images, they still suffer from some drawbacks: (1) such
methods often involve a time-consuming optimization process; (2) the performance may degrade quickly when image
statistics are biased from the image prior.
Deep convolution neural networks (CNNs) have recently achieved unprecedented success in various problems
[7, 25]. The powerful feature representation and end-to-end
training paradigm of CNN makes it a promising approach
to SISR. In the last several years, a ﬂurry of CNN-based
SISR methods have been proposed to learn a mapping function from an interpolated or LR input to its corresponding
HR output. By fully exploiting the image statics inherent in
training datasets, CNNs have achieved state-of-the-art results in SISR [2, 12, 14, 36, 39, 38]. Although considerable
progress has been achieved in image SR, existing CNNbased SR models are still faced with some limitations: (1)
most of CNN-based SR methods do not make full use of
the information from the original LR images, thereby resulting in relatively-low performance; (2) most existing CNNbased SR models focus mainly on designing a deeper or
wider network to learn more discriminative high-level features, while rarely exploiting the inherent feature correlations in intermediate layers, thus hindering the representational ability of CNNs.
To address these problems, we propose a deep secondorder attention network (SAN) for more powerful feature
expression and feature correlation learning. Speciﬁcally, we
111065

