Unsupervised learning of action classes with continuous temporal embedding
Anna Kukleva ∗
University of Bonn
Germany

Hilde Kuehne ∗
MIT-IBM Watson Lab
Cambridge, MA

Fadime Sener, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn
Germany

s6ankukl@uni-bonn.de

kuehne@ibm.com

sener,gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
The task of temporally detecting and segmenting actions
in untrimmed videos has seen an increased attention recently. One problem in this context arises from the need to
define and label action boundaries to create annotations for
training which is very time and cost intensive. To address
this issue, we propose an unsupervised approach for learning action classes from untrimmed video sequences. To this
end, we use a continuous temporal embedding of framewise
features to benefit from the sequential nature of activities.
Based on the latent space created by the embedding, we
identify clusters of temporal segments across all videos that
correspond to semantic meaningful action classes. The approach is evaluated on three challenging datasets, namely
the Breakfast dataset, YouTube Instructions, and the 50Salads dataset. While previous works assumed that the videos
contain the same high level activity, we furthermore show
that the proposed approach can also be applied to a more
general setting where the content of the videos is unknown.

1. Introduction
The task of action recognition has seen tremendous success over the last years. So far, high-performing approaches
require full supervision for training. But acquiring framelevel annotations of actions in untrimmed videos is very
expensive and impractical for very large datasets. Recent
works, therefore, explore alternative ways of training action
recognition approaches without having full frame annotations at training time. Most of those concepts, which are
referred to as weakly supervised learning, rely on ordered
action sequences which are given for each video in the training set.
Acquiring ordered action lists, however, can also be very
time consuming and it assumes that it is already known what
actions are present in the videos before starting the annotation process. For some applications like indexing large
∗ This work was mainly done at University of Bonn. Asterisk denotes
equal contribution.

video datasets or human behavior analysis in neuroscience
or medicine, it is often unclear what action should be annotated. It is therefore important to discover actions in large
video datasets before deciding which actions are relevant or
not. Recent works [27, 1] therefore proposed the task of
unsupervised learning of actions in long, untrimmed video
sequences. Here, only the videos themselves are used and
the goal is to identify clusters of temporal segments across
all videos that correspond to semantic meaningful action
classes.
In this work we propose a new method for unsupervised
learning of actions from long video sequences, which is
based on the following contributions. The first contribution is the learning of a continuous temporal embedding of
frame-based features. The embedding exploits the fact that
some actions need to be performed in a certain order and we
use a network to learn an embedding of frame-based features with respect to their relative time in the video. As the
second contribution, we propose a decoding of the videos
into coherent action segments based on an ordered clustering of the embedded frame-wise video features. To this end,
we first compute the order of the clusters with respect to
their timestamp. Then a Viterbi decoding approach is used
such as in [26, 13, 24, 19] which maintains an estimate of
the most likely activity state given the predefined order.
We evaluate our approach on the Breakfast [15] and
YouTube Instructions datasets [1], following the evaluation
protocols used in [27, 1]. We also conduct experiments on
the 50Salads dataset [31] where the videos are longer and
contain more action classes. Our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art in unsupervised learning of action classes
from untrimmed videos by a large margin. The evaluation protocol used in previous works, however, divides the
datasets into distinct clusters of videos using the groundtruth activity label of each video, i.e., unsupervised learning
and evaluation are performed only on videos, which contain
the same high level activity. This simplifies the problem
since in this case most of the actions occur in all videos.
As a third contribution, we therefore propose an extension of our approach that allows to go beyond the scenario
112066

