Deep Sky Modeling for Single Image Outdoor Lighting Estimation
Yannick Hold-Geoffroy∗
Adobe Research

Akshaya Athawale*
Indian Institute of Tech. Dhanbad

Jean-François Lalonde
Université Laval

holdgeof@adobe.com

akshaya.15je001564@am.ism.ac.in

jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca

Abstract
We propose a data-driven learned sky model, which we
use for outdoor lighting estimation from a single image. As
no large-scale dataset of images and their corresponding
ground truth illumination is readily available, we use complementary datasets to train our approach, combining the vast
diversity of illumination conditions of SUN360 with the radiometrically calibrated and physically accurate Laval HDR
sky database. Our key contribution is to provide a holistic
view of both lighting modeling and estimation, solving both
problems end-to-end. From a test image, our method can directly estimate an HDR environment map of the lighting without relying on analytical lighting models. We demonstrate
the versatility and expressivity of our learned sky model and
show that it can be used to recover plausible illumination,
leading to visually pleasant virtual object insertions. To
further evaluate our method, we capture a dataset of HDR
360◦ panoramas and show through extensive validation that
we significantly outperform previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The lighting conditions of outdoor scenes can create significant differences in the scene appearance depending on the
weather and the time of day. Indeed, one need only consider
the striking contrast created by bright highlights and dark
shadows at noon, the warm, orange hues of the golden hour,
or the gray ominous look of overcast conditions. This wide
variety of effects is challenging for approaches that attempt
to estimate the lighting conditions from outdoor images.
A popular solution to this problem involves capturing objects of known geometry and reflectance properties (notably,
a chrome sphere [6]). Another solution, which does not
require access to the scene, is to approximate outdoor lighting with low-dimensional, parametric models. This has the
advantage of drastically reducing the dimensionality of the
problem down to just a handful of variables, which can more
easily be estimated from an image. This insight has recently
been exploited to successfully learn to predict lighting from
a single outdoor image [12]. In particular, they propose to
represent outdoor lighting using the Hošek-Wilkie (HW) sky
* Parts of this work were completed while Y. Hold-Geoffroy and A.
Athawale were at U. Laval.

Figure 1. Our method can estimate HDR outdoor lighting conditions
from a single image (left). This estimation can be used “as-is” to
relight virtual objects that match the input image in both sunny (topright) and overcast (bottom-right) weather. Our key contribution is
to train both our sky model and lighting estimation end-to-end by
exploiting multiple complementary datasets during training.

model [13, 14], which can model high dynamic range (HDR)
sky domes using as few as 4 parameters. They learn to predict lighting by fitting the HW model to a large database of
outdoor, low dynamic range (LDR) panoramas and training
a CNN to regress the HW parameters from limited field of
view crops extracted from those panoramas.
Unfortunately, approximating outdoor lighting analytically comes at a cost. Popular sky models (e.g. [13, 25,
24]) were developed to model clear skies with smoothlyvarying amounts of atmospheric aerosols (represented by the
commonly-used turbidity parameter). Therefore, they do not
yield accurate representations for other types of common
weather conditions such as partially cloudy or completely
overcast skies. For example, consider the different lighting
conditions in fig. 2, which we represent with the HW parametric model using the non-linear fitting approach of [12].
Note how the HW approximation works well in clear skies
(top) but degrades as the cloud cover increases (bottom).
Can we obtain a lighting model that is low-dimensional, that
can accurately describe the wide variety of outdoor lighting
conditions, and that can be estimated from a single image?
In this paper, we propose an answer to this question by
learning an HDR sky model directly from data. Our nonanalytical data-driven sky model can be estimated directly
from a single image captured outdoors. Our approach suc16927

