Fitting Multiple Heterogeneous Models by Multi-class Cascaded T-linkage
Luca Magri Andrea Fusiello
DPIA - Università degli Studi di Udine, Italy
name.surname@uniud.it

Abstract

explanatory models enables higher level of abstraction
and allows more flexibility in the interpretation of the
data. In this sense, dealing with multiple model and
classes of varying complexities can be regarded as a
further step towards a better and more elaborate understanding of visual content to fill the gap between
low-level vision and higher level reasoning.

This paper addresses the problem of multiple model fitting in the general context where the sought structures
can be described by a mixture of heterogeneous parametric models drawn from different classes. To this end, we
conceive a multi-model selection framework that extends Tlinkage to cope with different nested classes of models. Our
method, called MCT, compares favourably with the stateof-the-art on publicly available data-sets for various fitting
problems: lines and conics, homographies and fundamental
matrices, planes and cylinders.

• From a practical point of view, in some applications,
degenerate structures may arise when the data do
not provide enough constraints to determine a model
uniquely. Then it is convenient to be able to switch to
a simpler and more appropriate model to circumvent
the pitfalls of ambiguous estimate which are extremely
fragile to outliers.

1. Introduction
During the past decades until nowadays, the need of
high-level geometric representations of visual content has
incessantly inspired the research towards the design of robust multi-model fitting methods aimed at segmenting the
data in meaningful structures by simultaneously estimating
a collection of underlying parametric models1 . In particular, most recent efforts focused on dealing with multiple
instances of the same model in the presence of noise and
outliers.
In this work we address the problem of multi-model fitting in the more general context where the sought structures
can be described by a mixture of heterogeneous parametric models, i.e., of different type or class. To this end, we
conceive a multi-model selection framework that extends Tlinkage to cope with different nested classes of models ( e.g.
lines vs. circles, homographies vs. fundamental matrices).
This problem is also referred to as multi-class/multi-model
fitting.
The main motivations can be ascribed to two orders of
reasons.
• Generally speaking, a wider choice between possible
1 Although used somehow interchangeably, ”structure” and ”model”

have different nuances. The term structure refers to the arrangement and
relations among the data, and it is intrinsic to the data itself, whereas the
model is ”in the eye of the beholder”, being the mathematical description
of the data that an observer fits onto them.

The success of such endeavours involves the explicit integration of model selection criteria in the multi-structure
recovery framework. In this regard, it is useful to keep in
mind, as a caveat, a well-known aphorism of scientific folklore: ”all models are wrong but some are useful”. In many
concrete situations, a qualitative dichotomy between models lags behind the quantitative nuances of continuous phenomena, and it may be puzzling to decide in favour of an
interpretation of the data rather than for another.
For instance, in stereo vision, assuming a rigid scene, the
borders between a planar setting – modelled by projectivities – and a full three-dimensional one – better described
by the epipolar geometry– are faintly traced by the relative
variation of the focal length of the camera compared to the
depth of the scene. Similar difficulties arise, as instance, if
a regular polygon with k sides has to be described either by
several lines or by a unique circle. In these situations, the
practical context of application should tip the scale of model
selection towards the more appropriate class of structure for
the task at hand.
Contributions On these premises, being aware that the
usefulness of a model is “in the eye of the beholder”, we
present a multi-model recovery framework that offers a hierarchical interpretation of data in nested compatible models, which can be conveniently biased to serve specific pur17460

