Taking a Deeper Look at the Inverse Compositional Algorithm
Zhaoyang Lv1,2 Frank Dellaert1 James M. Rehg1 Andreas Geiger2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, United States
2
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI-IS and University of Tübingen, Germany
{zhaoyang.lv, rehg}@gatech.edu

frank.dellaert@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a modern synthesis of the classic inverse compositional algorithm for dense image alignment. We first discuss the assumptions made by this wellestablished technique, and subsequently propose to relax
these assumptions by incorporating data-driven priors into
this model. More specifically, we unroll a robust version of
the inverse compositional algorithm and replace multiple
components of this algorithm using more expressive models
whose parameters we train in an end-to-end fashion from
data. Our experiments on several challenging 3D rigid motion estimation tasks demonstrate the advantages of combining optimization with learning-based techniques, outperforming the classic inverse compositional algorithm as
well as data-driven image-to-pose regression approaches.

andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

denote the warped template and image, respectively1 , the
Lucas-Kanade objective can be stated as follows
2

min kI(ξ) − T(0)k2

where I(ξ) denotes image I transformed using warp parameters ξ and T(0) = T denotes the original template.
Minimizing (1) is a non-linear optimization task as the
image I depends non-linearly on the warp parameters ξ.
The Lucas-Kanade algorithm therefore iteratively solves for
the warp parameters ξ k+1 = ξ k ◦ ∆ξ. At every iteration k,
the warp increment ∆ξ is obtained by linearizing
2

min kI(ξ k + ∆ξ) − T(0)k2
using first-order Taylor expansion

∆ξ

1. Introduction

Lucas-Kanade Algorithm: The Lucas-Kanade algorithm
minimizes the photometric error between a template and an
image. Letting T : Ξ → RW ×H and I : Ξ → RW ×H

(2)

∆ξ

min I(ξ k ) +
Since the seminal work by Lucas and Kanade [32], dense
image alignment has become an ubiquitous tool in computer
vision with many applications including stereo reconstruction [41], tracking [5, 42, 50], image registration [8, 29, 43],
super-resolution [22] and SLAM [13, 16, 17]. In this paper, we provide a learning-based perspective on the Inverse
Compositional algorithm, an efficient variant of the original Lucas-Kanade image registration technique. In particular, we lift some of the restrictive assumptions by parameterizing several components of the algorithm using neural
networks and training the entire optimization process endto-end. In order to put contributions into context, we will
now briefly review the Lucas-Kanade algorithm, the Inverse
Compositional algorithm, as well as the robust M-Estimator
which form the basis for our model. More details can be
found in the comprehensive reviews of Baker et al. [2, 3].

(1)

ξ

∂I(ξ k )
∆ξ − T(0)
∂ξ

2

(3)
2

Note that the “steepest descent image” ∂I(ξ k )/∂ξ needs to
be recomputed at every iteration as it depends on ξ k .
Inverse Compositional Algorithm: The inverse compositional (IC) algorithm [3] avoids this by applying the warp
increments ∆ξ to the template instead of the image
2

min kI(ξ k ) − T(∆ξ)k2

(4)

∆ξ

using the warp parameter update ξ k+1 = ξ k ◦ (∆ξ)−1 . In
the corresponding linearized equation
∂T(0)
min I(ξ k ) − T(0) −
∆ξ
∆ξ
∂ξ

2

(5)
2

∂T(0)/∂ξ does not depend on ξ k and can thus be precomputed, resulting in a more efficient algorithm.
1 The warping function W : R2 → R2 might represent translation,
ξ
affine 2D motion or (if depth is available) rigid or non-rigid 3D motion. To
avoid clutter in the notation, we do not make Wξ explicit in our equations.

14581

