Convolutional Mesh Regression for Single-Image Human Shape Reconstruction
Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D human pose and
shape estimation from a single image. Previous approaches
consider a parametric model of the human body, SMPL,
and attempt to regress the model parameters that give rise
to a mesh consistent with image evidence. This parameter
regression has been a very challenging task, with modelbased approaches underperforming compared to nonparametric solutions in terms of pose estimation. In our work,
we propose to relax this heavy reliance on the model’s parameter space. We still retain the topology of the SMPL template mesh, but instead of predicting model parameters, we
directly regress the 3D location of the mesh vertices. This is
a heavy task for a typical network, but our key insight is that
the regression becomes significantly easier using a GraphCNN. This architecture allows us to explicitly encode the
template mesh structure within the network and leverage the
spatial locality the mesh has to offer. Image-based features
are attached to the mesh vertices and the Graph-CNN is responsible to process them on the mesh structure, while the
regression target for each vertex is its 3D location. Having
recovered the complete 3D geometry of the mesh, if we still
require a specific model parametrization, this can be reliably regressed from the vertices locations. We demonstrate
the flexibility and the effectiveness of our proposed graphbased mesh regression by attaching different types of features on the mesh vertices. In all cases, we outperform the
comparable baselines relying on model parameter regression, while we also achieve state-of-the-art results among
model-based pose estimation approaches. 1

1. Introduction
Analyzing humans from images goes beyond estimating the 2D pose for one person [27, 47] or multiple people [2, 32], or even estimating a simplistic 3D skeleton [24, 25]. Our understanding relies heavily on being able
to properly reconstruct the complete 3D pose and shape of
people from monocular images. And while this problem
is well addressed in settings with multiple cameras [8, 14],
1 Project Page: seas.upenn.edu/

˜nkolot/projects/cmr

Figure 1: Summary of our approach. Given an input image we directly regress a 3D shape with graph convolutions.
Optionally, from the 3D shape output we can regress the
parametric representation of a body model.

the excessive ambiguity, the limited training data, and the
wide range of imaging conditions make this task particularly challenging in the monocular case.
Traditionally, optimization-based approaches [1, 18, 49]
have offered the most reliable solution for monocular pose
and shape recovery. However, the slow running time, the
reliance on a good initialization and the typical failures
due to bad local minima have recently shifted the focus
to learning-based approaches [15, 18, 28, 31, 39, 43], that
regress pose and shape directly from images. The majority
of these works investigate what is the most reliable modality to regress pose and shape from. Surface landmarks [18],
pose keypoints and silhouettes [31], semantic part segmentation [28], or raw pixels [15] have all been considered as
the network input. And while the input representation topic
has received much debate, all the above approaches nicely
conform to the SMPL model [21] and use its parametric representation as the regression target of choice. However, taking the decision to commit to a particular parametric space
can be quite constraining itself. For example, SMPL is not
modeling hand pose or facial expressions [14, 36]. What
is even more alarming is that the model parameter space
might not be appropriate as a regression target. In the case
of SMPL, the pose space is expressed in the form of 3D
14501

