Explicit Bias Discovery in Visual Question Answering Models
Varun Manjunatha1∗
Nirat Saini2
Larry S. Davis2
1
2
Adobe Research
University of Maryland, College Park
vmanjuna@adobe.com, {nirat@cs, lsd@umiacs}.umd.edu
Abstract
Researchers have observed that Visual Question Answering (VQA ) models tend to answer questions by learning
statistical biases in the data. For example, their answer to
the question “What is the color of the grass?” is usually
“Green”, whereas a question like “What is the title of the
book?” cannot be answered by inferring statistical biases.
It is of interest to the community to explicitly discover such
biases, both for understanding the behavior of such models, and towards debugging them. Our work address this
problem. In a database, we store the words of the question,
answer and visual words corresponding to regions of interest in attention maps. By running simple rule mining algorithms on this database, we discover human-interpretable
rules which give us unique insight into the behavior of such
models. Our results also show examples of unusual behaviors learned by models in attempting VQA tasks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the problem of Visual Question Answering (VQA ) - the task of answering a question about an
image has become a hotbed of research activity in the computer vision community. While there are several publicly
available VQA datasets[6, 23, 26, 29], our focus in this paper will be on the dataset provided in [6] and [18], which
is the largest natural image-question-answer dataset and the
most widely cited. Even so, the narrowed-down version of
the VQA problem on this dataset is not monolithic - ideally,
several different skills are required by a model to answer the
various questions. In Figure 1(left) , a question like “What
time is it?” requires the acquired skill of being able to read
the time on a clock-face, “What is the title of the top book?”
requires an OCR-like ability to read sentences, whereas the
question “What color is the grass?” can be answered largely
using statistical biases in the data itself (because frequently
in this dataset, grass is green in color). Many models have
attempted to solve the problem of VQA with varying degrees of success, but among them, the vast majority still
attempt to solve the VQA task by exploiting biases in the

dataset [25, 37, 2, 17, 7, etc], while a smaller minority address the individual problem types [4, 38, 11, etc].
Keeping the former in mind, in this work, we provide
a method to discover and enumerate explicitly, the various
biases that are learned by a VQA model. To illustrate, in
Figure 1(right), we provide examples of some rules learned
by a strong baseline [25]. The model seems to have learned
that if a question contains the words {What, time, day} (Eg
: “What time of day is it?”) and the accompanying image
contains the bright sky (
), the model is likely to answer “afternoon”. The model answers “night” to the same
question accompanied with an image containing a “nightsky” patch (
). On the other hand, if it contains a clock
), it tends to answer the question with a time in an
face(
“HH:MM” format, while a question like “What time of the
year?” paired with leafless trees(
) prompts “fall” as the
answer. At the core of our method towards discovering such
biases is the classical Apriori algorithm [3] which is used to
discover rules in large databases - here the database refers
to the question-words and model responses on the VQA
validation set, which can be mined to produce these rules.
Deep learning algorithms reduce training error by learning biases in the data. This is evident from the observation
that validation/test samples from the long tail of a data distribution are hard to solve, simply because similar examples
do not occur frequently enough in the training set[41, 31,
etc]. However, explicitly enumerating these biases in a
human-interpretable form is possible only in a handful of
problems, such as VQA. VQA is particularly illustrative
because the questions and answers are in human language,
while the images (and attention maps) can also be interpreted by humans. VQA is also interesting because it is
a multi-modal problem - both language and vision are required to solve this problem. The language alone (i.e., an
image agnostic model) can generate plausible (but often incorrect) answers to most questions (as we show in Section
4.1), but incorporating the image generates more accurate
answers. That the language alone is able to produce plausible answers strongly indicates that VQA models implicitly
∗ This work was done while the author was at the University of Mary-

land.

9562

