Completeness Modeling and Context Separation for Weakly Supervised
Temporal Action Localization
Daochang Liu1 , Tingting Jiang1 , Yizhou Wang1,2,3
1
NELVT, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Lab, 3 Deepwise AI Lab
{daochang, ttjiang, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal action localization is crucial for understanding untrimmed videos. In this work, we first identify two
underexplored problems posed by the weak supervision for
temporal action localization, namely action completeness
modeling and action-context separation. Then by presenting a novel network architecture and its training strategy, the two problems are explicitly looked into. Specifically, to model the completeness of actions, we propose
a multi-branch neural network in which branches are enforced to discover distinctive action parts. Complete actions can be therefore localized by fusing activations from
different branches. And to separate action instances from
their surrounding context, we generate hard negative data
for training using the prior that motionless video clips are
unlikely to be actions. Experiments performed on datasets
THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet show that our framework outperforms state-of-the-art methods. In particular, the average mAP on ActivityNet v1.2 is significantly improved from
18.0% to 22.4%. Our code will be released soon.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of the two issues. Top: Completeness modeling with the proposed multi-branch network. Branches are trained
to discover different action parts, such that complete action can be
localized using the averaged activations over branches. a) Ground
truth of an action instance of Soccer Penalty. b) Class Activation
Sequence (CAS) of one branch from our trained model, localizing
the Player Shooting part. c) CAS of another branch, localizing the
Ball Flying part. d) Average CAS, localizing the instance completely. Bottom: Context separation with the hard negative video
generation. e) Ground truth of an action instance of Billiards. f)
Background clips obtained, discriminating the co-occurring context. On the right are four frames taken from the time locations of
correspondingly colored arrows. Best viewed in color.

Temporal action localization is an important visual task
with potential applications in video surveillance [42], video
summarization [28], skill assessment [16], and others. The
goal is to predict not only the action label but also the
start and end times of each action instance from untrimmed
videos. Fully supervised temporal action localization has
witnessed remarkable progress recently [39, 48, 15, 9, 37,
51, 47, 8, 2, 31]. However, precisely annotating the temporal extent of action instances is labor-intensive and timeconsuming, which undermines fully supervised approaches
in real-world large-scale scenarios. Therefore the weakly
supervised setting, where only video-level category labels
are available during training, is more practical and draws
increasing attention from the community. This paper works

on temporal action localization with such weak labels.
Most of existing weakly supervised methods [45, 33, 38,
36, 52] fall into the framework of Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [54]. In this framework, a video is treated as a
bag of sampled frames or snippets and fed into video-level
classification networks. Action instances are then localized
using the Class Activation Sequence (CAS) [38], a 1D temporal classification score sequence of each action.
Compared with its fully-supervised counterpart, weakly
supervised temporal action localization introduces two new
challenges, dubbed as action completeness modeling and
action-context separation. The two issues have not been
well considered before and have notably limited the per-

1298

