Sensitive-Sample Fingerprinting of Deep Neural Networks
Zecheng He
Princeton University

Tianwei Zhang
No Affiliation

Ruby Lee
Princeton University

zechengh@princeton.edu

tianweiz@alumni.princeton.edu

rblee@princeton.edu

Abstract
Numerous cloud-based services are provided to help
customers develop and deploy deep learning applications.
When a customer deploys a deep learning model in the
cloud and serves it to end-users, it is important to be able to
verify that the deployed model has not been tampered with.
In this paper, we propose a novel and practical methodology to verify the integrity of remote deep learning models,
with only black-box access to the target models. Specifically, we define Sensitive-Sample fingerprints, which
are a small set of human unnoticeable transformed inputs
that make the model outputs sensitive to the model’s parameters. Even small model changes can be clearly reflected in
the model outputs. Experimental results on different types
of model integrity attacks show that the proposed approach
is both effective and efficient. It can detect model integrity
breaches with high accuracy (>99.95%) and guaranteed
zero false positives on all evaluated attacks. Meanwhile, it
only requires up to 103× fewer model inferences, compared
to non-sensitive samples.

brings new security concerns. First, the model owner does
not manage or have control over the actual model in the
cloud any more. This gives adversaries opportunities to
intentionally tamper with the remote models, to make it
malfunction. Different attacks against model integrity have
been proposed: e.g., DNN trojan attack [26, 17, 10], poisoning attack [7, 30, 34, 31], etc. These attacks have been
shown to be practical in various DNN-based applications,
e.g. autonomous driving [17, 26], user authentication [10]
and speech recognition [26]. Figure 1 shows an example of
attacking a deep learning based face recognition system: an
adversary can insert a trojan into the authentication model
by slightly modifying the face classifier. The compromised
model can still give correct prediction results for original
faces. However, it will mis-classify an arbitrary person
with a specific pair of galsses as “A. J. Buckley”. With this
technique the adversary can easily bypass the authentication
mechanism without being detected.

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the fast development
of deep learning (DL). One popular class of deep learning
models is Deep Neural Networks (DNN), which has been
widely adopted in many artificial intelligence applications,
such as image recognition [20, 25], natural language processing [11, 28], speech recognition [19, 13] and anomaly
detection [29, 21].
To make it automatic and convenient to deploy deep
learning applications, many IT corporations offer cloudbased services for deep learning model training and serving, usually dubbed as Machine Learning as a Service
(MLaaS). For example, Google Machine Learning Engine
[1], Microsoft Azure ML Studio [2] and Amazon SageMaker framework [3] enable customers to deploy their
models online and release query APIs to end users. Customers are charged on a pay-per-query basis.
However, deploying deep learning tasks in MLaaS

Trojaned
DNN
Trigger

“Chris Pine”

“Bae Doona”

Correct Output

“A.J. Buckley” “A.J. Buckley”

Malicious Output

Figure 1: Illustration of a DNN trojan. A person without the
trigger (left) is recognized correctly by the trojaned DNN.
A person wearing a specific pair of glasses, i.e. the trigger,
is mis-classified.
Second, a dishonest cloud provider may stealthily violate the Service Level Agreement (SLA), without making
the customers aware, for financial benefits [35, 8]. For instance, the cloud provider can use a simpler or compressed
model to replace the customers’ models to save computational resources and storage [15]. Customers are annoyed
with such SLA violations, even though it has a subtle impact

4729

