Temporal Cycle-Consistency Learning
Debidatta Dwibedi 1 , Yusuf Aytar 2 , Jonathan Tompson 1 , Pierre Sermanet 1 , and Andrew Zisserman 2
1
Google Brain 2 DeepMind
{debidatta, yusufaytar, tompson, sermanet, zisserman}@google.com
Embedding
Videos
Video 1
time

Alignment

Temporal
Alignment
time
Video 2

embedding space

Figure 1: We present a self-supervised representation learning technique called temporal cycle consistency (TCC) learning. It is inspired
by the temporal video alignment problem, which refers to the task of finding correspondences across multiple videos despite many factors
of variation. The learned representations are useful for fine-grained temporal understanding in videos. Additionally, we can now align
multiple videos by simply finding nearest-neighbor frames in the embedding space.

Abstract
We introduce a self-supervised representation learning
method based on the task of temporal alignment between
videos. The method trains a network using temporal cycleconsistency (TCC), a differentiable cycle-consistency loss
that can be used to find correspondences across time in
multiple videos. The resulting per-frame embeddings can
be used to align videos by simply matching frames using
nearest-neighbors in the learned embedding space.
To evaluate the power of the embeddings, we densely
label the Pouring and Penn Action video datasets for action phases. We show that (i) the learned embeddings
enable few-shot classification of these action phases, significantly reducing the supervised training requirements;
and (ii) TCC is complementary to other methods of selfsupervised learning in videos, such as Shuffle and Learn
and Time-Contrastive Networks. The embeddings are also
used for a number of applications based on alignment
(dense temporal correspondence) between video pairs, including transfer of metadata of synchronized modalities
between videos (sounds, temporal semantic labels), synchronized playback of multiple videos, and anomaly detection. Project webpage: https://sites.google.
com/view/temporal-cycle-consistency.

1. Introduction
The world presents us with abundant examples of sequential processes. A plant growing from a seedling to a
tree, the daily routine of getting up, going to work and com-

ing back home, or a person pouring themselves a glass of
water – are all examples of events that happen in a particular order. Videos capturing such processes not only contain
information about the causal nature of these events, but also
provide us with a valuable signal – the possibility of temporal correspondences lurking across multiple instances of
the same process. For example, during pouring, one could
be reaching for a teapot, a bottle of wine, or a glass of water to pour from. Key moments such as the first touch to
the container or the container being lifted from the ground
are common to all pouring sequences. These correspondences, which exist in spite of many varying factors like visual changes in viewpoint, scale, container style, the speed
of the event, etc., could serve as the link between raw video
sequences and high-level temporal abstractions (e.g. phases
of actions). In this work we present evidence that suggests
the very act of looking for correspondences in sequential
data enables the learning of rich and useful representations,
particularly suited for fine-grained temporal understanding
of videos.
Temporal reasoning in videos, understanding multiple
stages of a process and causal relations between them, is
a relatively less studied problem compared to recognizing
action categories [10, 42]. Learning representations that
can differentiate between states of objects as an action proceeds is critical for perceiving and acting in the world. It
would be desirable for a robot tasked with learning to pour
drinks to understand each intermediate state of the world as
it proceeds with performing the task. Although videos are
a rich source of sequential data essential to understanding
such state changes, their true potential remains largely un11801

