What Correspondences Reveal about Unknown Camera and Motion Models?
Thomas Probst1 , Ajad Chhatkuli1 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1 Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
In two-view geometry, camera models and motion types
are used as key knowledge along with the image point correspondences in order to solve several key problems of 3D
vision. Problems such as Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and
camera self-calibration are tackled under the assumptions
of a specific camera projection model and motion type.
However, these key assumptions may not be always justified, i.e., we may often know neither the camera model nor
the motion type beforehand. In that context, one can extract only the point correspondences between images. From
such correspondences, recovering two-view relationship –
expressed by the unknown camera model and motion type–
remains to be an unsolved problem. In this paper, we tackle
this problem in two steps. First, we propose a method that
computes the correct two-view relationship in the presence
of noise and outliers. Later, we study different possibilities to disambiguate the obtained relationships into camera
model and motion type. By extensive experiments on both
synthetic and real data, we verify our theory and assumptions in practical settings.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [14, 17, 21] and a vast majority of 3D vision applications rely on feature point correspondences between images, while assuming a known camera model. A key component of SfM and other 3D vision
methods is consensus maximization [10, 7, 28, 2, 13, 3, 15,
31] where the correct set of inliers is computed by searching
for specific relationships between image correspondences.
Such approaches have made possible the use of millions of
images for reconstructing 3D, as unreliable point correspondences are weeded out through maximizing the consensus.
However, this is only true when one is certain about the
most suitable two-view relationship. In fact, methods developed to tackle many 3D vision problems can be used only

for certain camera and motion types. For example, current
state-of-the-art SfM methods assume that the camera obeys
a perspective projection model and that the camera motion
involves at least some translation [24, 21, 14]. Similarly, existing camera calibration methods (self-calibration or with
known patterns) assume a known camera model [30, 6], and
sometimes also a known motion type [12]. In such cases,
experiments using images from an affine camera when the
method assumes a perspective model are doomed to fail. It
is therefore essential to know the camera model and the motion type beforehand, apart from the two-view relationship.
In fact, one requires to know the motion (if not its type) to
reason about the camera model, and vice versa. Therefore,
jointly recovering the camera model and motion becomes
very difficult, leading to the causality dilemma.
In that context, the problem can be broken down into two
important sub-problems. The first is that of choosing the
correct two-view relationship without knowing the camera
type and motion beforehand. Fitting an unknown model to
point correspondences is a challenging problem and is in
general NP hard. On the one hand, one can only hope to
know the correct two-view relationship after trying out all
possible models. This is exactly what is done in the context
of SfM for the Fundamental matrix and the 2D projective
homography as geometric verification [27, 25, 16]. However, it is not always clear how one should select among
the several models for a given problem even after trying
out all of them. For example, we can always fit a relationship less constrained than the actual model in order to
obtain a higher inlier count. Therefore, simply choosing
the model with the largest inlier set may lead to an undesired outcome. Additionally, there exists a natural conflict
between the desired camera motion baseline and the matching performance in real images [18, 1]. In such cases, one
can benefit by constraining the motion to be sparse [23, 11].
However, it may not be known which motions are absent
beforehand. The second problem is that of obtaining the
camera model and the motion type from the correctly recovered two-view relation. Although many key results are

8730

