Learning Shape-Aware Embedding for Scene Text Detection
Zhuotao Tian† ,
Michelle Shu‡ ,
Pengyuan Lyu§ ,
Ruiyu Li§ ,
Chao Zhou§ ,
Xiaoyong Shen§ ,
Jiaya Jia†,§
†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong,

‡

Johns Hopkins University,

§

YouTu Lab, Tencent

{zttian,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, mshu1@jhu.edu, {pengyuanlv,royryli,brycezhou,dylanshen}@tencent.com

Abstract
We address the problem of detecting scene text in arbitrary shapes, which is a challenging task due to the high
variety and complexity of the scene. We treat text detection as instance segmentation and propose a segmentationbased framework, which extracts each text instance as an
independent connected component. To distinguish among
different text instances, our method maps pixels onto an embedding space where pixels belonging to the same text are
encouraged to appear closer to each other and vise versa.
In addition, we introduce a shape-aware Loss to make training adaptively accommodate various aspect ratios of text
instances and even the tiny gaps among them. A new
post-processing pipeline yields precise bounding box prediction. Experimental results on three challenging datasets
(ICDAR15 [20], MSRA-TD500 [55] and CTW1500 [32])
demonstrate the effectiveness of our work.

1. Introduction
As an indispensable part of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) systems, scene text detection is essential to the
subsequent text recognition. High performing scene text
detection, as a fundamental tool, benefits a wide spectrum
of applications, including multilingual translation from images, human machine interaction, and environment understanding. This task, however, is challenging due to the varying attributes in natural images, such as the degree of image
blur, lighting condition, and aspect ratios.
Because of the complicated text shapes and aspect ratios,
although existing regression-based methods [30, 53, 60, 49,
15] have achieved impressive results on benchmark data
annotated by rectangular or quadrilateral bounding boxes,
they hardly generalize to curved text data in CTW1500 [32]
or TotalText [3] where text can be in arbitrary shape. Recently, Long et al. [34] handled curved text by modeling
text instances as a sequence of disks with different radius.
The method relies on radius regression that may result in
drop of precision.
So far, predicting text boxes at various scales and aspect
ratios is challenging for dense regression based methods
such as EAST [60], since the regression distance is con-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Given an input image (a), our model learns to map pixels
in text regions (b) into an embedding space (c) where pixels belonging to the same instance are pulled together and pixels from
different instances are pushed away from each other.

fined to training crop sizes, making the model hard to predict long (or large) instances during inference as shown in
Table 4 where dilating center area (marked with ‘No Regression’) predicted by EAST even outperforms regression.
Therefore we aim at a regression-free solution to circumvent the drawback.
Existing regression-free solutions in text detection community are mainly based on segmentation frameworks,
where the algorithms generate foreground masks before recovering corresponding text instances. Specifically, Yao et
al. [56] and Zhang et al. [58] linked candidates to form text
instances. But they fail to separate close text due to the lack
of ability to deal with tiny intervals that are very common in
natural scenes. Small space is also easily overlooked after
down-sampling in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
Wu et al. [51] predicted text masks alongside text borders,
and the model depends on boundaries to isolate individual
text regions. Nevertheless, long text instances often have
thin borders that may lead to inaccurate results if the text
borders are not correctly revealed.
In this work, we draw inspiration from [1] and propose
an alternative segmentation-based method to mitigate the
issues mentioned above. As shown in Figure 1, our model
considers each text instance as a cluster and learns to map
pixels onto an embedding space where pixels belonging to
the same text instance are encouraged to appear close.
By constraining embedding feature of pixels inside the
same text region to share similar properties, our model is
capable of learning intrinsic representation, i.e. the embedding feature, to separate instances rather than simply relying
on intervals and unclear boundaries. Moreover, to further

4234

