Self-Supervised Adaptation of High-Fidelity Face Models for
Monocular Performance Tracking
Jae Shin Yoon†
Takaaki Shiratori‡
†
University of Minnesota
{jsyoon, hspark}@umn.edu

Shoou-I Yu‡
Hyun Soo Park†
‡
Facebook Reality Labs
{tshiratori, shoou-i.yu}@fb.com

Figure 1: Results of high-fidelity 3D facial performance tracking from our method, which automatically adapts a highquality face model [12] captured in a controlled lab environment (left) to in-the-wild imagery (right) through our proposed
self-supervised domain adaptation method. Note the fine details we are able to recover from cellphone quality video.

Abstract
Improvements in data-capture and face modeling techniques have enabled us to create high-fidelity realistic face
models. However, driving these realistic face models requires special input data, e.g. 3D meshes and unwrapped
textures. Also, these face models expect clean input data
taken under controlled lab environments, which is very different from data collected in the wild. All these constraints
make it challenging to use the high-fidelity models in tracking for commodity cameras. In this paper, we propose a
self-supervised domain adaptation approach to enable the
animation of high-fidelity face models from a commodity
camera. Our approach first circumvents the requirement
for special input data by training a new network that can directly drive a face model just from a single 2D image. Then,
we overcome the domain mismatch between lab and uncontrolled environments by performing self-supervised domain adaptation based on “consecutive frame texture consistency” based on the assumption that the appearance of
the face is consistent over consecutive frames, avoiding the
necessity of modeling the new environment such as lighting
or background. Experiments show that we are able to drive
a high-fidelity face model to perform complex facial motion
from a cellphone camera without requiring any labeled data
from the new domain.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity face models enable the building of realistic
avatars, which play a key role in communicating ideas,
thoughts and emotions. Thanks to the uprising of datadriven approaches, highly realistic and detailed face models
can be created with active appearance models (AAMs) [6,
5], 3D morphable models (3DMMs) [1], or deep appearance
models (DAMs) [12]. These data-driven approaches jointly
model facial geometry and appearance, thus empowering
the model to learn the correlation between the two and synthesize high-quality facial images. Particularly, the recently
proposed DAMs can model and generate realistic animation and view-dependent textures with pore-level details by
leveraging the high capacity of deep neural networks.
Unfortunately, barriers exist when applying these highquality models to monocular in-the-wild imagery due to
modality mismatch and domain mismatch. Modality mismatch refers to the fact that high-fidelity face modeling
and tracking requires specialized input data, (e.g. DAMs require tracked 3D meshes and unwrapped textures) which is
not easily accessible on consumer-grade mobile capture devices. Domain mismatch refers to the fact that the visual
statistics of in-the-wild imagery are considerably different
from that of a controlled lab environment used to build the
high-fidelity face model. In-the-wild imagery includes var-

4601

