DeepCO3 : Deep Instance Co-segmentation by Co-peak Search and Co-saliency
Detection
Kuang-Jui Hsu1,2
1
Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Yen-Yu Lin1
Yung-Yu Chuang1,2
2
National Taiwan University, Taiwan

Abstract
In this paper, we address a new task called instance cosegmentation. Given a set of images jointly covering object
instances of a specific category, instance co-segmentation
aims to identify all of these instances and segment each of
them, i.e. generating one mask for each instance. This task
is important since instance-level segmentation is preferable
for humans and many vision applications. It is also challenging because no pixel-wise annotated training data are
available and the number of instances in each image is unknown. We solve this task by dividing it into two sub-tasks,
co-peak search and instance mask segmentation. In the former sub-task, we develop a CNN-based network to detect
the co-peaks as well as co-saliency maps for a pair of images. A co-peak has two endpoints, one in each image, that
are local maxima in the response maps and similar to each
other. Thereby, the two endpoints are potentially covered by
a pair of instances of the same category. In the latter subtask, we design a ranking function that takes the detected
co-peaks and co-saliency maps as inputs and can select the
object proposals to produce the final results. Our method
for instance co-segmentation and its variant for object colocalization are evaluated on four datasets, and achieve favorable performance against the state-of-the-art methods.
The source codes and the collected datasets are available
at https://github.com/KuangJuiHsu/DeepCO3/.

1. Introduction
Object co-segmentation aims to segment the common
objects repetitively appearing in a set of images. It is a fundamental and active research topic in computer vision. As
an important component of image content understanding, it
is essential to many vision applications, such as semantic
segmentation [48], image matching [4, 19, 25, 52, 60, 61],
object skeletonization [8, 27], and 3D reconstruction [42].
Object co-segmentation has recently gained signiﬁcant
progress owing to the fast development of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). The CNN-based methods [21, 33,
62] learn the representation of common objects in an end-

Figure 1. Two examples of instance co-segmentation on categories
bird and sheep, respectively. An instance here refers to an object
appearing in an image. In each example, the top row gives the
input images while the bottom row shows the instances segmented
by our method. The instance-speciﬁc coloring indicates that our
method produces a segmentation mask for each instance.

to-end manner and can produce object-level results of high
quality. However, they do not explore instance-aware information, i.e. one segmentation mask for each instance rather
than each class, which is more consistent with human perception and offers better image understanding, such as the
locations and shapes of individual instances.
In this work, we present a new and challenging task
called instance-aware object co-segmentation (or instance
co-segmentation for short). Two examples of this task are
shown in Figure 1 for a quick start. Given a set of images of
a speciﬁc object category with each image covering at least
one instance of that category, instance co-segmentation
aims to identify all of these instances and segment each of
them out, namely one mask for each instance. Note that unlike semantic [18] or instance segmentation [65], no pixelwise data annotations are collected for learning. The object
category can be arbitrary and unknown, which means that
no training images of that category are available in advance.
Instance-level segments that can be obtained by solving this
task are valuable to many vision applications, such as autonomous driving [2, 64], instance placement [31], image
and sentence matching [26] or amodal segmentation [23].
18846

