Shifting More Attention to Video Salient Object Detection
Deng-Ping Fan1
1

Wenguan Wang2

TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University

2

Ming-Ming Cheng1 ∗

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

3

Jianbing Shen2,3
Beijing Institute of Technology

http://mmcheng.net/DAVSOD/

Abstract
The last decade has witnessed a growing interest in
video salient object detection (VSOD). However, the research community long-term lacked a well-established
VSOD dataset representative of real dynamic scenes with
high-quality annotations. To address this issue, we elaborately collected a visual-attention-consistent Densely Annotated VSOD (DAVSOD) dataset, which contains 226 videos
with 23,938 frames that cover diverse realistic-scenes, objects, instances and motions. With corresponding real human eye-fixation data, we obtain precise ground-truths.
This is the first work that explicitly emphasizes the challenge of saliency shift, i.e., the video salient object(s) may
dynamically change. To further contribute the community a
complete benchmark, we systematically assess 17 representative VSOD algorithms over seven existing VSOD datasets
and our DAVSOD with totally ∼84K frames (largest-scale).
Utilizing three famous metrics, we then present a comprehensive and insightful performance analysis. Furthermore,
we propose a baseline model. It is equipped with a saliencyshift-aware convLSTM, which can efficiently capture video
saliency dynamics through learning human attention-shift
behavior. Extensive experiments1 open up promising future
directions for model development and comparison.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) targets at extracting the
most attention-grabbing objects from still images [17] or
dynamic videos. This task originates from the cognitive
studies of human visual attention behavior, i.e., the astonishing ability of the human visual system (HVS) to quickly orient attention to the most informative parts of visual
scenes. Previous studies [6, 45] quantitatively confirmed
that there exists a strong correlation between such explicit, object-level saliency judgment (object-saliency) and the
implicit visual attention allocation behavior (visual attention mechanism).
∗ M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.
1 Dataset and code are available at: http://dpfan.net/DAVSOD/

Video Cate.:
Animal

Frame

Attention Shift
Fixation

Object Cate.:
Lion

Instance-level
VSOD GT

Camera Mo.:
Slow

Saliency Shift

Object-level
VSOD GT

#Salient Obj.:

3

4

Object Mo.:
Slow

2

Figure 1: Annotation examples of our DAVSOD dataset. The
rich annotations, including saliency shift, object-/instance-level
ground-truths (GT), salient object numbers, scene/object categories, and camera/object motions, provide a solid foundation for
VSOD task and benefit a wide range of potential applications.

Video salient object detection (VSOD) is thus significantly essential for understanding the underlying mechanism behind HVS during free-viewing in general and instrumental to a wide range of real-world applications, e.g.,
video segmentation [74, 83], video captioning [57], video
compression [27, 29], autonomous driving [91], robotic interaction [82], weakly supervised attention [95]. Besides its
academic value and practical significance, VSOD presents
great difficulties due to the challenges carried by video data (diverse motion patterns, occlusions, blur, large objectdeformations, etc.) and the inherent complexity of human
visual attention behavior (i.e., selective attention allocation,
attention shift [5, 37, 60]) during dynamic scenes. Thus it
invoked dramatically increasing research interest over the
past few years [7, 25, 31, 36, 38, 39, 61] (Table 2).
However, in striking contrast with the flourishing development of VSOD modeling, the effort on a standard
representative VSOD benchmark still lags behind seriously. Although several datasets [35, 40, 43, 52, 56, 59, 75]
are proposed for VSOD, they suffered from the following
shortages. First, during dynamic-viewing, the allocation
of attentional resources is not only selective but also dynamically varied among different parts of inputs, with the
changing of video content. Nevertheless, previous datasets
are annotated via static frames, without a dynamic human
eye-fixation guided annotation methodology, and thus do
not reveal real human attention behavior during dynamic-

8554

