Rare Event Detection using Disentangled Representation Learning
Ryuhei Hamaguchi, Ken Sakurada, and Ryosuke Nakamura
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
{ryuhei.hamaguchi, k.sakurada, r.nakamura}@aist.go.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method for rare event detection from an image pair with class-imbalanced datasets.
A straightforward approach for event detection tasks is to
train a detection network from a large-scale dataset in an
end-to-end manner. However, in many applications such
as building change detection on satellite images, few positive samples are available for the training. Moreover, scene
image pairs contain many trivial events, such as in illumination changes or background motions. These many trivial
events and the class imbalance problem lead to false alarms
for rare event detection. In order to overcome these difficulties, we propose a novel method to learn disentangled
representations from only low-cost negative samples. The
proposed method disentangles different aspects in a pair
of observations: variant and invariant factors that represent trivial events and image contents, respectively. The
effectiveness of the proposed approach is verified by the
quantitative evaluations on four change detection datasets,
and the qualitative analysis shows that the proposed method
can acquire the representations that disentangle rare events
from trivial ones.

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision, event detection from an
image pair has been comprehensively studied as image similarity estimation. Similarity estimation between images is
one of the fundamental problems, which can be applied for
many tasks, such as change detection [11, 14, 20, 25], image
retrieval and matching [3, 23, 33], identification [26, 31],
and stereo matching [9, 34]. Thanks to the recent success
of deep features, the image comparison methods have substantially progressed. However, a general draw back is that
they require a large amount of dataset to fully utilize the
representational power of the deep features.
In the context of image similarity estimation, this paper
considers a particular task of detecting rare events from an
image pair, such as detecting building changes on a pair
of satellite images, or detecting manufacturing defects by

Representation learning

Enc

Enc
Negative
samples

𝑠

𝑐

𝑐

𝑠

Dec

Fine-tuning

Enc

Similarity

Dec

Enc

𝑐

Cls

𝑐

Positive/Negative
samples

Figure 1. The overall concept of the proposed model. From
the negative image pairs, the representation learning model (left)
learns features that are invariant to trivial events. The rare event
detector (right) is then trained on the learned invariant features.

comparing images of products. One challenge of the task
lies in the difficulty of collecting training samples. Because
finding rare samples is labor intensive task, the training
dataset often includes few positive samples. Additionally,
image pairs often contain many cumbersome events that are
not of interest (e.g., illumination changes, registration error of images, shadow changes, background motion, or seasonal changes). These many trivial events and the class imbalance problem lead to false alarms for trivial events, or
overlooking the rare events.
In order to overcome these difficulties, we propose a
novel network architecture for disentangled representation
learning using only low-cost negative image pairs. Figure 1
demonstrates the overall concept of the proposed method.
The proposed network is trained to encode each image into
the two separated features, specific and common, by introducing a similarity constraint between the image contents.
The common features represent image contents that is invariant to trivial events, and the specific features represent a
mixture of information related to trivial events (e.g., illumination, shadows, or background motion). This disentanglement can be learned using only low-cost negative samples
because negative samples contain rich information about
trivial events. Once we have acquired the common features,
we can build rare event detectors on the learned representations using small amount of training samples.

9327

