Multi-Channel Attention Selection GAN with Cascaded Semantic Guidance
for Cross-View Image Translation
Hao Tang1,2 * Dan Xu3 * Nicu Sebe1,4 Yanzhi Wang5 Jason J. Corso6 Yan Yan2
DISI, University of Trento, Trento, Italy 2 Texas State University, San Marcos, USA
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 4 Huawei Technologies Ireland, Dublin, Ireland
5
Northeastern University, Boston, USA 6 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA

1

3

Abstract
Cross-view image translation is challenging because it
involves images with drastically different views and severe
deformation. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
named Multi-Channel Attention SelectionGAN (SelectionGAN) that makes it possible to generate images of natural scenes in arbitrary viewpoints, based on an image
of the scene and a novel semantic map. The proposed
SelectionGAN explicitly utilizes the semantic information
and consists of two stages. In the first stage, the condition image and the target semantic map are fed into a cycled semantic-guided generation network to produce initial
coarse results. In the second stage, we refine the initial results by using a multi-channel attention selection mechanism. Moreover, uncertainty maps automatically learned
from attentions are used to guide the pixel loss for better network optimization. Extensive experiments on Dayton [41], CVUSA [43] and Ego2Top [1] datasets show that
our model is able to generate significantly better results
than the state-of-the-art methods. The source code, data
and trained models are available at https://github.
com/Ha0Tang/SelectionGAN .

1. Introduction
Cross-view image translation is a task that aims at synthesizing new images from one viewpoint to another. It has
been gaining a lot interest especially from computer vision
and virtual reality communities, and has been widely investigated in recent years [40, 20, 54, 34, 47, 15, 31, 52, 45].
Earlier works studied this problem using encoder-decoder
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) by involving viewpoint codes in the bottle-neck representations for city scene
synthesis [52] and 3D object translation [45]. There also
exist some works exploring Generative Adversarial Net* Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Examples of our cross-view translation results on
two public benchmarks i.e. Dayton [41] and CVUSA [43],
and on our self-created large-scale benchmark based on
Ego2Top [1].
works (GAN) for similar tasks [31]. However, these existing works consider an application scenario in which the
objects and the scenes have a large degree of overlapping in
appearances and views.
Different from previous works, in this paper, we focus on
a more challenging setting in which fields of views have little or even no overlap, leading to significantly distinct structures and appearance distributions for the input source and
the output target views, as illustrated in Fig. 1. To tackle this
challenging problem, Regmi and Borji [34] recently proposed a conditional GAN model which jointly learns the
generation in both the image domain and the corresponding
semantic domain, and the semantic predictions are further
utilized to supervise the image generation. Although this
approach performed an interesting exploration, we observe
unsatisfactory aspects mainly in the generated scene structure and details, which are due to different reasons. First,
since it is always costly to obtain manually annotated semantic labels, the label maps are usually produced from
pretrained semantic models from other large-scale segmentation datasets, leading to insufficiently accurate predictions
for all the pixels, and thus misguiding the image generation. Second, we argue that the translation with a single
12417

