RF-Net: An End-to-End Image Matching Network based on Receptive Field
Xuelun Shen1 Cheng Wang1∗
Xin Li2
Zenglei Yu1
Jonathan Li1,3 Chenglu Wen1 Ming Cheng1 Zijian He1
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Louisiana State University, USA
3
Department of Geography and Environmental Management, University of Waterloo, Canada
{cwang,junli,clwen,chm99}@xmu.edu.cn, xinli@cct.lsu.edu
{xuelun,zengleiyu,kemoho}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,

Abstract
This paper proposes a new end-to-end trainable matching network based on receptive field, RF-Net, to compute
sparse correspondence between images. Building end-toend trainable matching framework is desirable and challenging. The very recent approach, LF-Net, successfully
embeds the entire feature extraction pipeline into a jointly
trainable pipeline, and produces the state-of-the-art matching results. This paper introduces two modifications to
the structure of LF-Net. First, we propose to construct
receptive feature maps, which lead to more effective keypoint detection. Second, we introduce a general loss function term, neighbor mask, to facilitate training patch selection. This results in improved stability in descriptor training. We trained RF-Net on the open dataset HPatches,
and compared it with other methods on multiple benchmark
datasets. Experiments show that RF-Net outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Establishing correspondences between images plays a
key role in many Computer Vision tasks, including but not
limited to wide-baseline stereo, image retrieval, and image
matching. A typical feature-based matching pipeline consists of two components: detecting keypoints with attributions (scales, orientation), and extracting descriptors. Many
existing methods focus on building/training keypoint detectors or feature descriptors individually. However, when integrating these separately optimized subcomponents into a
matching pipeline, individual performance gain may not directly add up [29]. Jointly training detectors and descriptors
∗ Corresponding author.

to make them optimally cooperate with each other, hence,
is more desirable. However, training such a network is difficult because the two subcomponents have their individually different objectives to optimize. Not many successful
end-to-end matching pipelines have been reported in literatures. LIFT [29] is probably the first notable design towards
this goal. However, LIFT relies on the output of SIFT detector to initialize the training, and hence, its detector behaves similarly to the SIFT detector. The recent network,
SuperPoint [5], achieves this end-to-end training. But its
detector needs to be pre-trained on synthetic image sets,
and whole network is trained using images under synthesized affine transformations. The more recent LF-Net [18]
is inspired by Q-learning, and uses a Siamese architecture to
train the entire network without the help of any hand-craft
method. In this paper, we develop an end-to-end matching network with enhanced detector and descriptor training
modules, which we elaborate as follows.
Keypoint Detection. Constructing response maps is a
general way to find keypoints. LIFT [29] obtains response
maps by directly applying convolutions on different resolutions of the input image. SuperPoint [5] does not build
response maps, but it processes input image using some
convolution and max-pooling layers to produce an intermediate tensor B whose width and height are only 18 of the
input. Hence the response on B represents a highly abstract
feature of the input image and the size of the feature’s receptive field is larger than 8 pixels. LF-Net uses ResNet [9]
to produce abstract feature maps from the input image, then
build response maps by convolution on the abstract feature
maps at different resolutions. Therefore, the response on
each map has a large receptive field. In this work, we build
response maps using concerned receptive fields. Specifically, we apply convolution to produce feature maps related
to the increasing receptive field (Figure 1 (b)). For exam-

8132

