Linkage Based Face Clustering via Graph Convolution Network
Zhongdao Wang1 , Liang Zheng2 , Yali Li1 , Shengjin Wang1∗
1

2

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australian National University

wcd17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

liang.zheng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we present an accurate and scalable approach to the face clustering task. We aim at grouping a
set of faces by their potential identities. We formulate this
task as a link prediction problem: a link exists between two
faces if they are of the same identity. The key idea is that
we find the local context in the feature space around an instance (face) contains rich information about the linkage relationship between this instance and its neighbors. By constructing sub-graphs around each instance as input data,
which depict the local context, we utilize the graph convolution network (GCN) to perform reasoning and infer the
likelihood of linkage between pairs in the sub-graphs. Experiments show that our method is more robust to the complex distribution of faces than conventional methods, yielding favorably comparable results to state-of-the-art methods on standard face clustering benchmarks, and is scalable to large datasets. Furthermore, we show that the proposed method does not need the number of clusters as prior,
is aware of noises and outliers, and can be extended to a
multi-view version for more accurate clustering accuracy.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study the problem of clustering faces
according to their underlying identities. We assume no
prior of the distribution of face representations or the number of identities. Face clustering is a fundamental task in
face analysis and has been extensively studied in previous
works [38, 27, 22, 29]. Some key applications include:
grouping and tagging faces in desktop / online photo albums
for photo management [38], organizing large scale face image / video collections for fast retrieval in time-sensitive
scenarios like forensic investigations [19], and automatically data cleaning / labeling for constructing large-scale
datasets [26, 12, 34].
Conventional clustering methods suffer from the complex distribution of face representations, because they make
∗ Corresponding author

𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑖

𝑆ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 𝑖, 𝑗
𝑜𝑟 𝑛𝑜𝑡?
𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑗

(a) problem
𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘 𝑖, 𝑗 𝑖𝑓

ARO score < 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑

𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑖

(𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑦
𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑
𝑛𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑠)

𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑗

(c) Approximate Rank-Order

𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑖

𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘 𝑖, 𝑗 𝑖𝑓
𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑗 < 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
2

𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑗

(b) Naïve link
𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘 𝑖, 𝑗 𝑖𝑓

𝐺𝐶𝑁

, 𝑖, 𝑗

< 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑖
𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑗

(d) Proposed Method

Figure 1. High-level idea of our method. (a): This paper aims
to estimate whether two nodes should be linked. (b-d): Comparison of three linkage estimation methods. (b): Directly thresholding the l2 distance, without considering context. (c): Using
a heuristic mthod for linkage estimation based on context. (d):
Our method, i.e., learning the linkage likelihood with a parametric
model, which is context-based.

impractical assumptions on data distribution. For instance,
K-Means [24] requires the clusters to be convex-shaped,
Spectral Clustering [28] needs different clusters to be balanced in the number of instances, and DBSCAN [10] assumes different clusters to be in the same density. In contrast, a family of linkage-based clustering methods make no
assumption on data distribution and achieve higher accuracy. As shown in Fig.1 (a), linkage-based methods aim at
predicting whether two nodes (or clusters) should be linked
(are of the same identity). Fig.1 (b) presents a naive solution to this problem by directly linking node pairs whose
l2 distance is under a certain threshold. This is apparently
not a good solution since the densities of clusters vary a
lot. Therefore, more sophisticated metrics are designed to
compute the linkage likelihood, such as the Approximate
Rank-Order Distance (see Fig.1 (c)).
11117

