OICSR: Out-In-Channel Sparsity Regularization for
Compact Deep Neural Networks
Jiashi Li1,2,* , Qi Qi1,2,* , Jingyu Wang1,2,† , Ce Ge1,2 , Yujian Li1,2 , Zhangzhang Yue1 , and Haifeng Sun1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, P.R. China
2
EBUPT Information Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing 100191, P.R. China

Abstract
Channel pruning can significantly accelerate and compress deep neural networks. Many channel pruning works
utilize structured sparsity regularization to zero out all
the weights in some channels and automatically obtain
structure-sparse network in training stage. However, these
methods apply structured sparsity regularization on each
layer separately where the correlations between consecutive layers are omitted. In this paper, we first combine
one out-channel in current layer and the corresponding inchannel in next layer as a regularization group, namely outin-channel. Our proposed Out-In-Channel Sparsity Regularization (OICSR) considers correlations between successive layers to further retain predictive power of the compact
network. Training with OICSR thoroughly transfers discriminative features into a fraction of out-in-channels. Correspondingly, OICSR measures channel importance based
on statistics computed from two consecutive layers, not individual layer. Finally, a global greedy pruning algorithm
is designed to remove redundant out-in-channels in an iterative way. Our method is comprehensively evaluated with
various CNN architectures including CifarNet, AlexNet,
ResNet, DenseNet and PreActSeNet on CIFAR-10, CIFAR100 and ImageNet-1K datasets. Notably, on ImageNet-1K,
we reduce 37.2% FLOPs on ResNet-50 while outperforming the original model by 0.22% top-1 accuracy.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
significant successes in visual tasks, including image classification [10, 21, 33], object detection [5, 31], semantic segmentation [2, 25], etc. However, large CNNs suf∗ Authors contributed equally
†

Corresponding author: wangjingyu@bupt.edu.cn

fer from massive computational and storage overhead. For
instance, deep residual network ResNet-50 [10] takes up
about 190MB storage space, and needs more than 4 billion float point operations (FLOPs) to classify a single image. High demand for computation and storage resources
severely hinders the deployment of large-scale CNNs in resource constrained devices such as mobile devices, wearable devices and Internet of Things (IoT) equipment.
Pruning [9, 34] is an important family of methods to slim
neural network by removing redundant connections, channels and layers. Connection pruning gains high compression ratio but leads to non-structured sparsity of CNNs [34].
The practical acceleration of non-structured sparsity is limited due to irregular memory access. Therefore, structured
sparsity pruning [34, 36] becomes growing popular.
Regularization-based channel pruning [24, 34] is a popular direction of structured sparsity pruning. These works
introduce structured sparsity regularization (structured regularization) into optimization objective of model training.
Training with structured regularization transfers important
features into a small quantity of channels and automatically
obtains structure-sparse model. Pruning structure-sparse
models keeps more features/accuracy compared with directly pruning non-sparse models [34]. For channel-level
pruning, existing regularization-based works apply structured regularization on each layer separately, and only enforce channel-level sparsity in out-channels. However, the
corresponding in-channels in next layer are neglected and
non-sparse. We call them as the separated structured regularization. Pruning one out-channel in current layer results
in a dummy zero output feature map that in turn prunes
a corresponding in-channel in next layer together. Without structure sparsity, useful features in in-channels of next
layer are falsely discarded, which severely impair the representational capacity of the network.
In this paper, we propose a novel structured regulariza17046

