Connecting Touch and Vision via Cross-Modal Prediction
Yunzhu Li

Jun-Yan Zhu Russ Tedrake
MIT CSAIL

Antonio Torralba

Abstract
Humans perceive the world using multi-modal sensory
inputs such as vision, audition, and touch. In this work, we
investigate the cross-modal connection between vision and
touch. The main challenge in this cross-domain modeling
task lies in the significant scale discrepancy between the
two: while our eyes perceive an entire visual scene at once,
humans can only feel a small region of an object at any given
moment. To connect vision and touch, we introduce new tasks
of synthesizing plausible tactile signals from visual inputs as
well as imagining how we interact with objects given tactile
data as input. To accomplish our goals, we first equip robots
with both visual and tactile sensors and collect a large-scale
dataset of corresponding vision and tactile image sequences.
To close the scale gap, we present a new conditional adversarial model that incorporates the scale and location
information of the touch. Human perceptual studies demonstrate that our model can produce realistic visual images
from tactile data and vice versa. Finally, we present both
qualitative and quantitative experimental results regarding
different system designs, as well as visualizing the learned
representations of our model.

GelSight

Touch Image

Touch
Objects

(b) Sample Touch

(a) Setup

Predicted touch
Source

Reference

(c) Vision to Touch

Predicted vision
Source touch

1. Introduction
People perceive the world in a multi-modal way where
vision and touch are highly intertwined [24, 42]: when we
close our eyes and use only our fingertips to sense an object
in front of us, we can make guesses about its texture and geometry. For example in Figure 1d, one can probably tell that
s/he is touching a piece of delicate fabric based on its tactile
“feeling”; similarly, we can imagine the feeling of touch by
just seeing the object. In Figure 1c, without directly contacting the rim of a mug, we can easily imagine the sharpness
and hardness of the touch merely by our visual perception.
The underlying reason for this cross-modal connection is
the shared physical properties that influence both modalities
such as local geometry, texture, roughness, hardness and so
on. Therefore, it would be desirable to build a computational
model that can extract such shared representations from one
modality and transfer them to the other.
In this work, we present a cross-modal prediction system

Ground truth

Ground truth

Reference

(d) Touch to Vision

Figure 1. Data collection setup: (a) we use a robot arm equipped
with a GelSight sensor [15] to collect tactile data and use a webcam
to capture the videos of object interaction scenes. (b) An illustration of the GelSight touching an object. Cross-modal prediction:
given the collected vision-tactile pairs, we train cross-modal prediction networks for several tasks: (c) Learning to feel by seeing
(vision → touch): predicting the a touch signal from its corresponding vision input and reference images and (d) Learning to see by
touching (touch → vision): predicting vision from touch. The
predicted touch locations and ground truth locations (marked with
yellow arrows in (d)) share a similar feeling. Please check out our
website for code and more results.

between vision and touch with the goals of learning to see
by touching and learning to feel by seeing. Different from
other cross-modal prediction problems where sensory data
in different domains are roughly spatially aligned [13, 1], the
110609

