PointRCNN: 3D Object Proposal Generation and Detection from Point Cloud
Shaoshuai Shi
Xiaogang Wang
Hongsheng Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{ssshi, xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable progress on 2D
computer vision tasks, including object detection [8, 32, 16]
and instance segmentation [6, 10, 20], etc. Beyond 2D
scene understanding, 3D object detection is crucial and indispensable for many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving and domestic robots. While recent developed 2D detection algorithms are capable of handling large
variations of viewpoints and background clutters in images,
the detection of 3D objects with point clouds still faces great
challenges from the irregular data format and large search
space of 6 Degrees-of-Freedom (DoF) of 3D object.
In autonomous driving, the most commonly used 3D
sensors are the LiDAR sensors, which generate 3D point
clouds to capture the 3D structures of the scenes. The difficulty of point cloud-based 3D object detection mainly lies
in irregularity of the point clouds. State-of-the-art 3D de-

2D CNN

front view
projection & pooling

front view
projection & pooling

3D
anchors

fusion

2D CNN

fusion

3D RoIs

bird view
projection & pooling

bird view
projection & pooling

Bird s view

2D image
detector

2D RoIs

RGB image

point cloud
in frustum

3D box
estimation

point cloud

c: Our approach (PointRCNN)
point-wise
feature vector
point cloud
...
network

Point cloud

region
to
frustum

bottom-up 3D
proposal generation
point cloud
segmentation
3D proposal
generation

canonical 3D
point cloud box refinement
RoI pooling

3D Box Predictions

b: Frustum-Pointnet

3D Box Predictions

In this paper, we propose PointRCNN for 3D object detection from raw point cloud. The whole framework is
composed of two stages: stage-1 for the bottom-up 3D
proposal generation and stage-2 for refining proposals in
the canonical coordinates to obtain the final detection results. Instead of generating proposals from RGB image
or projecting point cloud to bird’s view or voxels as previous methods do, our stage-1 sub-network directly generates a small number of high-quality 3D proposals from
point cloud in a bottom-up manner via segmenting the point
cloud of the whole scene into foreground points and background. The stage-2 sub-network transforms the pooled
points of each proposal to canonical coordinates to learn
better local spatial features, which is combined with global
semantic features of each point learned in stage-1 for accurate box refinement and confidence prediction. Extensive experiments on the 3D detection benchmark of KITTI
dataset show that our proposed architecture outperforms
state-of-the-art methods with remarkable margins by using only point cloud as input. The code is available at
https://github.com/sshaoshuai/PointRCNN.

3D Box Predictions

a: Aggregate View Object Detection (AVOD)
RGB image

Abstract

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art methods. Instead of
generating proposals from fused feature maps of bird’s view and
front view [14], or RGB images [25], our method directly generates 3D proposals from raw point cloud in a bottom-up manner.

tection methods either leverage the mature 2D detection
frameworks by projecting the point clouds into bird’s view
[14, 42, 17] (see Fig. 1 (a)), to the frontal view [4, 38], or
to the regular 3D voxels [34, 43], which are not optimal and
suffer from information loss during the quantization.
Instead of transforming point cloud to voxels or other
regular data structures for feature learning, Qi et al. [26, 28]
proposed PointNet for learning 3D representations directly
from point cloud data for point cloud classification and segmentation. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), their follow-up work [25]
applied PointNet in 3D object detection to estimate the 3D
bounding boxes based on the cropped frustum point cloud
from the 2D RGB detection results. However, the performance of the method heavily relies on the 2D detection performance and cannot take the advantages of 3D information
for generating robust bounding box proposals.
Unlike object detection from 2D images, 3D objects in
autonomous driving scenes are naturally and well separated

770

