SparseFool: a few pixels make a big difference
Apostolos Modas, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Pascal Frossard
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
{apostolos.modas, seyed.moosavi, pascal.frossard}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks have achieved extraordinary results on image classification tasks, but have been shown to
be vulnerable to attacks with carefully crafted perturbations
of the input data. Although most attacks usually change values of many image’s pixels, it has been shown that deep networks are also vulnerable to sparse alterations of the input.
However, no computationally efficient method has been proposed to compute sparse perturbations. In this paper, we
exploit the low mean curvature of the decision boundary,
and propose SparseFool, a geometry inspired sparse attack
that controls the sparsity of the perturbations. Extensive
evaluations show that our approach computes sparse perturbations very fast, and scales efficiently to high dimensional data. We further analyze the transferability and the
visual effects of the perturbations, and show the existence
of shared semantic information across the images and the
networks. Finally, we show that adversarial training can
only slightly improve the robustness against sparse additive
perturbations computed with SparseFool. 1

1 The code of SparseFool is available at https://github.com/
LTS4/SparseFool.

palace

bathtub

sandal

wine bottle

bubble

Figure 1: Adversarial examples for ImageNet, as computed
by SparseFool on a ResNet-101 architecture. Each column
corresponds to different level of perturbed pixels. The fooling labels are shown below the images.
the classifier’s estimated label k(x):
minkrkp s.t. k(x + r) 6= k(x),

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful learning
models that achieve state-of-the-art performance in many
different classification tasks [27, 49, 1, 22, 9], but have been
shown to be vulnerable to very small, and often imperceptible, adversarial manipulations of their input data [46]. Interestingly, the existence of such adversarial perturbations
is not only limited to additive perturbations [21, 12, 48] or
classification tasks [8], but can be found in many other applications [47, 7, 28, 31, 39, 41, 42].
For image classification tasks, the most common type
of adversarial perturbations are the `p minimization ones,
since they are easier to analyze and optimize. Formally, for
a given classifier and an image x 2 Rn , we define as adversarial perturbation the minimal perturbation r that changes

cockroach

(1)

r

Several methods (attacks) have been proposed for computing `2 and `∞ adversarial perturbations [46, 15, 24, 33,
6, 32]. However, understanding the vulnerabilities of deep
neural networks in other perturbation regimes remains important. In particular, it has been shown [38, 44, 35, 2, 18]
that DNNs can misclassify an image, when only a small
fraction of the input is altered (sparse perturbations). In
practice, sparse perturbations could correspond to some
raindrops that reflect the sun on a “STOP” sign, but that
are sufficient to fool an autonomous vehicle; or a crop-field
with some sparse colorful flowers that force a UAV to spray
pesticide on non affected areas. Understanding the vulnerability of deep networks to such a simple perturbation regime
can further help to design methods to improve the robustness of deep classifiers.
Some prior work on sparse perturbations have been developed recently. The authors in [38] proposed the JSMA

9087

