Detailed Human Shape Estimation from a Single Image
by Hierarchical Mesh Deformation
Hao Zhu1,2 Xinxin Zuo2,3 Sen Wang3,2 Xun Cao1 Ruigang Yang2,4,5
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China 4 Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
5
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning and Technology and Application, China
1

zhuhao nju@163.com

xinxin.zuo@uky.edu

caoxun@nju.edu.cn

wangsen1312@gmail.com

yangruigang@baidu.com

Abstract
This paper presents a novel framework to recover detailed human body shapes from a single image. It is a
challenging task due to factors such as variations in human shapes, body poses, and viewpoints. Prior methods
typically attempt to recover the human body shape using
a parametric based template that lacks the surface details. As such the resulting body shape appears to be without clothing. In this paper, we propose a novel learningbased framework that combines the robustness of parametric model with the flexibility of free-form 3D deformation.
We use the deep neural networks to reﬁne the 3D shape
in a Hierarchical Mesh Deformation (HMD) framework,
utilizing the constraints from body joints, silhouettes, and
per-pixel shading information. We are able to restore detailed human body shapes beyond skinned models. Experiments demonstrate that our method has outperformed
previous state-of-the-art approaches, achieving better accuracy in terms of both 2D IoU number and 3D metric distance. The code is available in https://github.com/
zhuhao-nju/hmd.git.

Source image

HMR result

HMD result

Figure 1: Our method (HMD) takes a single 2D image of a person as input and predicts detailed human
body shape. As compared with the current state-of-the-art
method (HMR [16]), we have got the recovered body shapes
with surface details that better ﬁt to the input image.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D human shape from a single image is a
challenging problem and has drawn much attention in recent years. A large number of approaches [8, 5, 6, 31, 17,
32, 23, 16, 21] have been proposed in which the human
body shapes get reconstructed by predicting the parameters
of a statistical body shape model, such as SMPL [20] and
SCAPE [3]. The parametric shape is of low-ﬁdelity, and
unable to capture clothing details. Another collection of
methods[33, 35] estimate volumetric human shape directly
from the image using CNN, while the resulting volumetric
representation is fairly coarse and does not contain shape
details.

The limited performance of previous methods is caused
by the large variations of the human shape and pose. Parametric or volumetric shapes are not expressive enough to
represent the inherent complexity.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework to reconstruct detailed human shape from a single image. The key
here is to combine the robustness of parametric model with
the ﬂexibility of free-form deformation. In short, we build
on top of current SMPL model to obtain an initial parametric mesh model and perform non-rigid 3D deformation on
the mesh to reﬁne the surface shape. We design a coarseto-ﬁne reﬁnement scheme in which a deep neural network
14491

