3D Hand Shape and Pose Estimation from a Single RGB Image
Liuhao Ge1∗, Zhou Ren2 , Yuncheng Li3 , Zehao Xue3 , Yingying Wang3 , Jianfei Cai1 , Junsong Yuan4
1
2
Nanyang Technological University
Wormpex AI Research
3
4
Snap Inc.
State University of New York at Buffalo
ge0001ao@e.ntu.edu.sg, zhou.ren@bianlifeng.com, yuncheng.li@snap.com,
zehao.xue@snap.com, ywang@snap.com, asjfcai@ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract
This work addresses a novel and challenging problem
of estimating the full 3D hand shape and pose from a single RGB image. Most current methods in 3D hand analysis from monocular RGB images only focus on estimating the 3D locations of hand keypoints, which cannot fully
express the 3D shape of hand. In contrast, we propose a
Graph Convolutional Neural Network (Graph CNN) based
method to reconstruct a full 3D mesh of hand surface that
contains richer information of both 3D hand shape and
pose. To train networks with full supervision, we create a
large-scale synthetic dataset containing both ground truth
3D meshes and 3D poses. When fine-tuning the networks
on real-world datasets without 3D ground truth, we propose a weakly-supervised approach by leveraging the depth
map as a weak supervision in training. Through extensive
evaluations on our proposed new datasets and two public
datasets, we show that our proposed method can produce
accurate and reasonable 3D hand mesh, and can achieve
superior 3D hand pose estimation accuracy when compared
with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Vision-based 3D hand analysis is a very important topic because it has many applications in virtual reality (VR)
and augmented reality (AR). However, despite years of
studies [40, 57, 58, 47, 45, 13, 27], it remains an open problem due to the diversity and complexity of hand shape, pose,
gesture, occlusion, etc. In the past decade, we have witnessed a rapid advance in 3D hand pose estimation from
depth images [35, 52, 12, 15, 14, 61, 11, 16]. Considering
RGB cameras are more widely available than depth cameras, some recent works start looking into 3D hand analysis
from monocular RGB images, and mainly focus on estimating sparse 3D hand joint locations but ignore dense 3D hand
∗ This work was done when Liuhao Ge was a research intern at Snap

Inc.

Figure 1: Our proposed method is able to not only estimate
2D/3D hand joint locations, but also recover a full 3D mesh
of hand surface from a single RGB image. We show our
estimation results on our proposed synthetic and real-world
datasets as well as the STB real-world dataset [62].
shape [63, 44, 32, 5, 20, 36, 38]. However, many immersive
VR and AR applications often require accurate estimation
of both 3D hand pose and 3D hand shape.
This motivates us to bring out a more challenging task:
how to jointly estimate not only the 3D hand joint locations,
but also the full 3D mesh of hand surface from a single RGB
image? In this work, we develop a sound solution to this
task, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The task of single-view 3D hand shape estimation has
been studied previously, but mostly in controlled settings,
where a depth sensor is available. The basic idea is to fit
a generative 3D hand model to the input depth image with
iterative optimization [49, 30, 24, 21, 51, 41]. In contrast,
here we consider to estimate 3D hand shape from a monocular RGB image, which has not been extensively studied yet.
The absence of explicit depth cues in RGB images makes
this task difficult to be solved by iterative optimization approaches. In this work, we apply deep neural networks that
are trained in an end-to-end manner to recover 3D hand
mesh directly from a single RGB image. Specifically, we
predefine the topology of a triangle mesh representing the
hand surface, and aim at estimating the 3D coordinates of
all the vertices in the mesh using deep neural networks. To
achieve this goal, there are several challenges.

10833

