TransGaGa: Geometry-Aware Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Wayne Wu1 Kaidi Cao2 Cheng Li1 Chen Qian1 Chen Change Loy3
1

SenseTime Research 2 Stanford University
3
Nanyang Technological University

{wuwenyan, chengli, qianchen}@sensetime.com

kaidicao@cs.stanford.edu

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1: We propose a geometry-aware framework for unsupervised image-to-image translation, which is robust to arbitrary shape
variations between domains. We show the results of both near-rigid and non-rigid objects. (left) Cow and cheetah rendered from CAD
models. (center) Cat and human face from in-the-wild datasets. (right) Horse and giraffe from Flickr.

Abstract

Unsupervised image-to-image translation aims at learning a mapping between two visual domains. However,
learning a translation across large geometry variations always ends up with failure. In this work, we present a novel
disentangle-and-translate framework to tackle the complex
objects image-to-image translation task. Instead of learning the mapping on the image space directly, we disentangle image space into a Cartesian product of the appearance
and the geometry latent spaces. Specifically, we first introduce a geometry prior loss and a conditional VAE loss
to encourage the network to learn independent but complementary representations. The translation is then built
on appearance and geometry space separately. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our
method to other state-of-the-art approaches, especially in
the challenging near-rigid and non-rigid objects translation
tasks. In addition, by taking different exemplars as the appearance references, our method also supports multimodal
translation. Project page: https://wywu.github.
io/projects/TGaGa/TGaGa.html

1. Introduction
I will be your mirror. Reflect what you are, in case you
don’t know. I will be the wind, the rain and the sunset.
The light on your door to show that you are home.
Lou Reed

Unsupervised image-to-image translation aims at learning tahe translation between two different image domains
without any pairwise supervision. The notion of image
translation has been widely applied in colorization [47],
super-resolution [22, 43] and style transfer [9].
Early works demonstrated the effectiveness of deep neural network in transferring local textures, demonstrating
successful cases on seasonal scene shifting [52, 27] and
painting style transfer [23]. However, researchers soon realized its limitation on the more complicated cases, i.e.,
translation between two domains with large geometry variations [52, 10]. To handle more complex cases, one has to
establish the translation on the higher semantic level. For
example, based on the understanding of the components of
neck, body and leg of a horse, we may imagine a giraffe
with the same posture. However, one can hardly implement
this translation by replacing the local texture due to the large
geometry variations between the two domains.

8012

