Deep Video Inpainting
Dahun Kim∗
KAIST

Sanghyun Woo∗
KAIST

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

In So Kweon
KAIST

Abstract
Video inpainting aims to fill spatio-temporal holes with
plausible content in a video. Despite tremendous progress
of deep neural networks for image inpainting, it is challenging to extend these methods to the video domain due to
the additional time dimension. In this work, we propose
a novel deep network architecture for fast video inpainting. Built upon an image-based encoder-decoder model,
our framework is designed to collect and refine information
from neighbor frames and synthesize still-unknown regions.
At the same time, the output is enforced to be temporally
consistent by a recurrent feedback and a temporal memory
module. Compared with the state-of-the-art image inpainting algorithm, our method produces videos that are much
more semantically correct and temporally smooth. In contrast to the prior video completion method which relies on
time-consuming optimization, our method runs in near realtime while generating competitive video results. Finally, we
applied our framework to video retargeting task, and obtain
visually pleasing results.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting can help numerous video editing and
restoration tasks such as undesired object removal, scratch
or damage restoration, and retargeting. More importatnly,
and apart from its converntional demands, video inpainting
can be used in combination with Augmented Reality (AR)
for a greater visual experience; Removing existing items
gives more opportunities before overlaying new elements in
a scene. Therefore, as a Diminished Reality (DR) technology, it opens up new opportunities to be paired with recent
real-time / deep learning-based AR technologies. Moreover, there are several semi-online streaming scenarios such
as automatic content filtering and visual privacy filtering.
Only a small wait will lead to a considerable latency, thus
making the speed itself an important issue.
Despite tremendous progress on deep learning-based inpainting of a single image, it is still challenging to extend
these methods to video domain due to the additional time
∗ Both authors have contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Input video with mask boundaries in red (row-1). Video
inpainting results by per-frame image inpainting [33] (row-2),
optimization-based method [11] (row-3), and our method (row-4).
Best viewed when zoomed-in.

dimension. The difficulties coming from complex motions
and high requirement on temporal consistency make video
inpainting a challenging problem. A straightforward way
to perform video inpainting is to apply image inpainting
on each frame individually. However, this ignores motion
regularities coming from the video dynamics, and is thus
incapable of estimating non-trivial appearance changes in
image-space over time. Moreover, this scheme inevitably
brings temporal inconsistencies and causes severe flickering artifacts. The second row in Fig. 1 shows an example
of directly applying the state-of-the-art feed-forward image
inpainting [33] in a frame-by-frame manner.
To address the temporal consistency, several methods
have been developed to fill in the missing motion fields; using a greedy selection of local spatio-temporal patches [24],
a per-frame diffusion-based technique [16], or an iterative
optimization [11]. However, the first two methods treat flow
estimation to be independent of color estimation [16, 24]
and the last relies on time-consuming optimization [11] (3rd
row in Fig. 1), which is effective but limits their practicality
and flexibility in general scenarios.
15792

