Instance-Level Meta Normalization
Songhao Jia
National Tsing Hua University

Ding-Jie Chen
Academia Sinica

Hwann-Tzong Chen
National Tsing Hua University

gasoonjia@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

djchen.tw@gmail.com

htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents a normalization mechanism called
Instance-Level Meta Normalization (ILM Norm) to address a learning-to-normalize problem. ILM Norm learns
to predict the normalization parameters via both the feature feed-forward and the gradient back-propagation paths.
ILM Norm provides a meta normalization mechanism and
has several good properties. It can be easily plugged into
existing instance-level normalization schemes such as Instance Normalization, Layer Normalization, or Group Normalization. ILM Norm normalizes each instance individually and therefore maintains high performance even when
small mini-batch is used. The experimental results show
that ILM Norm well adapts to different network architectures and tasks, and it consistently improves the performance of the original models. The code is available at
https://github.com/Gasoonjia/ILM-Norm.

Figure 1. CIFAR-10 classification error rate versus batch size
per GPU. The evaluation model is ResNet-101. The result shows
that ILM Norm applied on Group Normalization has the best error
rates in comparison with Batch Normalization [11] and the original Group Normalization [27].

stage by
xn = ω ∗ xs + β ,

1. Introduction
The mechanism of normalization plays a key role in deep
learning. Various normalization strategies have been presented to show their effectiveness in stabilizing the gradient
propagation. In practice, a normalization mechanism aims
to normalize the output of a given layer such that the vanishing gradient problem can be suppressed and hence to reduce
the oscillation in the output distribution. With appropriate
normalization, a deep network would be able to improve the
training speed and the generalization capability.
A typical normalization mechanism contains two stages:
standardization and rescaling. The standardization stage
regularizes an input tensor x of feature maps with its mean
µ and variance γ by
x−µ
xs = √
,
γ+ǫ

(1)

where xs is a standardized input feature tensor. At
the rescaling stage, the standardized feature tensor xs is
rescaled by a learned weight ω and a bias β to recover
the statistics of the features vanished in the standardization

(2)

where xn is the final output of the entire normalization process.
Existing normalization techniques mainly focus on
studying the standardization stage to improve the training
of deep networks under various circumstances. In contrast,
as far as we know, the rescaling stage is less investigated
and its related improvements remain unexplored. We observe that existing techniques of estimating the rescaling parameters for recovering the standardized input feature tensor often merely rely on the back-propagation process without considering the correlation between the standardization
stage and the rescaling stage. As a result, information might
be lost while data flow is passing through these two stages.
We argue that the lack of correlation between two stages
may lead to a performance bottleneck for existing normalization techniques.
The proposed Instance-Level Meta Normalization
(ILM Norm) aims to connect the standardization stage and
the rescaling stage. The design of ILM Norm is inspired
by residual networks [6], which use the previously visited
feature maps for guiding the learning of the current feature
14865

