FastDraw: Addressing the Long Tail of Lane Detection
by Adapting a Sequential Prediction Network
Jonah Philion
ISEE.AI
jonahphilion@isee.ai

Abstract
The search for predictive models that generalize to the
long tail of sensor inputs is the central difficulty when developing data-driven models for autonomous vehicles. In this
paper, we use lane detection to study modeling and training techniques that yield better performance on real world
test drives. On the modeling side, we introduce a novel fully
convolutional model of lane detection that learns to decode
lane structures instead of delegating structure inference to
post-processing. In contrast to previous works, our convolutional decoder is able to represent an arbitrary number
of lanes per image, preserves the polyline representation
of lanes without reducing lanes to polynomials, and draws
lanes iteratively without requiring the computational and
temporal complexity of recurrent neural networks. Because
our model includes an estimate of the joint distribution of
neighboring pixels belonging to the same lane, our formulation includes a natural and computationally cheap definition of uncertainty. On the training side, we demonstrate
a simple yet effective approach to adapt the model to new
environments using unsupervised style transfer. By training FastDraw to make predictions of lane structure that are
invariant to low-level stylistic differences between images,
we achieve strong performance at test time in weather and
lighting conditions that deviate substantially from those of
the annotated datasets that are publicly available. We quantitatively evaluate our approach on the CVPR 2017 Tusimple lane marking challenge, difficult CULane datasets [29],
and a small labeled dataset of our own and achieve competitive accuracy while running at 90 FPS.

1. Introduction
Previous models of lane detection generally follow the
following three-step template. First, the likelihood that each
pixel is part of a lane is estimated. Second, pixels that clear
a certain threshold probability pmin of being part of a lane
are collected. Lastly, these pixels are clustered, for instance

Figure 1. Best viewed in color. We train a novel convolutional lane
detection network on a public dataset of labeled sunny California
highways. Deploying the model in conditions far from the training
set distribution (left) leads to poor performance (middle). Leveraging unsupervised style transfer to train FastDraw to be invariant to
low-level texture differences leads to robust lane detection (right).

with RANSAC, into individual lanes.
Because the second and third steps in which road structure is inferred from a point cloud of candidate pixels are
in general not differentiable, the performance of models of
lane detection that follow this template is limited by the performance of the initial segmentation. We propose a new
approach to lane detection in which the network performs
the bulk of the decoding, thereby eliminating the need for
hyper-parameters in post-processing. Our model “draws”
lanes in the sense that the network is trained to predict the
local lane shape at each pixel. At test time, we decode the
global lane by following the local contours as predicted by
the CNN.
A variety of applications benefit from robust lane detection algorithms that can perform in the wild. If the detector is iterative, the detector can be used as an interactive annotation tool which can be used to decrease the cost
of building high definition maps [16, 1]. For level 5 systems that depend on high definition maps, online lane de-

11582

