Unsupervised Open Domain Recognition by Semantic Discrepancy Minimization
Junbao Zhuo1,2
1

Shuhui Wang1∗

Shuhao Cui1,2

Qingming Huang1,2

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China

junbao.zhuo@vipl.ict.ac.cn

{wangshuhui,cuishuhao18s}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
We address the unsupervised open domain recognition
(UODR) problem, where categories in labeled source domain S is only a subset of those in unlabeled target domain
T . The task is to correctly classify all samples in T including known and unknown categories. UODR is challenging
due to the domain discrepancy, which becomes even harder to bridge when a large number of unknown categories
exist in T . Moreover, the classification rules propagated
by graph CNN (GCN) may be distracted by unknown categories and lack generalization capability.
To measure the domain discrepancy for asymmetric label space between S and T , we propose Semantic-Guided
Matching Discrepancy (SGMD), which first employs instance matching between S and T , and then the discrepancy is measured by a weighted feature distance between
matched instances. We further design a limited balance
constraint to achieve a more balanced classification output on known and unknown categories. We develop Unsupervised Open Domain Transfer Network (UODTN), which
learns both the backbone classification network and GCN
jointly by reducing the SGMD, enforcing the limited balance constraint and minimizing the classification loss on
S. UODTN better preserves the semantic structure and enforces the consistency between the learned domain invariant visual features and the semantic embeddings. Experimental results show superiority of our method on recognizing images of both known and unknown categories.

1. Introduction
We study the unsupervised open domain recognition
problem (UODR) in this paper. In UODR, a labeled source
domain S and unlabeled target domain T are given, where
the categories in S is only a subset of those in T . The
task is to classify all samples in T including known and
unknown categories, which is undoubtedly a more chal∗ Corresponding author.

qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

lenging task but closer to the case in real-world applications compared to other related tasks in Domain Adaptation
(DA) [2, 3, 4, 20, 21, 33, 40, 42, 34, 13, 5, 10, 25] and ZeroShot Learning (ZSL) [24, 11, 28, 16, 32, 15, 14, 29, 41].
The major differences among UODR and other related
problems are summarized in Table 1. Traditional unsupervised DA [4, 20, 21, 33, 42] is too strict to assume that
S and T share the same categories. Researchers begin to
explore a more difficult setting that S and T do not share
the same categories (asymmetric category space). In partial
adversarial-DA [3] and partial weighted-DA [40], the authors addressed the problem that the category space of T is a
subset of S. However, the category space is still constrained
in close set expanded by source domain categories. For the
more difficult setting, i.e., the category space of S is a subset of T is rarely considered in DA field. In open set DA [2],
there are unknown categories both in S and T , but the task
is to classify only the samples of known categories in the
target domain, while the samples of unknown categories are
ignored. In contrast, there is no unknown categories in S,
and all samples of known and unknown categories in target
domain are required to be classified in UODR. UODR is also different from generalized ZSL [28, 16, 11, 32, 15, 14],
since in generalized ZSL all the data are from the same domain and there is no presumed domain discrepancy between
S (i.e., training set in ZSL) and T (i.e., testing set in ZSL). Therefore, existing solutions can not be directly used to
solve UODR problem due to its unique characteristics.
UODR is challenging due to the semantic discrepancy
between S and T , which can be explained from both feature distribution and semantic aspects. First, there is large
divergence on both content and distribution perspectives between S and T , which is also referred to as domain discrepancy in existing DA studies [4, 20, 21, 33, 42]. The
domain discrepancy is even harder to bridge if a large number of unknown categories are injected into T . In this case,
directly applying techniques used in DA, e.g., MMD [20]
and DCORAL [33], would lead to negative transfer. Second, it is hard to classify instances of unknown categories

750

