Learning to Compose Dynamic Tree Structures for Visual Contexts
Kaihua Tang1 , Hanwang Zhang1 , Baoyuan Wu2 , Wenhan Luo2 , Wei Liu2
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
Tencent AI Lab
kaihua001@e.ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg,
{wubaoyuan1987, whluo.china}@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu
Abstract
We propose to compose dynamic tree structures that
place the objects in an image into a visual context, helping visual reasoning tasks such as scene graph generation
and visual Q&A. Our visual context tree model, dubbed
VCT REE, has two key advantages over existing structured
object representations including chains and fully-connected
graphs: 1) The efﬁcient and expressive binary tree encodes
the inherent parallel/hierarchical relationships among objects, e.g., “clothes” and “pants” are usually co-occur and
belong to “person”; 2) the dynamic structure varies from
image to image and task to task, allowing more content/task-speciﬁc message passing among objects. To construct
a VCT REE, we design a score function that calculates the
task-dependent validity between each object pair, and the
tree is the binary version of the maximum spanning tree
from the score matrix. Then, visual contexts are encoded by
bidirectional TreeLSTM and decoded by task-speciﬁc models. We develop a hybrid learning procedure which integrates end-task supervised learning and the tree structure
reinforcement learning, where the former’s evaluation result serves as a self-critic for the latter’s structure exploration. Experimental results on two benchmarks, which require reasoning over contexts: Visual Genome for scene
graph generation and VQA2.0 for visual Q&A, show that
VCT REE outperforms state-of-the-art results while discovering interpretable visual context structures.

1. Introduction
Objects are not alone. They are placed in the visual context: a coherent object conﬁguration attributed to the fact
that they co-vary with each other. Extensive studies in cognitive science show that our brains inherently exploit visual
contexts to understand cluttered visual scenes comprehensively [4, 6, 37]. For example, even the girl’s leg and the
horse are not fully observed in Figure 1, we can still infer
“girl riding horse”. Inspired by this, modeling visual con-

Chain

Fully-Connected Graph
What is on the
little girl’s head?

Is the girl sitting on
the horse correctly?

Helmet

Yes

Dynamic Tree (ours)

Figure 1. Illustrations of different object-level visual context structures: chains [57], fully-connected graphs [50], and dynamic tree
structures constructed by the proposed VCT REE. For the purpose
of efﬁcient context encoding by using TreeLSTM [44], we transform the multi-branch trees (left) to the equivalent left-child rightsibling binary trees [14], where the left branches (red) indicate the
hierarchical relations and right branches (blue) indicate the parallel relations. The key advantages of VCT REE over chains and
graphs are hierarchical, dynamic, and efﬁcient.

texts is also indispensable in many modern computer vision systems. For example, state-of-the-art CNN architectures capture the context by convolutions of various receptive ﬁelds and encode it into multi-scale feature map pyramid [8, 27, 60]. Such pixel-level visual context (or local
context [16]) arguably plays one of the key roles in closing the performance gap of the “mid-level” vision between
humans and machines, such as R-CNN based object detection [27, 29, 40], instance segmentation [18, 38], and FCN

6619

