Context-Aware Crowd Counting
Weizhe Liu Mathieu Salzmann Pascal Fua
Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{weizhe.liu, mathieu.salzmann, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for counting people in crowded
scenes rely on deep networks to estimate crowd density.
They typically use the same filters over the whole image or
over large image patches. Only then do they estimate local
scale to compensate for perspective distortion. This is typically achieved by training an auxiliary classifier to select,
for predefined image patches, the best kernel size among a
limited set of choices. As such, these methods are not endto-end trainable and restricted in the scope of context they
can leverage.
In this paper, we introduce an end-to-end trainable deep
architecture that combines features obtained using multiple
receptive field sizes and learns the importance of each such
feature at each image location. In other words, our approach adaptively encodes the scale of the contextual information required to accurately predict crowd density. This
yields an algorithm that outperforms state-of-the-art crowd
counting methods, especially when perspective effects are
strong.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is important for applications such as
video surveillance and traffic control. In recent years, the
emphasis has been on developing counting-by-density algorithms that rely on regressors trained to estimate the
people density per unit area so that the total number can
be obtained by integration, without explicit detection being required. The regressors can be based on Random
Forests [18], Gaussian Processes [7], or more recently Deep
Nets [41, 42, 26, 31, 40, 36, 32, 24, 19, 30, 33, 22, 15, 28, 5],
with most state-of-the-art approaches now relying on the
latter.
Standard convolutions are at the heart of these deeplearning-based approaches. By using the same filters and
pooling operations over the whole image, these implicitly
rely on the same receptive field everywhere. However,
due to perspective distortion, one should instead change
the receptive field size across the image. In the past, this

has been addressed by combining either density maps extracted from image patches at different resolutions [26] or
feature maps obtained with convolutional filters of different sizes [42, 5]. However, by indiscriminately fusing information at all scales, these methods ignore the fact that
scale varies continuously across the image. While this was
addressed in [31, 30] by training classifiers to predict the
size of the receptive field to use locally, the resulting methods are not end-to-end trainable; cannot account for rapid
scale changes because they assign a single scale to relatively
large patches; and can only exploit a small range of receptive fields for the networks to remain of a manageable size.
In this paper, we introduce a deep architecture that explicitly extracts features over multiple receptive field sizes
and learns the importance of each such feature at every
image location, thus accounting for potentially rapid scale
changes. In other words, our approach adaptively encodes
the scale of the contextual information necessary to predict
crowd density. This is in contrast to crowd-counting approaches that also use contextual information to account for
scaling effects as in [32], but only in the loss function as
opposed to computing true multi-scale features as we do.
We will show that it works better on uncalibrated images.
When calibration data is available, we will also show that
it can be leveraged to infer suitable local scales even better
and further increase performance.
Our contribution is therefore an approach that incorporates multi-scale contextual information directly into an
end-to-end trainable crowd counting pipeline, and learns
to exploit the right context at each image location. As
shown by our experiments, we consistently outperform the
state of the art on all standard crowd counting benchmarks,
such as ShanghaiTech, WorldExpo’10, UCF CC 50 and
UCF QNRF, as well as on our own Venice dataset1 , which
features strong perspective distortion.

2. Related Work
Early crowd counting methods [39, 38, 20] tended to
rely on counting-by-detection, that is, explicitly detecting
1 https://sites.google.com/view/weizheliu/home/
projects/context-aware-crowd-counting

5099

