RGBD Based Dimensional Decomposition Residual Network for 3D Semantic
Scene Completion
Jie Li1,2 ∗

Yu Liu2 ∗

Dong Gong2

Qinfeng Shi2
Xia Yuan1
2
Ian Reid
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
RGB images differentiate from depth as they carry more
details about the color and texture information, which can
be utilized as a vital complement to depth for boosting the
performance of 3D semantic scene completion (SSC). SSC
is composed of 3D shape completion (SC) and semantic
scene labeling while most of the existing approaches use
depth as the sole input which causes the performance bottleneck. Moreover, the state-of-the-art methods employ 3D
CNNs which have cumbersome networks and tremendous
parameters. We introduce a light-weight Dimensional Decomposition Residual network (DDR) for 3D dense prediction tasks. The novel factorized convolution layer is effective for reducing the network parameters, and the proposed multi-scale fusion mechanism for depth and color image can improve the completion and segmentation accuracy
simultaneously. Our method demonstrates excellent performance on two public datasets. Compared with the latest method SSCNet, we achieve 5.9% gains in SC-IoU and
5.7% gains in SSC-IOU, albeit with only 21% network parameters and 16.6% FLOPs employed compared with that
of SSCNet.

1. Introduction
We live in a 3D world where everything occupies part of
the physical space under the view of the human perception
system. Similarly, 3D scene understanding is of importance
since it is a reflection about the real-world scenario. As one
of the most vital fields in 3D scene understanding, Semantic
Scene Completion (SSC) has verity of applications, including robotic navigation [13], scene reconstruction [14], autodriving [22] etc. However, due to the dimensional curse
brought by 3D representation [40] and the limited annotation datasets, the research field of SSC still step slowly in
the past decades.
∗ First two authors contributed equally.

Chunxia Zhao1

With the renaissance of deep learning [21, 9, 41] and a
few large-scale datasets being made available [25, 5, 36] in
recent years. The research activities of 3D shape processing
thrive again in the computer vision community, injecting
new possibilities and objectives for SSC as well introducing
some unprecedented challenges.
Conventional methods usually utilize the hand-crafted
features, such as voxel [19] and TSDF [18] to represent
the 3D object shape, and make use of the graph model to
infer the scene occupations and semantic labeling individually [12, 19]. The current state-of-the-art technique SSCNet [36], instead uses an end-to-end 3D network to conduct
the scene completion and category labeling simultaneously.
Through combining the semantic and geometrical information implicitly via the network learning process, the two individual tasks can benefit from each other.
Though remarkable gains in terms of scene completion and labeling accuracy have been achieved, the massive amount of parameters brought by the 3D representation
make it computing-intensive. Moreover, another problem
suffered in the existing SSC is the low-resolution representation [36, 11]. In particular, due to the limitation of computation resources, both of the conventional and deep learning
based methods sacrifice high-resolution to compromise an
acceptable speed.
On the other hand, most of existing methods solely use
depth as input, which is struggled to differentiate objects
from various categories. For example, a paper and a tablecloth on the same table can be easily distinguished by color
or texture information. To sum up, depth and color image
are different modalities captured by the sensor, they all provide us with what the scene looks like. The former gives
us more sense about the object shape and distance, while
the later transfers more information about the object texture
and saliency. It is proved that both of the two modalities are
helpful to boost the performance of SSC task [7], although
how to fuse them is still an unsolved problem.
To overcome the problems as mentioned above, we propose a light-weight semantic scene completion network,

7693

