SIGNet: Semantic Instance Aided Unsupervised 3D Geometry Perception
Yue Meng1

Yongxi Lu1
Aman Raj1
Tara Javidi1
Gaurav Bansal2
1

UC San Diego

2

Samuel Sunarjo1
Dinesh Bharadia1

Rui Guo2

Toyota InfoTechnology Center

{yum107, yol070, amraj, ssunarjo, tjavidi, dineshb}@ucsd.edu
rguo@us.toyota-itc.com

gauravbs@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Visual perception of 3D scene geometry using a monocular camera is a fundamental problem with numerous applications, like autonomous driving and space exploration. We
focus on the ability to infer accurate geometry (depth and
flow) of static and moving objects in a 3D scene. Supervised
deep learning models have been proposed for geometry predictions, yielding “robust” and favorable results against the
traditional approaches (SfM) [38, 39, 10, 2, 1, 26]. However, supervised models require a dataset labeled with geometrically informative annotations, which is extremely
challenging as the collection of geometrically annotated
ground truth (e.g. depth, flow) requires expensive equipment (e.g. LIDAR) and careful calibration procedures.

Frame s

Ys

Xs

ft → s

Frame t

ft → s

Xt

Yt
ft → u

Frame u

Unsupervised learning for geometric perception (depth,
optical flow, etc.) is of great interest to autonomous systems. Recent works on unsupervised learning have made
considerable progress on perceiving geometry; however,
they usually ignore the coherence of objects and perform
poorly under scenarios with dark and noisy environments.
In contrast, supervised learning algorithms, which are robust, require large labeled geometric dataset. This paper
introduces SIGNet, a novel framework that provides robust geometry perception without requiring geometrically
informative labels. Specifically, SIGNet integrates semantic information to make depth and flow predictions consistent with objects and robust to low lighting conditions.
SIGNet is shown to improve upon the state-of-the-art unsupervised learning for depth prediction by 30% (in squared
relative error). In particular, SIGNet improves the dynamic
object class performance by 39% in depth prediction and
29% in flow prediction. Our code will be made available at
https://github.com/mengyuest/SIGNet

State-of-the-art unsupervised

Ours

Abstract

Yu

Xu ft → u

Figure 1: On the right, state-of-the-art unsupervised learning approach relies on pixel-wise information only, while
SIGNet on the left utilizes the semantic information to encode the spatial constraints hence further enhances the geometry prediction.
Recent works combine the geometric-based SfM methods with end-to-end unsupervised trainable deep models
to utilize abundantly available unlabeled monocular camera data. In [54, 41, 51, 9] deep models predict depth
and flow per pixel simultaneously from a short sequence of
images and typically use photo-metric reconstruction loss
of a target scene from neighboring scenes as the surrogate task. However, these solutions often fail when dealing
with dynamic objects1 . Furthermore, the prediction quality
is negatively affected by the imperfections like Lambertian
reflectance and varying intensity which occur in the real
world. In short, no robust solution is known.
In Fig 1, we highlight the innovation of our system (on
the left) comparing to the existing unsupervised frameworks
(on the right) for geometry perception. Traditional unsupervised models learn from the pixel-level feedback (i.e.
1 Section 5 presents empirical results that explicitly illustrate this shortcoming of state-of-the-art unsupervised approaches.

9810

