Octree guided CNN with Spherical Kernels for 3D Point Clouds
Huan Lei
Naveed Akhtar
Ajmal Mian
Computer Science and Software Engineering
The University of Western Australia
huan.lei@research.uwa.edu.au, {naveed.akhtar, ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
We propose an octree guided neural network architecture and spherical convolutional kernel for machine learning from arbitrary 3D point clouds. The network architecture capitalizes on the sparse nature of irregular point
clouds, and hierarchically coarsens the data representation
with space partitioning. At the same time, the proposed
spherical kernels systematically quantize point neighborhoods to identify local geometric structures in the data,
while maintaining the properties of translation-invariance
and asymmetry. We specify spherical kernels with the help
of network neurons that in turn are associated with spatial locations. We exploit this association to avert dynamic
kernel generation during network training that enables efficient learning with high resolution point clouds. The effectiveness of the proposed technique is established on the
benchmark tasks of 3D object classification and segmentation, achieving competetive performance on ShapeNet and
RueMonge2014 datasets.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [17] are known
to learn highly effective features from data. However, standard CNNs are only amenable to data defined over regular
grids, e.g. pixel arrays. This limits their ability in processing 3D point clouds that are inherently irregular. Point cloud
processing has recently gained significant research interest
and large repositories for this data modality have started to
emerge [1, 4, 12, 39, 40]. Recent literature has also seen
many attempts to exploit the representation prowess of standard convolutional networks for point clouds by adaption
[23, 39]. However, these attempts have often led to excessively large memory footprints that restrict the allowed input data resolution [29, 33]. A more attractive choice is to
combine the power of convolution operation with graph representations of irregular data. The resulting Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) offer convolutions either in spectral domain [3, 7, 15] or spatial domain [33].
In GCNs, the spectral domain methods require the Graph
Laplacian to be aligned, which is not straight forward to

achieve for point clouds. On the other hand, the only prominent approach in spatial domain is the Edge Conditioned filters in CNNs for graphs (ECC) [33] that, in contrast to the
standard CNNs, must generate convolution kernels dynamically entailing a significant computational overhead. Additionally, ECC relies on range searches for graph construction and coarsening, which can become prohibitively expensive for large point clouds. One major challenge in applying
convolutional networks to irregular 3D data is in specifying geometrically meaningful convolution kernels in the 3D
metric space. Naturally, such kernels are also required to
exhibit translation-invariance to identify similar local structures in the data. Moreover, they should be applied to point
pairs asymmetrically for a compact representation. Owing
to such intricate requirements, few existing techniques altogether avoid the use of convolution kernels in computational
graphs to process unstructured data [16, 27, 28]. Although
still attractive, these methods do not contribute towards harnessing the potential of convolutional neural networks for
point clouds.
In this work, we introduce the notion of spherical convolutional kernel that systematically partitions a spherical
3D region into multiple volumetric bins, see Fig. 1. Each
bin of the kernel specifies a matrix of learnable parameters
that weights the points falling within that bin for convolution. We apply these kernels between the layers of a Neural
Network (Ψ-CNN) that we propose to construct by exploiting octree partitioning [24] of the 3D space. The sparsity
guided octree structuring determines the locations to perform the convolutions in each layer of the network. The
network architecture itself is guided by the hierarchy of the
octree, having the same number of hidden layers as the tree
depth. By exploiting space partitioning, the network avoids
K-NN/range search and efficiently consumes high resolution point clouds. It also avoids dynamic generation of the
proposed kernels by associating them to its neurons. At the
same time, the kernels are able to share weights between
similar local structures in the data. We theoretically establish that the spherical kernels are applied asymmetrically to
points in our network just as the kernels in standard CNNs
19631

