Improving Action Localization by Progressive Cross-stream Cooperation
Rui Su1
Wanli Ouyang1,2
Luping Zhou1
Dong Xu1
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
{rui.su,wanli.ouyang,luping.zhou,dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Spatio-temporal action localization consists of three levels of tasks: spatial localization, action classification, and
temporal segmentation. In this work, we propose a new
Progressive Cross-stream Cooperation (PCSC) framework
to use both region proposals and features from one stream
(i.e. Flow/RGB) to help another stream (i.e. RGB/Flow) to
iteratively improve action localization results and generate
better bounding boxes in an iterative fashion. Specifically,
we first generate a larger set of region proposals by combining the latest region proposals from both streams, from
which we can readily obtain a larger set of labelled training
samples to help learn better action detection models. Second, we also propose a new message passing approach to
pass information from one stream to another stream in order to learn better representations, which also leads to better action detection models. As a result, our iterative framework progressively improves action localization results at
the frame level. To improve action localization results at
the video level, we additionally propose a new strategy to
train class-specific actionness detectors for better temporal
segmentation, which can be readily learnt by focusing on
“confusing” samples from the same action class. Comprehensive experiments on two benchmark datasets UCF-10124 and J-HMDB demonstrate the effectiveness of our newly
proposed approaches for spatio-temporal action localization in realistic scenarios.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has significantly improved performance in
various computer vision tasks [6; 16; 15; 14; 26; 13; 30] including human action detection. Human action detection,
also known as the spatio-temporal action localization, has
attracted increasing research interests due to its wide spectrum of applications in video surveillance (a brief review
of the related works is provided in Section 2). It consists
of three levels of tasks: i) spatial localization, i.e., finding
the spatial locations of persons within each frame, ii) ac-

tion classification, i.e., identifying the action categories, and
iii) temporal segmentation, i.e., determining the beginning
and the end of actions. Action detection in videos is a very
challenging task due to cluttered background, occlusion and
large intra-class variance, etc., especially when targeting the
three levels of tasks together.
Our work builds upon the existing observations that appearance and motion information are often complementary
to each other in recognizing and localizing human actions
at the feature level [21; 20; 17]. In addition, we further
observe that the two types of information are also complementary to each other at the region proposal level, so it is
beneficial to fully exploit the two types of information at
both region proposal and feature levels in order to further
improve spatial-temporal action localization results, which
is our first motivation.
Specifically, existing region proposals using either appearance or motion clues are not perfect, and they often
succeed or fail to detect region proposals in different scenarios. Therefore, they can help each other by providing
region proposals to each other. For example, when the motion clue is noisy because of subtle movement or cluttered
background, region proposal detectors based on motion information will fail, but region proposal detectors based on
appearance information may still successfully find candidate action regions and remove a large amount of background or non-action regions. In another example, it is
difficult to detect region proposals based on appearance information when certain type human actions exhibit extreme
poses, but human actions could be captured by motion information from human movements. Therefore, we can use
the bounding boxes detected from the motion as the region
proposals for improving action detection results based on
the appearance information, and vice versa.
On the other hand, the detected bounding boxes for actions in individual frames need to be linked in order to form
action tubes and temporally segmented out from the entire video clip. Current works [4; 17; 20; 23] for temporal
segmentation are mainly based on data association methods that depend on the temporal overlap and smoothness,
112016

