Reflection Removal Using a Dual-Pixel Sensor
Abhijith Punnappurath
York University

Michael S. Brown
York University

pabhijith@eecs.yorku.ca

mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
Reflection removal is the challenging problem of removing unwanted reflections that occur when imaging a scene
that is behind a pane of glass. In this paper, we show
that most cameras have an overlooked mechanism that can
greatly simplify this task. Specifically, modern DLSR and
smartphone cameras use dual pixel (DP) sensors that have
two photodiodes per pixel to provide two sub-aperture views
of the scene from a single captured image. “Defocusdisparity” cues, which are natural by-products of the DP
sensor encoded within these two sub-aperture views, can be
used to distinguish between image gradients belonging to
the in-focus background and those caused by reflection interference. This gradient information can then be incorporated into an optimization framework to recover the background layer with higher accuracy than currently possible
from the single captured image. As part of this work, we
provide the first image dataset for reflection removal consisting of the sub-aperture views from the DP sensor.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of removing reflection interference that occurs when imaging a scene behind
a pane of glass. The novelty of our work lies in our use of
the information available from dual pixel (DP) sensors that
are found on most smartphone and DSLR cameras. Traditional image sensors have a single photodiode per pixel
site. DP sensors have two photodiodes that effectively split
the pixel in half. The DP sensor design furnishes, from a
single captured image, two views of the scene where rays
passing through the left side of the lens are captured by the
right half-pixels (right sub-aperture view) and those passing through the right side of the lens are captured by the left
half-pixels (left sub-aperture view).
The DP sensor is effectively a rudimentary two-sample
light-field camera. Within this context, scene points that are
in-focus will have no difference between their positions in
the left and right sub-aperture views. However, out-of-focus
scene points will be blurred in opposite directions in the two

Captured input image

Left (L) sub‐aperture view

Right (R) sub‐aperture view

L

L

R

R

Estimated background
gradient map
based on L/R
defocus‐disparity cues

L/R disparity for background

L/R disparity for reflection

Ground truth
background layer

Our estimated
background layer

Our estimated
reflection layer

Figure 1. An example sketching our basic idea. The captured image and its two sub-aperture views are shown. In the zoomed-in
boxes, the upper half corresponds to the left view, and the lower
half to the right. In the box on the right showing an out-of-focus
reflection region, a horizontal shift can be observed between the
two white dots (best viewed electronically and zoomed), while no
disparity exists in the left box of an in-focus background region.
This disparity (illustrated in the plots) allows us to compute a mask
for image gradients belonging to the background region that can
be used to extract the background layer.

sub-aperture views, resulting in very small but detectable
shifts. These shifts, which we refer to as defocus-disparity
cues, are related to the amount of out-of-focus blur incurred
by the scene point with respect to the camera lens’s depth of
field. These defocus-disparity cues, which are natural byproducts of the DP sensor, allow us to robustly determine
which gradients in the captured composite image belong to
the in-focus background layer. Fig. 1 shows an example.
11556

