End-to-end Projector Photometric Compensation
Bingyao Huang1,2, *
1

Haibin Ling1,†

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA USA
2
Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
{bingyao.huang, hbling}temple.edu

Abstract
Projector photometric compensation aims to modify a
projector input image such that it can compensate for disturbance from the appearance of projection surface. In this
paper, for the first time, we formulate the compensation
problem as an end-to-end learning problem and propose a
convolutional neural network, named CompenNet, to implicitly learn the complex compensation function. CompenNet consists of a UNet-like backbone network and an autoencoder subnet. Such architecture encourages rich multilevel interactions between the camera-captured projection
surface image and the input image, and thus captures both
photometric and environment information of the projection
surface. In addition, the visual details and interaction information are carried to deeper layers along the multi-level
skip convolution layers. The architecture is of particular
importance for the projector compensation task, for which
only a small training dataset is allowed in practice.
Another contribution we make is a novel evaluation
benchmark, which is independent of system setup and thus
quantitatively verifiable. Such benchmark is not previously
available, to our best knowledge, due to the fact that conventional evaluation requests the hardware system to actually project the final results. Our key idea, motivated
from our end-to-end problem formulation, is to use a reasonable surrogate to avoid such projection process so as to
be setup-independent. Our method is evaluated carefully
on the benchmark, and the results show that our end-to-end
learning solution outperforms state-of-the-arts both qualitatively and quantitatively by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Projectors are widely used in applications such as presentation, cinema, structured light and projection mapping
[1, 3, 8, 9, 25, 28, 31, 32, 36]. To ensure high perception qual* Work partly done during internship with HiScene.
† Corresponding author.

a

b

c

d

e

Figure 1: Projector photometric compensation. (a) Textured projection surface under normal illumination. (b) Input image (desired visual effect). (c) Camera-captured uncompensated projection result, i.e., (b) projected onto (a).
(d) Compensated image by the proposed CompenNet. (e)
Camera-captured compensated projection result, i.e., (d)
projected onto (a). Comparing (c) and (e) we can see clearly
improved color and details.
ity, existing systems typically request the projection surface
(screen) to be white and textureless, under reasonable environment illumination. Such request, however, largely limits
applicability of these systems. Projector photometric compensation [1, 3, 25, 28, 31, 32, 36], or simply compensation
for short, aims to address this issue by modifying a projector input image to compensate for the projection surface as
well as associated photometric environment. An example
from our solution is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the compensated projection result (e) is clearly more visually pleasant
than the uncompensated one (c).

6810

