Devil is in the Edges: Learning Semantic Boundaries from Noisy Annotations
David Acuna1,2,3
1
NVIDIA

Amlan Kar2,3
Sanja Fidler1,2,3
2
3
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
{davidj, amlan}@cs.toronto.edu, sfidler@nvidia.com
STEAL: Semantic Thinning Edge Alignment Learning

Abstract
We tackle the problem of semantic boundary prediction,
which aims to identify pixels that belong to object(class)
boundaries. We notice that relevant datasets consist of a
significant level of label noise, reflecting the fact that precise annotations are laborious to get and thus annotators
trade-off quality with efficiency. We aim to learn sharp and
precise semantic boundaries by explicitly reasoning about
annotation noise during training. We propose a simple new
layer and loss that can be used with existing learning-based
boundary detectors. Our layer/loss enforces the detector to
predict a maximum response along the normal direction at
an edge, while also regularizing its direction. We further
reason about true object boundaries during training using
a level set formulation, which allows the network to learn
from misaligned labels in an end-to-end fashion. Experiments show that we improve over the CASENet [36] backbone network by more than 4% in terms of MF(ODS) and
18.61% in terms of AP, outperforming all current state-ofthe-art methods including those that deal with alignment.
Furthermore, we show that our learned network can be used
to significantly improve coarse segmentation labels, lending
itself as an efficient way to label new data.

1. Introduction
Image boundaries are an important cue for recognition [26, 15, 2]. Humans can recognize objects from
sketches alone, even in cases where a significant portion
of the boundary is missing [6, 38]. Boundaries have also
been shown to be useful for 3D reconstruction [23, 21, 39],
localization [35, 31], and image generation [19, 32].
In the task of semantic boundary detection, the goal is to
move away from low-level image edges to identifying image pixels that belong to object (class) boundaries. It can be
seen as a dual task to image segmentation which identifies
object regions. Intuitively, predicting semantic boundaries
is an easier learning task since they are mostly rooted in
identifiable higher-frequency image locations, while region
pixels may often be homogenous in color, leading to ambiguities for recognition. On the other hand, the performance
metrics are harder: while getting the coarse regions right

Devil is in the Edges

labeled ground-truth

active alignment

labeled ground-truth

coarse-to-fine segmentation

Figure 1: We introduce STEAL, an approach to learn sharper and more
accurate semantic boundaries. STEAL can be plugged onto any existing
semantic boundary network, and is able to significantly refine noisy annotations in current datasets.

may lead to artificially high Jaccard index [20], boundaryrelated metrics focus their evaluation tightly along the object edges. Getting these correct is very important for tasks
such as object instance segmentation, robot manipulation
and grasping, or image editing.
However, annotating precise object boundaries is extremely slow, taking as much as 30-60s per object [1, 9].
Thus most existing datasets consist of significant label noise
(Fig. 1, bottom left), trading quality with the labeling efficiency. This may be the root cause why most learned detectors output thick boundary predictions, which are undesirable for downstream tasks.
In this paper, we aim to learn sharp and precise semantic
boundaries by explicitly reasoning about annotation noise
during training. We propose a new layer and loss that can
be added on top of any end-to-end edge detector. It enforces the edge detector to predict a maximum response
along the normal direction at an edge, while also regularizing its direction. By doing so, we alleviate the problem
of predicting overly thick boundaries and directly optimize
for Non-Maximally-Suppressed (NMS) edges. We further
reason about true object boundaries using a level-set formulation, which allows the network to learn from misaligned
labels in an end-to-end fashion.
Experiments show that our approach improves the performance of a backbone network, i.e. CASENet [36], by
more than 4% in terms of MF(ODS) and 18.61% in terms of
AP, outperforming all current state-of-the-art methods. We
111075

