Visual Query Answering by Entity-Attribute Graph Matching and Reasoning
Peixi Xiong1∗, Huayi Zhan1∗ , Xin Wang2∗ ,
Baivab Sinha3 , Ying Wu1
1
Northwestern University,2 Southwest Jiaotong University,
3
Sichuan Changhong Electric Co. Ltd
1

{peixixiong2018, huayi.zhan, yingwu}@u.northwestern.edu,
2

xinwang@swjtu.cn, 3 baivabsinha@changhong.com

Abstract
Visual Query Answering (VQA) is of great signiﬁcance
in offering people convenience: one can raise a question
for details of objects, or high-level understanding about the
scene, over an image. This paper proposes a novel method
to address the VQA problem. In contrast to prior works,
our method that targets single scene VQA, replies on graphbased techniques and involves reasoning. In a nutshell, our
approach is centered on three graphs. The ﬁrst graph, referred to as inference graph GI , is constructed via learning over labeled data. The other two graphs, referred to as
query graph Q and entity-attribute graph GEA , are generated from natural language query Qnl and image Img, that
are issued from users, respectively. As GEA often does not
take sufﬁcient information to answer Q, we develop techniques to infer missing information of GEA with GI . Based
on GEA and Q, we provide techniques to ﬁnd matches of
Q in GEA , as the answer of Qnl in Img. Unlike commonly used VQA methods that are based on end-to-end neural networks, our graph-based method shows well-designed
reasoning capability, and thus is highly interpretable. We
also create a dataset on soccer match (Soccer-VQA)1 with
rich annotations. The experimental results show that our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art method and has
high potential for future investigation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, visual query answering (VQA) has received signiﬁcant attention [20, 24, 8] as it involves multidisciplinary research, e.g. natural language understanding,
visual information retrieving and multi-modal reasoning.
The task of VQA is to ﬁnd an answer to a query Qnl based
∗ Authors contributed equally
1 The Soccer-VQA dataset has been released publicly at
http://120.25.121.173/research/vqa

Figure 1: The image is about soccer match, where each person object is associated with attributes: id, uniform color,
status (Standing, Moving, Expansion), direction (Backing,
Facing, N/A), as well as location, and the soccer object is
attributed with location.
on the content of an image. There are a variety of applications of VQA, e.g. surveillance video understanding, visual
commentator robot, etc. Solving VQA problems usually requires high level reasoning from the content of an image.
Ever since the VQA problem was ﬁrst brought up
by [19], end-to-end neural network has become the dominant approach in the community. The basic idea is to
extract representations of image and text by convolutional
neural network and recurrent neural network respectively,
and to combine these two representations to form a joint
embedding which is then fed into a classiﬁer to infer the answer [36]. The NN-based approach tries to learn the correlations of text query with input image (and implicitly with
the expected answer) in a joint semantic space. A major
improvement to the basic method is to add attention mechanism [38, 31, 37, 12, 18].
Despite the dominance in VQA literature, neural network approach has a few weaknesses, which greatly hinders
its further development. First of all, deep neural network
works as “black boxes”, hence it is very hard to identify
the causal relations between model design and system per-

8357

