On Exploring Undetermined Relationships for Visual Relationship Detection
Yibing Zhan1 , Jun Yu∗1 , Ting Yu1 and Dacheng Tao2
1

Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney,
Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{zybjy,yujun}@hdu.edu.cn, yuting@zufedfc.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

Person Person

Person Hat

In visual relationship detection, human-notated relationships can be regarded as determinate relationships. However, there are still large amount of unlabeled data, such as
object pairs with less significant relationships or even with
no relationships. We refer to these unlabeled but potentially
useful data as undetermined relationships. Although a vast
body of literature exists, few methods exploit these undetermined relationships for visual relationship detection.
In this paper, we explore the beneficial effect of undetermined relationships on visual relationship detection. We
propose a novel multi-modal feature based undetermined
relationship learning network (MF-URLN) and achieve
great improvements in relationship detection. In detail, our
MF-URLN automatically generates undetermined relationships by comparing object pairs with human-notated data
according to a designed criterion. Then, the MF-URLN
extracts and fuses features of object pairs from three complementary modals: visual, spatial, and linguistic modals.
Further, the MF-URLN proposes two correlated subnetworks: one subnetwork decides the determinate confidence,
and the other predicts the relationships. We evaluate the
MF-URLN on two datasets: the Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) and the Visual Genome (VG) datasets. The
experimental results compared with state-of-the-art methods verify the significant improvements made by the undetermined relationships, e.g., the top-50 relation detection
recall improves from 19.5% to 23.9% on the VRD dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual relationships have been widely used in multiple
image understanding tasks, such as object categorization
∗ Jun Yu is the corresponding author

Street
Horse

(a) Person – Wear – Hat
Car

(b) Person – On – Horse
Lamp

Bike
Monitor

(c) Bike – Car
Irrelevant Objects

(d) Monitor – Lamp
Falsely Detected Lamp

Figure 1. This figure shows four images with different relationships. (a) and (b) surround the descriptions of object pairs with
determinate relationships. In addition, (b) presents an unlabeled
relationship: person-on-street. (c) and (d) outline the descriptions
of object pairs with undetermined relationships. In (d), the two
objects are detected by Faster R-CNN [29].

[8], object detection [14], image segmentation [11], image
captioning [6], and human-object interactions [10]. Due to
its wide applications, visual relationship detection has attracted increasingly more attention. The goal of visual relationship detection is to detect pairs of objects, meanwhile
to predict the object pairs’ relationships. In visual relationship detection, visual relationships are generally represented as subject-predicate-object triplets, such as personwear-hat and person-on-horse, which are shown in Fig. 1
(a) and (b). Since relation triplets are compositions of objects and predicates, their distribution is long-tailed. For N
objects and M predicates, the number of all possible relation triplets is O(N 2 M ). Therefore, taking relation triplets

5128

