Accel: A Corrective Fusion Network for
Efficient Semantic Segmentation on Video
Samvit Jain

Xin Wang

Joseph E. Gonzalez

University of California, Berkeley
{samvit,xinw,jegonzal}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present Accel, a novel semantic video segmentation
system that achieves high accuracy at low inference cost
by combining the predictions of two network branches: (1)
a reference branch that extracts high-detail features on a
reference keyframe, and warps these features forward using frame-to-frame optical flow estimates, and (2) an update branch that computes features of adjustable quality on
the current frame, performing a temporal update at each
video frame. The modularity of the update branch, where
feature subnetworks of varying layer depth can be inserted
(e.g., ResNet-18 to ResNet-101), enables operation over
a new, state-of-the-art accuracy-throughput trade-off spectrum. Over this curve, Accel models achieve both higher
accuracy and faster inference times than the closest comparable single-frame segmentation networks. In general,
Accel significantly outperforms previous work on efficient
semantic video segmentation, correcting warping-related
error that compounds on datasets with complex dynamics.
Accel is end-to-end trainable and highly modular: the reference network, the optical flow network, and the update
network can each be selected independently, depending on
application requirements, and then jointly fine-tuned. The
result is a robust, general system for fast, high-accuracy semantic segmentation on video.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an intensive computer vision
task that involves generating class predictions for each pixel
in an image, where classes range from foreground objects
such as “person” and “vehicle” to background entities such
as “building” and “sky”. When applied to frames in high
resolution video, this task becomes yet more expensive,
as the high spatial dimensionality of the output is further
scaled by the video’s temporal frame rate (e.g., 30 frames
per second). By treating video as a collection of uncorrelated still images, contemporary approaches to seman-

Ik

Ii

...

keyframe

current frame

NUfeat

...

NRfeat

W

...

update
branch

W

reference branch

NRtask

NUtask

score
fusion

segmentation

Si

Figure 1. Accel is a fast, high-accuracy, end-to-end trainable video
recognition system that combines two network branches: 1) a reference branch that computes a score map on high-detail features
warped from the last visited keyframe, and 2) a cheap update
branch that corrects this prediction based on features of adjustable
quality (e.g., ResNet-18 to -101) computed on the current frame.

tic video segmentation incur this full computational cost,
achieving inference throughput of less than 1.5 frames per
second (fps) on a 30 fps video feed [5, 8, 42]. Moreover, by
ignoring temporal context, frame-by-frame approaches fail
to realize the potential for improved accuracy offered by the
availability of preceding frames in a scene.
Prior work has proposed feature reuse and feature warping as means to reduce computation on video. In particular,
exploiting the observation that higher-level representations
evolve more slowly than raw pixels in a video [32], these
approaches relegate feature extraction, the most expensive
component of most video recognition architectures [45],
to select keyframes, and project these features forward via
naı̈ve copying or warping based on optical flow. While feature warping does enable some speedup [45], its efficacy is

8866

