d-SNE: Domain Adaptation using Stochastic Neighborhood Embedding
Xiang Xu† ,∗ Xiong Zhou ‡∗, Ragav Venkatesan‡ , Gurumurthy Swaminathan‡ , Orchid Majumder‡
†
Computational Biomedicine Lab, University of Houston, Houston, USA
‡
AWS AI, Seattle, USA
†

xxu18@central.uh.edu, ‡ {xiongzho,ragavven,gurumurs,orchid}@amazon.com

Abstract

Expectation: 𝐷 " ∪ 𝐷 # = 𝐷 #

𝐷#

Deep neural networks often require copious amount of
labeled-data to train their scads of parameters. Training
larger and deeper networks is hard without appropriate regularization, particularly while using a small dataset. Laterally, collecting well-annotated data is expensive, timeconsuming and often infeasible. A popular way to regularize these networks is to simply train the network with
more data from an alternate representative dataset. This
can lead to adverse effects if the statistics of the representative dataset are dissimilar to our target. This predicament is due to the problem of domain shift. Data from a
shifted domain might not produce bespoke features when
a feature extractor from the representative domain is used.
In this paper, we propose a new technique (d-SNE) of domain adaptation that cleverly uses stochastic neighborhood
embedding techniques and a novel modified-Hausdorff distance. The proposed technique is learnable end-to-end and
is therefore, ideally suited to train neural networks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that d-SNE outperforms the
current states-of-the-art and is robust to the variances in
different datasets, even in the one-shot and semi-supervised
learning settings. d-SNE also demonstrates the ability to
generalize to multiple domains concurrently.

1. Introduction
The use of pre-trained models and transfer-learning
have become commonplace in today’s deep learning-centric
computer vision. Consider a pre-trained model MDs
s
trained using a large dataset Ds = {(xsi , yis )}N
i=1 , where
xsi is the ith sample of the sth domain and N s is the number
of samples in the sth domain. Suppose that a typical user has
t
t
s
a smaller dataset Dt = {(xtj , yjt )}N
j=1 , with N << N , on
which they want to train their model. Also consider that the
label spaces are the same, i.e., {y s , y t } ∈ [0, 1, . . . c − 1].
∗ Equal contribution. This work was done during Xiang’s internship at
AWS AI.

Direct Deployment

𝐷"

Reality: 𝐷 " ∩ 𝐷 # = ∅
𝐷 #$
Domain Adaptation

𝐷"
𝐷 #%

Distribution of labeled training set, 𝐷"
Distribution of labeled evaluation set, 𝐷#$
Distribution of unlabeled evaluation set 𝐷#%

Figure 1: Domain adaptation in the true data space: Expectation vs. Reality.

The user should be able to repurpose the model MDs to
work with dataset Dt . Unless the user is extremely lucky as
shown in the top case of figure 1, such a deployment will not
work. This is due to domain-shift. Features become meaningless and their spaces get transformed, therefore classifier
boundaries have to be redrawn. The class of such problems
where the knowledge from another domain is recycled to
work to a new target domain is called domain adaptation.
If the solution can perform equally-well in both domains, it
is called as domain generalization.
Typical choices of dataset for source are large-scale
datasets such as ImageNet [3]. Donahue et al. popularized the idea of repurposing networks trained on this dataset
to be used as generic feature extractors [5]. They hypothesized and successfully demonstrated that in many cases,
when there is limited labeled data available in the target domain, as long as it contains only natural images, the feature
extractors learnt from ImageNet are general enough to produce discriminative features. Follow-up studies have analysed the transferability of neural networks and the generality of datasets in-detail [33, 29]. In all these cases, the

2497

