SoDeep: a Sorting Deep net to learn ranking loss surrogates
Martin Engilberge1,2 , Louis Chevallier2 , Patrick Pérez3 , Matthieu Cord1,3
1

Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 2 Technicolor, Cesson Sévigné, France, 3 Valeo.ai, Paris, France

{martin.engilberge, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr patrick.perez@valeo.com louis.chevallier@technicolor.com

Abstract
Several tasks in machine learning are evaluated using non-differentiable metrics such as mean average precision or Spearman correlation. However, their nondifferentiability prevents from using them as objective functions in a learning framework. Surrogate and relaxation
methods exist but tend to be specific to a given metric.
In the present work, we introduce a new method to learn
approximations of such non-differentiable objective functions. Our approach is based on a deep architecture that
approximates the sorting of arbitrary sets of scores. It is
trained virtually for free using synthetic data. This sorting
deep (SoDeep) net can then be combined in a plug-and-play
manner with existing deep architectures. We demonstrate
the interest of our approach in three different tasks that
require ranking: Cross-modal text-image retrieval, multilabel image classification and visual memorability ranking.
Our approach yields very competitive results on these three
tasks, which validates the merit and the flexibility of SoDeep
as a proxy for sorting operation in ranking-based losses.

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches have gained enormous research interest for many Computer Vision tasks in the recent
years. Deep convolutional networks are now commonly
used to learn state-of-the-art models for visual recognition,
including image classification [26, 18, 35] and visual semantic embedding [25, 22, 37]. One of the strengths of
these deep approaches is the ability to train them in an endto-end manner removing the need for handcrafted features
[29]. In such a paradigm, the network starts with the raw
inputs, and handles feature extraction (low level and highlevel features) and prediction internally. The main requirement is to define a trainable scheme. For deep architectures, stochastic gradient descent with back-propagation is
usually performed to minimize an objective function. This
loss function depends on the target task but has to be at least

Figure 1: Overview of SoDeep, the proposed end-toend trainable deep architecture to approximate nondifferentiable ranking metrics. A pre-trained differentiable sorter (deep neural net [DNN] ΘB ) is used to convert into ranks the raw scores given by the model (DNN
ΘA ) being trained to a collection of inputs. A loss is then
applied to the predicted rank and the error can be backpropagated through the differentiable sorter and used to update the weights ΘA .
differentiable.
Machine learning tasks are often evaluated and compared using metrics which differ from the objective function used during training. The choice of an evaluation metric is intimately related to the definition of the task at hand,
even sometimes to the benchmark itself. For example, accuracy seems to be the natural choice to evaluate classification methods, whereas the choice of the objective function
is also influenced by the mathematical properties that allow
a proper optimization of the model. For classification, one
would typically choose the cross entropy loss – a differentiable function – over the non-differentiable accuracy. Ideally, the objective function used during training would be
identical to the evaluation metric. However, standard evaluation metrics are often not suitable as training objectives for
lack of differentiability to start with. This results in the use
of surrogate loss functions that are better behaved (smooth,
possibly convex). Unfortunately, coming up with good surrogate functions is not an easy task.
110792

