Events-to-Video: Bringing Modern Computer Vision to Event Cameras
Henri Rebecq †

René Ranftl ‡

Vladlen Koltun ‡

Davide Scaramuzza †

Abstract
Event cameras are novel sensors that report brightness
changes in the form of asynchronous “events” instead of
intensity frames. They have significant advantages over
conventional cameras: high temporal resolution, high dynamic range, and no motion blur. Since the output of event
cameras is fundamentally different from conventional cameras, it is commonly accepted that they require the development of specialized algorithms to accommodate the particular nature of events. In this work, we take a different view and propose to apply existing, mature computer
vision techniques to videos reconstructed from event data.
We propose a novel recurrent network to reconstruct videos
from a stream of events, and train it on a large amount
of simulated event data. Our experiments show that our
approach surpasses state-of-the-art reconstruction methods by a large margin (> 20%) in terms of image quality. We further apply off-the-shelf computer vision algorithms to videos reconstructed from event data on tasks
such as object classification and visual-inertial odometry,
and show that this strategy consistently outperforms algorithms that were specifically designed for event data. We
believe that our approach opens the door to bringing the
outstanding properties of event cameras to an entirely new
range of tasks. A video of the experiments is available at
https://youtu.be/IdYrC4cUO0I

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors that work
radically differently from conventional cameras. Instead of
capturing intensity images at a fixed rate, event cameras
measure changes of intensity asynchronously at the time
they occur. This results in a stream of events, which encode
the time, location, and polarity (sign) of brightness changes
(Fig. 2). Event cameras such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor
(DVS) [24] possess outstanding properties when compared
to conventional cameras. They have a very high dynamic
range (140 dB versus 60 dB), do not suffer from motion
† Dept. Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and Dept. Neuroinformatics,
Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich
‡ Intel Labs

Y

E2VID

X

Time
Downstream applications

Object classification

Visual-inertial odometry

Off-the-shelf algorithm

Figure 1. Our network converts a spatio-temporal stream of events
(left) into a high-quality video (right). This enables direct application of off-the-shelf computer vision algorithms such as object classification (Section 5.1) and visual-inertial odometry (Section 5.2), yielding state-of-the-art results with event data in each
case. This figure shows an actual output sample from our method,
operating on a real event sequence from a publicly available
dataset [30].

blur, and provide measurements with a latency as low as
one microsecond. Event cameras thus provide a viable alternative, or complementary, sensor in conditions that are
challenging for conventional cameras.
However, since the output of an event camera is an asynchronous stream of events (a representation that is fundamentally different from natural images), existing computer
vision techniques cannot be directly applied to this data. As
a consequence, custom algorithms need to be specifically
tailored to leverage event data. Such specialized algorithms
have demonstrated impressive performance in applications
ranging from low-level vision tasks, such as visual odometry [18, 39, 53, 38, 41], feature tracking [20, 52, 15] and
optical flow [5, 3, 47, 55, 46], to high-level tasks such as object classification [35, 21, 45] and gesture recognition [2].
While some works [9, 10, 5, 29, 18, 14] focused on exploiting the low latency of the sensor by processing the data
event-by-event, significant progress has been made by mapping a set of events into an image-like 2D representation
prior to processing. Examples are the integration of events
on the image plane [39, 26, 27] as well as time surfaces
[21, 45, 55, 51, 55]. However, neither event images nor time
surfaces are natural images, meaning that much of the existing computer vision toolbox cannot be applied effectively.
Most importantly, deep networks trained on real image data
13857

