Learning Loss for Active Learning
Donggeun Yoo1,2 and In So Kweon2
1
2

Lunit Inc., Seoul, South Korea.
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea.

dgyoo@lunit.io

iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Input

1. Introduction
Data is flooding in, but deep neural networks are still
data-hungry. The empirical analysis of [33, 20] suggests
that the performance of recent deep networks is not yet
saturated with respect to the size of training data. For
this reason, learning methods from semi-supervised learning [42, 39, 33, 20] to unsupervised learning [1, 7, 58, 38]
are attracting attention along with weakly-labeled or unlabeled large-scale data.
However, given a fixed amount of data, the performance
of the semi-supervised or unsupervised learning is still
bound to that of fully-supervised learning. The experimen-

Model
Loss prediction module

Target prediction
Loss prediction

(a) A model with a loss prediction module
.
.
Human oracles
annotate top-𝐾
data points
⋯

The performance of deep neural networks improves with
more annotated data. The problem is that the budget for
annotation is limited. One solution to this is active learning, where a model asks human to annotate data that it
perceived as uncertain. A variety of recent methods have
been proposed to apply active learning to deep networks
but most of them are either designed specific for their target tasks or computationally inefficient for large networks.
In this paper, we propose a novel active learning method
that is simple but task-agnostic, and works efficiently with
the deep networks. We attach a small parametric module,
named “loss prediction module,” to a target network, and
learn it to predict target losses of unlabeled inputs. Then,
this module can suggest data that the target model is likely
to produce a wrong prediction. This method is task-agnostic
as networks are learned from a single loss regardless of target tasks. We rigorously validate our method through image
classification, object detection, and human pose estimation,
with the recent network architectures. The results demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms the previous methods over the tasks.

Unlabeled
pool

Predicted
losses

Labeled
training set

(b) Active learning with a loss prediction module
Figure 1. A novel active learning method with a loss prediction
module. (a) A loss prediction module attached to a target model
predicts the loss value from an input without its label. (b) All data
points in an unlabeled pool are evaluated by the loss prediction
module. The data points with the top-K predicted losses are labeled and added to a labeled training set.

tal results of semi-supervised learning in [42, 45] demonstrate that the higher portion of annotated data ensures superior performance. This is why we are suffering from annotation labor and cost of time.
The cost of annotation varies widely depending on target tasks. In the natural image domain, it is relatively cheap
to annotate class labels for classification, but detection requires expensive bounding boxes. For segmentation, it is
more expensive to draw pixel-level masks. The situation
gets much worse when we consider the bio-medical image
domain. It requires board-citified specialists trained for several years (radiologists for radiography images [35], pathologists for slide images [24]) to obtain annotations.
The budget for annotation is limited. What then is the
most efficient use of the budget? [3, 26] first proposed ac1 93

