A Skeleton-bridged Deep Learning Approach for Generating Meshes
of Complex Topologies from Single RGB Images
Jiapeng Tang ∗1 , Xiaoguang Han ∗2 , Junyi Pan1 , Kui Jia †1 , and Xin Tong3
1
2

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, the Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
Microsoft Research Asia
msjptang@mail.scut.edu.cn, hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn, eejypan@mail.scut.edu.cn,
kuijia@scut.edu.cn, xtong@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on the challenging task of learning
3D object surface reconstructions from single RGB images.
Existing methods achieve varying degrees of success by using different geometric representations. However, they all
have their own drawbacks, and cannot well reconstruct
those surfaces of complex topologies. To this end, we propose in this paper a skeleton-bridged, stage-wise learning
approach to address the challenge. Our use of skeleton is
due to its nice property of topology preservation, while being of lower complexity to learn. To learn skeleton from an
input image, we design a deep architecture whose decoder
is based on a novel design of parallel streams respectively
for synthesis of curve- and surface-like skeleton points. We
use different shape representations of point cloud, volume,
and mesh in our stage-wise learning, in order to take their
respective advantages. We also propose multi-stage use of
the input image to correct prediction errors that are possibly accumulated in each stage. We conduct intensive experiments to investigate the efficacy of our proposed approach.
Qualitative and quantitative results on representative object
categories of both simple and complex topologies demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing ones.
We will make our ShapeNet-Skeleton dataset publicly available.

1. Introduction
Learning 3D surface reconstructions of objects from single RGB images is an important topic from both the aca∗ Equal contributions
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our proposed approach can generate a closed surface
mesh from a single view RGB image, by correctly recovering the
complex topology.

demic and practical perspectives. This inverse problem is
extremely challenging due to the arbitrary shapes of different object instances and their possibly complex topologies. Recent methods [4, 7, 27, 30, 8, 11, 24, 6, 16, 28, 19]
leverage the powerful learning capacities of deep networks,
and achieve varying degrees of success by using different
shape representations, e.g., volume, point cloud, or mesh.
These methods have their own merits but also have their respective drawbacks. For example, volume-based methods
[4, 7, 30] exploit the establishment of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [23, 14, 26, 10], and simply extend
CNNs its 3D versions to generate volume representations of
3D shapes; however, both of their computational and memory complexities are high enough which prohibit them to be
deployed to generate high-resolution outputs. On the other
hand, point cloud based methods [6, 16] are by nature difficult to generate smooth and clean surfaces.
Given the fact that mesh representation is a more effi-

4541

