Revisiting Local Descriptor based Image-to-Class Measure
for Few-shot Learning
Wenbin Li1 , Lei Wang2 , Jinglin Xu3 , Jing Huo1 , Yang Gao1 , Jiebo Luo4
1
Nanjing University, China, 2 University of Wollongong, Australia
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China, 4 University of Rochester, USA

Abstract
Few-shot learning in image classification aims to learn
a classifier to classify images when only few training
examples are available for each class. Recent work has
achieved promising classification performance, where
an image-level feature based measure is usually used.
In this paper, we argue that a measure at such a level
may not be effective enough in light of the scarcity of
examples in few-shot learning. Instead, we think a local
descriptor based image-to-class measure should be taken,
inspired by its surprising success in the heydays of local
invariant features. Specifically, building upon the recent
episodic training mechanism, we propose a Deep Nearest
Neighbor Neural Network (DN4 in short) and train it in an
end-to-end manner. Its key difference from the literature is
the replacement of the image-level feature based measure
in the final layer by a local descriptor based image-to-class
measure. This measure is conducted online via a k-nearest
neighbor search over the deep local descriptors of convolutional feature maps. The proposed DN4 not only learns
the optimal deep local descriptors for the image-to-class
measure, but also utilizes the higher efficiency of such
a measure in the case of example scarcity, thanks to the
exchangeability of visual patterns across the images in
the same class. Our work leads to a simple, effective,
and computationally efficient framework for few-shot
learning. Experimental study on benchmark datasets
consistently shows its superiority over the related stateof-the-art, with the largest absolute improvement of 17%
over the next best. The source code can be available from
https://github.com/WenbinLee/DN4.git.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning aims to learn a model with good generalization capability such that it can be readily adapted to
new unseen classes (concepts) by accessing only one or few

examples. However, the extremely limited number of examples per class can hardly represent the class distribution
effectively, making this task truly challenging.
To tackle the few-shot learning task, a variety of methods have been proposed, which can be roughly divided into
two types, i.e., meta-learning based [16, 14, 13] and metriclearning based [9, 17, 25]. The former type introduces
a meta-learning paradigm [18, 21] to learn an across-task
meta-learner for generalizing to new unseen tasks. They
usually resort to recurrent neural networks or long short
term memory networks to learn a memory network [24, 12]
to store knowledge. The latter type adopts a relatively simpler architecture to learn a deep embedding space to transfer
representation (knowledge). This type of methods usually
relies on the metric learning and episodic training mechanism [22]. Both types of methods have greatly advanced
the development of few-shot learning.
These existing methods mainly focus on making knowledge transfer [22, 2], concept representation [17, 4] or relation measure [25], but have not paid sufficient attention
to the way of the final classification. They generally take
the common practice, i.e., using the image-level pooled features or fully connected layers designed for large-scale image classification, for the few-shot case. Considering the
unique characteristic of few-shot learning (i.e., the scarcity
of examples for each training class), such a common practice may not be appropriate anymore.
In this paper, we revisit the Naive-Bayes NearestNeighbor (NBNN) approach [1] published a decade ago,
and investigate its effectiveness in the context of the latest
few-shot learning research. The NBNN approach demonstrated a surprising success when the bag-of-features model
with local invariant features (i.e., SIFT) was popular. That
work provides two key insights. First, summarizing the local features of an image into a compact image-level representation could lose considerable discriminative information. It will not be recoverable when the number of training
examples is small. Second, in this case, directly using these
local features for classification will not work if an image-toimage measure is used. Instead, an image-to-class measure
17260

