Unsupervised Embedding Learning via Invariant and Spreading
Instance Feature
Mang Ye†
†

Xu Zhang‡

Pong C. Yuen†

Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong

‡

Shih-Fu Chang‡

Columbia University, New York

{mangye,pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, {xu.zhang,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the unsupervised embedding learning problem, which requires an effective similarity measurement between samples in low-dimensional embedding
space. Motivated by the positive concentrated and negative separated properties observed from category-wise supervised learning, we propose to utilize the instance-wise
supervision to approximate these properties, which aims at
learning data augmentation invariant and instance spreadout features. To achieve this goal, we propose a novel instance based softmax embedding method, which directly optimizes the ‘real’ instance features on top of the softmax
function. It achieves significantly faster learning speed and
higher accuracy than all existing methods. The proposed
method performs well for both seen and unseen testing categories with cosine similarity. It also achieves competitive
performance even without pre-trained network over samples from fine-grained categories.

1. Introduction
Deep embedding learning is a fundamental task in computer vision [14], which aims at learning a feature embedding that has the following properties: 1) positive concentrated, the embedding features of samples belonging to the
same category are close to each other [32]; 2) negative separated, the embedding features of samples belonging to different categories are separated as much as possible [52].
Supervised embedding learning methods have been studied
to achieve such objectives and demonstrate impressive capabilities in various vision tasks [28, 30, 53]. However,
annotated data needed for supervised methods might be difficult to obtain. Collecting enough annotated data for different tasks requires costly human efforts and special domain
expertise. To address this issue, this paper tackles the unsupervised embedding learning problem (a.k.a. unsupervised
metric learning in [21]), which aims at learning discriminative embedding features without human annotated labels.

Input Images

Output Features

CNN

Figure 1: Illustration of our basic idea. The features of the same
instance under different data augmentations should be invariant,
while features of different image instances should be separated.

Unsupervised embedding learning usually requires that
the similarity between learned embedding features is consistent with the visual similarity or category relations of input images. In comparison, general unsupervised feature
learning usually aims at learning a good “intermediate” feature representation from unlabelled data [6, 26, 31, 34]. The
learned feature is then generalized to different tasks by using a small set of labelled training data from the target task
to fine-tune models (e.g., linear classifier, object detector,
etc.) for the target task [3]. However, the learned feature
representation may not preserve visual similarity and its
performance drops dramatically for similarity based tasks,
e.g. nearest neighbor search [46, 48, 50].
The main challenge of unsupervised embedding learning
is to discover visual similarity or weak category information
from unlabelled samples. Iscen et al. [21] proposed to mine
hard positive and negative samples on manifolds. However,
its performance heavily relies on the quality of the initialized feature representation for label mining, which limits
the applicability for general tasks. In this paper, we propose to utilize the instance-wise supervision to approximate
the positive concentrated and negative separated properties mentioned earlier. The learning process only relies on
instance-wise relationship and does not rely on relations between pre-defined categories, so it can be well generalized
to samples of arbitrary categories that have not been seen
before (unseen testing categories) [12].

6210

