Model-blind Video Denoising Via Frame-to-frame Training
Thibaud Ehret
Axel Davy
Jean-Michel Morel
Gabriele Facciolo
Pablo Arias
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay, 94235 Cachan, France
thibaud.ehret@ens-cachan.fr

Figure 1: From the same starting point and only using the video, our fine-tuned network is able to denoise different noises
without any artifact. The top images are the noisy and the bottom ones the denoised. From left to right: Gaussian noise,
Poisson type noise, salt and pepper type noise and JPEG compressed Gaussian noise.

Abstract
Modeling the processing chain that has produced a video
is a difficult reverse engineering task, even when the camera is available. This makes model based video processing a still more complex task. In this paper we propose a
fully blind video denoising method, with two versions offline and on-line. This is achieved by fine-tuning a pretrained AWGN denoising network to the video with a novel
frame-to-frame training strategy. Our denoiser can be used
without knowledge of the origin of the video or burst and
the post-processing steps applied from the camera sensor.
The on-line process only requires a couple of frames before achieving visually pleasing results for a wide range of
perturbations. It nonetheless reaches state-of-the-art performance for standard Gaussian noise, and can be used offline with still better performance.

1. Introduction
Denoising is a fundamental image and video processing
problem. While the performance of denoising methods and
imaging sensors has steadily improved over decades of research, new challenges have also appeared. High-end cameras still acquire noisy images in low lighting conditions.
High-speed video cameras use short exposure times, reducing the SNR of the captured frames. Cheaper, lower quality
sensors are used extensively, for example in mobile phones
or surveillance cameras, and require denoising even with a
good scene illumination.
A plethora of approaches have been proposed for image
and video denoising: PDE and variational methods [36, 7],
bilateral filters [41], domain transform methods [31, 33],
non-local patch-based methods [3]. In the last decade, most
research focused on modeling image patches [51, 45, 15] or
groups of similar patches [13, 27, 22, 17, 5]. Recently the
111369

