Improving the Performance of Unimodal Dynamic Hand-Gesture Recognition
with Multimodal Training
Mahdi Abavisani
Rutgers University

Hamid Reza Vaezi Joze
Microsoft

Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University

mahdi.abavisani@rutgers.edu

hava@microsoft.com

vpatel36@jhu.edu

Abstract
We present an efficient approach for leveraging the
knowledge from multiple modalities in training unimodal
3D convolutional neural networks (3D-CNNs) for the task
of dynamic hand gesture recognition. Instead of explicitly
combining multimodal information, which is commonplace
in many state-of-the-art methods, we propose a different
framework in which we embed the knowledge of multiple
modalities in individual networks so that each unimodal
network can achieve an improved performance. In particular, we dedicate separate networks per available modality and enforce them to collaborate and learn to develop
networks with common semantics and better representations. We introduce a “spatiotemporal semantic alignment”
loss (SSA) to align the content of the features from different networks. In addition, we regularize this loss with our
proposed “focal regularization parameter” to avoid negative knowledge transfer. Experimental results show that
our framework improves the test time recognition accuracy of unimodal networks, and provides the state-of-the-art
performance on various dynamic hand gesture recognition
datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision and pattern recognition have made hand gesture recognition an accessible
and important interaction tool for different types of applications including human-computer interaction [36], sign language recognition [7], and gaming and virtual reality control [22]. In particular, recent developments in deep 3-D
convolutional neural networks (3D-CNNs) with video sequences have significantly improved the performance of dynamic hand gesture recognition [27, 24, 26].
Most state-of-the-art hand gesture recognition methods
exploit multiple sensors such as visible RGB cameras, depth
camera or compute an extra modality like optical flow
to improve their performances [21, 50, 47, 23]. Multi-

Training

Testing

Multimodal
Learning

Multimodal
Testing

(a) Multimodal recognition
Unimodal
Learning

Unimodal
Testing

(b) Unimodal recognition
Multimodal
Learning

Unimodal
Testing

(c) Multimodal-training /unimodal-testing procedure (proposed).

Figure 1. Training and testing schemes of different types of recognition systems. (a) The system is trained and tested with multiple modalities. (b) The system is trained and tested with a single modality. (c) The system leverages the benefits of multimodal
training but can be ran as a unimodal system during testing.

modal recognition systems offer significant improvements
to the accuracy of hand gesture recognition [25]. A multimodal recognition system is trained with multiple streams
of data and classifies the multimodal observations during
testing [35, 4] (Figure 1 (a)). On the other hand, a unimodal recognition system is trained and tested using only a
single modality data (Figure 1 (b)). This paper introduces
a third type of framework which leverages the knowledge
from multimodal data during training and improves the performance of a unimodal system during testing. Figure 1 (c)
gives an overview of the proposed framework.
The proposed approach uses separate 3D-CNNs per each
stream of modality for primarily training them to recognize
the dynamic hand gestures based on their input modality
streams. The streams of modalities that are available in
dynamic hand gesture recognition systems are often spatially and temporally aligned. For instance, the RGB and
11165

