Local to Global Learning: Gradually Adding Classes for
Training Deep Neural Networks
Hao Cheng1∗ , Dongze Lian1∗ , Bowen Deng1 , Shenghua Gao1 , Tao Tan2 , Yanlin Geng3†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China
2
Dept of Mathematics and Computer Science, Centre of Analysis, Eindhoven University of Technology
3
State Key Lab. of ISN, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
1

{chenghao, liandz, dengbw, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, t.tan1@tue.nl, ylgeng@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a new learning paradigm, Local to Global
Learning (LGL), for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to improve the performance of classification problems. The core
of LGL is to learn a DNN model from fewer categories (local) to more categories (global) gradually within the entire
training set. LGL is most related to the Self-Paced Learning
(SPL) algorithm but its formulation is different from SPL.
SPL trains its data from simple to complex, while LGL from
local to global. In this paper, we incorporate the idea of
LGL into the learning objective of DNNs and explain why
LGL works better from an information-theoretic perspective. Experiments on the toy data, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and ImageNet dataset show that LGL outperforms the baseline and SPL-based algorithms.

1. Introduction
Researchers have spent decades to develop the theory
and techniques of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Now
DNNs are very popular in many areas including speech
recognition [9], computer vision [16, 20], natural language
processing [30] etc. Some techniques have been proved to
be effective, such as data augmentation [32, 29] and identity mapping between layers [10, 11]. Recently, some researchers have focused on how to improve the performance
of DNNs by selecting training data in a certain order, such
as curriculum learning [3] and self-paced learning [17].
Curriculum learning (CL) was first introduced in 2009
by Bengio et al [3]. CL is inspired by human and animal
learning which suggests that a model should learn samples
gradually from a simple level to a complex level. However,
the curriculum often involves prior man-made knowledge
that is independent of the subsequent learning process. To
alleviate the issues of CL, Self-Paced Learning (SPL) [17]
1∗ Equal contribution; 3† Corresponding author

Transfer learning

Local to Global learning

CBA

CBA
Weight transfer

Weight transfer

BA
Weight transfer

Other
datasets

A

Figure 1. An illustration of the difference between transfer learning and LGL. A, B and C denote three classes in the training set.

was proposed to automatically generate the curriculum during the training process. SPL assigns a binary weight to
each training sample. Whether or not to choose a sample
is decided based on the sample’s loss at each iteration of
training. Since [17], many modifications of the basic SPL
algorithm have emerged. Moreover, [13] introduces a new
regularization term incorporating both easiness and diversity in learning. [12] designs soft weighting (instead of binary weight) methods such as linear soft weighting and logarithmic soft weighting. [14] proposes a framework called
self-paced curriculum learning (SPCL) which can exploit
both prior knowledge before the training and information
extracted dynamically during the training.
However, some SPL-based challenges still remain: 1) It
is hard to define simple and complex levels. CL defines
these levels according to prior knowledge, which needs to
be annotated by human. This process is extremely complicated and time-consuming, especially when the number
of categories is large. Another solution is to choose simple samples according to the loss like SPL. However, the
samples’ losses are related to the choice of different models and hyper-parameters, since it is likely that the loss of a
sample is large for one model but small for another; 2) SPL-

4748

