Co-occurrent Features in Semantic Segmentation
Hang Zhang 1

Han Zhang 2
1

Chenguang Wang 1

Junyuan Xie 1

Amazon Web Services 2 Google Brain

{hzaws,chgwang,junyuanx}@amazon.com, zhanghan@google.com

Abstract
Recent work has achieved great success in utilizing
global contextual information for semantic segmentation,
including increasing the receptive field and aggregating
pyramid feature representations. In this paper, we go beyond global context and explore the fine-grained representation using co-occurrent features by introducing Cooccurrent Feature Model, which predicts the distribution
of co-occurrent features for a given target. To leverage the semantic context in the co-occurrent features, we
build an Aggregated Co-occurrent Feature (ACF) Module
by aggregating the probability of the co-occurrent feature
within the co-occurrent context. ACF Module learns a
fine-grained spatial invariant representation to capture cooccurrent context information across the scene. Our approach significantly improves the segmentation results using FCN and achieves superior performance 54.0% mIoU
on Pascal Context, 87.2% mIoU on Pascal VOC 2012 and
44.89% mIoU on ADE20K datasets. The source code and
complete system will be publicly available upon publication1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation provides per-pixel label of object
categories for the given image, which is a challenging task
requiring accurate prediction of the object category, location and shape. Successful approaches are usually based
on Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [31], with a Deep
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [22, 23] as the base
network. Recent work achieves great success in leveraging contextual information, including enlarging receptive
field size with pyramid-based representations [6,29,53] and
learning category specific scaling factors using context embedding [51].
Despite the success in incorporating global contextual
1 Links can be found at http://hangzh.com/

(a) Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) FCN (baseline)

(d) CFNet (ours)

(e) legend

Figure 1: Some object categories are difficult to distinguish
based on local appearance and scene context. In this example, water, river and sea are visually similar and all fit this
scene context. Human can utilize the presence of the boat to
make the prediction, as it typically co-occurs with the sea.
Motivated by this, we introduce Aggregated Co-occurrent
Feature Module to relook at the relations with all the cooccurrent features before making the predictions. (More visual examples in Figure 2)
information, in some challenging scenarios, a rough holistic global context might not be enough for the classification
of ambiguous objects in the scene. In addition, we observe
natural scenes usually have reasonable and coherent composition of objects. The presence of one object, even in a
spatially disjoint region, can be compelling evidence of the
existence of the other. The co-occurrence property among
objects can improve the robustness of the recognition system and help resolve the ambiguity of object labels against
noises such as occlusion and variations in pose and illumination. For example, as shown in Figure 1, sea, river and
water are very similar in appearance and the global context
as a city scene is not able to disambiguate these three as
they can all exist near a city. But object co-occurrence asserts that sea is more likely to appear when boat is around.

548

