Exploring Object Relation in Mean Teacher for Cross-Domain Detection∗
Qi Cai † , Yingwei Pan ‡ , Chong-Wah Ngo § , Xinmei Tian † , Lingyu Duan ¶ , and Ting Yao ‡
†

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
§

City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong

¶

‡

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

Peking University, Beijing, China

{cqcaiqi, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, lingyu@pku.edu.cn

Synthetic Images from 3D
CAD Models with Labels

Abstract

(a) Faster R-CNN results

Faster R-CNN

Rendering synthetic data (e.g., 3D CAD-rendered images) to generate annotations for learning deep models
in vision tasks has attracted increasing attention in recent
years. However, simply applying the models learnt on synthetic images may lead to high generalization error on real images due to domain shift. To address this issue, recent progress in cross-domain recognition has featured the
Mean Teacher, which directly simulates unsupervised domain adaptation as semi-supervised learning. The domain
gap is thus naturally bridged with consistency regularization in a teacher-student scheme. In this work, we advance
this Mean Teacher paradigm to be applicable for crossdomain detection. Specifically, we present Mean Teacher
with Object Relations (MTOR) that novelly remolds Mean
Teacher under the backbone of Faster R-CNN by integrating the object relations into the measure of consistency cost
between teacher and student modules. Technically, MTOR
firstly learns relational graphs that capture similarities between pairs of regions for teacher and student respectively.
The whole architecture is then optimized with three consistency regularizations: 1) region-level consistency to align
the region-level predictions between teacher and student,
2) inter-graph consistency for matching the graph structures between teacher and student, and 3) intra-graph consistency to enhance the similarity between regions of same
class within the graph of student. Extensive experiments
are conducted on the transfers across Cityscapes, Foggy Cityscapes, and SIM10k, and superior results are reported
when comparing to state-of-the-art approaches. More remarkably, we obtain a new record of single model: 22.8%
of mAP on Syn2Real detection dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have been proven to be highly
effective for learning vision models on large-scale dataset∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

Real Images

car

(b) Adaptation Results

Adaptation with
Mean Teacher

car

car

person

Figure 1. Object detection on one real image by (a) directly applying Faster R-CNN trained on images from 3D CAD models and
(b) domain adaptation of Mean Teacher in this work.

s. To date in the literature, there are various datasets (e.g.,
ImageNet [41] and COCO [25]) that include well-annotated
images useful for developing deep models across a variety
of vision tasks, e.g., recognition [15, 47], detection [13, 40],
and semantic segmentation [2, 27]. Nevertheless, given a
new dataset, the typical first step is still to perform intensive manual labeling, which is cost expensive and time consuming. An alternative is to utilize synthetic data which is
largely available from 3D CAD models [34], and the ground
truth could be freely and automatically generated. However,
many previous experiences have also shown that reapplying
a model learnt on synthetic data may hurt the performance
on real data due to a phenomenon known as “domain shift”
[50]. Take the object detection results shown in Figure 1
(a) as an example, the model trained on synthetic data from
3D CAD fails to accurately localize the objects such as person and car. As a result, unsupervised domain adaptation,
which aims to utilize labeled examples from the source domain and numerous unlabeled examples in the target domain to reduce the prediction error on the target data, can
be a feasible solution for this challenge.
A recent pioneering practice [9] in unsupervised domain adaptation is to directly simulate this task as
semi-supervised learning. The basic idea is to develop
Mean Teacher [48], the state-of-the-art technique in semisupervised learning, to work in cross-domain recognition
task by pursuing the consistency of two predictions under
perturbations of inputs (e.g., different augmentations of image). As such, the domain gap is naturally bridged via the
consistency regularization in Mean Teacher, which enforces
the predictions of two models (i.e., teacher and student) to

11457

