Low-Rank Laplacian-Uniform Mixed Model for Robust Face Recognition
Jiayu Dong, Huicheng Zheng, Lina Lian
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
Email:

zhenghch@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Sparse representation based methods have successfully
put forward a general framework for robust face recognition through linear reconstruction and sparsity constraints.
However, residual modeling in existing works is not yet robust enough when dealing with dense noise. In this paper,
we aim at recognizing identities from faces with varying
levels of noises of various forms such as occlusion, pixel
corruption, or disguise, and take improving the fitting ability of the error model as the key to addressing this problem. To fully capture the characteristics of different noises,
we propose a mixed model combining robust sparsity constraint and low-rank constraint, which can deal with random errors and structured errors simultaneously. For random noises such as pixel corruption, we adopt a Laplacianuniform mixed function for fitting the error distribution. For
structured errors like continuous occlusion or disguise, we
utilize robust nuclear norm to constrain the rank of the error
matrix. An effective iterative reweighted algorithm is then
developed to solve the proposed model. Comprehensive experiments were conducted on several benchmark databases
for robust face recognition, and the overall results demonstrate that our model is most robust against various kinds of
noises, when compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
As one of the most important problems in computer vision, face recognition has claimed its importance in identity verification and security surveillance. Numerous face
recognition methods have been proposed during the years.
At the early beginning, geometric information has been
used for face classification [3]. Then robust appearance
features such as LBP [41, 1], SIFT [4], and Gabor features [29, 39] have been put forward successively. The geometric features or appearance features of facial images are
concerned with the contents of the outer appearance, while
ignoring the intrinsic attributes of the face. Subspace analy-

sis [9, 18, 3] can effectively excavate the intrinsic characteristics of an image by mapping the original image to a lower
dimension space. However, when the face image contains
occlusion or illumination changes, the subspace projection
methods can easily learn non-face feature components, especially when facing a small sample problem.
Deep learning has been applied widely in recent years
due to its convenience and learning ability [14, 21]. Compared to early shallow back-propagation models, deeper
models, such as DeepID2+ [30], DeepFace [31], VGGFace [27], and FaceNet [28], demonstrate largely improved
performance on face recognition. Although these methods
have achieved great success in practical applications, existing deep neural networks often rely on a large number of
training samples, and are not robust to inputs with anomalous distributions.
Sparse coding has achieved great performance in many
fields, such as feature extraction, signal processing, image
denoising and pattern recognition. Its core idea is to represent a test sample as a sparse linear combination of training samples, so that the smallest reconstruction error can
be achieved using only those training samples of the same
class as the test sample [35]. Usually, a test face image is
denoted by a column vector y in sparse representation. Let
D ∈ Rm×n be a dictionary composed of n samples, each
column of which is a training face sample. The general objective of sparse coding can be formulated as
X
ρ(ej ) + λkxk1 s.t. y − Dx = e
(1)
min
x

j

where ej denotes the j-th component in the residual e. The
objective is composed of two parts, i.e., the penalty for the
reconstruction errors and the sparsity constraint for the representation.
Among numerous face recognition methods, sparse representation based methods have achieved great robustness
against various types of noises. Most of these methods
focus on finding reasonable penalty for the reconstruction
residual. Many experimental results show that sparse repre-

11897

