TextureNet: Consistent Local Parametrizations for Learning from
High-Resolution Signals on Meshes
Jingwei Huang1

Haotian Zhang1
Matthias Nießner4

Li Yi1
Thomas Funkhouser2,3
Leonidas Guibas1,5

1
4

2
3
Stanford University
Princeton University
Google
5
Technical University of Munich
Facebook AI Research

Geodesic Patch

3D Textured Model

Orientation Field

High-res Patch High-res Network

Feature

Sampled Points

TextureNet

Label

Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1: TextureNet takes as input a 3D textured mesh. The mesh is parameterized with a consistent 4-way rotationally
symmetric (4-RoSy) field, which is used to extract oriented patches from the texture at a set of sample points. Networks of
4-RoSy convolutional operators extract features from the patches and used for 3D semantic segmentation.

Abstract
We introduce, TextureNet, a neural network architecture designed to extract features from high-resolution signals associated with 3D surface meshes (e.g., color texture
maps). The key idea is to utilize a 4-rotational symmetric (4RoSy) field to define a domain for convolution on a surface.
Though 4-RoSy fields have several properties favorable for
convolution on surfaces (low distortion, few singularities,
consistent parameterization, etc.), orientations are ambiguous up to 4-fold rotation at any sample point. So, we introduce a new convolutional operator invariant to the 4-RoSy
ambiguity and use it in a deep network to extract features
from high-resolution signals on geodesic neighborhoods of
a surface. In comparison to alternatives, such as PointNetbased methods which lack a notion of orientation, the coherent structure given by these neighborhoods results in significantly stronger features. As an example application, we
demonstrate the benefits of our architecture for 3D semantic
segmentation of textured 3D meshes. The results show that
our method outperforms all existing methods on the basis
of mean IoU by a significant margin in both geometry-only
(6.4%) and RGB+Geometry (6.9-8.2%) settings.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been tremendous progress in
RGB-D scanning methods that allow reliable tracking and

reconstruction of 3D surfaces using hand-held, consumergrade devices [8, 18, 27, 28, 41, 21, 11]. Though these
methods are now able to reconstruct high-resolution textured 3D meshes suitable for visualization, understanding
the 3D semantics of the scanned scenes is still a relatively
open research problem.
There has been a lot of recent work on semantic segmentation of 3D data using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Typically, features extracted from the scanned inputs (e.g., positions, normals, height above ground, colors,
etc.) are projected onto a coarse sampling of 3D locations,
and then a network of 3D convolutional filters is trained to
extract features for semantic classification – e.g., using convolutions over voxels [42, 25, 30, 36, 9, 13], octrees [33],
point clouds [29, 31], or mesh vertices [24]. The advantage
of these approaches over 2D image-based methods is that
convolutions operate directly on 3D data, and thus are relatively unaffected by view-dependent image effects, such
as perspective, occlusion, lighting, and background clutter. However, the resolution of current 3D representations
is generally quite low (2cm is typical), and so the ability
of 3D CNNs to discriminate fine-scale semantic patterns is
usually far below their color image counterparts [23, 16].
To address this issue, we propose a new convolutional
neural network, TextureNet, that extracts features directly
from high-resolution signals associated with 3D surface
meshes. Given a map that associates high-resolution signals with a 3D mesh surface (e.g., RGB photographic tex-

4440

