Learning Spatio-Temporal Representation with Local and Global Diffusion∗
Zhaofan Qiu† , Ting Yao‡ , Chong-Wah Ngo§ , Xinmei Tian† , and Tao Mei‡
†
‡

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

§

City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong

{zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@live.com

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been regarded as a powerful class of models for visual recognition problems. Nevertheless, the convolutional filters
in these networks are local operations while ignoring the
large-range dependency. Such drawback becomes even
worse particularly for video recognition, since video is an
information-intensive media with complex temporal variations. In this paper, we present a novel framework to boost
the spatio-temporal representation learning by Local and
Global Diffusion (LGD). Specifically, we construct a novel
neural network architecture that learns the local and global
representations in parallel. The architecture is composed
of LGD blocks, where each block updates local and global
features by modeling the diffusions between these two representations. Diffusions effectively interact two aspects of
information, i.e., localized and holistic, for more powerful way of representation learning. Furthermore, a kernelized classifier is introduced to combine the representations from two aspects for video recognition. Our LGD
networks achieve clear improvements on the large-scale
Kinetics-400 and Kinetics-600 video classification datasets
against the best competitors by 3.5% and 0.7%. We further examine the generalization of both the global and local
representations produced by our pre-trained LGD networks
on four different benchmarks for video action recognition
and spatio-temporal action detection tasks. Superior performances over several state-of-the-art techniques on these
benchmarks are reported.

1. Introduction
Today’s digital contents are inherently multimedia. Particularly, with the proliferation of sensor-rich mobile devices, images and videos become media of everyday communication. Therefore, understanding of multimedia content becomes highly demanded, which accelerates the
∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

Global Path C x 1 x 1 x 1

Cx1x1x1

Local Path

Cx Tx Hx W

Cx Tx Hx W

Figure 1. The schematic illustration of the Local and Global Diffusion block. The diffusion between local and global paths enrich
the representation learnt on each path.

development of various techniques in visual annotation.
Among them, a fundamental breakthrough underlining the
success of these techniques is representation learning. This
can be evidenced by the success of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN), which demonstrates high capability of
learning and generalization in visual representation. For example, an ensemble of residual nets [11] achieves 3.57%
top-5 error on ImageNet test set, which is even lower than
5.1% of the reported human-level performance. Despite
these impressive progresses, learning powerful and generic
spatio-temporal representation remains challenging, due to
larger variations and complexities of video content.
A natural extension of CNN from image to video domain is by direct exploitation of 2D CNN on video frames
[18, 34, 41] or 3D CNN on video clips [15, 28, 29, 38]. An
inherent limitation of this extension, however, is that each
convolution operation, either 2D or 3D, processes only a
local window of neighboring pixels. As window size is normally set to a small value, the holistic view of field cannot be adequately captured. This problem is engineered by
performing repeated convolution and pooling operations to
capture long-range visual dependencies. In this way, receptive fields can be increased through progressive propagation
of signal responses over local operations. When a network
is deep, the repeated operations, however, post difficulty
to parameter optimization. Concretely, the connection be-

12056

