Dynamics are Important for the Recognition of Equine Pain in Video
Sofia Broomé1
1

Karina Bech Gleerup2

Pia Haubro Andersen3

Hedvig Kjellström1

Division of Robotics, Perception, and Learning, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
2
Section for Medicine and Surgery, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
3
Deptartment of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden

sbroome@kth.se

kbg@sund.ku.dk

pia.haubro.andersen@slu.se

Abstract
A prerequisite to successfully alleviate pain in animals
is to recognize it, which is a great challenge in non-verbal
species. Furthermore, prey animals such as horses tend to
hide their pain. In this study, we propose a deep recurrent two-stream architecture for the task of distinguishing
pain from non-pain in videos of horses. Different models
are evaluated on a unique dataset showing horses under
controlled trials with moderate pain induction, which has
been presented in earlier work. Sequential models are experimentally compared to single-frame models, showing the
importance of the temporal dimension of the data, and are
benchmarked against a veterinary expert classification of
the data. We additionally perform baseline comparisons
with generalized versions of state-of-the-art human pain
recognition methods. While equine pain detection in machine learning is a novel field, our results surpass veterinary expert performance and outperform pain detection results reported for other larger non-human species.

1. Introduction
This paper presents a method for automatic detection of
equine pain behavior in video – a highly challenging problem since horses display pain through subtle signals.
Recognition of pain in animals is important because pain
compromises animal welfare and can be a manifestation of
disease. Pain diagnostics for humans typically include selfevaluation with the help of standardized forms and labeling
of the pain by a clinical expert using pain scales. However,
animals cannot verbalize their pain. The use of standardized
pain scales is moreover challenged by the fact that prey animals such as horses and cattle display subtle and less obvious pain behavior. It is simply beneficial for a prey animal
to appear healthy, to lower the interest from predators.
Pain in horses is instead typically assessed by (manually) observing a combination of behavioral traits such as
exploratory behavior, restlessness, positioning in the box

hedvig@kth.se

and changes in facial expressions [37]. Video filming may
be used to prolong the observation periods and increase
the likelihood of capturing pain behavior. However, proper
manual annotation such as EquiFACS [37] of the facial expressions and other behavioral signs of pain is time consuming [19] – it can take two hours to evaluate a two minute
video clip. This severely limits the possibilities for routine pain diagnostics on horses, for instance before or after
surgery. An automatic pain detection system would allow
veterinarians and horse owners to reliably and frequently
screen the pain level of the horse. Section 2.1 provides more
background on equine pain from a veterinary point of view.
We introduce a new research direction and application
field in computer vision: detection of equine pain in video.
While human pain detection has been performed with single images, owing to our expressive faces, the research hypothesis in this paper is that the pose and movement patterns matter more for horses. The equine pain detection
task is explored using recurrent neural network architectures. These memory-preserving networks are chosen in order to model temporality, which is considered crucial when
assessing pain in horses [37]. We have not seen previous
work in pain detection for non-human species where temporal information is taken into account.
Specifically, we propose a deep neural network approach
to automatic detection of horse pain in video, taking both
spatial and temporal context into account (Section 4). Our
architecture is a new combination of existing network types,
using optical flow as an attention mask in a Convolutional
LSTM [29] two-stream setting. We have reinterpreted the
two-stream network first presented by [30] into a fully recurrent two-stream Convolutional LSTM network. The
fusion of the two streams is done on the feature-level,
adding the optical flow feature map to the RGB feature map
element-wise, which highlights the regions of interest in the
video. The method learns patterns end-to-end without the
help of intermediate representations such as the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [5]. To the best of our knowledge, this has not been done previously for animals.

12667

