ODE-inspired Network Design for Single Image Super-Resolution
Xiangyu He1,2∗ , Zitao Mo1,2∗, Peisong Wang1 , Yang Liu4 , Mingyuan Yang4 , Jian Cheng1,2,3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
4
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{xiangyu.he, zitao.mo, peisong.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

the resulting images natural and detailed. In this paper, we
focus on single image super-resolution (SISR).

Single image super-resolution, as a high dimensional
structured prediction problem, aims to characterize finegrain information given a low-resolution sample. Recent
advances in convolutional neural networks are introduced
into super-resolution and push forward progress in this
field. Current studies have achieved impressive performance by manually designing deep residual neural networks but overly relies on practical experience. In this
paper, we propose to adopt an ordinary differential equation (ODE)-inspired design scheme for single image superresolution, which have brought us a new understanding
of ResNet in classification problems. Not only is it interpretable for super-resolution but it provides a reliable
guideline on network designs. By casting the numerical
schemes in ODE as blueprints, we derive two types of network structures: LF-block and RK-block, which correspond
to the Leapfrog method and Runge-Kutta method in numerical ordinary differential equations. We evaluate our models
on benchmark datasets, and the results show that our methods surpass the state-of-the-arts while keeping comparable
parameters and operations.

In light of the empirical success of convolutional neural
networks (CNN) in high-level computer vision tasks such
as image classification, Dong et al. [11] proposed a CNNbased SR algorithm. Since then, convolutional neural networks have became the mainstream in the field of superresolution [29, 20, 22, 12, 31]. Though the performance is
improving with tremendous effort, there remain some limitations: 1) Previous researches tend to care less about the
computation overhead and introduce deeper convolutional
neural networks to enhance performance. The huge amount
of calculations makes it intractable to apply the algorithm to
real-world applications. 2) Another side effect is that with
the depth increases, more training tricks are required. Otherwise, the training procedure becomes numerically unstable [35, 31]. 3) Super-resolution is different from high-level
visual tasks such as image classification, which extracts semantic features via a convolutional neural network. In contrast, super-resolution predicts pixel-level fine-grained information. Directly employing state-of-the-art CNNs does
not necessarily lead to an optimal solution.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) enjoys the recent advances in deep
learning and has attracted much attention in recent years
due to the rapid growth of image and video data. Generally
speaking, super-resolution can be applied to many applications including medical image processing [19], satellite and
aerial imaging [46], facial image improvement [28], etc. Although obtaining high-resolution images from one or several low-resolution samples can be an ill-posed problem, convolutional neural networks have powered this field, making
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

To alleviate these problems, we propose to apply ODEinspired schemes to Super-Resolution network designs
(OISR). First, we revisit the similarity between forward
Euler method and residual structure by adopting the view
of dynamical system, identifying that we can take advantage of ODEs for SISR network designs. Second, we develop two kinds of building blocks, corresponding to the
Leapfrog method and Runge-Kutta method in numerical
ODEs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to introduce ODE-inspired schemes into single image
super-resolution network design directly, providing a helpful viewpoint of single image super-resolution and a relatively reliable guidance on network designs. In this work,
both lightweight and deep networks are generated using
proposed building blocks. Experimental results on bench-

1732

