Activity Driven Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Zhenheng Yang1 Dhruv Mahajan2 Deepti Ghadiyaram2 Ram Nevatia1
Vignesh Ramanathan2
1

University of Southern California 2 Facebook AI
Spatial correlation between subject and object

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection aims at reducing the
amount of supervision required to train detection models.
Such models are traditionally learned from images/videos
labelled only with the object class and not the object bounding box. In our work, we try to leverage not only the object
class labels but also the action labels associated with the
data. We show that the action depicted in the image/video
can provide strong cues about the location of the associated
object. We learn a spatial prior for the object dependent
on the action (e.g. “ball” is closer to “leg of the person”
in “kicking ball”), and incorporate this prior to simultaneously train a joint object detection and action classification
model. We conducted experiments on both video datasets
and image datasets to evaluate the performance of our
weakly supervised object detection model. Our approach
outperformed the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) method by
more than 6% in mAP on the Charades video dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques and development of large
datasets have been vital to the success of image and video
classification models. One of the main challenges in extending this success to object detection is the difficulty in collecting fully labelled object detection datasets. Unlike classification labels, detection labels (object bounding boxes)
are more tedious to annotate. This is even more challenging
in the video domain due to the added complexity of annotating along the temporal dimension.
On the other hand, there are a large number of video and
image datasets [36, 18, 3, 4, 6] labelled with human actions
which are centered around objects. Action labels provide
strong cues about the location of the corresponding objects
in a scene (Fig. 1) and could act as weak supervision for
object detection. In light of this, we investigate the idea of
learning object detectors from data labelled only with action
classes as shown in Fig. 2.
All images/videos associated with an action contain the
object mentioned in the action (e.g.“cup” in the action
“drink from cup”). Yuan et al. [50] leveraged this prop-

hold vacuum

Object appearance consistency

fix vacuum

Object is strong cue for action

Figure 1: Our framework is built upon three observations we draw:
(1) there is spatial dependence between the subject and the interacted object; (2) the object appearance is consistent across different training samples and across different actions involving the
same object; (3) the most informative object about the action is the
one mentioned in the action.

erty to learn object detection from videos of corresponding
actions. However, the actions (“drink from” in above example) themselves are not utilized in this work. On the other
hand, the spatial location, appearance and movement of objects in a scene are dependent on the action performed with
the object. The key contribution of our work is to leverage
this intuition to build better object detection models.
Specifically, we have three observations (see Fig. 1):
(1) There is spatial dependence between the position of a
person and the object mentioned in the action, e.g.in action
“hold cup”, the location of cup is tightly correlated with the
location of the hand. This could provide a strong prior for
the object; (2) The object appearance is consistent across
images and videos of action classes which involve the object; (3) Detecting the object should help in predicting the
action and vice-versa.
The above observations can be used to address one of the
main challenges of weakly supervised detection: the presence of a large search space for object bounding boxes during training. Each training image/video has many candidate
object bounding boxes (object proposals). In our weakly su-

2917

