What’s to know?
Uncertainty as a Guide to Asking Goal-oriented Questions
Ehsan Abbasnejad, Qi Wu, Javen Shi, Anton van den Hengel
{ehsan.abbasnejad,qi.wu01,javen.shi,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Australian Institute of Machine Learning & The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract

Distribution of Predicted Tokens

Context

Baseline Model

One of the core challenges in Visual Dialogue problems
is asking the question that will provide the most useful information towards achieving the required objective. Encouraging an agent to ask the right questions is difficult because
we don’t know a-priori what information the agent will need
to achieve its task, and we don’t have an explicit model of
what it knows already. We propose a solution to this problem based on a Bayesian model of the uncertainty in the implicit model maintained by the visual dialogue agent, and
in the function used to select an appropriate output. By selecting the question that minimises the predicted regret with
respect to this implicit model the agent actively reduces ambiguity. The Bayesian model of uncertainty also enables
a principled method for identifying when enough information has been acquired, and an action should be selected.
We evaluate our approach on two goal-oriented dialogue
datasets, one for visual-based collaboration task and the
other for a negotiation-based task. Our uncertainty-aware
information-seeking model outperforms its counterparts in
these two challenging problems.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental problems in any challenge that
requires actively seeking the information required to carry
out a task is that of identifying the information that will best
enable the agent to achieve its objective. Identifying the information needed, and how to get it, is inherently complex,
not least because the space of all possibly useful information is so large. We propose a solution to this problem here
that is applicable to reinforcement learning in general, and
that we demonstrate on the challenging problem of goaloriented visual dialogue.
Goal-oriented visual dialogue requires the participants to
engage in a natural language conversation towards a specified objective. The objectives of the two participants might
be collaborative, such as communicating the identity of a
specific object in an image [14], or they may be adversar-

blue

red

hat

Selected
Token

shirt

…

blue

…

black shirt

Our Model

Q: Is it a person?

A: Yes

Token History

Is he wearing a …

blue

red

hat

black shirt

Figure 1. In GuessWhat [14] one player knows the correct object (here shown in a red box), and the other must ask questions
to identify it. Traditionally an agent would generate questions by
sequentially selecting words with the highest conditional probability, even though knowing the answer might be uninformative (in
this case ‘shirt’ in the Baseline histogram). Our solution, however,
selects ‘blue’, which corresponds to the highest sum of the probability and standard deviation (likely to be the most ‘informative’).

ial (see Sec. 4.2).
The primary technological challenge in goal-oriented visual dialogue is to devise natural language interactions that
are directed towards achieving the required objective. This
is in contrast to the more traditional approach that aims only
to keep the other participant talking for as long as possible [22, 27, 37]. Note that the performance criteria in these
two approaches are opposite, as in goal-directed visual dialogue success is indicated by achieving the shortest possible
conversation.
Inspired by the success of deep learning in both computer vision and natural language processing (NLP), most
recent goal-oriented dialogue studies rely on sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) deep learning models [34, 37]. Obtaining the large datasets this approach requires is challenging, however. As a partial solution, a combination of
seq2seq and deep reinforcement learning [35] are are commonly used to train a model (i.e. agent) with unlimited selfgenerated data in a self-play environment. Even if this was
achieved ideally, however, it is unlikely that it would lead
14155

