LAEO-Net: revisiting people Looking At Each Other in videos
Manuel J. Marı́n-Jiménez
University of Cordoba

Vicky Kalogeiton
University of Oxford

Pablo Medina-Suárez
University of Cordoba

Andrew Zisserman
University of Oxford

mjmarin@uco.es

vicky@robots.ox.ac.uk

i42mesup@uco.es

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1: Intimacy or hostility? Head pose, along with body pose and facial expressions, is a rich source of information for
interpreting human interactions. Being able to automatically understand the non-verbal cues provided by the relative head
orientations of people in a scene enables a new level of human-centric video understanding. Green and red/orange heads
represent LAEO and non-LAEO cases, respectively. Video source of second row: https://youtu.be/B3eFZMvNS1U

Abstract
Capturing the ‘mutual gaze’ of people is essential for
understanding and interpreting the social interactions between them. To this end, this paper addresses the problem
of detecting people Looking At Each Other (LAEO) in video
sequences. For this purpose, we propose LAEO-Net, a new
deep CNN for determining LAEO in videos. In contrast to
previous works, LAEO-Net takes spatio-temporal tracks as
input and reasons about the whole track. It consists of three
branches, one for each character’s tracked head and one
for their relative position. Moreover, we introduce two new
LAEO datasets: UCO-LAEO and AVA-LAEO. A thorough
experimental evaluation demonstrates the ability of LAEONet to successfully determine if two people are LAEO and
the temporal window where it happens. Our model achieves
state-of-the-art results on the existing TVHID-LAEO video
dataset, significantly outperforming previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Eye contact or ‘mutual gaze’ is an important part of the
non-verbal communication between two people [14]. The
duration and frequency of eye contact depends on the nature
of the relationship and reflects the power relationships, the
attraction or the antagonism between the participants [1].
Therefore, in order to understand and interpret the social
interactions that are occurring, it is important to capture
this signal accurately. The importance of detecting people Looking at Each Other (LAEO) has already been recognized in a series of computer vision papers [17, 18, 21] as

well as in other papers that study human gaze [3, 5, 23, 24].
LAEO is complementary to other forms of human nonverbal communication such as facial expressions, gestures,
proxemics (distance), body language and pose, paralanguage (the tone of the voice, prosody), and interactions (e.g.
hugging, handshake). Many of these have been the subject
of recent papers [9, 16, 32].
In this paper, we introduce a new deep convolutional
neural network (CNN) for determining LAEO in video material, coined LAEO-Net. Unlike previous works, our approach answers the question of whether two characters are
LAEO over a temporal period by using a spatio-temporal
model, whereas previous models have only considered individual frames. The problem with frame-wise LAEO is
that when characters blink or momentarily move their head,
then they are considered non-LAEO, and this can severely
affect the accuracy of the LAEO measurement over a time
period. The model we introduce considers head tracks over
multiple frames, and determines whether two characters are
LAEO for a time period based on the pose of their heads
and their relative position. Such an example is in Figure 1.
We make the following contributions: first, we introduce a spatio-temporal LAEO model that consists of three
branches, one for each character’s tracked head and one for
their relative position, together with a fusion block. This is
described in Section 3. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work that uses tracks as input and reasons about
people LAEO in the whole track, instead of using only individual frames. Second, we introduce two new datasets (Section 4): (i) UCO-LAEO, a new dataset for training and test13477

