Blind Super-Resolution With Iterative Kernel Correction
Jinjin Gu1∗, Hannan Lu2∗ , Wangmeng Zuo2 , Chao Dong3
1
The School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
jinjingu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {hannanlu, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep learning based methods have dominated superresolution (SR) field due to their remarkable performance in
terms of effectiveness and efficiency. Most of these methods
assume that the blur kernel during downsampling is predefined/known (e.g., bicubic). However, the blur kernels involved in real applications are complicated and unknown,
resulting in severe performance drop for the advanced SR
methods. In this paper, we propose an Iterative Kernel Correction (IKC) method for blur kernel estimation in blind SR
problem, where the blur kernels are unknown. We draw the
observation that kernel mismatch could bring regular artifacts (either over-sharpening or over-smoothing), which
can be applied to correct inaccurate blur kernels. Thus
we introduce an iterative correction scheme – IKC that
achieves better results than direct kernel estimation. We further propose an effective SR network architecture using spatial feature transform (SFT) layers to handle multiple blur
kernels, named SFTMD. Extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world images show that the proposed IKC method
with SFTMD can provide visually favorable SR results and
the state-of-the-art performance in blind SR problem.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental low-level vision problem, single image
super-resolution (SISR) is an active research topic and has
attracted increasingly attention. SISR aims to reconstruct
the high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution
(LR) observation. Since the seminal work of employing
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for SR [6], various
deep learning based methods with different network architectures [15, 16, 18, 29, 41, 10, 40] and training strategies
[19, 34, 27, 5] have been proposed to continuously improve the SR performance. Most of the existing advanced
∗ This work was done when they were interns at SenseTime.

LR image

ZSSR [27]

SR without kernel correction

Iterative Kernel Correction (ours)

Figure 1. SISR results on image “img 017” with SR factor 4. Before bicubic downsamping, the HR image is blurred by a Gaussian
kernel with σ = 1.8

SR methods assume that the downsampling blur kernel is
known and pre-defined, but the blur kernels involved in real
applications are typically complicated and unavailable. As
has been revealed in [9, 36], learning-based methods will
suffer severe performance drop when the pre-defined blur
kernel is different from the real one. This phenomenon of
kernel mismatch will introduce undesired artifacts to output
images, as shown in Figure 2. Thus the problem with unknown blur kernels, also known as blind SR, has failed most
of deep learning based SR methods and largely limited their
usage in real-world applications.
Most existing blind SR methods are model-based [3, 32,
11, 12, 14], which usually involve complicated optimization
procedures. They predict the underlying blur kernel using
self-similarity properties of natural images [23]. However,
their predictions are easily affected by input noises, leading to inaccurate kernel estimation. A few deep learning
based methods have also tried to make progress for blind
SR. For example, in CAB [25] and SRMD [39], the net11604

