FineGAN: Unsupervised Hierarchical Disentanglement for
Fine-Grained Object Generation and Discovery
Krishna Kumar Singh∗
Utkarsh Ojha∗
Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis

Abstract

Background code

We propose FineGAN, a novel unsupervised GAN framework, which disentangles the background, object shape,
and object appearance to hierarchically generate images
of fine-grained object categories. To disentangle the factors without supervision, our key idea is to use information theory to associate each factor to a latent code, and
to condition the relationships between the codes in a specific way to induce the desired hierarchy. Through extensive experiments, we show that FineGAN achieves the desired disentanglement to generate realistic and diverse images belonging to fine-grained classes of birds, dogs, and
cars. Using FineGAN’s automatically learned features,
we also cluster real images as a first attempt at solving
the novel problem of unsupervised fine-grained object category discovery. Our code/models/demo can be found at
https://github.com/kkanshul/finegan

1. Introduction
A

B

C

D

Consider the figure above: if tasked to group any of the
images together, as humans we can easily tell that birds A
and B should not be grouped with C and D as they have
completely different backgrounds and shapes. But how
about C and D? They share the same background, shape,
and rough color. However, upon close inspection, we see
that even C and D should not be grouped together as C’s
beak is yellow and its tails have large white spots while D’s
beak is black and its tails have thin white strips.1 This example demonstrates that clustering fine-grained object categories requires not only disentanglement of the background,
∗ Equal contribution.
1 The ground-truth fine-grained categories are A: Barrow’s Goldeneye,
B: California Gull, C: Yellow-billed Cuckoo, D: Black-billed Cuckoo.

Parent code

Child code

Figure 1. FineGAN disentangles the background, object shape
(parent), and object appearance (child) to hierarchically generate
fine-grained objects, without mask or fine-grained annotations.

shape, and appearance (color/texture), but that it is naturally
facilitated in a hierarchical fashion.
In this work, we aim to develop a model that can do
just that: model fine-grained object categories by hierarchically disentangling the background, object’s shape, and
its appearance, without any manual fine-grained annotations. Specifically, we make the first attempt at solving the
novel problem of unsupervised fine-grained object clustering (or “discovery”). Although both unsupervised object
discovery and fine-grained recognition have a long history,
prior work on unsupervised object category discovery focus
only on clustering entry-level categories (e.g., birds vs. cars
vs. dogs) [17, 42, 31, 51, 47, 15], while existing work on
fine-grained recognition focus exclusively on the supervised
setting in which ground-truth fine-grained category annotations are provided [35, 52, 34, 4, 13, 33, 12, 7, 46].
Why unsupervised discovery for such a difficult problem? We have two key motivations. First, fine-grained annotations require domain experts. As a result, the overall
annotation process is very expensive and standard crowdsourcing techniques cannot be used, which restrict the
amount of training data that can be collected. Second, unsupervised learning enables the discovery of latent structure
in the data, which may not have been labeled by annotators.
For example, fine-grained image datasets often have an in-

6490

