PCAN: 3D Attention Map Learning Using Contextual Information for Point
Cloud Based Retrieval
Wenxiao Zhang, Chunxia Xiao
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
wenxxiao.zhang@gmail.com cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract

Point Contextual
Attention Network

Point cloud based retrieval for place recognition is an
emerging problem in vision field. The main challenge is how
to find an efficient way to encode the local features into a
discriminative global descriptor. In this paper, we propose
a Point Contextual Attention Network (PCAN), which can
predict the significance of each local point feature based on
point context. Our network makes it possible to pay more attention to the task-relevent features when aggregating local
features. Experiments on various benchmark datasets show
that the proposed network can provide outperformance than
current state-of-the-art approaches.

Point1
Point2

Feature
Extraction

...
PointN

F1

X

Score1

F2
...

X

Score2
...

FN

X

Local
Features

Global
Feature

ScoreN
Contextual
Attention Map

(a)

1

1. Introduction
The task of visual localization is a core problem in
computer vision, which can be widely applied in augmented reality[24], robot navigation [22, 6, 39, 38], and
autonomous driving[7, 18]. Visual localization is always
defined as follows: Given an image from a scene, the purpose is to predict the location where the photo is taken. The
common process to complete this task is first to construct a
large 2D image database, and then retrieval an image from
the database which is closest to the query image. According
to whether storing 3D point cloud in database, existing localization methods can be catagorized into image-retrieval
based methods [23, 17, 28, 21] and direct 2D-3D matching
based methods [16, 15, 35, 35]. All these methods are image based retrieval. However, image based retrieval always
suffers from the illumination conditions. e.g. different day
time, different climate environment, season changes. As
the 3D scanned tech becomes mature, e.g. 3D Lidar sensor
is widely used in robotics and autonomous driving, point
cloud based retrieval for place recognition is first proposed
in PointNetVLAD [1], a deep network for large-scale 3D
point cloud retrieval. It uses PointNet [25] to extract local
features which are then fed into a NetVLAD [2] to get the
final discriminative global descriptor.

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Our Point Contextual Attention Network (PCAN)
takes the per-point local features and produces an attention map
which estimates an attention score for each point based on the
contextual information. (b) The input point cloud. (c) The visualization of the attention map.

Actcually, when aggregating the local features into a
global one, it is more reasonable to reweight the contributions for each local point feature before being aggregated to
the global descriptor for distributing more attention to the
task-relevant regions. For instance, in localization task, the
time-varying objects such as pedestrians, or floating noisy
pieces caused by unknown objects may lead to false retrieval results.
There has been a number of works focus on selecting
the most important or interesting local features for localization in 2D image area [9, 13, 33]. Most of these works
pay attention to the discriminative local features in feature
space which can represent the image more efficiently. Kim
et al.[12] addresses the problem that the significance of a local feature in a 2D image is largely effected by its context in
4321
12436

