Deep Single Image Camera Calibration with Radial Distortion
Manuel López-Antequera*
Roger Marı́ †
Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez‡

Pau Gargallo*
Gloria Haro§

Yubin Kuang*

Abstract
Single image calibration is the problem of predicting
the camera parameters from one image. This problem is
of importance when dealing with images collected in uncontrolled conditions by non-calibrated cameras, such as
crowd-sourced applications. In this work we propose a
method to predict extrinsic (tilt and roll) and intrinsic (focal length and radial distortion) parameters from a single
image. We propose a parameterization for radial distortion that is better suited for learning than directly predicting the distortion parameters. Moreover, predicting additional heterogeneous variables exacerbates the problem of
loss balancing. We propose a new loss function based on
point projections to avoid having to balance heterogeneous
loss terms. Our method is, to our knowledge, the first to
jointly estimate the tilt, roll, focal length, and radial distortion parameters from a single image. We thoroughly analyze
the performance of the proposed method and the impact of
the improvements and compare with previous approaches
for single image radial distortion correction.

1. Introduction
Single image calibration deals with the prediction of
camera parameters from a single image. Camera calibration
is the first step in many computer vision tasks e.g. Structure
from Motion, especially in applications where the capturing conditions are not controlled is particularly challenging,
such as those relying on crowdsourced imagery.
The process of image formation is well understood and
has been studied extensively in computer vision [1], allowing for very precise calibration of cameras when there are
enough geometric constraints to fit the camera model. This
is a well established practice that is performed daily on an
industrial scale, but requires a set of images taken for the
purpose of calibration. Geometric based methods can also
be used with images taken outside of the lab, performing
* Mapillary, firstname@mapillary.com
† CMLA, ENS Cachan, mari@cmla.ens-cachan.fr
‡ Universidad de Málaga, javiergonzalez@uma.es
§ Universitat Pompeu Fabra, gloria.haro@upf.edu

Figure 1. Our method is able to recover extrinsic (tilt, roll) and
intrinsic (focal length and radial distortion) parameters from single images (top row). In the bottom row, we visualize the predicted
parameters by undistorting the input images and overlaying a horizon line, which is a proxy for the tilt and roll angles.

best on images depicting man-made environments presenting strong cues such as vanishing points and straight lines
that can be used to recover the camera parameters [2, 3].
However, since geometric-based methods rely on detecting and processing specific cues such as straight lines and
vanishing points, they lack robustness to images taken in
unstructured environments, with low quality equipment or
difficult illumination conditions.
In this work we present a method to recover extrinsic
(tilt, roll) and intrinsic (focal length and radial distortion)
parameters given a single image. We train a convolutional
neural network to perform regression on alternative representations of these parameters which are better suited for
prediction from a single image.
We advance with respect to the state of the art with three
main contributions: 1. a single parameter representation for
k1 and k2 based on a large database of real calibrated cameras. 2. a representation of the radial distortion that is independent from the focal length and more easily learned by
the network. 3. a new loss function based on the projection of points to alleviate the problem of balancing hetero111817

