Progressive Attention Memory Network for Movie Story Question Answering
Junyeong Kim1∗ Minuk Ma1
Kyungsu Kim2
Sungjin Kim2
Chang D. Yoo1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Samsung Research
1

{junyeong.kim, akalsdnr, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper proposes the progressive attention memory
network (PAMN) for movie story question answering (QA).
Movie story QA is challenging compared to VQA in two aspects: (1) pinpointing the temporal parts relevant to answer
the question is difficult as the movies are typically longer
than an hour, (2) it has both video and subtitle where different questions require different modality to infer the answer. To overcome these challenges, PAMN involves three
main features: (1) progressive attention mechanism that utilizes cues from both question and answer to progressively
prune out irrelevant temporal parts in memory, (2) dynamic
modality fusion that adaptively determines the contribution
of each modality for answering the current question, and (3)
belief correction answering scheme that successively corrects the prediction score on each candidate answer. Experiments on publicly available benchmark datasets, MovieQA
and TVQA, demonstrate that each feature contributes to our
movie story QA architecture, PAMN, and improves performance to achieve the state-of-the-art result. Qualitative
analysis by visualizing the inference mechanism of PAMN
is also provided.

1. Introduction
Humans have an innate cognitive ability to infer from
different sensory inputs to answer questions of 5W’s and
1H involving who, what, when, where, why and how, and it
has been a quest of mankind to duplicate this ability on machines. In recent years, studies on question answering (QA)
have successfully benefited from deep neural networks, and
showed remarkable performance improvement on textQA
[24, 30], imageQA [2, 3, 19, 31], videoQA [8, 11, 32, 34].
This paper considers movie story QA [15, 18, 21, 26, 29]
that aims at a joint understanding of vision and language by
answering questions about movie contents and storyline after observing temporally-aligned video and subtitle. Movie
∗ This research was supported by Samsung Research

2

{ks0326.kim, sj9373.kim}@samsung.com

story QA is challenging compared to VQA in following two
aspects: (1) pinpointing the temporal parts relevant to answer the question is difficult as the movies are typically
longer than an hour and (2) it has both video and subtitle
where different questions require different modality to infer
the answer.
The first challenge of movie story QA is that it involves
long videos that are possibly longer than an hour which
hinders pinpointing the required temporal parts. The information in the movie required to answer the question is
not distributed uniformly across the temporal axis. To address this issue, memory networks [24] have widely been
accepted in QA tasks [21, 24, 26, 30]. The attention mechanism have widely been adopted to retrieve the information
relevant to the question. We observed that single-step attention on memory networks [21, 26] often generates blurred
temporal attention map.
The second challenge of movie story QA is that it involves both video and subtitle where different questions require different modality to infer the answer. Each modality
may convey essential information for different questions,
and optimally fusing them is an important problem. For example in the movie Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, answering the question “What does Indy do to the grave robbers at the beginning of the movie?” would require video
modality rather than subtitle modality while the question
“How has the guard managed to stay alive for 700 years?”
would require subtitle modality. Existing multi-modal fusion methods [7, 14, 15] only focus on modeling rich interactions between the modalities. However, these methods
are question-agnostic in that the fusion process is not conditioned on the question.
To address the aforementioned challenges, this paper
proposes Progressive Attention Memory Network (PAMN)
for movie story QA. PAMN contains three main features;
(1) progressive attention mechanism for pinpointing required temporal parts, (2) dynamic modality fusion for
adaptively fusing modalities conditioned on question and
(3) belief correction answering scheme. Progressive attention mechanism utilizes cues from both question and an18337

