DeepVoxels: Learning Persistent 3D Feature Embeddings
Vincent Sitzmann1 , Justus Thies2 , Felix Heide3 ,
Matthias Nießner2 , Gordon Wetzstein1 , Michael Zollhöfer1
1

Stanford University, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 Princeton University
vsitzmann.github.io/deepvoxels/

Images & poses

Abstract
In this work, we address the lack of 3D understanding
of generative neural networks by introducing a persistent
3D feature embedding for view synthesis. To this end, we
propose DeepVoxels, a learned representation that encodes
the view-dependent appearance of a 3D scene without having to explicitly model its geometry. At its core, our approach is based on a Cartesian 3D grid of persistent embedded features that learn to make use of the underlying 3D
scene structure. Our approach combines insights from 3D
geometric computer vision with recent advances in learning
image-to-image mappings based on adversarial loss functions. DeepVoxels is supervised, without requiring a 3D reconstruction of the scene, using a 2D re-rendering loss and
enforces perspective and multi-view geometry in a principled manner. We apply our persistent 3D scene representation to the problem of novel view synthesis demonstrating
high-quality results for a variety of challenging scenes.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant progress in applying generative machine learning methods to the creation
of synthetic imagery. Many deep neural networks, for example based on (variational) autoencoders, are able to inpaint, refine, or even generate complete images from scratch
[19, 30]. A very prominent direction is generative adversarial networks [13] which achieve impressive results for
image generation, even at high resolutions [26] or conditional generative tasks [20]. These developments allow us
to perform highly-realistic image synthesis in a variety of
settings; e.g., purely generative, conditional, etc.
However, while each generated image is of high quality, a major challenge is to generate a series of coherent
views of the same scene. Such consistent view generation
would require the network to have a latent space representation that fundamentally understands the 3D layout of the
scene; e.g., how would the same chair look from a different viewpoint? Unfortunately, this is challenging to learn

DeepVoxels

Global
Optimization

Training
Testing

Novel Views

Rendering

Figure 1: During training, we learn a persistent DeepVoxels representation that encodes the view-dependent appearance of a 3D
scene from a dataset of posed multi-view images (top). At test
time, DeepVoxels enable novel view synthesis (bottom).

for existing generative neural network architectures that are
based on a series of 2D convolution kernels. Here, spatial
layout and transformations of a real, 3D environment would
require a tedious learning process which maps 3D operations into 2D convolution kernels [22]. In addition, the generator network in these approaches is commonly based on
a U-Net architecture with skip connections [47]. Although
skip connections enable efficient propagation of low-level
features, the learned 2D-to-2D mappings typically struggle
to generalize to large 3D transformations, due to the fact
that the skip connections bypass higher-level reasoning.
To tackle similar challenges in the context of learningbased 3D reconstruction and semantic scene understanding, the field of 3D deep learning has seen large and rapid
progress over the last few years. Existing approaches are
able to predict surface geometry with high accuracy. Many
of these techniques are based on explicit 3D representations in the form of occupancy grids [35, 43], signed distance fields [46], point clouds [42, 32], or meshes [21].
While these approaches handle the geometric reconstruction task well, they are not directly applicable to the synthesis of realistic imagery, since it is unclear how to rep-

2437

