Graph-Based Global Reasoning Networks
Yunpeng Chen†‡ , Marcus Rohrbach† , Zhicheng Yan† , Shuicheng Yan‡♭ , Jiashi Feng‡ , Yannis Kalantidis†
†
Facebook AI, ‡ National University of Singapore, ♭ Qihoo 360 AI Institute

Abstract
Globally modeling and reasoning over relations between
regions can be beneficial for many computer vision tasks on
both images and videos. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) excel at modeling local relations by convolution
operations, but they are typically inefficient at capturing
global relations between distant regions and require stacking multiple convolution layers. In this work, we propose
a new approach for reasoning globally in which a set of
features are globally aggregated over the coordinate space
and then projected to an interaction space where relational
reasoning can be efficiently computed. After reasoning,
relation-aware features are distributed back to the original
coordinate space for down-stream tasks. We further present
a highly efficient instantiation of the proposed approach
and introduce the Global Reasoning unit (GloRe unit) that
implements the coordinate-interaction space mapping by
weighted global pooling and weighted broadcasting, and
the relation reasoning via graph convolution on a small
graph in interaction space. The proposed GloRe unit is
lightweight, end-to-end trainable and can be easily plugged
into existing CNNs for a wide range of tasks. Extensive experiments show our GloRe unit can consistently boost the
performance of state-of-the-art backbone architectures, including ResNet [15, 16], ResNeXt [34], SE-Net [18] and
DPN [9], for both 2D and 3D CNNs, on image classification, semantic segmentation and video action recognition
task.

1. Introduction
Relational reasoning between distant regions of arbitrary
shape is crucial for many computer vision tasks like image
classification [10], segmentation [36, 37] and action recognition [32]. Humans can easily understand the relations
among different regions of an image/video, as shown in Figure 1(a). However, deep CNNs cannot capture such relations without stacking multiple convolution layers, since an
individual layer can only capture information locally. This
is very inefficient, since relations between distant regions of
arbitrary shape on the feature map can only be captured by

Interaction Space
(a) GT: Playing TV Game

Coordinate Space
(b) Reasoning between Regions

reverse
projection

projection

Coordinate Space
(c) Graph Reasoning Framework

Figure 1: Illustration of our main idea. Aiming at capturing
relations between arbitrary regions over the full input space
(shown in different colors), we propose a novel approach for
reasoning globally (shown in Fig. (c)). Features from the
colored regions in coordinate space are projected into nodes
in interaction space, forming a fully-connected graph. After
reasoning over the graph, node features are projected back
to the coordinate space.
a near-top layer with a sufficiently large receptive field to
cover all the regions of interest. For instance, in ResNet50 [15] with 16 residual units, the receptive field is gradually increased to cover the entire the image of size 224×224
at 11th unit (the near-end of Res4). To solve this problem,
we propose a unit to directly perform global relation reasoning by projecting features from regions of interest to an
interaction space and then distribute back to the original coordinate space. In this way, relation reasoning can be performed in early stages of a CNN model.
Specifically, rather than relying solely on convolutions in
the coordinate space to implicitly model and communicate
information among different regions, we propose to construct a latent interaction space where global reasoning can
be performed directly, as shown in Figure 1(c). Within this
interaction space, a set of regions that share similar semantics are represented by a single feature, instead of a set of
scattered coordinate-specific features from the input. Reasoning the relations of multiple different regions is thus simplified to modeling those between the corresponding fea1433

