MirrorGAN: Learning Text-to-image Generation by Redescription
Tingting Qiao1,3 , Jing Zhang2,3,* , Duanqing Xu1,* , and Dacheng Tao3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
School of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
3
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, The University of Sydney, Australia
qiaott@zju.edu.cn, jing.zhang@uts.edu.au, xdq@zju.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

T2I

Abstract
Generating an image from a given text description has
two goals: visual realism and semantic consistency. Although significant progress has been made in generating
high-quality and visually realistic images using generative adversarial networks, guaranteeing semantic consistency between the text description and visual content remains very challenging. In this paper, we address this
problem by proposing a novel global-local attentive and
semantic-preserving text-to-image-to-text framework called
MirrorGAN. MirrorGAN exploits the idea of learning textto-image generation by redescription and consists of three
modules: a semantic text embedding module (STEM), a
global-local collaborative attentive module for cascaded
image generation (GLAM), and a semantic text regeneration and alignment module (STREAM). STEM generates
word- and sentence-level embeddings. GLAM has a cascaded architecture for generating target images from coarse
to fine scales, leveraging both local word attention and
global sentence attention to progressively enhance the diversity and semantic consistency of the generated images.
STREAM seeks to regenerate the text description from the
generated image, which semantically aligns with the given
text description. Thorough experiments on two public
benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of MirrorGAN over other representative state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation refers to generating a visually realistic image that matches a given text descrip1.The work was performed when Tingting Qiao was a visiting student
at UBTECH Sydney AI Centre in the School of Computer Science, FEIT,
in the University of Sydney
2.*corresponding author

(a)

I2T

this bird is
blue with
white and
has a pointy
beak

a small bird
with a white
breast and
blue wings

text

image

text

this bird is blue with white
and has a pointy beak

this bird is blue with white
and has a pointy beak

this bird has a grey side
and a brown back

a small bird with a white
breast and blue wings
T2I

×
(b)

I2T

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of the mirror structure that embodies the idea of learning text-to-image generation by redescription. (b)-(c) Semantically inconsistent and consistent images/redescriptions generated by [35] and the proposed MirrorGAN, respectively.

tion. Due to its significant potential in a number of applications but its challenging nature, T2I generation has become
an active research area in both natural language processing and computer vision communities. Although significant
progress has been made in generating visually realistic images using generative adversarial networks (GANs) such as
in [39, 42, 35, 13], guaranteeing semantic alignment of the
generated image with the input text remains challenging.
In contrast to fundamental image generation problems,
T2I generation is conditioned on text descriptions rather
than starting with noise alone. Leveraging the power of
GANs [10], different T2I methods have been proposed to
generate visually realistic and text-relevant images. For instance, Reed et al. proposed to tackle text to image synthesis problem by finding a visually discriminative representation for the text descriptions and using this representation to
generate realistic images [24]. Zhang et al. proposed StackGAN to generate images in two separate stages [39]. Hong
et al. proposed extracting a semantic layout from the input
text and then converting it into the image generator to guide
11505

