Dichromatic Model Based Temporal Color Constancy for AC Light Sources
Jun-Sang Yoo, Jong-Ok Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University
Seoul, Korea
look2017@korea.ac.kr, jokim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing dichromatic color constancy approach commonly requires a number of spatial pixels which have high
specularity. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
to estimate the illuminant chromaticity of AC light source
using high-speed camera. We found that the temporal observations of an image pixel at a fixed location distribute
on an identical dichromatic plane. Instead of spatial pixels
with high specularity, multiple temporal samples of a pixel
are exploited to determine AC pixels for dichromatic plane
estimation, whose pixel intensity is sinusoidally varying
well. A dichromatic plane is calculated per each AC pixel,
and illuminant chromaticity is determined by the intersection of dichromatic planes. From multiple dichromatic
planes, an optimal illuminant is estimated with a novel MAP
framework. It is shown that the proposed method outperforms both existing dichromatic based methods and temporal color constancy methods, irrespective of the amount of
specularity.

1. Introduction
Color constancy is human’s inherent ability to adapt to
various changes of lighting condition [30]. Thanks to our
brain’s memory ability, human can easily discern the original color of an object irrespective of illuminant condition
[26, 29]. In contrast, for machine vision, a computational
color constancy technique is necessarily required to recover
the original color of an object because it does not have any
prior knowledge about neither reflectance of an object nor
illuminant color. Thus, color constancy plays a vital role
in machine vision, which contributes to image quality enhancement. There have been many color constancy algorithms to improve color visual quality [1, 3, 7, 9, 11, 17, 34],
and most of these methods are typically classified into to
4 major categories: statistics-based, physics-based, gamutbased, and learning-based methods.
Statistics-based methods have been most actively researched. Due to their simple assumption of Lambertian re-

Figure 1. Summary of the proposed method. The fast variations
of AC light source is captured with high-speed camera. An illuminant is estimated from multiple dichromatic planes, which are
obtained from temporal observations at a pixel.

flectance and low computational cost with quite high accuracy [6, 19, 39], it is even commonly used in digital camera
[43]. However, there is a critical drawback of these methods
that a scene must include various colors on target surfaces to
satisfy their statistical assumption [10, 38, 39]. On the other
hand, physics-based methods are more complex approach
to color constancy than statistics-based ones in that specularity (surface reflected light) is additionally considered
[36]. Their fundamental concept is based on the dichromatic reflection model, which represents the physical relationship between illuminant and object surface [13, 38]. In
contrast with statistics-based methods, they work well with
monotonous surface color [11, 14, 35]. However, since the
number of parameters in the dichromatic reflection model
is increased by adding the specular component, they become a severe ill-posed problem, and thus commonly require additional assumption such as fixed parameter (commonly diffuse weight) and sufficient specularity. Gamutbased methods [12, 16, 18] have also attracted many attentions, but they require proper training data which are appropriate for a target illuminant. Recently, there have been
proposed learning-based methods to use convolutional neu-

12329

