Latent Filter Scaling for Multimodal Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Yazeed Alharbi
King Abdullah University for Science and Technology (KAUST)

Neil Smith
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

yazeed.alharbi@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1: An illustration of latent filter scaling. Input noise codes are mapped to the filters of the network, instead of injection
into the input image.

Abstract

In multimodal unsupervised image-to-image translation
tasks, the goal is to translate an image from the source
domain to many images in the target domain. We present
a simple method that produces higher quality images than
current state-of-the-art while maintaining the same amount
of multimodal diversity. Previous methods follow the unconditional approach of trying to map the latent code directly to a full-size image. This leads to complicated network architectures with several introduced hyperparameters to tune. By treating the latent code as a modifier
of the convolutional filters, we produce multimodal output
while maintaining the traditional Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) loss and without additional hyperparameters. The only tuning required by our method controls the
tradeoff between variability and quality of generated images. Furthermore, we achieve disentanglement between
source domain content and target domain style for free as
a by-product of our formulation. We perform qualitative
and quantitative experiments showing the advantages of
our method compared with the state-of-the art on multiple
benchmark image-to-image translation datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, GANs have emerged as a promising research
field [9, 3, 2, 11, 19]. The use of adversarial training has
shown to be effective in many computer vision tasks. Generative networks can be trained with reasonable success to
produce realistic images of humans and objects [6, 21, 7].
In the unconditional generation task, the aim is to map
a randomly generated low-dimensional code to a realistic
image. After training, the entries of the input code should
control sources of variation in the output image. There is an
effort in the community to guarantee certain desirable qualities about this mapping. For example, InfoGAN [6] aims
to enhance the interpretability of changing the latent code
through disentanglement. Other methods aim for a mapping
where the interpolation between two latent codes results
in an image that is semantically interpolated between the
images resulting from the two codes. Additionally, some
methods aim for an application-specific disentangled mapping, where changing certain parts of the input code will
correspond to changes in certain parts of the output images
[20, 17]. In the case of pedestrian image generation, the disentanglement might allow the user to change the pedestrian
appearance independently of the background.
In the literature, image-to-image translation is handled
similarly to unconditional generation, where the latent vec-

1458

