Unsupervised Person Image Generation with Semantic Parsing Transformation
Sijie Song1 , Wei Zhang2 , Jiaying Liu1∗, Tao Mei2
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China

Abstract
In this paper, we address unsupervised pose-guided person image generation, which is known challenging due to
non-rigid deformation. Unlike previous methods learning a
rock-hard direct mapping between human bodies, we propose a new pathway to decompose the hard mapping into two more accessible subtasks, namely, semantic parsing transformation and appearance generation. Firstly, a
semantic generative network is proposed to transform between semantic parsing maps, in order to simplify the nonrigid deformation learning. Secondly, an appearance generative network learns to synthesize semantic-aware textures. Thirdly, we demonstrate that training our framework in an end-to-end manner further refines the semantic
maps and final results accordingly. Our method is generalizable to other semantic-aware person image generation
tasks, e.g., clothing texture transfer and controlled image
manipulation. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method on DeepFashion and Market-1501
datasets, especially in keeping the clothing attributes and
better body shapes.

1. Introduction
Pose-guided image generation has attracted great attentions recently, which is to change the pose of the person image to a target pose, while keeping the appearance details.
This topic is of great importance in fashion and art domains
for a wide range of applications from image / video editing,
person re-identification to movie production.
With the development of deep learning and generative
model [8], many researches have been devoted to poseguided image generation [19, 21, 5, 27, 26, 1, 20]. Initially, this problem is explored under the fully supervised setting [19, 27, 26, 1]. Though promising results have been presented, their training data has to be composed with paired
images (i.e., same person in the same clothing but in different poses). To tackle this data limitation and enable more
∗ Corresponding author. This work was done at JD AI Research.
Our project is available at https://github.com/SijieSong/
person_generation_spt.git.

Figure 1: Visual results of different methods on DeepFashion [18]. Compared with PG2 [19], Def-GAN [27], and
UPIS [21], our method successfully keeps the clothing attributes (e.g., textures) and generates better body shapes
(e.g., arms).
flexible generation, more recent efforts have been devoted to learning the mapping with unpaired data [21, 5, 20].
However without “paired” supervision, results in [21] are
far from satisfactory due to the lack of supervision. Disentangling image into multiple factors (e.g., background /
foreground, shape / appearance) is explored in [20, 5]. But
ignoring the non-rigid human-body deformation and clothing shapes leads to compromised generation quality.
Formally, the key challenges of this unsupervised task
are in three folds. First, due to the non-rigid nature of human body, transforming the spatially misaligned body-parts
is difficult for current convolution-based networks. Second, clothing attributes, e.g., sleeve lengths and textures,
are generally difficult to preserve during generation. However, these clothing attributes are crucial for human visual
perception. Third, the lack of paired training data gives little
clue in establishing effective training objectives.
To address these aforementioned challenges, we propose
to seek a new pathway for unsupervised person image generation. Specifically, instead of directly transforming the
person image, we propose to transform the semantic parsing
between poses. On one hand, translating between person
12357

