Translate-to-Recognize Networks for RGB-D Scene Recognition
Dapeng Du Limin Wang∗ Huiling Wang Kai Zhao Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
Cross-modal transfer is helpful to enhance modalityspecific discriminative power for scene recognition. To
this end, this paper presents a unified framework to integrate the tasks of cross-modal translation and modalityspecific recognition, termed as Translate-to-Recognize Network (TRecgNet). Specifically, both translation and recognition tasks share the same encoder network, which allows
to explicitly regularize the training of recognition task with
the help of translation, and thus improve its final generalization ability. For translation task, we place a decoder
module on top of the encoder network and it is optimized
with a new layer-wise semantic loss, while for recognition task, we use a linear classifier based on the feature
embedding from encoder and its training is guided by the
standard cross-entropy loss. In addition, our TRecgNet allows to exploit large numbers of unlabeled RGB-D data to
train the translation task and thus improve the representation power of encoder network. Empirically, we verify that
this new semi-supervised setting is able to further enhance
the performance of recognition network. We perform experiments on two RGB-D scene recognition benchmarks: NYU
Depth v2 and SUN RGB-D, demonstrating that TRecgNet
achieves superior performance to the existing state-of-theart methods, especially for recognition solely based on a
single modality.

1. Introduction
Recently computer vision community has concentrated
on applying convolutional neural networks (CNN) [15] to
various vision tasks [10, 22, 8, 28, 30, 29]. Meanwhile, the
rapid development of cost-affordable depth sensors (e.g.,
Microsoft Kinect and Intel Realsense) have triggered more
attractions to revisit computer vision problems using RGBD data, such as object detection [7, 34], image segmentation [19], activity recognition [36, 31].
In this paper, we focus on enhancing the modalityspecific network’s representative power of RGB-D scene
recognition, the goal of which is to accurately classify the
∗ Corresponding author.

given scene images with aligned color and depth information. It is a highly challenging classification task on understanding RGB-D scene data on one hand for its essentially diverse combination of cluttered objects, bounding in
different semantic representations for indoors scenes, and
importantly on the other hand for the data scarcity problem. The amount of the largest RGB-D dataset [25] is still
order-of-magnitude insufficient to provide enough labeled
RGB-D data. Since pre-trained RGB CNN models are easily adapted for new RGB data, recent works have focused
on learning effective depth features. A few methods [27, 40]
directly use the pre-trained RGB CNN weights to fine tune
a depth CNN, but only limited improvements are given.
[7] directly transferred semantic supervision from labeled
RGB images to unlabeled depth images, which has limits
on transform direction.
This paper tackles major challenges mentioned above
from two aspects: 1) We propose to enhance the discriminative power for both RGB and depth’s single-modal networks by a cross-modal translation procedure, and 2) we
enhance training data sampling with the generated images
of high semantic relevance for the classification task. The
basic idea is that the modality translation enhances the description power of the encoding network as it forces the
RGB/depth data to infer information towards its complementary modality. RGB→ depth translation network could
improve the representation ability of RGB scene network,
by learning generating depth data which encodes better
on geometric and appearance invariant cues, while depth
scene network get benefited learning color and texture cues
through depth→ RGB translation. Meanwhile, this translation process produces new cross-modal data of high quality
for the other modality data’s classification task.
Specifically, we propose to couple an arbitrary modalityspecific scene Recognition network with a modality Translation network trained in a multi-task manner,
termed as TRecgNet; both branches share the same Encoding Network (E Net), as shown in Figure 1. The effectiveness of TRecgNet that boost modality-specific description
power essentially lies on the effect of modality translation,
i.e., how the RGB-D data could effectively learn the semantic similarity from the paired data to boost the jointly learn-

11836

