Convolutional Relational Machine for Group Activity Recognition
Sina Mokhtarzadeh Azar1∗, Mina Ghadimi Atigh1∗, Ahmad Nickabadi1 , Alexandre Alahi2
1
Amirkabir University of Technology (AUT), SML lab
424 Hafez Ave, Tehran, Iran
{sinamokhtarzadeh,minaghadimi}@aut.ac.ir
2

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), VITA lab
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Activity Map

Abstract

Group Activity Map

Individual Activity Map

We present an end-to-end deep Convolutional Neural
Network called Convolutional Relational Machine (CRM)
for recognizing group activities that utilizes the information
in spatial relations between individual persons in image or
video. It learns to produce an intermediate spatial representation (activity map) based on individual and group activities. A multi-stage refinement component is responsible
for decreasing the incorrect predictions in the activity map.
Finally, an aggregation component uses the refined information to recognize group activities. Experimental results
demonstrate the constructive contribution of the information extracted and represented in the form of the activity
map. CRM shows advantages over state-of-the-art models
on Volleyball and Collective Activity datasets.

1. Introduction
Human activities can be categorized into two types: either individual actions involving a single person e.g., Running/Jumping, or group activities involving multiple humans e.g., Talking/Queuing. Recognizing group activity requires understanding individual actions as well as the joint
modeling of the group of individuals. It is important in applications like sports video analysis, surveillance, and even
social robots that need to operate in a socially-aware manner
around humans (e.g., not crossing two individuals talking to
each other). In this work, we propose to classify the group
activity given single or few consecutive images of a scene.
We do not explicitly detect nor track any individual.
There are multiple sources of information that can be
helpful in recognizing activities. One source is the appearance features of individuals. Many activities are recognizable by knowing how the persons look like. Temporal infor∗ Equal contribution

Right Spike

Figure 1. Group activity recognition using the proposed spatial
representation (activity map). Our model learns to encode spatial
relations in the form of the activity map and uses it to recognize
the group activity (“Right Spike” in this example). Different individual and group activity fields are shown with different colors.

mation between consecutive frames of a video also plays an
important role in understanding complex activities. Another
recently explored source of information in reasoning over
group activities is the relationships between individuals in
a scene. Some of the existing approaches use various pooling strategies to extract a part of relational cues [2, 20, 13].
In [12], a more complex approach is used to extract relational information from the neighbouring individuals. Yet,
existing methods are not fully exploiting all the available
information to model spatial relationships between persons.
One may expect a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to
extract these relations. Our experiments show that it is very
difficult for a CNN to learn high-level relationships. Hence,
we introduce a mechanism to jointly consider the relationships between individuals.
In this paper, we propose a Convolutional Neural Network model for group activity recognition, referred to as
Convolutional Relational Machine (CRM), where we introduce an intermediate activity-based representation – an activity map– as a means of extracting the spatial relations be-

7892

