Data Representation and Learning with Graph Diffusion-Embedding Networks
Bo Jiang, Doudou Lin, Jin Tang∗, Bin Luo
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China
jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn, ahu lindd@163.com, ahhftang@gmail.com, luobin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, graph convolutional neural networks have
been widely studied for graph-structured data representation and learning. In this paper, we present Graph
Diffusion-Embedding networks (GDENs), a new model for
graph-structured data representation and learning. GDENs
are motivated by our development of graph based feature diffusion. GDENs integrate both feature diffusion and graph
node (low-dimensional) embedding simultaneously into a unified network by employing a novel diffusion-embedding
architecture. GDENs have two main advantages. First, the
equilibrium representation of the diffusion-embedding operation in GDENs can be obtained via a simple closed-form
solution, which thus guarantees the compactivity and efficiency of GDENs. Second, the proposed GDENs can be
naturally extended to address the data with multiple graph
structures. Experiments on various semi-supervised learning tasks on several benchmark datasets demonstrate that
the proposed GDENs significantly outperform traditional
graph convolutional networks.

1. Introduction
Compact feature representation of data is a fundamental problem in computer vision and machine learning area.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely
applied for data representation and learning in many computer vision applications, in which the underlying data generally have a grid-like structure. However, in some real
problems, data are not coming with grid-like structure but
instead have some irregular structures. Such data are usually represented in the form of graphs. Traditional CNNs
generally fail to directly address graph-structured data and
the convolution operation on graph data is generally not as
well-defined as on grid structure data. To solve this problem, early works aim to use Recursive Neural Networks (RNNs) [7, 29] to deal with directed acyclic graph data.
As an extension of RNNs, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)

[9, 27] have also been introduced to address the general
cyclic graph data.
Recently, there is an increasing attention in generalizing
neural networks to deal with arbitrary graph-structured data
[22, 10, 30, 30]. For example, Bruna et al. [3] propose a
CNN-like neural architecture on graphs in the Fourier domain by employing eigen-decomposition of graph Laplacian. To reduce high computational complexity of graph
Laplacian eigen-decomposition, Defferrard et al. [4] propose to approximate the filters by using recurrent Chebyshev polynomials. Kipf and Welling [15] further propose
a simplified Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) based
on the first-order approximation of spectral filters. Similar
work has also been proposed in [6]. Atwood and Towsley
[1] propose Diffusion-Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNNs) by employing a random walk diffusion process to
include contextual information for data feature representation. Monti et al. [22] present mixture model CNNs (MoNet) which provides a kind of unified generalization of CNN
architecture on graphs. Veličković et al. [30] present Graph
Attention Networks (GAT) by designing an attention layer
that aggregates the feature information of the neighboring
nodes for data representation.
In this paper, we propose Graph Diffusion-Embedding
Networks (GDENs) for graph data representation and learning. GDENs are motivated by our development on graph
based feature diffusion to explore contextual information
for graph node representation. Our GDENs follow the general network structure of recent GCNs [15], but compute
the hidden representation of each node by employing a novel ‘diffusion-embedding’ architecture. The main benefits
of the proposed diffusion-embedding architecture are two
aspects. First, the equilibrium representation of the proposed diffusion-embedding operation can be obtained via
a simple closed-form solution, which guarantees the compactivity and efficiency of GDENs. Second, the proposed
diffusion-embedding architecture can be naturally extended
to address the data with multiple graph structures. Overall,
the main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose Graph Diffusion-Embedding Networks
(GDENs) which integrate graph feature diffusion and

∗ Corresponding author

110414

