Self-Supervised Representation Learning by Rotation Feature Decoupling
Zeyu Feng
Chang Xu
Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT,
University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
zfen2406@uni.sydney.edu.au, {c.xu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We introduce a self-supervised learning method that focuses on beneficial properties of representation and their
abilities in generalizing to real-world tasks. The method
incorporates rotation invariance into the feature learning
framework, one of many good and well-studied properties of visual representation, which is rarely appreciated
or exploited by previous deep convolutional neural network based self-supervised representation learning methods. Specifically, our model learns a split representation
that contains both rotation related and unrelated parts. We
train neural networks by jointly predicting image rotations
and discriminating individual instances. In particular, our
model decouples the rotation discrimination from instance
discrimination, which allows us to improve the rotation prediction by mitigating the influence of rotation label noise, as
well as discriminate instances without regard to image rotations. The resulting feature has a better generalization ability for more various tasks. Experimental results show that
our model outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on
standard self-supervised feature learning benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural
networks (ConvNets), have led to breakthroughs in the field
of computer vision. Given large scale manually labeled image datasets, e.g. ImageNet, ConvNets can be well trained
by back propagation and achieve state-of-the-art performance on many tasks such as image classification [25, 45]
and object detection [31]. Rich representations extracted
by these networks often serve as good general-purpose features not only for the task where the network was trained,
but also for many other vision tasks like semantic segmentation [33] and visual question answering [2]. However, training deep neural networks in a fully supervised manner requires a tremendous amount of efforts on manual labeling,
which could be infeasible in some real-world scenarios.
As an alternative to supervised feature learning, unsupervised methods that do not rely on expensive and time-

Figure 1: Examples of some rotation agnostic images in ImageNet.
The default orientations of these images are ambiguous.

consuming human labeling are receiving increasingly more
attention. The recently emerged self-supervised learning
paradigm [10, 43, 52, 27, 37] is a scalable and promising
solution for learning useful general-purpose visual representations. These methods used to exploit the structural information of data itself and define pretext tasks that relates
to the final application of the learned features to train neural
network. In pretext tasks, supervisory signals can be easily
developed without significant human efforts, and thus massive readily available images can be applied for training.
Over the last few years, many different pretext tasks have
been proposed for self-supervised learning. For example,
one category of these methods tries to recover one part of
the data from the other part itself [43, 28, 53]. While a
shortcoming of these approach is the requirement of reconstructing and predicting image pixel values, which often need significant computational resources. Deep neural
networks can also be trained to differentiate original images
from restored incomplete images [21]. However, generating
synthetic images is not always an easy feat. Siamese network architecture has been investigated in self-supervised
learning [2, 36, 53], but memory consumption is usually
huge. Another different but popularly adopted strategy is to
discover supervisory signals in videos like tracking imagepatches [47] and sorting frame sequences [30].
110364

