Learning joint reconstruction of hands and manipulated objects
Yana Hasson1,2
Gül Varol1,2
Michael J. Black3
1

Dimitrios Tzionas3
Igor Kalevatykh1,2
1,2
Ivan Laptev
Cordelia Schmid1

Inria, 2 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University
3
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Abstract
Estimating hand-object manipulations is essential for interpreting and imitating human actions. Previous work has
made significant progress towards reconstruction of hand
poses and object shapes in isolation. Yet, reconstructing
hands and objects during manipulation is a more challenging task due to significant occlusions of both the hand and
object. While presenting challenges, manipulations may
also simplify the problem since the physics of contact restricts the space of valid hand-object configurations. For
example, during manipulation, the hand and object should
be in contact but not interpenetrate. In this work, we regularize the joint reconstruction of hands and objects with manipulation constraints. We present an end-to-end learnable
model that exploits a novel contact loss that favors physically plausible hand-object constellations. Our approach
improves grasp quality metrics over baselines, using RGB
images as input. To train and evaluate the model, we also
propose a new large-scale synthetic dataset, ObMan, with
hand-object manipulations. We demonstrate the transferability of ObMan-trained models to real data.

1. Introduction
Accurate estimation of human hands, as well as their interactions with the physical world, is vital to better understand human actions and interactions. In particular, recovering the 3D shape of a hand is key to many applications
including virtual and augmented reality, human-computer
interaction, action recognition and imitation-based learning
of robotic skills.
Hand analysis in images and videos has a long history
in computer vision. Early work focused on hand estimation and tracking using articulated models [15, 44, 58, 71]
or statistical shape models [26]. The advent of RGB-D sensors brought remarkable progress to hand pose estimation
from depth images [13, 20, 36, 60, 62]. While depth sensors provide strong cues, their applicability is limited by
the energy consumption and environmental constrains such

Figure 1: Our method jointly reconstructs hand and object meshes
from a monocular RGB image. Note that the model generating
the predictions for the above images, which we captured with an
ordinary camera, was trained only on images from our synthetic
dataset, ObMan.

as distance to the target and exposure to sunlight. Recent
work obtains promising results for 2D and 3D hand pose estimation from monocular RGB images using convolutional
neural networks [7, 16, 32, 40, 55, 56, 73]. Most of this
work, however, targets sparse keypoint estimation which is
not sufficient for reasoning about hand-object contact. Full
3D hand meshes are sometimes estimated from images by
fitting a hand mesh to detected joints [40] or by tracking
given a good initialization [6]. Recently, the 3D shape or
surface of a hand using an end-to-end learnable model has
been addressed with depth input [28].
Interactions impose constraints on relative configurations of hands and objects. For example, stable object
grasps require contacts between hand and object surfaces,
while solid objects prohibit penetration. In this work we
exploit constraints imposed by object manipulations to reconstruct hands and objects as well as to model their interactions. We build on a parametric hand model, MANO
[50], derived from 3D scans of human hands, that provides
anthropomorphically valid hand meshes. We then propose

11807

