A Flexible Convolutional Solver for Fast Style Transfers
Gilles Puy
Technicolor
975 Avenue des Champs Blancs
F-35576 Cesson-Sévigné

Patrick Pérez
Valeo.ai
15 Rue de la Baume
F-75008 Paris

gilles.puy@technicolor.com

patrick.perez@valeo.com

Abstract
We propose a new flexible deep convolutional neural network (convnet) to perform fast neural style transfers. Our
network is trained to solve approximately, but rapidly, the
artistic style transfer problem of [15] for arbritary styles.
While solutions already exist, our network is uniquely flexible by design: it can be manipulated at runtime to enforce
new constraints on the final output. As examples, we show
that it can be modified to perform tasks such as fast photo
style transfer, or fast video style transfer with short term
consistency, with no retraining. This flexibility stems from
the proposed architecture which is obtained by unrolling the
gradient descent algorithm used in [15]. Regularisations
added to [15] to solve a new task can be reported on-the-fly
in our network, even after training.

1. Introduction
Style transfer is a longstanding problem [12, 23, 38, 13]
for which impressive results have recently been obtained
with deep convnets. In [15], a stylised image is obtained
by minimisation of a loss built from features provided by a
pre-trained convnet. The loss involves two terms: the first
preserves the content of one image; the second transfers the
style of another image. The drawback of this method is its
speed as the stylised image is the result of a long optimisation process. Nevertheless, this method is highly flexible as the original style transfer loss can be manipulated to
guide the solution towards a desired result. This flexibility
allows one to control perceptual factors during style transfer [16]. It permits one to augment the original style loss
with regularisers favouring temporal consistency to perform
video style transfer [40, 41]. It also allows one to achieve
photo style transfer with the use of a regulariser encouraging the transformation to be locally affine [33]. This flexibility is crucial to construct a tool giving maximum freedom
to an artist. A methodological challenge is thus to make the
method of [15] faster while keeping most of its original flex-

ibility, hence avoiding retraining for any new style transfer
feature one wishes to add.
All the methods solving [15] rapidly rely on the same
principle: a deep network taking as input a natural image
is trained to estimate a minimiser of the style transfer loss,
hence obtaining a stylised version of the input. The first fast
methods [26, 48] crucially lacked flexibility as one network
needed to be trained for each style. This shortcoming was
partly addressed by subsequent works showing that the style
can be encoded by a small subset of the network parameters
[6, 11]. Recent works show that it is possible to train a network that takes as inputs any pair of painting and content
images and produces a stylised image, even for paintings
not viewed at training time [17, 25, 29]. Deep networks
trained for fast artistic style transfer have thus gained more
and more flexibility. Yet, these fast style transfer methods
are not as flexible as the method of [15] as one cannot plug
easily a new feature in them. For example, fast video style
transfer is achieved after adaptation of the network architecture and specific retraining [5, 20, 24, 41]. Similarly, the
authors of [30] had to adapt the network architecture of [29]
and retrain it to get it to work for fast photo style transfer.
Contributions. Specialising a network for each style
transfer task is a cumbersome work. Our main contribution is to propose instead a new flexible network that is
(a) trained to solve rapidly the artistic style transfer problem of [15] for arbitrary styles via unsupervised learning
and (b) which can be modified at test time to take into account important modifications of the artistic style transfer
loss. These modifications do not need to be known at training time. No retraining is required when adding them in the
network. This high level of flexibility stems from the proposed network architecture that has the structure of the gradient descent algorithm used in [15]: modifications brought
to the initial style transfer loss can be reported directly in
our trained network. Like existing methods, our network
yields fast controllable artistic style transfer results but, unlike them, it can be used to perform several other tasks without retraining. This flexibility permits us to make this net18963

