A Late Fusion CNN for Digital Matting
Yunke Zhang1 , Lixue Gong1 , Lubin Fan2 , Peiran Ren2 , Qixing Huang3 , Hujun Bao1 and Weiwei Xu∗1
1

Zhejiang University

2

Alibaba Group

3

University of Texas at Austin

{yunkezhang, gonglx}@zju.edu.cn, {lubin.flb, peiran.rpr}@alibaba-inc.com, huangqx@cs.uteaxs.edu,{bao, xww}@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies the structure of a deep convolutional
neural network to predict the foreground alpha matte by
taking a single RGB image as input. Our network is fully
convolutional with two decoder branches for the foreground
and background classification respectively. Then a fusion
branch is used to integrate the two classification results
which gives rise to alpha values as the soft segmentation
result. This design provides more degrees of freedom than
a single decoder branch for the network to obtain better
alpha values during training. The network can implicitly
produce trimaps without user interaction, which is easy to
use for novices without expertise in digital matting. Experimental results demonstrate that our network can achieve
high-quality alpha mattes for various types of objects and
outperform the state-of-the-art CNN-based image matting
methods on the human image matting task.

1. Introduction
Digital matting is to accurately extract the foreground
object in an image for object-level image composition. It
has the advantage of estimating the alpha (opacity) values
of the pixels to create an alpha matte so that the foreground
object can be correctly abstracted and then composed with
a new background image to render a new scene. Formally
speaking, we assume that the observed image I is generated
from three underlying images: the foreground image F, the
background image B, and the alpha matte α, through the
following model:
Ip = αp Fp + (1 − αp )Bp

(1)

where p represents a pixel across all images, and the value
of αp ∈ [0, 1].
A common approach to digital matting [10, 15, 36] proceeds in three steps, namely, (1) learn the foreground and
∗ Corresponding author. The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.

Image
Our alpha matte
Composition
Figure 1. Two example matting results of our late fusion CNN that
does not need trimaps as input. Left: two images collected from
internet outside of our training dataset. Middle: the alpha mattes
predicted by our network. Right: the composition results.

background color models, (2) compute the probabilities of
each pixel belonging to the learned models, and (3) obtain
the alpha values. To this end, a critical task in digital matting is to determine the pixel alpha values α, which represents a soft segmentation of the image. [20] leverages
the spectral clustering to compute α. However, such methods usually rely on user-inputs such as trimaps and scribbles: The trimap separates an image into foreground region,
background region and a transition region to cover fuzzy
or transparent foreground object boundaries [10], while the
scribbles specify sparse pixels on the foreground and background [35]. Early works exploit the local color as the
main feature, which may lead to blurred or chunky artifacts as shown in [39]. Recent works (e.g., [9, 31, 38, 39])
leverage fully convolutional neural network (CNN) to learn
multi-scale features, which lead to high-quality semantic
image segmentation results. In addition, deep image matting (DIM) [39] has shown that high-quality alpha mattes
can be directly predicted through a deep CNN trained on
a large-scale image matting dataset. A recent contribution
combines the multi-scale features learned by deep CNN and

7469

