Deep Supervised Cross-modal Retrieval
Liangli Zhen∗
Peng Hu∗
Xu Wang
Dezhong Peng†
Machine Intelligence Laboratory, College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China
llzhen@outlook.com, {penghu.ml, wangxu.scu}@gmail.com, pengdz@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

data since they , which is referred to as the heterogeneity
gap [32].

Cross-modal retrieval aims to enable flexible retrieval
across different modalities. The core of cross-modal retrieval is how to measure the content similarity between
different types of data. In this paper, we present a novel cross-modal retrieval method, called Deep Supervised
Cross-modal Retrieval (DSCMR). It aims to find a common
representation space, in which the samples from different
modalities can be compared directly. Specifically, DSCMR minimises the discrimination loss in both the label space
and the common representation space to supervise the model learning discriminative features. Furthermore, it simultaneously minimises the modality invariance loss and uses
a weight sharing strategy to eliminate the cross-modal discrepancy of multimedia data in the common representation
space to learn modality-invariant features. Comprehensive experimental results on four widely-used benchmark
datasets demonstrate that the proposed method is effective
in cross-modal learning and significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art cross-modal retrieval methods.

A common approach to bridge the heterogeneity gap is
representation learning. It tries to find a function to transform the data samples from different modalities into a common
representation space in which the similarity between them
can be measured directly. A variety of cross-modal retrieval
methods [20] have been developed, which propose different
learning ways for finding the common space. The traditional ones use the statistical correlation analysis to learn linear
projections by optimising target statistical values. For example, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [8] is one
of the most representative works, which learns the common
space by maximising the pairwise correlations between two sets of heterogeneous data. However, the correlation
of multimedia data in the real world is too complex to be
fully modelled only by applying linear projections. Then,
some kernel-based methods [1, 34] have been developed to
address this issue, but how to select a suitable kernel function for particular cross-modal learning application is still
an unsolved problem.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval aims to enable flexible retrieval
across different modalities (e.g., texts vs. images) [30]. It
takes one type of data as the query to retrieve relevant data
of another type. The provided search results across various
modalities can be helpful to the users to obtain comprehensive information about the target events or topics. With the
rapid growth of different types of media data such as texts,
images, and videos on the Internet, cross-modal retrieval
becomes increasingly important in real-world applications [32]. Recently, cross-modal retrieval has attracted the considerable attention of the researchers from both academia
and industry. The challenge of cross-modal retrieval is how
to measure the content similarity between different types of
∗ First two authors contributed equally to this work.
† D. Peng is the corresponding author.

Inspired by the great success of deep neural networks in representation learning [14], a large number of deep
learning-based approaches [2, 33, 19, 36, 21, 25, 7] have
been proposed to learn a common presentation space for
multimedia data. For instance, Ngiam et al. [18] propose
a bimodal deep auto-encoder to learn the cross-modal correlation as well as preserve the reconstruction information
and apply a Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) to learn
the common space for cross-modal retrieval. Different from
[18], which learns common representations in an unsupervised way, some supervised deep cross-modal learning approaches have been proposed to learn more discriminative
representations. They are potentially able to provide a much
better separation between classes in the common representation space. In this class of methods, Jiang et al. [9] propose to use the label information to learn the discriminative
information between samples from inter-modalities. In addition, the cross-modal similarity is preserved by enforcing
the representations of each image-text pair to be close to
110394

