LaSOT: A High-quality Benchmark for Large-scale Single Object Tracking
Heng Fan1∗ Liting Lin2∗ Fan Yang1∗ Peng Chu1∗ Ge Deng1 Sijia Yu1
Yong Xu2 Chunyuan Liao3 Haibin Ling1†
1

Hexin Bai1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
2
School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China Univ. of Tech., Guangzhou,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
https://cis.temple.edu/lasot/

Abstract
In this paper, we present LaSOT, a high-quality benchmark for Large-scale Single Object Tracking. LaSOT consists of 1,400 sequences with more than 3.5M frames in total. Each frame in these sequences is carefully and manually annotated with a bounding box, making LaSOT the
largest, to the best of our knowledge, densely annotated
tracking benchmark. The average video length of LaSOT
is more than 2,500 frames, and each sequence comprises
various challenges deriving from the wild where target objects may disappear and re-appear again in the view. By releasing LaSOT, we expect to provide the community with a
large-scale dedicated benchmark with high quality for both
the training of deep trackers and the veritable evaluation of
tracking algorithms. Moreover, considering the close connections of visual appearance and natural language, we enrich LaSOT by providing additional language specification,
aiming at encouraging the exploration of natural linguistic
feature for tracking. A thorough experimental evaluation of
35 tracking algorithms on LaSOT is presented with detailed
analysis, and the results demonstrate that there is still a big
room for improvements.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking, aiming to locate an arbitrary target in
a video with an initial bounding box in the first frame, has
been one of the most important problems in computer vision
with many applications such as video surveillance, robotics,
human-computer interaction and so forth [32, 47, 54]. With
considerable progresses in the tracking community, numerous algorithms have been proposed. In this process, tracking benchmarks have played a vital role in objectively eval∗ Authors make equal contributions to this work.
† Corresponding author.

UAV20L

LaSOT

UAV123
OTB-2013OTB-2015
VOT-2014

VOT-2017

TC-128

NUS-PRO

Figure 1. Summaries of existing tracking benchmarks with highquality dense (per frame) annotations, including OTB-2013 [52],
OTB-2015 [53], TC-128 [35], NUS-PRO [28], UAV123 [39],
UAV20L [39], VOT-2014 [26], VOT-2017 [27] and LaSOT. The
circle diameter is in proportion to the number of frames of a benchmark. The proposed LaSOT is larger than all other benchmarks,
and focused on long-term tracking. Best viewed in color.

uating and comparing different trackers. Nevertheless, further development and assessment of tracking algorithms are
restricted by existing benchmarks with several issues:
Small-scale. Deep representations have been popularly applied to modern object tracking algorithms, and demonstrated state-of-the-art performances. However, it is difficult to train a deep tracker using tracking-specific videos
due to the scarcity of large-scale tracking datasets. As
shown in Fig. 1, existing datasets seldom have more than
400 sequences. As a result, researchers are restricted to
leverage either the pre-trained models (e.g., [46] and [18])
from image classification for deep feature extraction or the
sequences from video object detection (e.g., [45] and [43])
for deep feature learning, which may result in suboptimal
tracking performance because of the intrinsic differences
among different tasks [55]. Moreover, large scale benchmarks are desired for more reliable evaluation results.
Lack of high-quality dense annotations. For tracking,

5374

