Spatial-aware Graph Relation Network for Large-scale Object Detection
Hang Xu1∗ ChenHan Jiang2∗ Xiaodan Liang2† Zhenguo Li1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract

Most recent advancement of CNN detectors is focused
on the task with a limited number of categories (say, 20 for
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author: xdliang328@gmail.com

(b) Fully Connected Graph
1st propagate
weight
1

man

man
driver

car

horse

horse
distance

goat

…

1. Introduction

(a) Handcraft Knowledge Graph

…

How to proper encode high-order object relation in the
detection system without any external knowledge? How to
leverage the information between co-occurrence and locations of objects for better reasoning? These questions are
key challenges towards large-scale object detection system
that aims to recognize thousands of objects entangled with
complex spatial and semantic relationships nowadays.
Distilling key relations that may affect object recognition is crucially important since treating each region separately leads to a big performance drop when facing heavy
long-tail data distributions and plenty of confusing categories. Recent works try to encode relation by constructing graphs, e.g. using handcraft linguistic knowledge between classes or implicitly learning a fully-connected graph
between regions. However, the handcraft linguistic knowledge cannot be individualized for each image due to the semantic gap between linguistic and visual context while the
fully-connected graph is inefficient and noisy by incorporating redundant and distracted relations/edges from irrelevant objects and backgrounds. In this work, we introduce
a Spatial-aware Graph Relation Network (SGRN) to adaptive discover and incorporate key semantic and spatial relationships for reasoning over each object. Our method considers the relative location layouts and interactions among
which can be easily injected into any detection pipelines to
boost the performance. Specifically, our SGRN integrates
a graph learner module for learning a interpatable sparse
graph structure to encode relevant contextual regions and
a spatial graph reasoning module with learnable spatial
Gaussian kernels to perform graph inference with spatial
awareness. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness
of our method, e.g. achieving around 32% improvement on
VG(3000 classes) and 28% on ADE in terms of mAP.

kth propagate
weight
1
distance

(c) Spatial-aware Sparse Graph

man

man
car

driver
horse

horse
goat

(d) Propagation with Gaussian Kernels

Figure 1. Different choice of constructing a graph to encode relation: (a) Using handcraft knowledge to build class-to-class graph.
Some spatial relations are ignored and the fixed graph cannot
adapt to the image due to the gap between linguistic and visual
context. (e.g. “goat” is alone). (b) Implicitly learning a fullyconnected graph between regions. The learned edges are redundant since background regions are also connected and the fullyconnected graph ignore the pairwise spatial information. (c) Our
proposed SGRN learns a spatial-aware sparse graph, leveraging
semantic and spatial layout relationship. (d) An example of propagation with multiple learnable spatial Gaussian kernels about the
“driver” node. Different spatial kernels allows the propagation of
the graph behaves differently according to the pairwise spatial information(different thickness of the edges).

VOC [11] and 80 for MS-COCO dataset [32]). However,
there is an increasing need for recognizing more kinds of
objects (e.g. 3000 categories in VG [25]) so that large-scale
object detection [19, 23] has received a lot of attention because of its practical usefulness in the industry. Current detection pipelines mostly treat the recognition of each region
separately and suffer from great performance drops when
facing heavy long-tail data distributions and plenty of confusing categories. It has been well recognized in the community that relation between objects can help to improve
object recognition before the prevalence of deep learning
[12, 17, 47, 48, 49]. Adding more contextual information
by evolving the relation information will relieve the above

9298

