Learning View Priors for Single-view 3D Reconstruction
Hiroharu Kato1 and Tatsuya Harada1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN
{kato,harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
There is some ambiguity in the 3D shape of an object
when the number of observed views is small. Because of
this ambiguity, although a 3D object reconstructor can be
trained using a single view or a few views per object, reconstructed shapes only fit the observed views and appear
incorrect from the unobserved viewpoints. To reconstruct
shapes that look reasonable from any viewpoint, we propose
to train a discriminator that learns prior knowledge regarding possible views. The discriminator is trained to distinguish the reconstructed views of the observed viewpoints
from those of the unobserved viewpoints. The reconstructor
is trained to correct unobserved views by fooling the discriminator. Our method outperforms current state-of-theart methods on both synthetic and natural image datasets;
this validates the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Humans can estimate the 3D structure of an object in a
single glance. We utilize this ability to grasp objects, avoid
obstacles, create 3D models using CAD, and so on. This is
possible because we have gained prior knowledge about the
shapes of 3D objects.
Can machines also acquire this ability? This problem
is called single-view 3D object reconstruction in computer
vision. A straightforward approach is to train a reconstructor using 2D images and their corresponding ground truth
3D models [3, 5, 9, 13, 16, 27, 30]. However, creating 3D
annotations requires extraordinary effort from professional
3D designers. Another approach is to train a reconstructor
using a single view or multiple views of an object without
explicit 3D supervision [15, 17, 18, 31, 36]. We call this
approach view-based training. This approach typically requires annotations of silhouettes of objects and viewpoints,
which are relatively easy to obtain.
Because a ground truth 3D shape is not given in viewbased training, there is some ambiguity in the possible
shapes. In other words, several different 3D shapes can
be projected into the same 2D view, as shown in the up-

2D image

Reconstructed 3D model

From original viewpoint

Unobserved views

+ View prior learning

Figure 1. When a 3D reconstructor is trained using only a single
view per object, because of ambiguity in the 3D shape of an object,
it reconstructs a shape which only fits the observed view and looks
incorrect from unobserved viewpoints (upper). By introducing a
discriminator that learns prior knowledge of correct views, the reconstructor is able to generate a shape that is viewed as reasonable
from any viewpoint (lower).

per half and lower half of Figure 1. To reduce this ambiguity, twenty or more views per object are typically used in
training [18, 36]. However, this is not practical in many
cases in terms of feasibility and scalability. When creating
a dataset by taking photos, if an object is moving or deforming, it is difficult to take photos from many viewpoints. In
addition, when creating a dataset using a large number of
photos from the Internet, it is not always possible to collect
multiple views of an object. Therefore, it is desirable that
a reconstructor can be trained using a few views or even a
single view of an object.
In this work, we focus on training a reconstructor using a
single view or a few views for single-view 3D object reconstruction. In this case, the ambiguity in shapes in training
is not negligible. The upper half of Figure 1 shows the result of single-view 3D reconstruction using a conventional
approach [18]. Although this method originally uses multiple views per object for training, a single view is used in
this experiment. As a result, the reconstructed shape looks

9778

