Towards Universal Object Detection by Domain Attention
Xudong Wang1 , Zhaowei Cai1 , Dashan Gao2 and Nuno Vasconcelos1
1
University of California, San Diego, 2 12 Sigma Technologies
{xuw080,zwcai,nuno}@ucsd.edu, dgao@12sigma.ai
Abstract
Despite increasing efforts on universal representations
for visual recognition, few have addressed object detection.
In this paper, we develop an effective and efficient universal object detection system that is capable of working on
various image domains, from human faces and traffic signs
to medical CT images. Unlike multi-domain models, this
universal model does not require prior knowledge of the
domain of interest. This is achieved by the introduction
of a new family of adaptation layers, based on the principles of squeeze and excitation, and a new domain-attention
mechanism. In the proposed universal detector, all parameters and computations are shared across domains, and
a single network processes all domains all the time. Experiments, on a newly established universal object detection benchmark of 11 diverse datasets, show that the proposed detector outperforms a bank of individual detectors,
a multi-domain detector, and a baseline universal detector, with a 1.3× parameter increase over a single-domain
baseline detector. The code and benchmark are available at
http://www.svcl.ucsd.edu/projects/universal-detection/.

1. Introduction
There has been signiﬁcant progress in object detection
in recent years [11, 44, 2, 26, 13, 3], powered by the availability of challenging and diverse object detection datasets,
e.g. PASCAL VOC [6], COCO [27], KITTI [9], WiderFace
[58], etc. However, existing detectors are usually domainspecific, e.g. trained and tested on a single dataset. This is
partly due to the fact that object detection datasets are diverse and there is a nontrivial domain shift between them.
As shown in Figure 1, detection tasks can vary in terms of
categories (human face, horse, medical lesion, etc.), camera
viewpoints (images taken from aircrafts, autonomous vehicles, etc.), image styles (comic, clipart, watercolor, medical), etc. In general, high detection performance requires a
detector specialized on the target dataset.
This poses a signiﬁcant problem for practical applications, which are not usually restricted to any one of the

Watercolor

WiderFace

DOTA

Clipart

MS-COCO

Kitchen

KITTI

Pascal VOC

LISA

Comic

DeepLesion

Figure 1. Samples of our universal object detection benchmark.

domains of Figure 1. Hence, there is a need for systems
capable of detecting objects regardless of the domain in
which images are collected. A simple solution is to design
a specialized detector for each domain of interest, e.g. use
D detectors trained on D datasets, and load the detector
specialized to the domain of interest at each point in time.
This, however, may be impractical, for two reasons. First,
in most applications involving autonomous systems the domain of interest can change frequently and is not necessarily known a priori. Second, the overall model size increases
linearly with the number of domains D. A recent trend,
known as general AI, is to request that a single universal
model solves multiple tasks [21, 25, 62], or the same task
over multiple domains [40, 1]. However, existing efforts in
this area mostly address image classiﬁcation, rarely targeting the problem of object detection. The fact that modern
object detectors are complex systems, composed of a backbone network, proposal generator, bounding box regressor,
classiﬁer, etc., makes the design of a universal object detec-

7289

