Simultaneously Optimizing Weight and Quantizer of Ternary Neural Network
using Truncated Gaussian Approximation
Zhezhi He
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

Deliang Fan
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

Elliot.He@Knights.ucf.edu

dfan@ucf.edu

Abstract
In the past years, deep convolution neural network has
achieved great success in many artificial intelligence applications. However, its enormous model size and massive
computation cost have become the main obstacle for the deployment of such powerful algorithm in the low power and
resource-limited mobile systems. As the countermeasure to
this problem, deep neural networks with ternarized weights
(i.e., -1, 0, +1) have been widely explored to greatly reduce the model size and computational cost, with limited
accuracy degradation. In this work, we propose a novel
ternarized neural network training method which simultaneously optimizes both weights and quantizer during training, differentiating from prior works. Instead of fixed and
uniform weight ternarization, we are the first to incorporate the thresholds of weight ternarization into a closedform representation using truncated Gaussian approximation, enabling simultaneous optimization of weights and
quantizer through back-propagation training. With both of
the first and last layer ternarized, the experiments on the ImageNet classification task show that our ternarized ResNet18/34/50 only has ∼3.9/2.52/2.16% accuracy degradation
in comparison to the full-precision counterparts.

research effort on the topics of model compression in recent
years, including channel pruning [9, 29], weight sparsification [7], weight quantization [6] and etc [10].
Weight ternarization, as a special case of weight quantization technique to efficiently compress DNN model,
mainly provides three benefits: 1) it converts the floatingpoint weights into the ternary format (i.e., -1, 0, +1), which
can significantly reduce the model size by 16×. With proper
sparse encoding technique, such model compression rate
can be further boosted. 2) Besides the model size reduction, the ternarized weight enables elimination of hardwareexpensive floating-point multiplication operations, while replacing with hardware friendly addition/subtraction operations. Thus, it could significantly reduce the inference latency. 3) The ternarized weights with zero values intrinsically prune network connections, thus the computations
related to those zero weights can be simply skipped.
In the previous low bit-width quantization works, such
as TTN [15], TTQ [28] and BNN [5], they do re-train the
models’ weights but a fixed weight quantizer is used and
not properly updated together with other model parameters, which leads to accuracy degradation and slow convergence of training. In this work, we have proposed a
network ternarization method which simultaneously update
both weights and quantizer (i.e. thresholds) during training,
where our contributions can be summarized as:

1. Introduction

• We propose a fully trainable DNN ternarization
method that can jointly train the quantizer threshold,
layer-wise scaling factor, and weights to minimize the
accuracy degradation caused by the model compression.

Artificial intelligence is nowadays one of the hottest research topics, which has drawn tremendous efforts from
various fields in the past years. While computer scientists
have succeeded to develop Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
with transcendent performance in the domains of computer
vision, speech recognition, big data processing and etc.
[13]. The state-of-the-art DNN evolves into structures with
larger model size, higher computational cost and denser
layer connections [8, 25, 24, 11]. Such evolution brings
great challenges to the computer hardware in terms of both
computation and on-chip storage [10], which leads to great

• Rather than utilizing the fixed and uniform ternarizer, we are the first to incorporate the thresholds of
weight ternarization into a closed-form expression using truncated Gaussian approximation, which can be
optimized through back-propagation together with network’s other parameters through the end-to-end training.

11438

