Scan2CAD: Learning CAD Model Alignment in RGB-D Scans
Armen Avetisyan1
1

Manuel Dahnert1
Angela Dai1
Angel X. Chang2
Matthias Nießner1
2

Technical University of Munich

Manolis Savva2

Simon Fraser University

Figure 1: Scan2CAD takes as input an RGB-D scan and a set of 3D CAD models (left). We then propose a novel 3D CNN
approach to predict heatmap correspondences between the scan and the CAD models (middle). From these predictions, we
formulate an energy minimization to find optimal 9 DoF object poses for CAD model alignment to the scan (right).

Abstract
We present Scan2CAD1 , a novel data-driven method
that learns to align clean 3D CAD models from a shape
database to the noisy and incomplete geometry of an RGBD scan. For a 3D reconstruction of an indoor scene, our
method takes as input a set of CAD models, and predicts a
9DoF pose that aligns each model to the underlying scan
geometry. To tackle this problem, we create a new scanto-CAD alignment dataset based on 1506 ScanNet scans
with 97607 annotated keypoint pairs between 14225 CAD
models from ShapeNet and their counterpart objects in the
scans. Our method selects a set of representative keypoints
in a 3D scan for which we find correspondences to the CAD
geometry. To this end, we design a novel 3D CNN architecture to learn a joint embedding between real and synthetic objects, and thus predict a correspondence heatmaps.
Based on these correspondence heatmaps, we formulate
a variational energy minimization that aligns a given set
of CAD models to the reconstruction. We evaluate our
approach on our newly introduced Scan2CAD benchmark
where we outperform both handcrafted feature descriptor
as well as state-of-the-art CNN based methods by 21.39%.

1 The Scan2CAD dataset is publicly released along with an automated
benchmark script for testing under www.Scan2CAD.org

1. Introduction
In recent years, the wide availability of consumer-grade
RGB-D sensors, such as the Microsoft Kinect, Intel Real
Sense, or Google Tango, has led to significant progress
in RGB-D reconstruction. We now have 3D reconstruction frameworks, often based on volumetric fusion [6],
that achieve impressive reconstruction quality [18, 29, 30,
40, 21] and reliable global pose alignment [40, 5, 8]. At
the same time, deep learning methods for 3D object classification and semantic segmentation have emerged as a
primary consumer of large-scale annotated reconstruction
datasets [7, 2]. These developments suggest great potential
in the future of 3D digitization, for instance, in applications
for virtual and augmented reality.
Despite these improvements in reconstruction quality,
the geometric completeness and fine-scale detail of indoor
scene reconstructions remain a fundamental limitation. In
contrast to artist-created computer graphics models, 3D
scans are noisy and incomplete, due to sensor noise, motion
blur, and scanning patterns. Learning-based approaches for
object and scene completion [9, 37, 10] cannot reliably recover sharp edges or planar surfaces, resulting in quality far
from artist-modeled 3D content.
One direction to address this problem is to retrieve a set
of CAD models from a shape database and align them to
an input scan, in contrast to a bottom-up reconstruction of

2614

