Doodle to Search: Practical Zero-Shot Sketch-based Image Retrieval
Sounak Dey∗, Pau Riba∗, Anjan Dutta, Josep Lladós
Computer Vison Center, UAB, Spain

Yi-Zhe Song
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK

{sdey,priba,adutta,josep}@cvc.uab.cat

y.song@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
In the context of retrieval, sketch modality has shown
great promise thanks to the pervasive nature of touchscreen
devices. Consequently, research on sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) has flourished, with many great examples
addressing various aspects of the retrieval process: fine∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† http://dag.cvc.uab.es/doodle2search/

Frog

Crab

Owl

Sea-turtle

QuickDraw TUBerlin [6] Sketchy [27]

In this paper, we investigate the problem of zeroshot sketch-based image retrieval (ZS-SBIR), where human
sketches are used as queries to conduct retrieval of photos
from unseen categories. We importantly advance prior arts
by proposing a novel ZS-SBIR scenario that represents a
firm step forward in its practical application. The new setting uniquely recognizes two important yet often neglected
challenges of practical ZS-SBIR, (i) the large domain gap
between amateur sketch and photo, and (ii) the necessity
for moving towards large-scale retrieval. We first contribute
to the community a novel ZS-SBIR dataset, QuickDrawExtended, that consists of 330, 000 sketches and 204, 000
photos spanning across 110 categories. Highly abstract
amateur human sketches are purposefully sourced to maximize the domain gap, instead of ones included in existing
datasets that can often be semi-photorealistic. We then formulate a ZS-SBIR framework to jointly model sketches and
photos into a common embedding space. A novel strategy
to mine the mutual information among domains is specifically engineered to alleviate the domain gap. External
semantic knowledge is further embedded to aid semantic
transfer. We show that, rather surprisingly, retrieval performance significantly outperforms that of state-of-the-art
on existing datasets that can already be achieved using a
reduced version of our model. We further demonstrate the
superior performance of our full model by comparing with a
number of alternatives on the newly proposed dataset. The
new dataset, plus all training and testing code of our model,
will be publicly released to facilitate future research† .

Fish

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of sketch datasets, columns show
examples belonging the same class. Sketchy, TUBerlin and QuickDraw datasets orderly contain sketches with increasing level of
abstraction. It is worth noting that despite being the most abstract
dataset, QuickDraw sketches can still be reliably recognised.

grained matching [37, 30, 24], large-scale hashing [17, 16],
cross-modal attention [5, 30] to name a few.
However, a common bottleneck identified by almost all
sketch researches is that of data scarcity. Different to photos that can be effortlessly crawled for free, sketches have
to be drawn one by one by human being. As a result,
existing SBIR datasets suffer in both volume and variety,
leaving only less than thousand of sketches per category,
with maximum number of classes limited to few hundreds.
This largely motivated the problem of zero-shot SBIR (ZSSBIR), where one wishes to conduct SBIR on object categories without having the training data. ZS-SBIR is increasingly being regarded as an important component in unlocking the practical application of SBIR, since million-scale
datasets that have been used to train commercial photo-only
systems [4] might not be feasible.
The problem of ZS-SBIR is extremely challenging. It
shares all challenges laid out in conventional SBIR: (i) large
domain gap between sketch and image, and (ii) high degree
12179

