SiamRPN++: Evolution of Siamese Visual Tracking with Very Deep Networks
Bo Li∗
SenseTime Research

Wei Wu∗
SenseTime Research

Qiang Wang∗
NLPR, CASIA

libo@sensetime.com

wuwei@sensetime.com

qiang.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Fangyi Zhang
VIPL, ICT

Junliang Xing
NLPR, CASIA

Junjie Yan
SenseTime Research

fangyi.zhang@vipl.ict.ac.cn

jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

yanjunjie@sensetime.com

Abstract
Siamese network based trackers formulate tracking as
convolutional feature cross-correlation between a target
template and a search region. However, Siamese trackers still have an accuracy gap compared with state-of-theart algorithms and they cannot take advantage of features
from deep networks, such as ResNet-50 or deeper. In this
work we prove the core reason comes from the lack of strict
translation invariance. By comprehensive theoretical analysis and experimental validations, we break this restriction
through a simple yet effective spatial aware sampling strategy and successfully train a ResNet-driven Siamese tracker
with significant performance gain. Moreover, we propose
a new model architecture to perform layer-wise and depthwise aggregations, which not only further improves the accuracy but also reduces the model size. We conduct extensive ablation studies to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed tracker, which obtains currently the best results
on five large tracking benchmarks, including OTB2015,
VOT2018, UAV123, LaSOT, and TrackingNet.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking has received increasing attention
over the last decades and has remained a very active research direction. It has a large range of applications in diverse fields like visual surveillance [49], human-computer
interactions [27], and augmented reality [50]. Although
much progress has been made recently, it has still been commonly recognized as a very challenging task due to numerous factors such as illumination variation, occlusion, and
background clutters, to name a few [48].
Recently, the Siamese network based trackers [42, 1,
16, 44, 43, 25, 45, 54, 46] have drawn much attention in
∗ The first three authors contributed equally. Work done at SenseTime.
Project page: http://bo-li.info/SiamRPN++.

the community. These Siamese trackers formulate the visual object tracking problem as learning a general similarity map by cross-correlation between the feature representations learned for the target template and the search
region. To ensure tracking efficiency, the offline learned
Siamese similarity function is often fixed during the running time [42, 1, 16]. The CFNet tracker [43] and DSiam
tracker [12] update the tracking model via a running average template and a fast transformation module, respectively.
The SiamRNN tracker [25] introduces the region proposal
network [25] after the Siamese network and performs joint
classification and regression for tracking. The DaSiamRPN
tracker [54] further introduces a distractor-aware module
and improves the discrimination power of the model.
Although the above Siamese trackers have obtained outstanding tracking performance, especially for the wellbalanced accuracy and speed, even the best performed
Siamese trackers, such as SiamPRN, the accuracy still has a
notable gap with the state-of-the-arts [5] on tracking benchmarks like OTB2015 [48]. We observe that all these trackers have built their network upon architecture similar to
AlexNet [24] and tried several times to train a Siamese
tracker with more sophisticated architecture like ResNet
[15] yet with no performance gain. Inspired by this observation, we perform an analysis of existing Siamese trackers
and find the core reason comes from the destroy of the strict
translation invariance. Since the target may appear at any
position in the search region, the learned feature representation for the target template should stay spatial invariant,
and we further theoretically find that, among modern deep
architectures, only the zero-padding variant of AlexNet satisfies this spatial invariance restriction.
To overcome this restriction and drive the Siamese
tracker with more powerful deep architectures, through extensive experimental validations, we introduce a simple
yet effective sampling strategy to break the spatial invariance restriction of the Siamese tracker. We successfully
14282

