Towards Robust Curve Text Detection with Conditional Spatial Expansion
Zichuan Liu1 , Guosheng Lin1 , Sheng Yang1 , Fayao Liu2 , Weisi Lin1 and Wang Ling Goh1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
University of Adelaide, Australia
{zliu016, syang014}@e.ntu.edu.sg, {gslin, wslin, ewlgoh}@ntu.edu.sg, fayaoliu@gmail.com

Abstract
It is challenging to detect curve texts due to their
irregular shapes and varying sizes. In this paper, we first
investigate the deficiency of the existing curve detection
methods and then propose a novel Conditional Spatial
Expansion (CSE) mechanism to improve the performance
of curve text detection. Instead of regarding the curve
text detection as a polygon regression or a segmentation
problem, we treat it as a region expansion process. Our
CSE starts with a seed arbitrarily initialized within a
text region and progressively merges neighborhood regions
based on the extracted local features by a CNN and
contextual information of merged regions. The CSE is
highly parameterized and can be seamlessly integrated into
existing object detection frameworks. Enhanced by the
data-dependent CSE mechanism, our curve text detection
system provides robust instance-level text region extraction
with minimal post-processing. The analysis experiment
shows that our CSE can handle texts with various shapes,
sizes, and orientations, and can effectively suppress the
false-positives coming from text-like textures or unexpected
texts included in the same RoI. Compared with the existing
curve text detection algorithms, our method is more robust
and enjoys a simpler processing flow. It also creates a new
state-of-art performance on curve text benchmarks with Fscore of up to 78.4%.

1. Introduction
In recent years, great progress has been made in text
detection. The performance has been enhanced by the
advanced object detection and segmentation frameworks
based on Neural Networks. Although detecting words or
text lines with different sizes and orientations has been well
tackled by recently proposed methods [28, 24, 34, 32, 23],
detecting curve texts remains a challenging problem.
The main challenges of curve text detection come from
irregular shapes and highly varying orientations. The
traditional bounding box representation does not scale well

(a) Proposed Box

(b) Mask RCNN

(c) Our CSE

(d) Proposed Box

(e) Polygon Regression

(f) Our CSE

Figure 1. Problems of existing curve text detection methods:
Two region proposals shown in (a) and (d) inevitably include
unexpected texts since they are closed to each other. Thus,
it causes failures for Mask RCNN based methods and polygon
regression methods demonstrated in (b) and (e). Our CSE
method demonstrated in (c) and (f) shows strong robustness to this
situation and brings significant performance gain.

in the curve scenario since one box may cover multiple
text objects. Therefore, the recently proposed curve text
detection algorithms [39, 27, 40] follow a two-stage detectand-refine approach to generate elaborated polygons or
boundaries. In these methods, a CNN based text detector
is applied to locate the regions containing texts, and
then a segmentation or polygon regression algorithm is
performed on these regions to produce a tight polygon or
boundary. Both methods highly depend on the accurate
region proposal provided by the text detector. They prefer
a proposed region with only one targeted object included
which reduces the ambiguity of the sampled features.
Although an oriented box regression is preferable, it often
fails in the curve text scenario [29, 14]. The recently
proposed curve text detection methods turn to predict
horizontal rectangles in the first stage, which is inevitably
affected non-targeted texts in the sampled regions.
Specifically, both segmentation and regression based

7269

