Modulating Image Restoration with Continual Levels
via Adaptive Feature Modification Layers

1

Jingwen He1,∗ Chao Dong1,∗ Yu Qiao1,2,†
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
q30 DeJPEG

Abstract
In image restoration tasks, like denoising and superresolution, continual modulation of restoration levels is
of great importance for real-world applications, but has
failed most of existing deep learning based image restoration methods. Learning from discrete and fixed restoration
levels, deep models cannot be easily generalized to data of
continuous and unseen levels. This topic is rarely touched
in literature, due to the difficulty of modulating well-trained
models with certain hyper-parameters. We make a step forward by proposing a unified CNN framework that consists
of little additional parameters than a single-level model yet
could handle arbitrary restoration levels between a start
and an end level. The additional module, namely AdaFM
layer, performs channel-wise feature modification, and can
adapt a model to another restoration level with high accuracy. By simply tweaking an interpolation coefficient, the
intermediate model – AdaFM-Net could generate smooth
and continuous restoration effects without artifacts. Extensive experiments on three image restoration tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of both model training and modulation testing. Besides, we carefully investigate the properties
of AdaFM layers, providing a detailed guidance on the usage of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved great success in
image restoration tasks, such as denoising, super-resolution,
compression artifacts reduction, etc [12, 10, 5, 4, 22]. However, there still exists a large gap of restoration performance between research environment mand real-world applications. In this work, we focus on two main issues that
prevent CNN based restoration methods from wide usages.
First, the degradation levels of real-world images are
∗ The first two authors are co-first authors. (e-mail: jw.he@siat.ac.cn;
dong.chao@siat.ac.cn).
† Corresponding author (e-mail: yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn).

q80

q10

model

model

over-sharpening

over-smoothed

Is it possible to achieve a compromise ?
Figure 1. Applying q10 or q80 DeJPEG model on images (LIVE1
[15]) with degradation q30 tends to produce either over-sharpening
(left) or over-smoothed (right) images.

generally continuous, such as JPEG quality q27 and q34.
On the other hand, the deep restoration models are usually
trained with discrete and fix levels (e.g., q20, q30). Applying models with mismatched restoration levels tends to
produce either over-sharpening or over-smoothed images,
as shown in Figure 11 . A straightforward solution is to train
a sufficiently large model to handle all degradation levels.
However, regardless of the computational burden, this general model is not optimal for each individual level. When
we want to slightly adjust the output effects, we have to
retrain a new model by refining the model structure, parameters or (and) loss functions, which is a tedious procedure
with unpredictable results.
Second, in industrial and commercial scenarios (e.g.,
human-interactive softwares), it is often necessary to consecutively modulate the restoration strength/effect to meet
different requirements. For example, the users always expect a tool bar to flexibly adjust the restoration level, as
1 DeJPEG is also known as JPEG deblocking and compression artifacts
reduction.

11056

