3D-SIS: 3D Semantic Instance Segmentation of RGB-D Scans
Ji Hou

Angela Dai
Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: 3D-SIS performs 3D instance segmentation on RGB-D scan data, learning to jointly fuse both 2D RGB input
features with 3D scan geometry features. In combination with a fully-convolutional approach enabling inference on full 3D
scans at test time, we achieve accurate inference for object bounding boxes, class labels, and instance masks.

Abstract
We introduce 3D-SIS, a novel neural network architecture for 3D semantic instance segmentation in commodity
RGB-D scans. The core idea of our method is to jointly
learn from both geometric and color signal, thus enabling
accurate instance predictions. Rather than operate solely
on 2D frames, we observe that most computer vision applications have multi-view RGB-D input available, which we
leverage to construct an approach for 3D instance segmentation that effectively fuses together these multi-modal inputs. Our network leverages high-resolution RGB input by
associating 2D images with the volumetric grid based on
the pose alignment of the 3D reconstruction. For each image, we first extract 2D features for each pixel with a series
of 2D convolutions; we then backproject the resulting feature vector to the associated voxel in the 3D grid. This combination of 2D and 3D feature learning allows significantly
higher accuracy object detection and instance segmentation
than state-of-the-art alternatives. We show results on both
synthetic and real-world public benchmarks, achieving an
improvement in mAP of over 13 on real-world data.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene understanding is critical to many realworld computer vision applications. It is fundamental towards enabling interactivity, which is core to robotics in
both indoor and outdoor settings, such as autonomous cars,
drones, and assistive robotics, as well as upcoming scenarios using mobile and AR/VR devices. In all these applications, we would not only want semantic inference of single
images, but importantly, also require understanding of spatial relationships and layouts of objects in 3D environments.
With recent breakthroughs in deep learning and the increasing prominence of convolutional neural networks, the
computer vision community has made tremendous progress
on analyzing images in the recent years. Specifically, we are
seeing rapid progress in the tasks of semantic segmentation
[19, 13, 21], object detection [11, 26], and semantic instance
segmentation [12]. The primary focus of these impressive
works lies in the analysis of visual input from a single image; however, in many real-world computer vision scenarios, we rarely find ourselves in such a single-image setting.
Instead, we typically record video streams of RGB input
sequences, or as in many robotics and AR/VR applications,
we have 3D sensors such as LIDAR or RGB-D cameras.

4421

