Learning Pyramid-Context Encoder Network for High-Quality Image Inpainting
Yanhong Zeng1,2∗, Jianlong Fu3 , Hongyang Chao1,2 , Baining Guo3
1
2

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P.R. China

The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University),
Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, P.R. China
3

Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China

zengyh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {jianf,bainguo}@microsoft.com, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Figure 1: High-quality image inpainting results generated by the proposed Pyramid-context ENcoder Network (PEN-Net).
In each pair, the left is a damaged image masked in white, and the right is the result of image inpainting. PEN-Net shows
excellent performance on a variety of images, including facades, natural scene, face and texture. [Best viewed in color]

Abstract
High-quality image inpainting requires filling missing
regions in a damaged image with plausible content. Existing works either fill the regions by copying image patches or
generating semantically-coherent patches from region context, while neglect the fact that both visual and semantic
plausibility are highly-demanded. In this paper, we propose a Pyramid-context ENcoder Network (PEN-Net) for
image inpainting by deep generative models. The PEN-Net
is built upon a U-Net structure, which can restore an image
by encoding contextual semantics from full resolution input,
and decoding the learned semantic features back into images. Specifically, we propose a pyramid-context encoder,
which progressively learns region affinity by attention from
∗ This work was performed when the first author was visiting Microsoft
Research as a research intern.

a high-level semantic feature map and transfers the learned
attention to the previous low-level feature map. As the missing content can be filled by attention transfer from deep to
shallow in a pyramid fashion, both visual and semantic coherence for image inpainting can be ensured. We further
propose a multi-scale decoder with deeply-supervised pyramid losses and an adversarial loss. Such a design not only
results in fast convergence in training, but more realistic results in testing. Extensive experiments on various datasets
show the superior performance of the proposed network.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting aims at filling missing pixels in a damaged image given a corresponding mask [2]. This task has
drawn great attention and become a valuable and active research topic for decades [5, 12, 17], because high-quality

1486

