Label-Noise Robust Generative Adversarial Networks
Takuhiro Kaneko1
1

Real (unobservable)

(a) Clean labeled data

Yoshitaka Ushiku1

The University of Tokyo

Tatsuya Harada1,2
2

RIKEN

Real (observable)

Generated

Generated

(b) Noisy labeled data

(c) cGAN trained with (b)

(d) rcGAN trained with (b)

Flipped with probability 0.5

[Baseline]

[Proposed]

Figure 1. Examples of label-noise robust conditional image generation. Each column shows samples belonging to the same class. In
(c) and (d), each row contains samples generated with a fixed z and a varied y g . Our goal is, given noisy labeled data (b), to learn a
conditional generative distribution that corresponds with clean labeled data (a). When naive cGAN (c) is trained with (b), it fails to learn
the disentangled representations, disturbed by noisy labeled data. In contrast, proposed rcGAN (d) succeeds in learning the representations
disentangled on the basis of clean labels, which are close to (a), even when we can only access the noisy labeled data (b) during training.

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are a framework that learns a generative distribution through adversarial training. Recently, their class conditional extensions (e.g., conditional GAN (cGAN) and auxiliary classifier GAN (AC-GAN)) have attracted much attention owing
to their ability to learn the disentangled representations and
to improve the training stability. However, their training requires the availability of large-scale accurate class-labeled
data, which are often laborious or impractical to collect in
a real-world scenario. To remedy this, we propose a novel
family of GANs called label-noise robust GANs (rGANs),
which, by incorporating a noise transition model, can learn
a clean label conditional generative distribution even when
training labels are noisy. In particular, we propose two
variants: rAC-GAN, which is a bridging model between
AC-GAN and the label-noise robust classification model,
and rcGAN, which is an extension of cGAN and solves this
problem with no reliance on any classifier. In addition to
providing the theoretical background, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our models through extensive experiments
using diverse GAN configurations, various noise settings,
and multiple evaluation metrics (in which we tested 402
conditions in total).

1. Introduction
In computer vision and machine learning, generative
modeling has been actively studied to generate or reproduce samples indistinguishable from real data. Recently,
deep generative models have emerged as a powerful framework for addressing this problem. Among them, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [14], which learn a generative distribution through adversarial training, have become
a prominent one owing to their ability to learn any data distribution without explicit density estimation. This mitigates
oversmoothing resulting from data distribution approximation, and GANs have succeeded in producing high-fidelity
data for various tasks [24, 38, 69, 7, 19, 29, 53, 25, 66, 77,
18, 31, 10, 61, 60, 76, 8, 22].
Along with this success, various extensions of GANs
have been proposed. Among them, class conditional extensions (e.g., conditional GAN (cGAN) [37, 39] and auxiliary classifier GAN (AC-GAN) [41]) have attracted much
attention mainly for two reasons. (1) By incorporating class
labels as supervision, they can learn the representations that
are disentangled between the class labels and the others.
This allows them to selectively generate images conditioned
on the class labels [37, 41, 22, 73, 23, 10]. Recently, this
usefulness has also been demonstrated in class-specific data
augmentation [12, 75]. (2) The added supervision simpli-

2467

