GIF2Video: Color Dequantization and Temporal Interpolation of GIF images
Yang Wang1 , Haibin Huang2† , Chuan Wang2 , Tong He3 , Jue Wang2 , Minh Hoai1
1
Stony Brook University, 2 Megvii Research USA, 3 UCLA, † Corresponding Author

Abstract
Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) is a highly portable
graphics format that is ubiquitous on the Internet. Despite their small sizes, GIF images often contain undesirable visual artifacts such as flat color regions, false contours, color shift, and dotted patterns. In this paper, we
propose GIF2Video, the first learning-based method for enhancing the visual quality of GIFs in the wild. We focus
on the challenging task of GIF restoration by recovering
information lost in the three steps of GIF creation: frame
sampling, color quantization, and color dithering. We first
propose a novel CNN architecture for color dequantization.
It is built upon a compositional architecture for multi-step
color correction, with a comprehensive loss function designed to handle large quantization errors. We then adapt
the SuperSlomo network for temporal interpolation of GIF
frames. We introduce two large datasets, namely GIF-Faces
and GIF-Moments, for both training and evaluation. Experimental results show that our method can significantly
improve the visual quality of GIFs, and outperforms direct
baseline and state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
GIFs [1] are everywhere, being created and consumed
by millions of Internet users every day on the Internet. The
widespread of GIFs can be attributed to its high portability
and small file sizes. However, due to heavy quantization
in the creation process, GIFs often have much worse visual
quality than their original source videos. Creating an animated GIF from a video involves three major steps: frame
sampling, color quantization, and optional color dithering.
Frame sampling introduces jerky motion, while color quantization and color dithering create flat color regions, false
contours, color shift, and dotted patterns, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we propose GIF2Video, the first learningbased method for enhancing the visual quality of GIFs. Our
algorithm consists of two components. First, it performs
color dequantization for each frame of the animated gif
sequence, removing the artifacts introduced by both color
quantization and color dithering. Second, it increases the

Color
Quantization

Color
Dithering

!"#"$ %&#'(('

)$$"$ *+,,-.+"/

Artifacts:
1. False Contour
2. Flat Region
3. Color Shift

Artifacts:
4. Dotted Pattern

Figure 1. Color quantization and color dithering. Two major
steps in the creation of a GIF image. These are lossy compression
processes that result in undesirable visual artifacts. Our approach
is able to remove these artifacts and produce a much more natural
image.

temporal resolution of the image sequence by using a modified SuperSlomo [20] network for temporal interpolation.
The main effort of this work is to develop a method for
color dequantization, i.e., removing the visual artifacts introduced by heavy color quantization. Color quantization is
a lossy compression process that remaps original pixel colors to a limited set of entries in a small color palette. This
process introduces quantization artifacts, similar to those
observed when the bit depth of an image is reduced. For
example, when the image bit depth is reduced from 48-bit
to 24-bit, the size of the color palette shrinks from 2.8×1014
colors to 1.7 × 107 colors, leading to a small amount of artifacts. The color quantization process for GIF, however,
is far more aggressive with a typical palette of 256 distinct colors or less. Our task is to perform dequantization
from a tiny color palette (e.g., 256 or 32 colors), and it is
much more challenging than traditional bit depth enhancement [15, 25, 38].
Of course, recovering all original pixel colors from the
quantized image is nearly impossible, thus our goal is to
render a plausible version of what the original image might
look like. The idea is to collect training data and train a
ConvNet [16, 23, 29, 34, 44] to map a quantized image to
its original version. It is however difficult to obtain a good

1419

