Content Authentication for Neural Imaging Pipelines: End-to-end
Optimization of Photo Provenance in Complex Distribution Channels
Pawel Korus1,2 and Nasir Memon1
New York University1 , AGH University of Science and Technology2
http://kt.agh.edu.pl/~korus

Abstract
Forensic analysis of digital photo provenance relies
on intrinsic traces left in the photograph at the time
of its acquisition. Such analysis becomes unreliable after heavy post-processing, such as down-sampling and
re-compression applied upon distribution in the Web.
This paper explores end-to-end optimization of the entire image acquisition and distribution workflow to facilitate reliable forensic analysis at the end of the distribution channel. We demonstrate that neural imaging pipelines can be trained to replace the internals of
digital cameras, and jointly optimized for high-fidelity
photo development and reliable provenance analysis. In
our experiments, the proposed approach increased image manipulation detection accuracy from 45% to over
90%. The findings encourage further research towards
building more reliable imaging pipelines with explicit
provenance-guaranteeing properties.

1. Introduction
Ensuring integrity of digital images is one of the
most challenging and important problems in multimedia communications. Photographs and videos are commonly used for documentation of important events, and
as such, require efficient and reliable authentication
protocols. Our current media acquisition and distribution workflows are built with entertainment in mind,
and not only fail to provide explicit security features,
but actually work against them. Image compression
standards exploit heavy redundancy of visual signals
to reduce communication payload, but optimize for human perception alone. Security extensions of popular
standards lack in adoption [20].
Two general approaches to assurance and verification of digital image integrity include [24, 30, 32]: (1)
pro-active protection methods based on digital signatures or watermarking; (2) passive forensic analysis

which exploits inherent statistical properties resulting from the photo acquisition pipeline. While the
former provides superior performance and allows for
advanced protection features (like precise tampering
localization [38], or reconstruction of tampered content [25]), it failed to gain widespread adoption due to
the necessity to generate protected versions of the photographs, and the lack of incentives for camera vendors
to modify camera design to integrate such features [4].
Passive forensics, on the other hand, relies on our
knowledge of the photo acquisition pipeline, and statistical artifacts introduced by its successive steps. While
this approach is well suited for potentially analyzing
any digital photograph, it often falls short due to the
complex nature of image post-processing and distribution channels. Digital images are not only heavily compressed, but also enhanced or even manipulated before,
during or after dissemination. Popular images have
many online incarnations, and tracing their distribution and evolution has spawned a new field of image
phylogeny [13, 14] which relies on visual differences between multiple images to infer their relationships and
editing history. However, phylogeny does not provide
any tools to reason about the authenticity or history
of individual images. Hence, reliable authentication of
real-world online images remains untractable [39].
At the moment, forensic analysis often yields useful
results in near-acquisition scenarios. Analysis of native
images straight from the camera is more reliable, and
even seemingly benign implementation details - like the
rounding operators used in the camera’s image signal
processor [1] - can provide useful clues. Most forensic
traces quickly become unreliable as the image undergoes further post-processing. One of the most reliable
tools at our disposal involves analysis of the imaging
sensor’s artifacts (the photo response non-uniformity
pattern) which can be used both for source attribution
and content authentication problems [10].
In the near future, rapid progress in computational
imaging will challenge digital image forensics even in

8621

