Attentive Feedback Network for Boundary-Aware Salient Object Detection
Mengyang Feng1 , Huchuan Lu1 , and Errui Ding2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
mengyang feng@mail.dlut.edu.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, dingerrui@baidu.com

Abstract
Recent deep learning based salient object detection
methods achieve gratifying performance built upon Fully
Convolutional Neural Networks (FCNs). However, most
of them have suffered from the boundary challenge. The
state-of-the-art methods employ feature aggregation technique and can precisely find out wherein the salient object,
but they often fail to segment out the entire object with fine
boundaries, especially those raised narrow stripes. So there
is still a large room for improvement over the FCN based
models. In this paper, we design the Attentive Feedback
Modules (AFMs) to better explore the structure of objects.
A Boundary-Enhanced Loss (BEL) is further employed for
learning exquisite boundaries. Our proposed deep model
produces satisfying results on the object boundaries and
achieves state-of-the-art performance on five widely tested
salient object detection benchmarks. The network is in a
fully convolutional fashion running at a speed of 26 FPS
and does not need any post-processing.

1. Introduction
Different from other dense-labeling tasks, e.g. semantic
segmentation and edge detection, the goal in salient object
detection is to identify the visually distinctive regions or objects in an image and then segment the targets out. Such a
useful processing is usually served as the first step to benefit
other computer vision tasks including content-aware image
editing [6] and image resizing [2], visual tracking [3], person re-identification [35] and image segmentation [7].
Along with the breakthrough of deep learning approaches, convolutional neural networks (CNNs, e.g.
VGG [25] and ResNet [9]) trained for the image recognition task have been further developed to other computer vision fields via transfer learning. One successful transform
is the fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs) in semantic segmentation. In order to perform predictions for every
image pixel, [23, 24] usually bring in up-sampling operations by interpolation or learning deconvolutional filters be-

Figure 1. previous multi-scale aggregation methods fail to segment
exquisite boundaries.

fore the inferences. Benefiting from such an effective and
efficient approach, a large margin of performance gain for
dense-labeling tasks has been achieved compared to previous traditional methods. However, the imperfection of the
generic fully convolutional frameworks is that they suffer
from the scale space problem. The repeated stride and pooling operations in CNN architectures result in the loss of essential fine details (low-level visual cues), which cannot be
reconstructed by up-sampling operations.
To address the aforementioned problem, multi-scale
mechanisms for conducting communications among hierarchical deep features are introduced to reinforce the spatial
information, such as skip-connections, short-connections
and feature aggregations proposed in [30], [10] and [33], respectively. These mechanisms are based on the observations
that 1) deeper layers encode high-level knowledge and are
good at locating objects; 2) shallower layers capture more
spatial representations and can better reconstruct spatial details. Although these strategies have brought satisfactory
improvements, they fail to predict the overall structures and
have difficulties in detecting fine boundaries (see Fig. 1).
For the sake of getting exquisite object boundaries, some
of the researchers have to employ time-consuming CRF to
refine the final saliency maps.
This paper concentrates on proposing a boundary-aware

1623

