Attribute-aware Face Aging with Wavelet-based Generative Adversarial
Networks
Yunfan Liu1∗
Qi Li1,2,3∗
Zhenan Sun1,2,4
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
3
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, CAS, Jiaozhou, Qingdao, China
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
yunfan.liu@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {qli, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Since it is difficult to collect face images of the same subject over a long range of age span, most existing face aging
methods resort to unpaired datasets to learn age mappings.
However, the matching ambiguity between young and aged
face images inherent to unpaired training data may lead to
unnatural changes of facial attributes during the aging process, which could not be solved by only enforcing identity
consistency like most existing studies do. In this paper, we
propose an attribute-aware face aging model with waveletbased Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to address
the above issues. To be specific, we embed facial attribute
vectors into both the generator and discriminator of the
model to encourage each synthesized elderly face image to
be faithful to the attribute of its corresponding input. In addition, a wavelet packet transform (WPT) module is incorporated to improve the visual fidelity of generated images
by capturing age-related texture details at multiple scales
in the frequency space. Qualitative results demonstrate the
ability of our model in synthesizing visually plausible face
images, and extensive quantitative evaluation results show
that the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on existing datasets.

1. Introduction
Face aging, also known as age progression [16], aims at
rendering a given face image with aging effects while still
preserving personalized features. Applications of face aging techniques range from social security to digital entertainment, such as predicting contemporary appearance of
missing children and cross-age identity veriﬁcation. Due
to the practical value of face aging, many approaches have
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Test Face

Output

Test Face

Output

Test Face

Output

Black

Asian

White

Black

Asian

White

Male

Female

Female

Male

Female

Male

Race

Gender

Glasses

Bald

Figure 1. Examples of face aging with mismatched facial attributes
generated by face aging model without facial attribute embedding.
Four attributes (Race, Gender, Glasses, and Bald) are considered
and three sample results are presented for each. Labels of ‘Race’
and ‘Gender’ are all obtained via advanced publicly available APIs
of Face++ [13] and placed underneath each image.

been proposed to address this problem in the last two
decades [8, 20, 19, 21, 7]. With the rapid development of
deep learning, deep generative models are widely adopted
to synthesize aged face images [23, 3, 4]. However, the
most critical problem of these methods is that multiple face
images of the same person at different ages are required at
training stage, which is extremely expensive to collect in
practice and thus their applications are largely limited.
To deal with this problem, many recent studies resort to
unpaired face aging data to train the model [23, 28, 25, 9].
However, these approaches mainly focus on face aging itself while neglecting other critical conditional information
of the input (e.g., facial attributes), thus fail to regulate
the training process. Consequently, training face image
pairs with mismatched attributes would mislead the model

11877

