Scene Categorization from Contours: Medial Axis Based Salience Measures
Morteza Rezanejad1 , Gabriel Downs1 , John Wilder2 , Dirk B. Walther2 ,
Allan Jepson2,3 , Sven Dickinson2,3 , and Kaleem Siddiqi1
1 McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
2 University of Toronto, ON, Canada
3 Samsung Toronto AI Research Center, ON, Canada∗

Abstract
The computer vision community has witnessed recent advances in scene categorization from images, with the state
of the art systems now achieving impressive recognition
rates on challenging benchmarks. Such systems have been
trained on photographs which include color, texture and
shading cues. The geometry of shapes and surfaces, as conveyed by scene contours, is not explicitly considered for this
task. Remarkably, humans can accurately recognize natural
scenes from line drawings, which consist solely of contourbased shape cues. Here we report the first computer vision study on scene categorization of line drawings derived
from popular databases including an artist scene database,
MIT67 and Places365. Specifically, we use off-the-shelf
pre-trained Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to perform scene classification given only contour information as
input, and find performance levels well above chance. We
also show that medial-axis based contour salience methods
can be used to select more informative subsets of contour
pixels, and that the variation in CNN classification performance on various choices for these subsets is qualitatively
similar to that observed in human performance. Moreover,
when the salience measures are used to weight the contours, we find that these weights boost our CNN performance above that for unweighted contour input. That is,
the medial axis based salience weights appear to add useful
information that is not available when CNNs are trained to
use contours alone.

1. Introduction
Both biological and artificial vision systems are confronted with a potentially highly complex assortment of vi∗ Dr. Jepson and Dr. Dickinson contributed to this article in their per-

sonal capacity as Professors at the University of Toronto. The views expressed [or the conclusions reached] are their own and do not necessarily
represent the views of Samsung Research America, Inc.

sual features in real-world scenarios. The features need
to be sorted and grouped appropriately in order to support high-level visual reasoning, including the recognition
or categorization of objects or entire scenes. In fact, scene
categorization cannot be easily disentangled from the recognition of objects, since scene classes are often defined by
a collection of objects in context. A beach scene, for example, would typically contain umbrellas, beach chairs and
people in bathing suits, all of whom are situated next to a
body of water. A street scene might have roads with cars,
cyclists and pedestrians as well as buildings along the edge.
How might computer vision systems tackle this problem of
organizing visual features to support scene categorization?
In human vision, perceptual organization is thought to
be effected by a set of heuristic grouping rules originating
from Gestalt psychology [13]. Such rules posit that visual
elements ought to be grouped together if they are, for instance, similar in appearance, in close proximity, or if they
are symmetric or parallel to each other. Developed on an
ad-hoc, heuristic basis originally, these rules have been validated empirically, even though their precise neural mechanisms remain elusive. Grouping cues, such as those based
on symmetry, are thought to aid in high-level visual tasks
such as object detection, because symmetric contours are
more likely to be caused by the projection of a symmetric
object than to occur accidentally. In the categorization of
complex real-world scenes by human observers, local contour symmetry does indeed provide a perceptual advantage
[23], but the connection to the recognition of individual objects is not as straightforward as it may appear.
In computer vision, symmetry, proximity, good continuation, contour closure and other cues have been used for image segmentation, curve inference, object recognition, object manipulation, and other tasks [14, 2, 7, 17]. Instantiations of such organizational principles have found their way
into many computer vision algorithms and have been the
subject of regular workshops on perceptual organization in
artificial vision systems. However, perceptually motivated
14116

