Learning to Regress 3D Face Shape and Expression
from an Image without 3D Supervision
Soubhik Sanyal

Timo Bolkart Haiwen Feng Michael J. Black
Perceiving Systems Department
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

{soubhik.sanyal, timo.bolkart, haiwen.feng, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1: Without 3D supervision, RingNet learns a mapping from the pixels of a single image to the 3D facial parameters
of the FLAME model [21]. Top: Images are from the CelebA dataset [22]. Bottom: estimated shape, pose and expression.

Abstract
The estimation of 3D face shape from a single image
must be robust to variations in lighting, head pose, expression, facial hair, makeup, and occlusions. Robustness
requires a large training set of in-the-wild images, which
by construction, lack ground truth 3D shape. To train
a network without any 2D-to-3D supervision, we present
RingNet, which learns to compute 3D face shape from a
single image. Our key observation is that an individual’s
face shape is constant across images, regardless of expression, pose, lighting, etc. RingNet leverages multiple images
of a person and automatically detected 2D face features. It
uses a novel loss that encourages the face shape to be similar when the identity is the same and different for different
people. We achieve invariance to expression by representing the face using the FLAME model. Once trained, our
method takes a single image and outputs the parameters
of FLAME, which can be readily animated. Additionally
we create a new database of faces “not quite in-the-wild”
(NoW) with 3D head scans and high-resolution images of
the subjects in a wide variety of conditions. We evaluate
publicly available methods and find that RingNet is more
accurate than methods that use 3D supervision. The dataset,
model, and results are available for research purposes at
http://ringnet.is.tuebingen.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to estimate 3D head and face shape from a
single image of a person. In contrast to previous methods, we are interested in more than just a tightly cropped
region around the face. Instead, we estimate the full 3D
face, head and neck. Such a representation is necessary for
applications in VR/AR, virtual glasses try-on, animation,
biometrics, etc. Furthermore, we seek a representation that
captures the 3D facial expression, factors face shape from
expression, and can be reposed and animated. While there
have been numerous methods proposed in the computer vision literature to address the problem of facial shape estimation [40], no previous methods address all of our goals.
Specifically, we train a neural network that regresses
from image pixels directly to the parameters of a 3D face
model. Here we use FLAME [21] because it is more accurate than other models, captures a wide range of shapes,
models the whole head and neck, can be easily animated,
and is freely available. Training a network to solve this
problem, however, is challenging because there is little
paired data of 3D heads/faces together with natural images
of people. For robustness to imaging conditions, pose, facial hair, camera noise, lighting, etc., we wish to train from
a large corpus of in-the-wild images. Such images, by definition, lack controlled ground truth 3D data.
This is a generic problem in computer vision – finding

7763

