Learning Not to Learn: Training Deep Neural Networks with Biased Data
Byungju Kim1

Hyunwoo Kim2
Kyungsu Kim3
Sungjin Kim3
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea1
Beijing Institute of Technology2
Samsung Research3

Junmo Kim1

{byungju.kim,junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr
{hwkim}@bit.edu.cn
{ks0326.kim,sj9373.kim}@samsung.com

Abstract
We propose a novel regularization algorithm to train
deep neural networks, in which data at training time is
severely biased. Since a neural network efficiently learns
data distribution, a network is likely to learn the bias information to categorize input data. It leads to poor performance at test time, if the bias is, in fact, irrelevant to the
categorization. In this paper, we formulate a regularization
loss based on mutual information between feature embedding and bias. Based on the idea of minimizing this mutual
information, we propose an iterative algorithm to unlearn
the bias information. We employ an additional network to
predict the bias distribution and train the network adversarially against the feature embedding network. At the end of
learning, the bias prediction network is not able to predict
the bias not because it is poorly trained, but because the
feature embedding network successfully unlearns the bias
information. We also demonstrate quantitative and qualitative experimental results which show that our algorithm
effectively removes the bias information from feature embedding.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms and artificial intelligence
have been used in wide ranging fields. The growing variety of applications has resulted in great demand for robust
algorithms. The most ideal way to robustly train a neural network is to use suitable data free of bias. However
great effort is often required to collect well-distributed data.
Moreover, there is a lack of consensus as to what constitutes
well-distributed data.
Apart from the philosophical problem, the data distribution significantly affects the characteristics of networks, as
current deep learning-based algorithms learn directly from
the input data. If biased data is provided during training,

Figure 1. Detrimental effect of biased data. The points colored
with high saturation indicate samples provided during training,
while the points with low saturation would appear in test scenario.
Although the classifier is well-trained to categorize the training
data, it performs poorly with test samples because the classifier
learns the latent bias in the training samples.

the machine perceives the biased distribution as meaningful
information. This perception is crucial because it weakens
the robustness of the algorithm and unjust discrimination
can be introduced.
A similar concept has been explored in the literature and
is referred to as unknowns [3]. The authors categorized
unknowns as follows: known unknowns and unknown unknowns. The key criterion differentiating these categories
is the confidence of the predictions made by the trained
models. The unknown unknowns correspond to data points
that the model’s predictions are wrong with high confidence, e.g. high softmax score, whereas the known unknowns represent mispredicted data points with low confidence. Known unknowns have better chance to be detected
as the classifier’s confidence is low, whereas unknown unknowns are much difficult to detect as the classifier generates high confidence score.
In this study, the data bias we consider has a similar flavor to the unknown unknowns in [3]. However, unlike the
unknown unknowns in [3], the bias does not represent data
points themselves. Instead, bias represents some attributes

9012

