Task Agnostic Meta-Learning for Few-Shot Learning
Muhammad Abdullah Jamal
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL
a jamal@knights.ucf.edu

Guo-Jun Qi ∗
Laboratory for MAchine
Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
http://maple-lab.net/
Huawei Cloud
guojunq@gmail.com

Abstract
Meta-learning approaches have been proposed to tackle
the few-shot learning problem. Typically, a meta-learner is
trained on a variety of tasks in the hopes of being generalizable to new tasks. However, the generalizability on new tasks
of a meta-learner could be fragile when it is over-trained on
existing tasks during meta-training phase. In other words,
the initial model of a meta-learner could be too biased towards existing tasks to adapt to new tasks, especially when
only very few examples are available to update the model.
To avoid a biased meta-learner and improve its generalizability, we propose a novel paradigm of Task-Agnostic MetaLearning (TAML) algorithms. Specifically, we present an
entropy-based approach that meta-learns an unbiased initial
model with the largest uncertainty over the output labels by
preventing it from over-performing in classification tasks. Alternatively, a more general inequality-minimization TAML is
presented for more ubiquitous scenarios by directly minimizing the inequality of initial losses beyond the classification
tasks wherever a suitable loss can be defined. Experiments
on benchmarked datasets demonstrate that the proposed approaches outperform compared meta-learning algorithms
in both few-shot classification and reinforcement learning
tasks.

1. Introduction
The key to achieving human level intelligence is to learn
from a few labeled examples. Human can learn and adapt
quickly from a few examples using prior experience. We
want our learner to be able to learn from a few examples and
quickly adapt to a changing task. All these concerns motivate
to study the few-shot learning problem. The advantage of
studying the few-shot problem is that it only relies on few
examples and it alleviates the need to collect large amount
∗ Corresponding author: G.-J. Qi.

of labeled training set which is a cumbersome process.
Recently, meta-learning approach is being used to tackle
the problem of few-shot learning. A meta-learning model
usually contains two parts – an initial model, and an updating strategy (e.g., a parameterized model) to train the initial
model to a new task with few examples. Then the goal of
meta-learning is to automatically meta-learn the optimal parameters for both the initial model and the updating strategy
that are generalizable across a variety of tasks. There are
many meta-learning approaches that show promising results
on few-shot learning problems. For example, Meta-LSTM
[1] uses LSTM meta-learner that not only learns initial model
but also the updating rule. On the contrary, MAML [2] only
learns an initial model since its updating rule is fixed to a
classic gradient descent method as a meta-learner.
The problem with existing meta-learning approaches is
that the initial model can be trained biased towards some
tasks, particularly those sampled in meta-training phase.
Such a biased initial model may not be well generalizable to
an unseen task that has a large deviation from meta-training
tasks, especially when very few examples are available on
the new task. This inspires us to meta-train an unbiased
initial model by preventing it from overperforming on some
tasks or directly minimizing the inequality of performances
across different tasks, in a hope to make it more generalizable
to unseen tasks. To this end, we propose a Task-Agnostic
Meta-Learning (TAML) algorithms in this paper.
Specifically, we propose two novel paradigms of TAML
algorithms – an entropy-based TAML and inequalityminimization measures based TAML. The idea of using
entropy based approach is to maximize the entropy of labels
predicted by the initial model to prevent it from overperforming on some tasks. However, the entropy-based approach
is limited to discrete outputs from a model, making it more
amenable to classification tasks.
The second paradigm is inspired by inequality measures
used in Economics. The idea is to meta-train an initial model
in such a way that it directly minimizes the inequality of
111719

