3D Motion Decomposition for RGBD Future Dynamic Scene Synthesis
Xiaojuan Qi*
University of Oxford

Zhengzhe Liu*
DJI

Abstract
A future video is the 2D projection of a 3D scene with
predicted camera and object motion. Accurate future video
prediction inherently requires understanding of 3D motion
and geometry of a scene. In this paper, we propose a RGBD
scene forecasting model with 3D motion decomposition. We
predict ego-motion and foreground motion that are combined to generate a future 3D dynamic scene, which is then
projected into a 2D image plane to synthesize future motion,
RGB images and depth maps. Optional semantic maps can
be integrated. Experimental results on KITTI and Driving
datasets show that our model outperforms other state-ofthe-arts in forecasting future RGBD dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Future prediction is an exciting direction with limitless
potential applications in decision-making, control system
design, and navigation for intelligent agents. In this paper,
we study RGBD future scene synthesis, which refers to prediction of videos and depth given a number of past frames.
Most approaches on future prediction aim to predict a
specific component in the future scene. They are mostly to
predict future color video frames [37, 30, 6, 15, 11, 12, 13]
or facilitate semantic understanding, including future semantic segmentation [15, 11], instance segmentation prediction [14], and 2D motion trajectories [12, 11].
Depth prediction is still new in this area with early work
of [17]. RGBD future prediction makes it possible to model
real-world dynamics. Existing approaches are mostly with
2D data and are self-supervised learning based. These approaches take past frames as input. Then a deep neural network is utilized to directly generate future frames [4, 13]
with 2D optical flow [12, 11] as an intermediate representation. Approaches of [29, 6, 31] disentangled foreground
and background in 2D space. Luo et al. [16] proposed an
unsupervised solution for forecasting 3D motion in RGBD
data. This framework only operates in 2D domain and does
not explicitly reason the future 3D scene.
* indicates co-first authorship.

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

Jiaya Jia
CUHK & YouTu Lab

We note when the underlying 3D geometry of a scene is
ignored, it becomes difficult to obtain accurate optical flow
prediction since optical flow reflects a level of 2D projection of 3D motion in the physical world. Further, without
full geometric understanding, it is challenging to estimate
future depth where its change is affected by both 3D camera motion and object motion. Our experiments show that
simply training a deep neural network in 2D for depth prediction is not feasible.
With this understanding, unlike previous work, we explicitly reason scene dynamics in 3D space, jointly predicting semantic segmentation, RGB pixel color, and depth
information. For 3D motion, we separately forecast egomotion and object motion in the future. Our main contribution is threefold.
First, we raise the RGBD future prediction problem and
propose a self-supervised 3D motion decomposition approach for forecasting 3D motion without labeled data. Second, on top of the predicted 3D motion, we present a general
framework for holistic future scene prediction for motion,
semantic, depth, and RGB images. Finally, our experimental results on KITTI [8], Driving [20] datasets show that our
method is effective to solve this new problem.

2. Related Work
Prior work on future prediction can be roughly categorized into two groups. The first focuses on designing deep
neural network architectures or loss functions to directly
predict future RGB video frames [13, 19, 4, 33, 7, 2] or
high-level semantic description [15, 14, 30, 31]. Direct future prediction is challenging because the solution space is
enormously large with high uncertainty. Xue et al. [37]
proposed the Cross Convolutional Network to model future frames in a probabilistic fashion. Similarly, Byeon
et al. [4] proposed a future prediction framework that aggregates contextual information with LSTM to avoid “blind
spot problem”. Progressive GAN [2] progressively synthesizes frames from coarse to fine resolution. Luc et al. [15]
proposed an auto-regressive model for predicting semantic
segmentation. The following work [14] contains a feature
prediction network for future instance segmentation.
The other group concentrates on exploiting or modeling
17673

