End-to-End Efficient Representation Learning
via Cascading Combinatorial Optimization
Yeonwoo Jeong, Yoonsung Kim, Hyun Oh Song
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{yeonwoo, yskim227, hyunoh}@mllab.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We develop hierarchically quantized efficient embedding
representations for similarity-based search and show that
this representation provides not only the state of the art performance on the search accuracy but also provides several
orders of speed up during inference. The idea is to hierarchically quantize the representation so that the quantization
granularity is greatly increased while maintaining the accuracy and keeping the computational complexity low. We also
show that the problem of finding the optimal sparse compound hash code respecting the hierarchical structure can
be optimized in polynomial time via minimum cost flow in an
equivalent flow network. This allows us to train the method
end-to-end in a mini-batch stochastic gradient descent setting. Our experiments on Cifar100 and ImageNet datasets
show the state of the art search accuracy while providing several orders of magnitude search speedup respectively over
exhaustive linear search over the dataset.

1. Introduction
Learning the feature embedding representation that preserves the notion of similarities among the data is of great
practical importance in machine learning and vision and
is at the basis of modern similarity-based search [21, 23],
verification [26], clustering [2], retrieval [25, 24], zero-shot
learning [31, 5], and other related tasks. In this regard, deep
metric learning methods [2, 21, 23] have shown advances
in various embedding tasks by training deep convolutional
neural networks end-to-end encouraging similar pairs of data
to be close to each other and dissimilar pairs to be farther
apart in the embedding space.
Despite the progress in improving the embedding representation accuracy, improving the inference efficiency and
scalability of the representation in an end-to-end optimization framework is relatively less studied. Practitioners deploying the method on large-scale applications often resort
to employing post-processing techniques such as embedding
thresholding [1, 32] and vector quantization [27] at the cost
of the loss in the representation accuracy. Recently, Jeong

& Song [11] proposed an end-to-end learning algorithm for
quantizable representations which jointly optimizes the quality of the convolutional neural network based embedding
representation and the performance of the corresponding
sparsity constrained compound binary hash code and showed
significant retrieval speedup on ImageNet [20] without compromising the accuracy.
In this work, we seek to learn hierarchically quantizable
representations and propose a novel end-to-end learning
method significantly increasing the quantization granularity
while keeping the time and space complexity manageable
so the method can still be efficiently trained in a mini-batch
stochastic gradient descent setting. Besides the efficiency
issues, however, naively increasing the quantization granularity could cause severe degradation in the search accuracy
or lead to dead buckets hindering the search speedup.
To this end, our method jointly optimizes both the sparse
compound hash code and the corresponding embedding representation respecting a hierarchical structure. We alternate
between performing cascading optimization of the optimal
sparse compound hash code per each level in the hierarchy
and updating the neural network to adjust the corresponding
embedding representations at the active bits of the compound
hash code.
Our proposed learning method outperforms both the reported results in [11] and the state of the art deep metric
learning methods [21, 23] in retrieval and clustering tasks on
Cifar-100 [13] and ImageNet [20] datasets while, to the best
of our knowledge, providing the highest reported inference
speedup on each dataset over exhaustive linear search.

2. Related works
Embedding representation learning with neural networks
has its roots in Siamese networks [4, 9] where it was trained
end-to-end to pull similar examples close to each other and
push dissimilar examples at least some margin away from
each other in the embedding space. [4] demonstrated the idea
could be used for signature verification tasks. The line of
work since then has been explored in wide variety of practical
applications such as face recognition [26], domain adaptation
111379

