PMS-Net: Robust Haze Removal Based on Patch Map for Single Images
Wei-Ting Chen 1
1

Jian-Jiun Ding 2

Sy-Yen Kuo 2

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
{r05943089, jjding, sykuo}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, a novel haze removal algorithm based on a
new feature called the patch map is proposed.
Conventional patch-based haze removal algorithms (e.g.
the dark channel prior) usually performs dehazing with a
fixed patch size. However, it may lead to several problems
such as oversaturation and color distortion. Therefore, in
this paper, we designed an adaptive and automatic patch
size selection model called the Patch Map Selection
Network (PMS-Net) to select the patch size corresponding
to each pixel. This network is designed based on the
convolutional neural network (CNN), which can generate
the patch map from the input image. Experimental results
on both synthesized and real-world hazy images show that,
with the combination of the proposed PMS-Net, the
performance in haze removal is much better than that of
state-of-the-art algorithms and we can address the
problems caused by the fixed patch size.

1. Introduction
Haze is an atmospheric phenomenon which compose of
smoke, dust and other floating particles. They may degrade
the visibility and lead to the poor performance of image
processing such as object detection and classification.
Narasimhan et al. [1] modeled the hazy scene as:
I  x   J  x  t ( x)  A 1  t  x  
(1)
where J(x) is the haze-free image, I(x) is the observed hazy
image, A is the global atmospheric light which indicates the
luminance of the light source from infinite distance away,
and t(x) is the transmission map which can be denoted as
t(x)=e-βd(x), where β is the scattering coefficient and d(x) is
the path length. We can rewrite (1) as:
I ( x)  A
(2)
J  x 
 A.
t ( x)
Then, one can notice that, to get better recovered results in
haze removal, the critical parameters are t(x) and A.

11681

(a)

(c) PSNR:15.21
SSIM: 0.769

(b)

(d) PSNR:14.39
SSIM: 0.592

(f)

(e) PSNR = 21.7
SSIM = 0.9

(g) PSNR:28.74
SSIM: 0.947

Figure 1: Dehazing results of the proposed patch map compare to
the method with fixed patch size. (a) Input image; (b) the ground
truth; (c)-(e) recovered by the fixed patch sizes of 1, 120, 15; (f)
the patch map determined by the proposed algorithm; (g)
recovered image by the patch map.

There have been many algorithms [2-22] addressing the
image dehazing problem. Tarel et al. [2] applied the special
bilateral filter to investigate the atmospheric veil. He et al.
[4] proposed the dark channel prior (DCP) based on the
statistical results of natural haze-free images to compute the
transmission map. In [14], Tang et al. applied machine
learning techniques to predict the transmission map. In
recent years, several deep-learning based dehazing
methods [15-22], including the DehazeNet [15], the
multi-scale CNN (MSCNN) [16], the residue learning
technique [18], the quad-tree CNN [19], and the densely
connected pyramid dehazing network [21], were proposed
for haze removal. For haze removal in the night time case,
various algorithms [23-27] were proposed to solve this
problem.
Although there have been many dehazing algorithms,
there are still several limitations that constrain the
performance of recovered results. Traditional algorithms

