Semantic Correlation Promoted Shape-Variant Context for Segmentation
Henghui Ding1
1

Xudong Jiang1

Bing Shuai2

Ai Qun Liu1

Gang Wang3

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
3
Amazon, Seattle, United States
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
Image

Abstract
Context is essential for semantic segmentation. Due
to the diverse shapes of objects and their complex layout
in various scene images, the spatial scales and shapes of
contexts for different objects have very large variation. It
is thus ineffective or inefficient to aggregate various context
information from a predefined fixed region. In this work, we
propose to generate a scale- and shape-variant semantic
mask for each pixel to confine its contextual region. To
this end, we first propose a novel paired convolution to
infer the semantic correlation of the pair and based on
that to generate a shape mask. Using the inferred spatial
scope of the contextual region, we propose a shape-variant
convolution, of which the receptive field is controlled by
the shape mask that varies with the appearance of input.
In this way, the proposed network aggregates the context
information of a pixel from its semantic-correlated region
instead of a predefined fixed region. Furthermore, this work
also proposes a labeling denoising model to reduce wrong
predictions caused by the noisy low-level features. Without
bells and whistles, the proposed segmentation network
achieves new state-of-the-arts consistently on the six public
segmentation datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation or scene parsing is aimed at
classifying every pixel in scene images to one of the
predefined categories (e.g., person, car, etc.). It has been a
critical element in artificial intelligence and can be applied
in many practice applications, such as automatic parking
system. The recent success of Deep Neural Networks has
greatly improved the performance of semantic segmentation [9, 43, 75, 11]. Most of state-of-the-arts segmentation
networks are based on Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [37, 63, 64, 26, 28] pre-trained on ImageNet [58],
in which CNNs are employed as the local feature extractor.
To achieve robust semantic segmentation, informative highlevel context is necessary. Context provides surrounding in-

Spatial-Dependent

Pixel A

Pixel A

Pixel B

Pixel B
Semantic-Dependent

Ground Truth

Pixel A

Pixel A

Pixel B

Pixel B

Figure 1. Most existing methods model spatial-dependent context
with predefined window (e.g., the red rectangle region for pixel A
in the second image), which may not provide the specific context
information and thus weaken the semantic shape layout. In this
work, we propose to aggregate the context information from the
semantic-dependent region instead of the spatial-dependent one.

formation of the object, which helps a better discrimination
of the object.
However, due to the diverse shapes (including contours,
scales, etc) and the complex layout of objects in scene
images, the common context aggregated within a predefined
fixed region weakens the semantic shape layout and might
bring unnecessary irrelevant information. For example in
Figure 1, contexts of pixel A (lake) and pixel B (train)
should be different but the predefined receptive fields to
collect their contexts largely overlap, which decrease their
discriminative power. Meanwhile, not all information
in a predefined surrounding region (rectangle region in
the second image) is beneficial for their final parsing.
Information collected in the semantic correlated region
is more helpful to identify the object while that in an
irrelevant region, though spatially close, may result in
parsing error and hence should be suppressed or even
disregarded. For pixel A in Figure 1, information of pixels
belonging to the lake and its shore, which are semantic

8885

