RepNet: Weakly Supervised Training of an Adversarial Reprojection Network
for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Bastian Wandt and Bodo Rosenhahn
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Hannover, Germany
wandt@tnt.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D human pose estimation from single images. While for a long time human
skeletons were parameterized and fitted to the observation
by satisfying a reprojection error, nowadays researchers directly use neural networks to infer the 3D pose from the observations. However, most of these approaches ignore the
fact that a reprojection constraint has to be satisfied and are
sensitive to overfitting. We tackle the overfitting problem by
ignoring 2D to 3D correspondences. This efficiently avoids
a simple memorization of the training data and allows for
a weakly supervised training. One part of the proposed reprojection network (RepNet) learns a mapping from a distribution of 2D poses to a distribution of 3D poses using
an adversarial training approach. Another part of the network estimates the camera. This allows for the definition of
a network layer that performs the reprojection of the estimated 3D pose back to 2D which results in a reprojection
loss function.
Our experiments show that RepNet generalizes well to
unknown data and outperforms state-of-the-art methods
when applied to unseen data. Moreover, our implementation runs in real-time on a standard desktop PC.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation from monocular images is a very
active research field in computer vision with many applications e.g. in movies, medicine, surveillance, or humancomputer interaction. Recent approaches are able to infer
3D human poses from monocular images in good quality
[27, 8, 21, 23, 28, 32, 24, 20, 19, 31]. However, most recent methods use neural networks that are straightforwardly
trained with a strict assignment from input to output data
e.g. [27, 8, 21, 23, 28, 32, 24, 19]. This leads to surprisingly
impressive results on similar data but usually the generalization to unknown motions and camera positions is problem-

Figure 1. Our network predicts 3D human poses from noisy 2D
joint detections. We use weakly supervised adversarial training
without 2D to 3D point correspondences. Our critic networks enforces a plausible 3D pose while a reprojection layer projects the
3D pose back to 2D. Even strong deformations and unusal camera
poses can be reconstructed.

atic. This paper presents a method to overcome this problem
by using a neural network trained with a weakly supervised
adversarial learning approach. We relax the assumption that
a specific 3D pose is given for every image in the training data by training a discriminator network –widely used
in generative adversarial networks (GAN) [9]– to learn a
distribution of 3D human poses. A second neural network
learns a mapping from a distribution of detected 2D keypoints (obtained by [25]) to a distribution of 3D keypoints
which are valid 3D human poses according to the discriminator network. From the generative adversarial network
point of view this can be seen as the generator network. To
force the generator network to generate matching 3D poses
to the 2D observations we propose to add a third neural network that predicts camera parameters from the input data.
The inferred camera parameters are used to reproject the
estimated 3D pose back to 2D which gives this framework
its name: Reprojection Network (RepNet). Fig. 2 shows
an overview of the proposed network. Additionally, to further enforce kinematic constraints we propose to employ an
easy to calculate and implement descriptor for joint lengths
and angles inspired by the kinematic chain space (KCS) of
Wandt et al. [41].

7782

