Precise Detection in Densely Packed Scenes
Eran Goldman1,3⋆ Roei Herzig2⋆ Aviv Eisenschtat3⋆ Jacob Goldberger1 Tal Hassner4†
1
Bar-Ilan University, 2 Tel Aviv University, 3 Trax Retail, 4 The Open University of Israel

Abstract
Man-made scenes can be densely packed, containing numerous objects, often identical, positioned in close proximity. We show that precise object detection in such scenes remains a challenging frontier even for state-of-the-art object
detectors. We propose a novel, deep-learning based method
for precise object detection, designed for such challenging
settings. Our contributions include: (1) A layer for estimating the Jaccard index as a detection quality score; (2)
a novel EM merging unit, which uses our quality scores to
resolve detection overlap ambiguities; finally, (3) an extensive, annotated data set, SKU-110K, representing packed
retail environments, released for training and testing under such extreme settings. Detection tests on SKU-110K
and counting tests on the CARPK and PUCPR+ show our
method to outperform existing state-of-the-art with substantial margins. The code and data will be made available on
www.github.com/eg4000/SKU110K_CVPR19.

1. Introduction
Recent deep learning–based detectors can quickly and
reliably detect objects in many real world scenes [15, 16,
19, 27, 30, 36, 37, 38]. Despite this remarkable progress, the
common use case of detection in crowded images remains
challenging even for leading object detectors.
We focus on detection in such densely packed scenes,
where images contain many objects, often looking similar or even identical, positioned in close proximity. These
scenes are typically man-made, with examples including retail shelf displays, traffic, and urban landscape images. Despite the abundance of such environments, they are underrepresented in existing object detection benchmarks. It is
therefore unsurprising that state-of-the-art object detectors
are challenged by such images.
To understand what makes these detection tasks difficult,
consider two identical objects placed in immediate proximity, as is often the case for items on store shelves (Fig. 1).
⋆ Equal Contribution.
† Work done while at the University of Southern California.

Figure 1. Detection in packed domains. A typical image in our
SKU-110K, showing densely packed objects. (Top) (a) Detection
results for the state-of-the-art RetinaNet [27], showing incorrect
and overlapping detections, especially for the dark objects at the
bottom which are harder to separate. (b) Our results showing far
fewer misdetections and better fitting bounding boxes. (Bottom)
Zoomed-in views for (c) RetinaNet [27] and (d) our method.

The challenge is to determine where one object ends and
the other begins; minimizing overlaps between their adjacent bounding boxes. In fact, as we show in Fig. 1(a,c),
the state-of-the-art RetinaNet detector [27], often returns
bounding boxes which partially overlap multiple objects or
detections of adjacent object regions as separate objects.
We describe a method designed to accurately detect objects, even in such densely packed scenes (Fig. 1(b,d)). Our
method includes several innovations. We propose learning the Jaccard index with a soft Intersection over Union
(Soft-IoU) network layer. This measure provides valuable
information on the quality of detection boxes. We explain
how detections can be represented as a Mixture of Gaussians (MoG), reflecting their locations and their Soft-IoU

5227

