Cross-Modal Relationship Inference for Grounding Referring Expressions
Sibei Yang1
1

Guanbin Li2∗

Yizhou Yu1,3

2
3
The University of Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen University
Deepwise AI Lab
sbyang9@hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Grounding referring expressions is a fundamental yet
challenging task facilitating human-machine communication in the physical world. It locates the target object in an
image on the basis of the comprehension of the relationships
between referring natural language expressions and the image. A feasible solution for grounding referring expressions
not only needs to extract all the necessary information (i.e.
objects and the relationships among them) in both the image and referring expressions, but also compute and represent multimodal contexts from the extracted information.
Unfortunately, existing work on grounding referring expressions cannot extract multi-order relationships from the referring expressions accurately and the contexts they obtain
have discrepancies with the contexts described by referring
expressions. In this paper, we propose a Cross-Modal Relationship Extractor (CMRE) to adaptively highlight objects
and relationships, that have connections with a given expression, with a cross-modal attention mechanism, and represent the extracted information as a language-guided visual relation graph. In addition, we propose a Gated Graph
Convolutional Network (GGCN) to compute multimodal semantic contexts by fusing information from different modes
and propagating multimodal information in the structured
relation graph. Experiments on various common benchmark datasets show that our Cross-Modal Relationship Inference Network, which consists of CMRE and GGCN, outperforms all existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Understanding natural languages and their relationship
with visual information is the foundation in AI for bridging
humans and machines in the physical world. This problem
involves many challenging tasks, among which, grounding
∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
No.61702565 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No.18lgpy63.

Figure 1. Cross-Modal Relationship Inference Network. Given an
expression and image, Cross-Modal Relationship Extractor constructs the language-guided visual relation graph (the attention
scores of proposals and edges’ types are visualized inside green
dashed box). The Gated Graph Convolutional Network captures
semantic contexts and computes the matching score between the
context of every proposal and the context of the expression (the
matching scores of proposals are shown inside blue dashed box).
Warmer color indicates higher scores of pixels and darker blue indicates higher scores of edges’ types.

referring expressions [9, 23] is a fundamental one. Grounding referring expressions attempts to locate the target visual
object in an image on the basis of comprehending the relationships between referring natural language expressions
(e.g. “the man with glasses”, “the dog near a car”) and the
image.
Grounding referring expressions is typically formulated
as a task that identifies a proposal referring to the expressions from a set of proposals in an image [35]. Recent work
combines Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [13] and
Long Short-Term Memory Neural Networks (LSTM) [6] to
process the multimodal information in images and referring
expressions. CNNs are used for extracting visual features of
single objects, global visual contexts [23, 28] and pairwise
visual differences [19, 35, 36, 37], while LSTMs encode
global language contexts [19, 22, 23, 36, 37] and language
features of the decomposed phrases [7, 35, 41, 33]. CNN
cooperating with LSTM can also capture the context of object pairs [7, 26, 41]. However, such work cannot extract
first-order relationships or multi-order relationships accurately from referring expressions, and the captured contexts
also have discrepancies with the contexts described by referring expressions.

4145

