Learning for Single-Shot Confidence Calibration in Deep Neural Networks
through Stochastic Inferences

1

Seonguk Seo∗ 1
Paul Hongsuck Seo∗ 1,2
Bohyung Han1
Computer Vision Lab., ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Korea
{seonguk, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a generic framework to calibrate accuracy
and confidence of a prediction in deep neural networks
through stochastic inferences. We interpret stochastic regularization using a Bayesian model, and analyze the relation
between predictive uncertainty of networks and variance of
the prediction scores obtained by stochastic inferences for
a single example. Our empirical study shows that the accuracy and the score of a prediction are highly correlated
with the variance of multiple stochastic inferences given by
stochastic depth or dropout. Motivated by this observation,
we design a novel variance-weighted confidence-integrated
loss function that is composed of two cross-entropy loss
terms with respect to ground-truth and uniform distribution, which are balanced by variance of stochastic prediction scores. The proposed loss function enables us to learn
deep neural networks that predict confidence calibrated
scores using a single inference. Our algorithm presents outstanding confidence calibration performance and improves
classification accuracy when combined with two popular
stochastic regularization techniques—stochastic depth and
dropout—in multiple models and datasets; it alleviates
overconfidence issue in deep neural networks significantly
by training networks to achieve prediction accuracy proportional to confidence of prediction.

hsseo@postech.ac.kr

fidence issue makes deep neural networks inappropriate to
be deployed for real-world problems in spite of their impressive accuracy.
Regularization is a common technique in training deep
neural networks to avoid overfitting problems and improve
generalization performance [10, 11, 24]. Although regularization is effective to learn robust models, its objective is
not directly related to generating score distributions aligned
with uncertainty of predictions. Hence, existing deep neural
networks are often poor at calibrating prediction accuracy
and confidence.
Our goal is to learn deep neural networks that are able
to estimate uncertainty of each prediction while maintaining accuracy. In other words, we propose a generic framework to calibrate prediction score (confidence) with accuracy in deep neural networks. The main idea of our algorithm starts with an observation that the variance of prediction scores measured from multiple stochastic inferences is
highly correlated with the accuracy and confidence of the
average prediction. We also show that a Bayesian interpretation of stochastic regularizations such as stochastic depth
and dropout leads to the consistent conclusion with the observation. By using the empirical observation with the theoretical interpretation, we design a novel loss function to enable a deep neural network to predict confidence-calibrated
scores based only on a single prediction, without multiple
stochastic inferences. Our contribution is summarized as
• We provide a generic framework to estimate uncertainty of a prediction based on stochastic inferences in
deep neural networks, which is supported by empirical
observations and theoretical analysis.
• We propose a novel variance-weighted confidenceintegrated loss function in a principled way, which enables networks to produce confidence-calibrated predictions even without performing stochastic inferences
and introducing hyper-parameters.
• The proposed framework presents outstanding performance to reduce overconfidence issue and estimate ac-

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in various tasks, but have critical limitations in reliability of their predictions. One example is that inference results are often overly confident even for unseen or ambiguous examples. Since many practical applications including
medical diagnosis, autonomous driving, and machine inspection require accurate uncertainty estimation as well as
high prediction score for each inference, such an overcon∗ Equal contribution

19030

