Unsupervised Part-Based Disentangling of Object Shape and Appearance
Dominik Lorenz
Leonard Bereska
Timo Milbich
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing / IWR, Heidelberg University

Abstract
Large intra-class variation is the result of changes in
multiple object characteristics. Images, however, only show
the superposition of different variable factors such as appearance or shape. Therefore, learning to disentangle and
represent these different characteristics poses a great challenge, especially in the unsupervised case. Moreover, large
object articulation calls for a flexible part-based model.
We present an unsupervised approach for disentangling appearance and shape by learning parts consistently over all
instances of a category. Our model for learning an object representation is trained by simultaneously exploiting
invariance and equivariance constraints between synthetically transformed images. Since no part annotation or
prior information on an object class is required, the approach is applicable to arbitrary classes. We evaluate our
approach on a wide range of object categories and diverse
tasks including pose prediction, disentangled image synthesis, and video-to-video translation. The approach outperforms the state-of-the-art on unsupervised keypoint prediction and compares favorably even against supervised approaches on the task of shape and appearance transfer.

1. Introduction
A grand goal of computer vision is to automatically,
without supervision information, learn about the characteristics of an object in the world. Typically, images show
the interplay of multiple such factors of variation. We
want to disentangle [9, 2, 5, 17, 10] the effects of these
different characteristics and imagine, i.e., synthesize, new
images where they are altered individually. For instance,
after observing a number of different unlabeled instances
of an object category, we want to learn their variations in
shape (such as pose relative to the viewer and body articulation) and appearance, e.g., texture and color differences in
fur/clothing or skin color. Disentangling shape and appearance is particularly challenging because object deformation
typically leads to complicated “recoloring” of image pixels
1 https://compvis.github.io/unsupervised-disentangling/

Figure 1: Our unsupervised learning of a disentangled partbased shape and appearance enables numerous tasks ranging from unsupervised pose estimation to image synthesis
and retargeting. For more results visit the project page 1

[40, 12]: moving a limb may change the color of former
background pixels into foreground and vice versa.
To address the disentangling problem for shape and appearance, several supervised methods have been proposed
lately [29, 28, 7, 12, 41, 1]. By conditioning generative
models on a pre-specified shape representation, they are
able to successfully explain away appearance. However,
they are limited to object categories, for which pose labels
are readily available such as human bodies and faces, but
they cannot be applied to the vast amounts of unlabelled
data of arbitrary object classes.
For unsupervised learning, instead of taking a known
shape to capture all non-shape factors, both shape and appearance need to be learned simultaneously. Recently some
unsupervised approaches have been proposed to disentangle these factors [40, 52]. However, these works have only
shown results for rather rigid objects, like human faces or
require several instances of the same person [8].
Object variation can be global, such as difference in

10955

