Trust Region Based Adversarial Attack on Neural Networks
Zhewei Yao1

Amir Gholami1 Peng Xu2 Kurt Keutzer1 Michael W. Mahoney1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Stanford Univeristy
1
{zheweiy, amirgh, keutzer, and mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu, 2 pengxu@stanford.edu
Abstract
Deep Neural Networks are quite vulnerable to adversarial perturbations. Current state-of-the-art adversarial attack methods typically require very time consuming
hyper-parameter tuning, or require many iterations to
solve an optimization based adversarial attack. To address this problem, we present a new family of trust
region based adversarial attacks, with the goal of computing adversarial perturbations efficiently. We propose
several attacks based on variants of the trust region optimization method. We test the proposed methods on
Cifar-10 and ImageNet datasets using several different
models including AlexNet, ResNet-50, VGG-16, and
DenseNet-121 models. Our methods achieve comparable
results with the Carlini-Wagner (CW) attack, but with
significant speed up of up to 37×, for the VGG-16 model
on a Titan Xp GPU. For the case of ResNet-50 on ImageNet, we can bring down its classification accuracy to
less than 0.1% with at most 1.5% relative L∞ (or L2 )
perturbation requiring only 1.02 seconds as compared to
27.04 seconds for the CW attack. We have open sourced
our method which can be accessed at [1].

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive results in many research areas, such as classification, object detection, and natural language processing.
However, recent studies have shown that DNNs are often not robust to adversarial perturbation of the input
data [8, 26]. This has become a major challenge for
DNN deployment, and significant research has been
performed to address this. These efforts can be broadly
classified into three categories: (i) research into finding
strategies to defend against adversarial inputs (which
has so far been largely unsuccessful); (ii) new attack
methods that are stronger and can break the proposed
defense mechanisms; and (iii) using attack methods as
form of implicit adversarial regularization for training
neural networks [23, 28, 29]. Our interest here is mainly

Figure 1: An example of DeepFool, CW, and our
TR attack on AlexNet, with L2 norm. Both CW and
TR perturbations are smaller in magnitude and more
targeted than DeepFool’s (2× smaller here). TR attack
obtains similar perturbation as CW, but 15× faster. In
the case of the VGG-16 network, we achieve an even
higher speedup of 37.5× (please see Fig. 4 for timings).

focused on finding more effective attack methods that
could be used in the latter two directions. Such ad111350

