L3 -Net: Towards Learning based LiDAR Localization for Autonomous Driving
Weixin Lu∗

Yao Zhou∗ Guowei Wan
Shenhua Hou
Shiyu Song†
Baidu Autonomous Driving Business Unit (ADU)

{luweixin, zhouyao, wanguowei, houshenhua, songshiyu}@baidu.com

Abstract
We present L3 -Net - a novel learning-based LiDAR localization system that achieves centimeter-level localization
accuracy, comparable to prior state-of-the-art systems with
hand-crafted pipelines. Rather than relying on these handcrafted modules, we innovatively implement the use of various deep neural network structures to establish a learningbased approach. L3 -Net learns local descriptors specifically optimized for matching in different real-world driving scenarios. 3D convolutions over a cost volume built in
the solution space significantly boosts the localization accuracy. RNNs are demonstrated to be effective in modeling
the vehicle’s dynamics, yielding better temporal smoothness and accuracy. We comprehensively validate the effectiveness of our approach using freshly collected datasets.
Multiple trials of repetitive data collection over the same
road and areas make our dataset ideal for testing localization systems. The SunnyvaleBigLoop sequences, with a
year’s time interval between the collected mapping and testing data, made it quite challenging, but the low localization
error of our method in these datasets demonstrates its maturity for real industrial implementation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, autonomous driving has gained substantial interest in both academia and in the industry. A precise and reliable localization module that estimates the position and orientation of the autonomous vehicle is highly
critical. In an ideal situation, the positioning accuracy has
to be specific to the level of centimeters and reach subdegree attitude accuracy universally. In the last decade, several methods have been proposed to achieve this goal with
the help of 3D light detection and ranging (LiDAR) scanners [19, 20, 18, 36, 37, 17, 9, 32]. A classic localization
pipeline typically involves several steps with certain variations as shown in Figure 1. They are a feature representation method (e.g., points[2], planes, poles, Gaussian bars
∗ Authors with equal contributions
† Author to whom correspondence should be addressed

Traditional Method

The Proposed Method

Optimal
Pose

PointNet

CNNs

RNNs

Figure 1: Architectures of the traditional and the proposed
learning based method. In our method, L3 -Net takes online
LiDAR scans, a pre-built map and a predicted pose as inputs, learns features by PointNet, constructs cost volumes
over the solution space, applies CNNs and RNNs to estimate the optimal pose.
over 2D grids [20, 37, 32]), a matching algorithm, an outlier rejection step (optional), a matching cost function, a
spatial searching or optimization method (e.g., exhaustive
or coarse-to-fine searching, Monte Carlo sampling or iterative gradient-descent minimization) and a temporal optimization or filtering framework. Although some of them
have shown excellent performance in terms of the accuracy
and robustness across different scenarios, it usually requires
significant engineering effort in tuning each module in the
pipeline and designing the hard-coded featuring and matching methods. Moreover, these handcrafted systems typically have strong preferences over the running scenarios.
Making a universal localization system that is adaptive to
all challenging scenarios requires tremendous engineering
efforts, which is not feasible.
The learning based method opens a completely new window to solving the above problems in a data-driven fashion.
The good part is that it’s easy to collect a huge amount of
training data for a localization task because the ground truth
trajectory typically can be obtained automatically or semiautomatically using offline methods. In this way, human
labeling efforts can be minimized making it more attractive and more cost-effective. Thus, localization or other 3D
16389

