MUREL: Multimodal Relational Reasoning for Visual Question Answering
Remi Cadene 1∗
Hedi Ben-younes 1,2∗
Matthieu Cord 1
Nicolas Thome 3
1
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
2
Heuritech, 110 avenue de la République, 75011 Paris
3
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, 75003 Paris
remi.cadene@lip6.fr, hedi.ben-younes@lip6.fr, matthieu.cord@lip6.fr, nicolas.thome@cnam.fr

Abstract
Multimodal attentional networks are currently state-ofthe-art models for Visual Question Answering (VQA) tasks
involving real images. Although attention allows to focus
on the visual content relevant to the question, this simple
mechanism is arguably insufficient to model complex reasoning features required for VQA or other high-level tasks.
In this paper, we propose MuRel, a multimodal relational
network which is learned end-to-end to reason over real images. Our first contribution is the introduction of the MuRel
cell, an atomic reasoning primitive representing interactions between question and image regions by a rich vectorial representation, and modeling region relations with
pairwise combinations. Secondly, we incorporate the cell
into a full MuRel network, which progressively refines visual and question interactions, and can be leveraged to define visualization schemes finer than mere attention maps.
We validate the relevance of our approach with various ablation studies, and show its superiority to attentionbased methods on three datasets: VQA 2.0, VQA-CP v2 and
TDIUC. Our final MuRel network is competitive to or outperforms state-of-the-art results in this challenging context.
Our code is available: github.com/Cadene/
murel.bootstrap.pytorch

1. Introduction
Since the success of Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets) at the ILSVRC 2012 challenge [29], Deep
Learning has become the baseline approach for any computer vision problem. Beyond their outstanding performances for perception tasks, e.g. classification or detection [14], deep ConvNets have also been successfully used
for new artificial intelligence tasks like Visual Question Answering (VQA) [4, 17, 23]. VQA requires a high level understanding of images and questions, and is often considered to be a good proxy for visual reasoning. However, it
∗ Equal contribution

MuRel network

What is she
eating?

Donut

✔

Step #1

Step #2

Step #3

Figure 1. Visualization of the MuRel approach. Our MuRel
network for VQA is an iterative process based on a rich vectorial
representation between the question and visual information explicitly modeling pairwise region relations. MuRel is thus able to express complex analysis primitives beyond attention maps: here the
two regions corresponding to the head and the donuts are selected
based on their visual cues and semantic relations to properly answer the question ”what is she eating?”

is not straightforward to use ConvNets in a context where a
high level of reasoning is required. The question of leveraging the perception power of deep CNNs for reasoning tasks
is crucial if we want to go further in visual scene understanding [21, 11].
It is also not trivial to define nor evaluate a model’s
capacity to reason about the visual modality in VQA. To
fill this need, synthetic datasets have been released, e.g.
CLEVR [21], which specific structure controls the exact
reasoning primitives required to give the answer [22, 19,
34]. However, methods that tackle the VQA problem on
real data struggle to integrate this explicit reasoning procedure. Instead, state-of-the-art methods often rely on the
much simpler attentional framework [16, 8, 25, 12]. Despite
its effectiveness, this mechanism restricts visual reasoning
to a soft selection of regions that are relevant to answer the
question. This arguably limits the modeling power of such
models to bridge the gap between the perceptual strengths
of ConvNets and the high-level reasoning demand for VQA.
In this paper, we propose MuRel, a multimodal relational
network that goes one step further towards reasoning about
questions and images. Our first contribution is to introduce
the MuRel cell, an atomic reasoning primitive enabling to
11989

