Learning to Film from Professional Human Motion Videos
Chong Huang1 , Chuan-En Lin2 , Zhenyu Yang1 , Yan Kong1 , Peng Chen3 , Xin Yang4∗, Kwang-Ting Cheng2
1
University of California, Santa Barbara,
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Zhejiang University of Technology
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
chonghuang@umail.ucsb.edu, clinaf@connect.ust.hk, {zhenyuyang, yankong}@ucsb.edu
chenpeng@zjut.edu.cn, xinyang2014@hust.edu.cn, timcheng@ust.hk

Abstract
We investigate the problem of 6 degrees of freedom
(DOF) camera planning for filming professional human
motion videos using a camera drone. Existing methods
[4, 3, 5] either plan motions for only a pan-tilt-zoom (PTZ)
camera, or adopt ad-hoc solutions without carefully considering the impact of video contents and previous camera
motions on the future camera motions. As a result, they
can hardly achieve satisfactory results in our drone cinematography task. In this study, we propose a learningbased framework which incorporates the video contents and
previous camera motions to predict the future camera motions that enable the capture of professional videos. Specifically, the inputs of our framework are video contents which
are represented using subject-related feature based on 2D
skeleton and scene-related features extracted from background RGB images, and camera motions which are represented using optical flows. The correlation between the
inputs and output future camera motions are learned via a
sequence-to-sequence convolutional long short-term memory (Seq2Seq ConvLSTM) network from a large set of video
clips. We deploy our approach to a real drone system by
first predicting the future camera motions, and then converting them to the drone’s control commands via an odometer.
Our experimental results on extensive datasets and showcases exhibit significant improvements in our approach over
conventional baselines and our approach can successfully
mimic the footage of a professional cameraman.

1. Introduction
Filming human motions with a camera drone is a very
challenging task, because it requires the cameraman to take
an overall consideration of the scenes, the moving subject
* corresponding author

Figure 1. We learn a model to predict camera motions which
imitate the operation of the professional cameraman.

and the previous camera motions to determine the next camera motion, and meanwhile precisely control the drone towards the target position and camera pose. In this study, we
investigate the problem of autonomously planning 6DOF
motions of a camera drone as an expert for filming a video
with a moving subject (see Fig. 1).
Several studies have been conducted in the literature
for autonomous camera planning. Existing solutions range
from heuristic parametric methods to learning-based nonparametric approaches. For instance, the state-of-the-art
autonomous filming application DJI QuickShot employs
a parametric method by providing several filming modes,
each of which utilizes a predefined path and camera poses
for producing footages. Without considering the video
contents, this simple solution usually suffers from problems including losing tracking of the subject and/or capturing repetitive unexciting patterns. Learning-based nonparametric methods, such as [4, 3, 5], are much more flexible as they can learn (almost) arbitrary camera motion predictors directly from training data. In [4, 3], Chen et al.
learned a 3DOF camera pose predictor via recurrent decision trees to imitate professional filming basketball game
events. In their method, a sequence of moving subjects’ positions and camera poses were utilized to predict the next
best camera pose. This method was also applied to automatic soccer game broadcasting [5]. However, existing
4321
4244

