Neighbourhood Watch: Referring Expression Comprehension via
Language-guided Graph Attention Networks∗
Peng Wang1
1

Qi Wu1 Jiewei Cao1 Chunhua Shen1 Lianli Gao2 Anton van den Hengel1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
2
The University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract

Referring Expression:

The child held by a woman beside a table
Language Self Attention

The task in referring expression comprehension is to
localise the object instance in an image described by a
referring expression phrased in natural language. As a
language-to-vision matching task, the key to this problem
is to learn a discriminative object feature that can adapt to
the expression used. To avoid ambiguity, the expression normally tends to describe not only the properties of the referent itself, but also its relationships to its neighbourhood. To
capture and exploit this important information we propose
a graph-based, language-guided attention mechanism. Being composed of node attention component and edge attention component, the proposed graph attention mechanism
explicitly represents inter-object relationships, and properties with a flexibility and power impossible with competing approaches. Furthermore, the proposed graph attention
mechanism enables the comprehension decision to be visualisable and explainable. Experiments on three referring
expression comprehension datasets show the advantage of
the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
A referring expression is a natural language phrase that
refers to a particular object visible in an image. Referring expression comprehension thus requires to identify the
unique object of interest, referred to by the language expression [29]. The critical challenge is thus the joint understanding of the textual and visual domains.
Referring expression comprehension can be formulated
as a language-to-region matching problem, where the region with highest matching score is selected as the prediction. Learning a discriminative region representation
that can adapt to the language expression is thus critical.
The predominant approaches [7, 15, 16] tend to represent
the region by stacking various types of features, such as
∗ Q. Wu’s participation was supported in part by the National Science
of China (No. 61876152).

The child held by a woman beside a table
Language-guided
Graph Attention

Region
Proposal

Input Image

Directed Relational Graph with Attention Masks

Figure 1. A directed graph is built over the object instances of the
image, where nodes correspond to object regions and edges (partially visualised) represent relationships between objects (blue and
red edges denote intra- and inter-class relationships respectively).
Graph attention predicts the attention distribution over the nodes
as well as the edges, based on the decomposed information present
in the expression. Summarising the attended object and its highlighted neighbours enables more discriminative feature. Higher
transparency here denotes a lower attention value.

CNN features, spatial features or heuristic contextual features, and employ a LSTM to process the expression simply as a series of words. However, these approaches are
limited by the monolithic vector representations that ignore the complex structures in the compound language expression as well as in the image. Another potential problem for these approaches, and for more advanced modular
schemes [5, 27], is that the language and region features are
learned or designed independently without being informed
by each other, which makes the features of the two modalities difficult to adapt to each other, especially when the
expression is complex. Co-attention mechanisms are employed in [3, 32] to extract more informative features from
both the language and the image to achieve better matching
performance. These approaches, however, treat the objects
in the image in isolation and thus fail to model the relationships between them. These relationships are naturally
important in identifying the referent, especially when the
expression is compound. For example, in Fig. 1, the expression “the child held by a woman beside a table” describes
11960

