Centripetal SGD for Pruning Very Deep Convolutional Networks with
Complicated Structure ∗
Xiaohan Ding 1 Guiguang Ding 1 Yuchen Guo 1 Jungong Han 2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Lancaster University
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn {yuchen.w.guo,jungonghan77}@gmail.com

Abstract
The redundancy is widely recognized in Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), which enables to remove unimportant filters from convolutional layers so as to slim the
network with acceptable performance drop. Inspired by the
linearity of convolution, we seek to make some filters increasingly close and eventually identical for network slimming. To this end, we propose Centripetal 1 SGD (C-SGD),
a novel optimization method, which can train several filters to collapse into a single point in the parameter hyperspace. When the training is completed, the removal of the
identical filters can trim the network with NO performance
loss, thus no finetuning is needed. By doing so, we have
partly solved an open problem of constrained filter pruning on CNNs with complicated structure, where some layers must be pruned following others. Our experimental results on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet have justified the effectiveness of C-SGD-based filter pruning. Moreover, we have
provided empirical evidences for the assumption that the redundancy in deep neural networks helps the convergence of
training by showing that a redundant CNN trained using CSGD outperforms a normally trained counterpart with the
equivalent width.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has become an
important tool for machine learning and many related fields
[10, 36, 37, 38]. However, due to their nature of computational intensity, as CNNs grow wider and deeper,
their memory footprint, power consumption and required
floating-point operations (FLOPs) have increased dramat∗ This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(No. 2018YFC0807500), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61571269), National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents
(No. BX20180172), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No.
2018M640131). Corresponding author: Guiguang Ding.
1 Here “centripetal” means “several objects moving towards a center”,
not “an object rotating around a center by the centripetal force”.

ically, thus making them difficult to be deployed on platforms without rich computational resource, like embedded
systems. In this context, CNN compression and acceleration methods have been intensively studied, including tensor low rank expansion [31], connection pruning [20], filter
pruning [40], quantization [19], knowledge distillation [27],
fast convolution [48], feature map compacting [61], etc.
We focus on filter pruning, a.k.a. channel pruning [26]
or network slimming [44], for three reasons. Firstly, filter
pruning is a universal technique which is able to handle any
kinds of CNNs, making no assumptions on the application
field, the network architecture or the deployment platform.
Secondly, filter pruning effectively reduces the FLOPs of
the network, which serve as the main criterion of computational burdens. Lastly, as an important advantage in practice, filter pruning produces a thinner network with no customized structure or extra operation, which is orthogonal to
the other model compression and acceleration techniques.
Motivated by the universality and significance, considerable efforts have been devoted to filter pruning techniques. Due to the widely observed redundancy in CNNs
[8, 9, 13, 19, 66, 69], numerous excellent works have shown
that, if a CNN is pruned appropriately with acceptable structural damage, a follow-up finetuning procedure can restore
the performance to a certain degree. 1) Some prior works
[2, 5, 28, 40, 49, 50, 66] sort the filters by their importance,
directly remove the unimportant ones and re-construct the
network with the remaining filters. As the important filters
are preserved, a comparable level of performance can be
reached by finetuning. However, some recent powerful networks have complicated structures, like identity mapping
[23] and dense connection [29], where some layers must be
pruned in the same pattern as others, raising an open problem of constrained filter pruning. This further challenges
such pruning techniques, as one cannot assume the important filters at different layers reside on the same positions.
2) Obviously, the model is more likely to recover if the destructive impact of pruning is reduced. Taking this into consideration, another family of methods [3, 15, 43, 60, 63]
seeks to zero out some filters in advance, where group-

4943

