Selective Kernel Networks
Xiang Li∗1,2 , Wenhai Wang†3,2 , Xiaolin Hu‡4 and Jian Yang§1
1

PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Tsinghua University

Abstract
In standard Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), the
receptive fields of artificial neurons in each layer are designed to share the same size. It is well-known in the neuroscience community that the receptive field size of visual
cortical neurons are modulated by the stimulus, which has
been rarely considered in constructing CNNs. We propose
a dynamic selection mechanism in CNNs that allows each
neuron to adaptively adjust its receptive field size based
on multiple scales of input information. A building block
called Selective Kernel (SK) unit is designed, in which multiple branches with different kernel sizes are fused using
softmax attention that is guided by the information in these
branches. Different attentions on these branches yield different sizes of the effective receptive fields of neurons in
the fusion layer. Multiple SK units are stacked to a deep
network termed Selective Kernel Networks (SKNets). On
the ImageNet and CIFAR benchmarks, we empirically show
that SKNet outperforms the existing state-of-the-art architectures with lower model complexity. Detailed analyses
show that the neurons in SKNet can capture target objects
with different scales, which verifies the capability of neurons for adaptively adjusting their receptive field sizes according to the input. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/implus/SKNet.

∗ Xiang Li and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent
Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of
Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for
Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, China. Xiang Li is also a visiting
scholar at Momenta. Email: xiang.li.implus@njust.edu.cn
† Wenhai Wang is with National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University. He was an research intern at Momenta.
‡ Xiaolin Hu is with the Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information
Science and Technology (TNList) Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University, China.
§ Corresponding author.

2

Momenta

3

Nanjing University

1. Introduction
The local receptive fields (RFs) of neurons in the primary
visual cortex (V1) of cats [14] have inspired the construction of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [26] in the
last century, and it continues to inspire mordern CNN structure construction. For instance, it is well-known that in the
visual cortex, the RF sizes of neurons in the same area (e.g.,
V1 region) are different, which enables the neurons to collect multi-scale spatial information in the same processing
stage. This mechanism has been widely adopted in recent
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). A typical example is InceptionNets [42, 15, 43, 41], in which a simple concatenation is designed to aggregate multi-scale information
from, e.g., 3×3, 5×5, 7×7 convolutional kernels inside the
“inception” building block.
However, some other RF properties of cortical neurons
have not been emphasized in designing CNNs, and one such
property is the adaptive changing of RF size. Numerous experimental evidences have suggested that the RF sizes of
neurons in the visual cortex are not fixed, but modulated by
the stimulus. The Classical RFs (CRFs) of neurons in the
V1 region was discovered by Hubel and Wiesel [14], as determined by single oriented bars. Later, many studies (e.g.,
[30]) found that the stimuli outside the CRF will also affect the responses of neurons. The neurons are said to have
non-classical RFs (nCRFs). In addition, the size of nCRF
is related to the contrast of the stimulus: the smaller the
contrast, the larger the effective nCRF size [37]. Surprisingly, by stimulating nCRF for a period of time, the CRF
of the neuron is also enlarged after removing these stimuli [33]. All of these experiments suggest that the RF sizes
of neurons are not fixed but modulated by stimulus [38].
Unfortunately, this property does not receive much attention in constructing deep learning models. Those models
with multi-scale information in the same layer such as InceptionNets have an inherent mechanism to adjust the RF
size of neurons in the next convolutional layer according
to the contents of the input, because the next convolutional

510

