Textured Neural Avatars
Aliaksandra Shysheya 1,2 Egor Zakharov 1,2 Kara-Ali Aliev 1 Renat Bashirov 1
Egor Burkov 1,2 Karim Iskakov 1 Aleksei Ivakhnenko 1 Yury Malkov 1
Igor Pasechnik 1 Dmitry Ulyanov 1,2 Alexander Vakhitov 1,2 Victor Lempitsky 1,2
1

Samsung AI Center, Moscow

2

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow

Figure 1: We propose a new model for neural rendering of humans. The model is trained for a single person and can produce
renderings of this person from novel viewpoints (top) or in the new body pose (bottom) unseen during training. To improve
generatlization, our model retains explicit texture representation, which is learned alongside the rendering neural network.

Abstract
We present a system for learning full body neural avatars,
i.e. deep networks that produce full body renderings of a
person for varying body pose and varying camera pose.
Our system takes the middle path between the classical graphics pipeline and the recent deep learning approaches that generate images of humans using image-toimage translation. In particular, our system estimates an
explicit two-dimensional texture map of the model surface.
At the same time, it abstains from explicit shape modeling in 3D. Instead, at test time, the system uses a fullyconvolutional network to directly map the configuration of
body feature points w.r.t. the camera to the 2D texture coordinates of individual pixels in the image frame. We show
that such system is capable of learning to generate realistic renderings while being trained on videos annotated with
3D poses and foreground masks. We also demonstrate that
maintaining an explicit texture representation helps our system to achieve better generalization compared to systems
that use direct image-to-image translation.

1. Introduction
Capturing and rendering human body in all of its complexity under varying pose and imaging conditions is one

of the core problems of both computer vision and computer
graphics. Recently, there is a surge of interest that involves
deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) as an alternative to
traditional computer graphics means. Realistic neural rendering of body fragments e.g. faces [37, 43, 62], eyes [24],
hands [47] is now possible. Very recent works have shown
abilities of such networks to generate views of a person with
a varying body pose but with fixed camera position, and using an excessive amount of training data [1, 12, 42, 67].
In this work, we focus on the learning of neural avatars,
i.e. generative deep networks that are capable of rendering
views of individual people under varying body pose defined
by a set of 3D positions of the body joints and under varying camera positions (Figure 1). We prefer to use body joint
positions to represent the human pose, as joint positions are
often easier to capture using marker-based or marker-less
motion capture systems.
Generally, neural avatars can serve as an alternative to
classical (“neural-free”) avatars based on a standard computer graphics pipeline that estimates a user-personalized
body mesh in a neutral position, performs skinning (deformation of the neutral pose), and projects the resulting 3D
surface onto the image coordinates, while superimposing
person-specific 2D texture. Neural avatars attempt to shortcut the multiple stages of the classical pipeline and to replace them with a single network that learns the mapping
from the input (the location of body joints) to the output (the
12387

