DeepView: View synthesis with learned gradient descent
John Flynn, Michael Broxton, Paul Debevec, Matthew DuVall, Graham Fyffe,
Ryan Overbeck, Noah Snavely, Richard Tucker
{jflynn,broxton,debevec,matthewduvall,fyffe,rover,snavely,richardt}@google.com

Google Inc.

Figure 1: The DeepView architecture. (a) The network takes a sparse set of input images shot from different viewpoints. (b, c) The scene
is reconstructed using learned gradient descent, producing a multi-plane image (a series of fronto-parallel, RGBA textured planes). (d)
The multi-plane image is suitable for real-time, high-quality rendering of novel viewpoints. The result above uses four input views in a
30cm × 20cm rectangular layout. The novel view was rendered with a virtual camera positioned at the centroid of the four input views.

Abstract
We present a novel approach to view synthesis using
multiplane images (MPIs). Building on recent advances
in learned gradient descent, our algorithm generates an
MPI from a set of sparse camera viewpoints. The resulting
method incorporates occlusion reasoning, improving performance on challenging scene features such as object boundaries, lighting reflections, thin structures, and scenes with
high depth complexity. We show that our method achieves
high-quality, state-of-the-art results on two datasets: the
Kalantari light field dataset, and a new camera array dataset,
Spaces, which we make publicly available.

1. Introduction
Light fields offer a compelling way to view scenes from
a continuous, dynamic set of viewpoints. The recently intro-

duced multiplane image (MPI) representation approximates
a light field as a stack of semi-transparent, colored layers
arranged at various depths [32, 34] allowing real-time synthesis of new views of real scenes. MPIs are a powerful
representation that can model complex appearance effects
such as transparency and alpha matting.
Reconstructing an MPI from a sparse set of input views
is an ill-posed inverse problem, like computed tomography
(CT) or image deblurring, where we want to estimate a
model whose number of parameters is much larger than the
effective number of measurements. Such inverse problems
can be solved using gradient descent based optimization
methods that solve for the parameters that best predict the
measurements via a forward model (such as a renderer in
the case of view synthesis). However, for ill-posed problems
these methods can overfit the measurements, necessitating
the use of priors that are difficult to design and often data
dependent. In the case of view synthesis, such overfitting
results in synthesized views with noticeable visual artifacts.
12367

