Spectral Reconstruction from Dispersive Blur: A Novel Light Efficient Spectral
Imager
Xuemei Hu∗,1 Hui Guo1 Zhan Ma1 Tao Yue1,2 Xun Cao1
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
NJU institute of sensing and imaging engineering, Nanjing, China

Yuanyuan Zhao∗,1

{yuan square,

guo hui}@smail.nju.edu.cn

{xuemeihu,

Abstract
Developing high light efficiency imaging techniques to
retrieve high dimensional optical signal is a long-term
goal in computational photography. Multispectral imaging,
which captures images of different wavelengths and boosting the abilities for revealing scene properties, has developed rapidly in the last few decades. From scanning method
to snapshot imaging, the limit of light collection efficiency
is kept being pushed which enables wider applications especially under the light-starved scenes. In this work, we
propose a novel multispectral imaging technique, that could
capture the multispectral images with a high light efficiency.
Through investigating the dispersive blur caused by spectral dispersers and introducing the difference of blur (DoB)
constraints, we propose a basic theory for capturing multispectral information from a single dispersive-blurred image and an additional spectrum of an arbitrary point in the
scene. Based on the theory, we design a prototype system
and develop an optimization algorithm to realize snapshot
multispectral imaging. The effectiveness of the proposed
method is verified on both the synthetic data and real captured images.

1. Introduction
The spectrum of light contains rich information of the
scene, and is of great significance for many applications,
e.g., medical diagnostics [3], object distinguishment [8],
face recognition [26], etc. The core technique for capturing the spectrum of light is snapshot multispectral imaging,
i.e., taking images or videos of different wavelength band
over the visible wavelength range in a single snapshot.
Existing snapshot multispectral imaging techniques can
be mainly categorized into five main categories: tomography methods [9], remapping methods [7, 13, 16], coded
aperture methods [11, 17, 23, 28, 30], spectral filter based
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

mazhan,

yuetao,

Edge
Mask

Relay
Lens

Imaging
Lens

Prism

caoxun}@nju.edu.cn

Sensor
#1

Object
Imaging
Lens

Sensor
#2

Sharp Gray
Image

(a)
I

I

Dispersive
Image

dI/dx

I
0
0

x6
x

x2

x2

I
s2
y

0
I

I

x6 x
s3 - s1

0

s6
0
x

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Overview of our imaging method. (a) Prototype system:
incoming light is splitted into two light paths: a sharp gray image is captured from one light path for the location information of
edges. A dispersive-blurred and margin-masked image is captured
on the other path for the DoB constraints and the additional spectrum of the edge point. (b) DoB constraints along each edge: the
derivative of the dispersive blur along each edge equals the difference of the spectrum of the adjacent areas. (c) DoB constraints
over all edges constitute a graph, based on which we reconstruct
the hyperspectral images.

methods [5, 21, 22, 25] and RGB camera based methods [1, 2, 4, 10, 33]. The total light throughput of these
multispectral imaging techniques is sacrificed either in the
spatial or the spectral dimension, which greatly reduce the
signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) of measurements and prevent
the high-quality multispectral reconstruction [24]. Thus,
improving the light throughput is one of the key concern in
spectrometer design, especially for the video-rate spectral
imagers where the exposure time is strictly limited.
In this paper, we propose a novel snapshot multispectral imaging technique with high light throughput. Based
on the difference of blur (DoB) constraints [12] (i.e., the
derivative of the dispersive blur along the dispersive direction over each edge is exactly the difference of spectrum
of the adjacent area, as shown in Fig. 1(b)), we theoret112202

