Spatial Attentive Single-Image Deraining with a High Quality Real Rain Dataset
Tianyu Wang1,2∗

Xin Yang1,2∗
1

Ke Xu1,2

Shaozhe Chen1

Dalian University of Technology

2

Qiang Zhang1

Rynson W.H. Lau2†

City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Removing rain streaks from a single image has been
drawing considerable attention as rain streaks can severely
degrade the image quality and affect the performance of existing outdoor vision tasks. While recent CNN-based derainers have reported promising performances, deraining
remains an open problem for two reasons. First, existing
synthesized rain datasets have only limited realism, in terms
of modeling real rain characteristics such as rain shape, direction and intensity. Second, there are no public benchmarks for quantitative comparisons on real rain images,
which makes the current evaluation less objective. The core
challenge is that real world rain/clean image pairs cannot be captured at the same time. In this paper, we address the single image rain removal problem in two ways.
First, we propose a semi-automatic method that incorporates temporal priors and human supervision to generate a
high-quality clean image from each input sequence of real
rain images. Using this method, we construct a large-scale
dataset of ∼29.5K rain/rain-free image pairs that covers a
wide range of natural rain scenes. Second, to better cover
the stochastic distribution of real rain streaks, we propose
a novel SPatial Attentive Network (SPANet) to remove rain
streaks in a local-to-global manner. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our network performs favorably against
the state-of-the-art deraining methods.

1. Introduction
Images taken under various rain conditions often show
low visibility, which can signiﬁcantly affect the performance of some outdoor vision tasks, e.g., pedestrian detection [30], visual tracking [37], or road sign recognition [48].
Hence, removing rain streaks from input rain images is an
important research problem. In this paper, we focus on the
single-image rain removal problem.
In the last decade, we have witnessed a continuous
progress on rain removal research with many methods proposed [20, 29, 26, 5, 47, 9], through carefully modeling
∗ Joint ﬁrst authors. † Rynson Lau is the corresponding author, and
he led this project.

(a) Rain image

(b) Clean image

(c) SPANet

(d) DDN [11]

(e) DID-MDN [42]

(f) RESCAN [25]

Figure 1. We address the single-image rain removal problem in
two ways. First, we generate a high-quality rain/clean image pair
((a) and (b)) from each sequence of real rain images, to form a
dataset. Second, we propose a novel SPANet to take full advantage
of the proposed dataset. (c) to (f) compare the visual results from
SPANet and from state-of-the-art derainers.

the physical characteristics of rain streaks. Beneﬁted from
large-scale training data, recent deep-learning-based derainers [10, 11, 40, 42, 25, 45, 15] achieve further promising
performances. Nonetheless, the single-image rain removal
problem remains open in two ways, as discussed below.
Lack of real training data. As real rain/clean image
pairs are unavailable, existing derainers typically rely on
synthesized datasets to train their models. They usually
start with a clean image and add synthetic rain on it to form
a rain/clean image pair. Although some works have been
done to study the physical characteristics of rain, e.g., rain
direction [40] and rain density [42], their datasets still lack
the ability to model a large range of real world rain streaks.
For example, it is often very difﬁcult to classify the rain
density into one of the three levels (i.e., light, medium and
heavy) as in [42], and any misclassiﬁcation would certainly
affect the deraining performance. To simulate global rain
effects, some methods adopt the nonlinear “screen blend
mode” from Adobe Photoshop, or additionally superimpose
haze on the synthesized rain images. However, these global
settings can only be used in certain types of rain, or the
background may be darkened, with the details lost.

12270

