Weakly Supervised Open-set Domain Adaptation by
Dual-domain Collaboration
Shuhan Tan1,3,4 , Jiening Jiao2,3 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3*
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Accuvision Technology Co. Ltd.
{tanshh, jiaojn}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
In conventional domain adaptation, a critical assumption is that there exists a fully labeled domain (source)
that contains the same label space as another unlabeled
or scarcely labeled domain (target). However, in the real
world, there often exist application scenarios in which both
domains are partially labeled and not all classes are shared
between these two domains. Thus, it is meaningful to let
partially labeled domains learn from each other to classify all the unlabeled samples in each domain under an
open-set setting. We consider this problem as weakly supervised open-set domain adaptation. To address this practical
setting, we propose the Collaborative Distribution Alignment (CDA) method, which performs knowledge transfer
bilaterally and works collaboratively to classify unlabeled
data and identify outlier samples. Extensive experiments
on the Office benchmark and an application on person reidentification show that our method achieves state-of-theart performance.

1. Introduction
We have recently seen state-of-the-art performances in
many computer vision applications, mostly with deep learning. Nevertheless, most of that impressive progress strongly
depends on a large collection of labeled data. However,
in real-world applications, labeled data are often scarce or
sometimes even unobtainable. A straightforward solution is
to utilize off-the-shelf labeled datasets (e.g., ImageNet [6]).
However, datasets collected in different scenarios could be
in different data domains due to differences in many aspects
(e.g., background, light and sensor resolution). Therefore,
there is a strong demand to align the two domains and lever*Corresponding author

Domain A

Unlabeled

Labeled

Domain B

Labeled

濛瀂瀊澳瀇瀂澳
濿濴濵濸濿濒

Unlabeled

Figure 1. An illustration of weakly supervised open-set domain
adaptation for domain collaboration. In each domain, there are
some labeled and unlabeled samples. The frame colors represent
the class of each item, while the unknown-class items have black
frames. Without domain collaboration, the blue-framed item in
Domain B cannot be classiﬁed properly because there are no labeled blue-framed data in its own domain. This is the same for the
green-framed item in Domain A. (Best viewed in color)

age labeled data from the source domain to train a classiﬁer
that is applicable in the target domain. This approach is
termed domain adaptation [33].
In conventional domain adaptation, the label spaces of
the source and target domains are identical. However, such
a setting may be restricted in applications. Recently in [2],
open-set domain adaptation was proposed, where there exist samples in the target domain that do not belong to any
class in the source domain, and vice versa. These samples
cannot be represented by any class in the known label space,
and they are therefore aggregated to an additional unknown
class. One of our main goals is to detect these unknownclass samples in the target domain and in the meantime still
classify the remaining known-class samples.
Moreover, in real applications, there often exists a large
number of partially labeled datasets, where we cannot always ﬁnd an off-the-shelf source dataset. Therefore, in the
absence of an ideally large source domain, it is meaning-

5394

