Iterative Residual CNNs for Burst Photography Applications
Filippos Kokkinos
Stamatios Lefkimmiatis
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow, Russia
filippos.kokkinos@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Modern inexpensive imaging sensors suffer from inherent hardware constraints which often result in captured images of poor quality. Among the most common ways to deal
with such limitations is to rely on burst photography, which
nowadays acts as the backbone of all modern smartphone
imaging applications. In this work, we focus on the fact that
every frame of a burst sequence can be accurately described
by a forward (physical) model. This, in turn, allows us to
restore a single image of higher quality from a sequence
of low-quality images as the solution of an optimization
problem. Inspired by an extension of the gradient descent
method that can handle non-smooth functions, namely the
proximal gradient descent, and modern deep learning techniques, we propose a convolutional iterative network with a
transparent architecture. Our network uses a burst of lowquality image frames and is able to produce an output of
higher image quality recovering fine details which are not
distinguishable in any of the original burst frames. We focus both on the burst photography pipeline as a whole, i.e.,
burst demosaicking and denoising, as well as on the traditional Gaussian denoising task. The developed method
demonstrates consistent state-of-the art performance across
the two tasks and as opposed to other recent deep learning
approaches does not have any inherent restrictions either to
the number of frames or their ordering.

1. Introduction
With more than one billion smartphones sold each year,
smartphone cameras have dominated the photography market. However, to allow for small and versatile sensors, inevitably manufacturers of such cameras need to make several compromises. As a result, the quality of images captured by smartphone cameras is significantly inferior compared to the quality of images acquired by sophisticated
hand-held cameras like DSLRs. The most common hardware restrictions in smartphone cameras are the lack of
large aperture lens and the small sensors that consist of
fewer photodiodes. To overcome such inherent hardware
restrictions, the focus is thus shifted towards the software

s.lefkimmiatis@skoltech.ru

of the camera, i.e., the Image Processing Pipeline (ISP).
The shortcomings of mobile photography can be mitigated by the use of burst photography, where a camera
firstly captures a burst of images, milliseconds apart, and
afterward fuses them in a sophisticated manner to produce a
higher-quality image. Therefore, burst photography allows
inexpensive hardware to overcome mechanical and physical
constraints and thus achieving higher imaging quality in the
expense of computation time. While ideally, we would like
each frame of the burst to capture precisely the same scene,
this is not possible due to camera motion (e.g. hand shake),
scene motion by dynamic moving objects and finally inefficiencies of Optical Image Stabilization (OIS) hardware that
may cause a slight drift even for completely static scenes.
Therefore, homography estimation and alignment usually
is necessary when processing frames of the same scene.
The idea of using a sequence of photographs to enhance
the image quality, is not new and it has been successfully
exploited in the past for the tasks of image debluring [1, 5],
denoising [29] and super-resolution [9]. Inspired from these
works, we design a restoration algorithm that involves a
neural network, to handle various tasks of burst photography. First, we rely on a physical model for the observations of the burst, which in turn enables us to derive an optimization scheme for restoration purposes. The optimization
scheme is combined with supervised learning of a neural
network with a transparent architecture, leading to an Iterative Neural Network (INN). The developed framework exhibits by design many desired properties, which competing
deep learning methods for burst photography do not necessarily exhibit, namely a) inherent invariance to the ordering
of the frames, b) support of bursts of arbitrary size and c)
scalability to burst size.

2. Related work
2.1. Image Denoising
Single image denoising is a longstanding problem, and
it has progressed dramatically in recent decades, approaching its believed performance limit [26]. The list of methods includes but not limited to Field-of-Experts [35], NonLocal Means [4] and BM3D [6], with the latter being the de

5929

