Improved Road Connectivity by Joint Learning of Orientation and Segmentation
Anil Batra ∗1 Suriya Singh ∗ †2 Guan Pang3 Saikat Basu3 C.V. Jawahar1 Manohar Paluri3
1

IIIT Hyderabad

2

MILA / Polytechnique Montréal

Abstract
Road network extraction from satellite images often produce fragmented road segments leading to road maps unfit
for real applications. Pixel-wise classification fails to predict topologically correct and connected road masks due to
the absence of connectivity supervision and difficulty in enforcing topological constraints. In this paper, we propose
a connectivity task called Orientation Learning, motivated
by the human behavior of annotating roads by tracing it
at a specific orientation. We also develop a stacked multibranch convolutional module to effectively utilize the mutual information between orientation learning and segmentation tasks. These contributions ensure that the model predicts topologically correct and connected road masks. We
also propose Connectivity Refinement approach to further
enhance the estimated road networks. The refinement model
is pre-trained to connect and refine the corrupted groundtruth masks and later fine-tuned to enhance the predicted
road masks. We demonstrate the advantages of our approach on two diverse road extraction datasets SpaceNet
[30] and DeepGlobe [11]. Our approach improves over the
state-of-the-art techniques by 9% and 7.5% in road topology metric on SpaceNet and DeepGlobe, respectively.

1. Introduction
A mapped road network provides routing information to
find the traversable paths, which are important for planning
in various applications such as navigation and disaster management. Example of a connected road network is shown
in Figure 1a. Manual mapping of a complex road network
is time consuming and requires intensive human effort. Automatic extraction of road networks from satellite imagery
has been proposed [2, 6, 18, 29, 33], where recently, deep
learning based techniques have shown high quality mapping
results in diverse scenarios [3, 8, 10, 19, 21–23, 28, 31, 35].
However, the extracted road networks often produce frag∗ Equal Contribution
† Work partially done as Research Fellow at IIIT Hyderabad

Code available at:
road-connectivity

https://github.com/anil-2185/

3

Facebook

a

a

c
f

e

d
g

b

c

h

f

e

d
g

b
h

(a)

(b)
a

c
f

(c)

e

d
g

b
h

(d)

Figure 1: Road network extraction formulated as binary segmentation fails to produce topologically correct road map due to
change in road appearance. (a) Annotators trace lines (highlighted
nodes) along the center of roads with a traversable shortest path
(a, c, d, e, b) for a → b. (b) Fragmented road network estimated
using segmentation resulting in path (a, c, f, g, h, b) for a → b.
(c) Tracing roads with orientation to achieve connectivity. (d) We
extract connected and topologically correct road networks using
segmentation and orientation.

mented road segments, and therefore, are unfit for real applications (Figure 1b). Satellite images pose difficulties in
the extraction of roads due to (a) shadows of clouds and
trees, (b) diverse appearance and illumination condition due
to terrain, weather, geography, etc., and, (c) similarity of
road texture with other materials. Label scarcity [28] as well
as omission and registration noise in road ground-truths
[22] also inhibit the accurate estimation of road maps.
Road network extraction is explored in [8, 10, 19, 21,
22], where the problem is posed as segmentation followed
by post-processing steps to refine and couple the missing
110385

