VITAMIN-E: VIsual Tracking And MappINg
with Extremely Dense Feature Points
Masashi Yokozuka, Shuji Oishi, Thompson Simon, Atsuhiko Banno
Robot Innovation Research Center,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan
{yokotsuka-masashi, shuji.oishi, simon.thompson, atsuhiko.banno}@aist.go.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel indirect monocular
SLAM algorithm called “VITAMIN-E,” which is highly accurate and robust as a result of tracking extremely dense
feature points. Typical indirect methods have difficulty in
reconstructing dense geometry because of their careful feature point selection for accurate matching. Unlike conventional methods, the proposed method processes an enormous number of feature points by tracking the local extrema of curvature informed by dominant flow estimation.
Because this may lead to high computational cost during
bundle adjustment, we propose a novel optimization technique, the ”subspace Gauss–Newton method”, that significantly improves the computational efficiency of bundle adjustment by partially updating the variables. We concurrently generate meshes from the reconstructed points and
merge them for an entire 3D model. The experimental
results on the SLAM benchmark dataset EuRoC demonstrated that the proposed method outperformed state-of-theart SLAM methods, such as DSO, ORB-SLAM, and LSDSLAM, both in terms of accuracy and robustness in trajectory estimation. The proposed method simultaneously generated significantly detailed 3D geometry from the dense
feature points in real time using only a CPU.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is a key
technology for applications such as autonomous systems
and augmented reality. Whereas LiDAR-based SLAM[34,
11, 25] is well established and widely used in autonomous
vehicles, visual SLAM with a monocular camera does not
provide sufficient accuracy and robustness, particularly regarding dense map reconstruction, to replace LiDAR-based
SLAM. Although some visual SLAM algorithms that use
stereo cameras[7, 32], RGB-D cameras[12, 14, 33], and inertial sensors[20, 18, 2, 28, 19] have achieved high perfor-

Figure 1. Dense geometry reconstruction with VITAMIN-E on
EuRoC V101. (https://youtu.be/yfKccCmmMsM)

mance, these methods are based on pure monocular SLAM;
hence, improving monocular SLAM is important.
Monocular SLAM methods can be classified into two
types: direct methods and indirect methods.
Direct methods: Direct methods estimate camera poses
and reconstruct the scene by minimizing the photometric
error defined as a sum of the intensity difference between
each pixel in the latest image and the reprojection of the
color / monochrome 3D map. Direct methods, such as LSDSLAM[5], SVO[9], and DSO[6], process almost all pixels
in incoming images. They do not require exact pixel correspondences among multiple views unlike indirect methods,
which leads to denser map reconstruction. However, direct
methods are susceptible to image noise, luminance fluctuation, and lens aberration because they directly use pixel
intensities. To overcome this drawback, Bergmann et al.[1]
proposed a normalization method against luminance fluctuation and a calibration method for lens aberration. As another approach, Zhang et al.[35] proposed an auto-exposure
method that is suitable for direct methods.
Indirect methods: Indirect methods minimize the geometric error between observed 2D feature points and re19641

