TraPHic: Trajectory Prediction in Dense and Heterogeneous Traffic Using
Weighted Interactions
Rohan Chandra
University of Maryland
College Park

Uttaran Bhattacharya
University of Maryland
College Park

Aniket Bera
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill

Dinesh Manocha
University of Maryland
College Park
https://go.umd.edu/TraPHic

Abstract
We present a new algorithm for predicting the near-term
trajectories of road agents in dense traffic videos. Our approach is designed for heterogeneous traffic, where the road
agents may correspond to buses, cars, scooters, bi-cycles,
or pedestrians. We model the interactions between different
road agents using a novel LSTM-CNN hybrid network for
trajectory prediction. In particular, we take into account
heterogeneous interactions that implicitly account for the
varying shapes, dynamics, and behaviors of different road
agents. In addition, we model horizon-based interactions
which are used to implicitly model the driving behavior of
each road agent. We evaluate the performance of our prediction algorithm, TraPHic, on the standard datasets and
also introduce a new dense, heterogeneous traffic dataset
corresponding to urban Asian videos and agent trajectories. We outperform state-of-the-art methods on dense traffic datasets by 30%.

1. Introduction
The increasing availability of cameras and computer vision techniques has made it possible to track traffic road
agents in realtime. These road agents may correspond to
vehicles such as cars, buses, or scooters as well as pedestrians, bicycles, or animals. The trajectories of road agents
extracted from a video can be used to model traffic patterns,
driver behaviors, that are useful for autonomous driving. In
addition to tracking, it is also important to predict the future trajectory of each road agent in realtime. The predicted
trajectories are useful for performing safe autonomous navigation, traffic forecasting, vehicle routing, and congestion
management [32, 11].
In this paper, we deal with dense traffic composed of het-

Figure 1. Trajectory Prediction: in dense heterogeneous traffic conditions. The scene consists of cars, scooters, motorcycles,
three-wheelers, and bicycles in close proximity. Our algorithm
(TraPHic) can predict the trajectory (red) of each road-agent close
to the ground truth (green) and is better than other prior algorithms
(shown in other colors).

erogeneous road agents. The heterogeneity corresponds to
the interactions between different types of road agents such
as cars, buses, pedestrians, two-wheelers (scooters and motorcycles), three-wheelers (rickshaws), animals, etc. These
agents have different shapes, dynamic constraints, and behaviors. The traffic density corresponds to the number of
distinct road agents captured in a single frame of the video
or the number of agents per unit length (e.g., a kilometer)
of the roadway. High density traffic is described as traffic
with more than 100 road agents per Km. Finally, an interaction corresponds to how two road agents in close proximity
affect each other’s movement or avoid collisions.
There is considerable work on trajectory prediction for
moving agents [2, 18, 36, 12, 26, 30, 12, 26]. Most of
these algorithms have been developed for scenarios with
single type of agents (a.k.a. homogeneous agents), which
may correspond to human pedestrians in a crowd or cars
18483

