ToothNet: Automatic Tooth Instance Segmentation and Identification from Cone
Beam CT Images
Zhiming Cui

Changjian Li

Wenping Wang

The University of Hong Kong
{zmcui, cjli, wenping}@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
This paper proposes a method that uses deep convolutional neural networks to achieve automatic and accurate
tooth instance segmentation and identification from CBCT
(cone beam CT) images for digital dentistry. The core of
our method is a two-stage network. In the first stage, an
edge map is extracted from the input CBCT image to enhance image contrast along shape boundaries. Then this
edge map and the input images are passed to the second
stage. In the second stage, we build our network upon the
3D region proposal network (RPN) with a novel learnedsimilarity matrix to help efficiently remove redundant proposals, speed up training and save GPU memory. To resolve
the ambiguity in the identification task, we encode teeth spatial relationships as an additional feature input in the identification task, which helps to remarkably improve the identification accuracy. Our evaluation, comparison and comprehensive ablation studies demonstrate that our method
produces accurate instance segmentation and identification
results automatically and outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches. To the best of our knowledge, our method is
the first to use neural networks to achieve automatic tooth
segmentation and identification from CBCT images.

1. Introduction
Digital dentistry has been developing rapidly in the past
decade. The key to digital dentistry is the acquisition and
segmentation of complete 3D teeth models; for example,
they are needed for specifying the target setup and movements of individual teeth for orthodontic diagnosis and
treatment planning. However, acquiring complete 3D input teeth models is a challenging task. Currently, there are
two mainstream technologies for acquiring 3D teeth models: (1) Intraoral or desktop scanning; and (2) cone beam
computed tomography (CBCT) [25]. Intraoral or desktop
scanning is a convenient way to obtain surface geometry of
tooth crowns but it cannot provide any information of tooth

Figure 1. An example of tooth segmentation and tooth identification. The first column shows a CBCT scan in the axis view, the
second column shows its segmentation results, and the last column shows the 3D segmentation results with different colors for
different teeth respectively.

roots, which is needed for accurate diagnosis and treatment
in many cases. In contrast, CBCT provides more comprehensive 3D volumetric information of all oral tissues, including teeth. Because of its high spatial resolution, CBCT
is suitable for 3D image reconstruction and is widely used
for oral surgery and digital orthodontics. In this paper, we
focus on 3D tooth instance segmentation and identification
from CBCT image data, which is a critical task for applications in digital orthodontics, as shown in Fig. 1.
Segmenting teeth from CBCT images is a difficult problem for the following reasons. (1) When CBCT is acquired
in the nature occlusion condition (i.e., the lower teeth and
upper teeth are in touch in the normal bite condition), it is
hard to separate a lower tooth from its opposing upper teeth
along their occlusal surface because of the lack of changes
in gray values [18, 22]; (2) Similarly, it is hard to separate a tooth from its surrounding alveolar bone due to their
highly similar densities; and (3) Adjacent teeth with similar
shape appearance are likely to confuse the effort of identifying different tooth instances (See for example the two maxillary central incisors in Fig. 1). Hence, successful tooth
segmentation can hardly be achieved by relying only on the
intensity variation of CT images, as shown by many previ16368

