Learning-based Sampling for Natural Image Matting
Jingwei Tang1,2

Yağız Aksoy2
1

Cengiz Öztireli1
2

Disney Research

Abstract
The goal of natural image matting is the estimation of
opacities of a user-defined foreground object that is essential in creating realistic composite imagery. Natural matting is a challenging process due to the high number of
unknowns in the mathematical modeling of the problem,
namely the opacities as well as the foreground and background layer colors, while the original image serves as
the single observation. In this paper, we propose the estimation of the layer colors through the use of deep neural
networks prior to the opacity estimation. The layer color
estimation is a better match for the capabilities of neural networks, and the availability of these colors substantially increase the performance of opacity estimation due to
the reduced number of unknowns in the compositing equation. A prominent approach to matting in parallel to ours
is called sampling-based matting, which involves gathering color samples from known-opacity regions to predict the
layer colors. Our approach outperforms not only the previous hand-crafted sampling algorithms, but also current
data-driven methods. We hence classify our method as a
hybrid sampling- and learning-based approach to matting,
and demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through
detailed ablation studies using alternative network architectures.

1. Introduction
Natural image matting is the estimation of the accurate
soft transitions between a user-defined foreground and the
background of an image. These soft transitions define the
opacity of the foreground at each pixel, and the resulting
alpha matte is one of the core elements in image and video
editing workflows that is essential in compositing. Matting
is a fundamental operation for various tasks during the postproduction stage of feature films, such as compositing liveaction and rendered elements together, and performing local
color corrections.
Formally, the color mixtures in soft transitions between
foreground and background are typically represented with
the compositing equation
Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi ,

(1)

Markus Gross1,2

Tunç Ozan Aydın1

ETH Zürich

where αi ∈ [0, 1] denotes the opacity of the foreground at
pixel i. I is the original image, and F and B represent the
unknown color values of the foreground and the background
respectively. Typically, user input is provided in the form of
a trimap, which provides a label for every pixel as purely
foreground (i.e. opaque, α = 1), purely background (i.e.
transparent, α = 0), or of unknown opacity. Matting algorithms aim to estimate the unknown opacities by making
use of the colors of the pixels in the known-opacity regions.
Data-driven matting algorithms [5, 14, 20] typically aim
to estimate the alpha values directly. In this paper, we propose to estimate the other unknowns in (1), F and B, using
deep neural networks prior to the opacity estimation process. Our main motivation is to increase the matting accuracy by reducing the number of unknowns in (1). This goal
of layer color estimation has many similarities with image
inpainting, as it is essentially a scene completion process
using partial observations. As demonstrated by the success
of data-driven image inpainting algorithms [9, 11, 21, 22],
estimating F and B is a more convenient task for deep networks than estimating α directly. We demonstrate through
quantitative and qualitative evaluations that the matting performance can be substantially increased by first estimating the layer colors even when standard network architectures that have been originally designed for inpainting and
direct α estimation are utilized. We also provide an extended data augmentation procedure for natural matting and
demonstrate the effectiveness of each design choice through
ablation studies.
Our approach has conceptual parallels with samplingbased matting methods, a prominent approach to matting
where two color samples are selected from the foreground
and background for each pixel to get an initial matte estimate using (1). Existing work in sampling-based matting
typically selects a color pair by using the color line assumption and other metrics from spatial proximity of the samples
among others. The inherent shortcoming of this approach
is the lack of consideration of image structure and texture
during the sample selection process. In contrast, the deep
networks we train for this sample-selection process are able
to make use of the color and texture characteristics of the
whole image, and as a result, provide a much more reliable
F and B estimations that is critical for the α estimation.
13055

