Graph Convolutional Label Noise Cleaner:
Train a Plug-and-play Action Classifier for Anomaly Detection

1

Jia-Xing Zhong1,2 Nannan Li3,1,2 Weijie Kong1,2 Shan Liu4 Thomas H. Li1 Ge Li 1,2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Institute of Intelligent Video Audio Technology, Longgang Shenzhen 4 Tencent America
jxzhong@pku.edu.cn

lnnsiat@gmail.com

weijie.kong@pku.edu.cn

shanl@tencent.com

tli@aiit.org.cn

geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Video anomaly detection under weak labels is formulated as a typical multiple-instance learning problem in previous works. In this paper, we provide a new perspective,
i.e., a supervised learning task under noisy labels. In such
a viewpoint, as long as cleaning away label noise, we can
directly apply fully supervised action classifiers to weakly
supervised anomaly detection, and take maximum advantage of these well-developed classifiers. For this purpose,
we devise a graph convolutional network to correct noisy
labels. Based upon feature similarity and temporal consistency, our network propagates supervisory signals from
high-confidence snippets to low-confidence ones. In this
manner, the network is capable of providing cleaned supervision for action classifiers. During the test phase, we
only need to obtain snippet-wise predictions from the action
classifier without any extra post-processing. Extensive experiments on 3 datasets at different scales with 2 types of action classifiers demonstrate the efficacy of our method. Remarkably, we obtain the frame-level AUC score of 82.12%
on UCF-Crime.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection in videos has been long studied for
its ubiquitous applications in real-world scenarios, e.g. intelligent surveillance, violence alerting, evidence investigation, etc. Since anomalous events are rarely seen in common environments, anomalies are often defined as behavioral or appearance patterns different from usual patterns in
previous work [6, 1, 13]. Based on this definition, a popular paradigm for anomaly detection is one-class classification [66, 11] (a.k.a. unary classification), i.e., to encode
the usual pattern with only normal training samples. Then
the distinctive encoded patterns are detected as anomalies.
However, it is impossible to collect all normal behaviors in

&ODVVLILFDWLRQ 6WDJH

+LJKFRQILGHQFH /DEHOV
6HOHFW

&OHDQLQJ 6WDJH

/DEHO
1RVLH
&OHDQHU
*&1

6QLSSHWOHYHO $QRPDO\/DEHOV
1RLV\

$FWLRQ &ODVVLILHU
6WHS W
9LGHR
6QLSSHWV



9LGHROHYHO
/DEHO

6WHS W ≥ 
6QLSSHWOHYHO $QRPDO\/DEHOV
/HVV QRLVH

Figure 1: The concept of alternate optimization mechanism.
Noisy labels predicted by the action classifier are utilized to
train the label noise cleaner and then they are refined. The
cleaned labels are reassigned to optimize the action classifier. The two training processes are executed alternatively.

a dataset. Therefore some normal events might deviate from
the encoded patterns, and could cause false alarms. In recent years, there has been some research [20, 22, 58] on an
emerging binary-classification paradigm: the training data
contain both anomalous and normal videos.
Following the binary-classification paradigm, we attempt to address the weakly supervised anomaly detection
problem, on which only video-level anomaly labels are
available in the training data. In this problem, there are neither trimmed anomalous segments nor temporal annotations
for the consideration of the human-labor cost.
The weakly supervised anomaly detection problem is
viewed as a multiple-instance learning (MIL) task in prior
works [20, 22, 58]. They consider a video (or a set of snippets) as a bag, which consists of the snippets (or frames)
deemed as instances, and learn instance-level anomaly labels via bag-level annotations. In this paper, we address

1237

