Compressing Unknown Images with Product Quantizer for Efficient Zero-Shot
Classification
Jin Li1,2 , Xuguang Lan1,2∗, Yang Liu3 , Le Wang1,2 , Nanning Zheng1,2
1
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Visual Information
Processing and Applications, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China,
3
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, China
{j.lixjtu, liuyangxidian}@gmail.com, {xglan, lewang, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
For Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL), the Nearest Neighbor (NN) search is generally conducted for classification, which
may cause unacceptable computational complexity for
large-scale datasets. To compress zero-shot classes by the
trained quantizer for efficient search, it tends to induce
large quantization error because distributions between seen
and unseen classes are different. However, as semantic
attributes of classes are available in ZSL, both seen and
unseen classes have the same distribution for one specific
property, e.g., animals have or do not have spots. Based
on this intuition, a Product Quantization Zero-Shot Learning (PQZSL) method is proposed to learn embeddings as
well as quantizers to compress visual features into compact
codes for Approximate NN (ANN) search. Particularly, visual features are projected into an orthogonal semantic space, and then the Product Quantization (PQ) is utilized to
quantize individual properties. Experimental results on five
benchmark datasets demonstrate that unseen classes are
represented by the Cartesian product of quantized properties with little quantization error. As classes in orthogonal
common space are more discriminative, the classification
based on PQZSL achieves state-of-the-art performance in
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) task, meanwhile,
the speed of ANN search is 10-100 times higher than traditional NN search.

1. Introduction
As deep learning-based architectures achieve many successes [23] [40], large-scale labeled training images are
more and more important for computer vision applications recently. However, large-scale well-annotated datasets
∗ Corresponding author: X. Lan. (xglan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn)

are difﬁcult to be established. One of the main reasons is
that the frequencies of natural images obtained by people
follow long-tailed distributions [47]. The number of newly deﬁned visual concepts and products is growing rapidly. Meanwhile, some objects are simply rare by nature
and there are little labeled samples for training. Besides,
sometimes image annotation requires options from experts, which is expensive. Alternatively, Zero-Short Learning
(ZSL) has been proposed as a feasible solution [24]. Images in limited classes are used in the training phase while
the learned model aims to recognize images in totally new
classes without additional data collections. Aiming at this
goal, ZSL utilizes semantic auxiliary information such as
word descriptions and attributes to preserve inter-class associations between seen and unseen classes [24] [10] [11] [48]
[14]. In the training phase, embeddings and compatibility
functions are learned given images and attributes of seen
classes. In the testing phase, the task of unseen class recognition becomes a typical classiﬁcation problem, which can
be solved by employing the Nearest Neighbor (NN) search
with learned compatibility functions.
Nowadays, as the number of obtained images and new
concepts grows rapidly, very large space and long time
are required to store and annotate images. For ZSL, to
achieve high efﬁciency of classiﬁcation in the large-scale
dataset such as ImageNet [9] is a big challenge. Compressing data into compact code is a powerful technique
for enabling efﬁcient Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search. Particularly, the methods of generating compact
code can be divided into two categories, i.e., hashing-based
and quantization-based methods. Hashing learns embeddings mapping high-dimension vectors into binary codes,
and thus can signiﬁcantly save storage space [42] [36] [26].
More importantly, in the binary space, the Euclidean distance is replaced by the Hamming distance, which can be efﬁciently calculated by the bit-wise XOR operation. Howev15463

