Reducing Uncertainty in Undersampled MRI Reconstruction
with Active Acquisition
Zizhao Zhang1,2,∗ Adriana Romero2 Matthew J. Muckley3 Pascal Vincent2 Lin Yang1 Michal Drozdzal2
1
University of Florida 2 Facebook AI Research 3 NYU School of Medicine

Abstract
The goal of MRI reconstruction is to restore a high fidelity image from partially observed measurements. This
partial view naturally induces reconstruction uncertainty
that can only be reduced by acquiring additional measurements. In this paper, we present a novel method for MRI reconstruction that, at inference time, dynamically selects the
measurements to take and iteratively refines the prediction
in order to best reduce the reconstruction error and, thus, its
uncertainty. We validate our method on a large scale knee
MRI dataset, as well as on ImageNet. Results show that
(1) our system successfully outperforms active acquisition
baselines; (2) our uncertainty estimates correlate with error maps; and (3) our ResNet-based architecture surpasses
standard pixel-to-pixel models in the task of MRI reconstruction. The proposed method not only shows high-quality
reconstructions but also paves the road towards more applicable solutions for accelerating MRI.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a commonly
used scanning technique, which provides detailed images
of organs and tissues within the human body. The promises
of MRI, when compared to computed tomography, are the
superior soft tissue contrast and the lack of ionizing radiation [49]. However, its main drawback is the slow acquisition time; MRI examinations can take as long as an hour.
The acquisition is performed sequentially in k-space – a 2D
complex-valued space that can be linked to the 2D Fourier
transform of the image – at speed controlled by hardware
and physiological constraints [27, 36], causing uncomfortable examination experiences and high health care costs.
Therefore, accelerating MRI is a critical medical imaging
problem, with the potential of substantially improving both
its accessibility and the patient experience.
Reducing the number of k-space measurements is a standard way of speeding up the examination time. However,
*Work done during internship at Facebook AI Research

(2)

k-space

Image

(3)

MRI
scanner

Network
system

(1)
Monitor

Initial k-space
trajectory

next (red) Uncertainty
trajectory
(4)

Reconst
-ruction

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed pipeline. A MRI scanner (1) acquires measurements given an initial trajectory.
The zero-filled image reconstruction (2) is fed into our system (3), which outputs a reconstruction, an uncertainty map
and the next suggested measurement (in red) to scan (4).
These steps are repeated until the stopping criteria is met.
the images resulting from basic reconstructions from the
undersampled k-space often exhibit blur or aliasing effects
[27], making them unsuitable for clinical use. Hence, the
goal of MRI reconstruction systems is to reduce the previously mentioned artifacts and recover high fidelity images.
Deep learning has recently shown great promise in MRI
reconstruction with convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[13, 36, 49, 11]. Most of these methods are designed to
work with a fixed set of measurements defining a sampling trajectory1 . We argue that this sampling trajectory
should be adapted on the fly, depending on the difficulty
of the reconstruction. Figure 2 depicts box plots obtained
by applying a reconstruction network to a large dataset for
1 Throughout the paper, we use horizontal Cartesian acquisition trajectory, where k-space is acquired row-by-row and we use measurement to
refer to a whole row of the Cartesian trajectory.

12049

