Locating Objects Without Bounding Boxes
Javier Ribera, David Güera, Yuhao Chen, Edward J. Delp
Video and Image Processing Laboratory (VIPER), Purdue University

Abstract
Recent advances in convolutional neural networks
(CNN) have achieved remarkable results in locating objects
in images. In these networks, the training procedure usually
requires providing bounding boxes or the maximum number
of expected objects. In this paper, we address the task of estimating object locations without annotated bounding boxes
which are typically hand-drawn and time consuming to label. We propose a loss function that can be used in any fully
convolutional network (FCN) to estimate object locations.
This loss function is a modification of the average Hausdorff distance between two unordered sets of points. The
proposed method has no notion of bounding boxes, region
proposals, or sliding windows. We evaluate our method
with three datasets designed to locate people’s heads, pupil
centers and plant centers. We outperform state-of-the-art
generic object detectors and methods fine-tuned for pupil
tracking.

1. Introduction
Locating objects in images is an important task in computer vision. A common approach in object detection is to
obtain bounding boxes around the objects of interest. In this
paper, we are not interested in obtaining bounding boxes.
Instead, we define the object localization task as obtaining
a single 2D coordinate corresponding to the location of each
object. The location of an object can be any key point we are
interested in, such as its center. Figure 1 shows an example
of localized objects in images. Differently from other keypoint detection problems, we do not know in advance the
number of keypoints in the image. To also make the method
as generic as possible we do not assume any physical constraint between the points, unlike in cases such as pose estimation. This definition of object localization is more appropriate for applications where objects are very small, or substantially overlap (see the overlapping plants in Figure 1).
In these cases, bounding boxes may not be provided by the
dataset or they may be infeasible to groundtruth.
Bounding-box annotation is tedious, time-consuming
and expensive [37]. For example, annotating ImageNet [43]

Figure 1. Object localization with human heads, eye pupils and
plant centers. (Bottom) Heat map and estimations as crosses.

required 42 seconds per bounding box when crowdsourcing
on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk using a technique specifically developed for efficient bounding box annotation [50].
In [6], Bell et al. introduce a new dataset for material recognition and segmentation. By collecting click location labels
in this dataset instead of a full per-pixel segmentation, they
reduce the annotation costs an order of magnitude.
In this paper, we propose a modification of the average
Hausdorff distance as a loss function of a CNN to estimate
the location of objects. Our method does not require the use
of bounding boxes in the training stage, and does not require
to know the maximum number of objects when designing
the network architecture. For simplicity, we describe our
method only for a single class of objects, although it can
trivially be extended to multiple object classes. Our method
is object-agnostic, thus the discussion in this paper does
not include any information about the object characteristics.
Our approach maps input images to a set of coordinates, and
we validate it with diverse types of objects. We evaluate our
method with three datasets. One dataset contains images acquired from a surveillance camera in a shopping mall, and
we locate the heads of people. The second dataset contains
images of human eyes, and we locate the center of the pupil.
The third dataset contains aerial images of a crop field taken

6479

