Deep Asymmetric Metric Learning via Rich Relationship Mining
Xinyi Xu1 , Yanhua Yang1 , Cheng Deng1∗, Feng Zheng2
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
xyxu.xd@gmail.com, yanhyang@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, zhengf@sustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning effective distance metric between data has
gained increasing popularity, for its promising performance
on various tasks, such as face verification, zero-shot learning, and image retrieval. A major line of researches employs hard data mining, which makes efforts on searching
a subset of significant data. However, hard data mining
based approaches only rely on a small percentage of data,
which is apt to overfitting. This motivates us to propose
a novel framework, named deep asymmetric metric learning via rich relationship mining (DAMLRRM), to mine rich
relationship under satisfying sampling size. DAMLRRM
constructs two asymmetric data streams that are differently
structured and of unequal length. The asymmetric structure enables the two data streams to interlace each other,
which allows for the informative comparison between new
data pairs over iterations. To improve the generalization
ability, we further relax the constraint on the intra-class
relationship. Rather than greedily connecting all possible
positive pairs, DAMLRRM builds a minimum-cost spanning
tree within each category to ensure the formation of a connected region. As such there exists at least one direct or indirect path between arbitrary positive pairs to bridge intraclass relevance. Extensive experimental results on three
benchmark datasets including CUB-200-2011, Cars196,
and Stanford Online Products show that DAMLRRM effectively boosts the performance of existing deep metric learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Metric learning aims at finding appropriate similarity
measurements of data, whose major thinking is to keep the
distance between similar instances close and dissimilar instances far away in an embedding space. This topic is of
great practical importance due to its wide applications, including face recognition [12, 52, 45], clustering [9, 44, 53],
∗ Corresponding author.

and retrieval [57, 49, 51, 50, 22, 10]. Conventional Mahalanobis metric learning approaches learn a linear transformation of the data and measure the similarity based on
Euclidean distance, which fail to capture the high-order
correlation[15, 42, 47]. Riding on the development of deep
neural network [21, 33, 37], deep metric learning (DML)
has gained a lot of attention. Guided by a metric loss, DML
projects data into an embedding space with rich semantic
information through convolutional neural network. It shows
potential capability even in challenging tasks, such as finegrained classification [8, 41, 55, 25], large-category classification [2, 31, 46], and zero-shot learning [28, 56, 6, 26].
According to the types of loss, DML can be roughly
divided into contrastive and triplet approaches. However,
enumerating all possible pairs or triplets will arise nearly
exponential sampling size, which is impractical even for a
moderate number of instances. One common solution is to
sample a subset of instances as a training pool. The fact
is that, when the sampled training pool merely covers easy
instances that contribute little to the optimization, only a
weak embedding model can be obtained. Therefore, hard
data mining aiming to find out confusing instances becomes
an important topic, and a large number of methods are proposed [35, 34, 16, 11, 43, 54, 14]. Those methods tackle
this topic to a certain extent yet are still deficient in the following three aspects. First, a complicated data preprocessing is involved to select hard data, whereas the hard level is
changing with the evolution of the model [34]. Second, only
a small subset of relationship is exploited. Third, the hard
level is difficult to control. When the selected instances are
not hard enough, the learned model is not discriminative.
Conversely, when the instances are selected too hard, the
overfitting problem often occurs [43].
In this work, we propose a novel framework, named deep
asymmetric metric learning via rich relationship mining
(DAMLRRM). DAMLRRM firstly builds two asymmetric
data streams, which interlace to each other so that continues new pairs are compared during iterations. Compared
with conventional one stream metric learning approaches,
DAMLRRM can mine considerably richer relationship un14076

