Relation-Shape Convolutional Neural Network for Point Cloud Analysis
Yongcheng Liu†‡
Bin Fan∗†
Shiming Xiang†‡
Chunhong Pan†
†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Email: {yongcheng.liu, bfan, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Point cloud analysis is very challenging, as the shape
implied in irregular points is difficult to capture. In
this paper, we propose RS-CNN, namely, Relation-Shape
Convolutional Neural Network, which extends regular grid
CNN to irregular configuration for point cloud analysis.
The key to RS-CNN is learning from relation, i.e., the geometric topology constraint among points. Specifically, the
convolutional weight for local point set is forced to learn
a high-level relation expression from predefined geometric
priors, between a sampled point from this point set and the
others. In this way, an inductive local representation with
explicit reasoning about the spatial layout of points can be
obtained, which leads to much shape awareness and robustness. With this convolution as a basic operator, RS-CNN,
a hierarchical architecture can be developed to achieve
contextual shape-aware learning for point cloud analysis.
Extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks across
three tasks verify RS-CNN achieves the state of the arts.

1. Introduction
Recently, the analysis of 3D point cloud has drawn a lot
of attention, as it has many applications such as autonomous
driving and robot manipulation. However, this task is very
challenging, since it is difficult to infer the underlying shape
formed by these irregular points (see Fig. 1 for detail).
For this issue, much effort is focused on replicating the
remarkable success of convolutional neural network (CNN)
on regular grid data (e.g., image) analysis [17, 32], to irregular point cloud processing [26, 15, 45, 29, 27, 34, 38]. Some
works transform point cloud to regular voxels [42, 22, 3] or
multi-view images [35, 2, 5] for easy application of classic grid CNN. These transformations, however, usually lead
to much loss of inherent geometric information in 3D point
cloud, as well as high complexity.
To directly process point cloud, PointNet [24] independently learns on each point and gathers the final features
∗ Corresponding author: Bin Fan

Figure 1. Left part: Point cloud. Right part: Underlying shape
formed by this point cloud.

for a global representation. Though impressive, this design ignores local structures that have been proven to be
important for abstracting high-level visual concepts in image CNN [49]. To solve this problem, some works partition point cloud into several subsets by sampling [26] or
superpoint [18]. Then a hierarchy is built to learn contextual representation from local to global. Nevertheless, this
extremely relies on effective inductive learning of local subsets, which is quite intractable to achieve.
Generally, there are mainly three challenges for learning
from point set P ⊂ R3 : (1) P is unordered, thus requiring the learned representation being permutation invariant;
(2) P distributes in 3D geometric space, thus demanding
the learned representation being robust to rigid transformation (e.g., rotation and translation); (3) P forms an underlying shape, therefore, the learned representation should be of
discriminative shape awareness. The issue (1) has been well
resolved by symmetric function [24, 27, 48], while (2) and
(3) still demand for a full exploration. The goal of this work
is to extend regular grid CNN to irregular configuration for
handling these issues together.
To this end, we propose a relation-shape convolutional
neural network (aliased as RS-CNN). The key to RS-CNN
is learning from relation, i.e., the geometric topology constraint among points, which in our view can encode meaningful shape information in 3D point cloud.
Specifically, each local convolutional neighborhood is
constructed by taking a sampled point x as the centroid and

8895

