What Do Single-view 3D Reconstruction Networks Learn?
Maxim Tatarchenko∗1 , Stephan R. Richter∗2 , René Ranftl2 , Zhuwen Li2 ,
Vladlen Koltun2 , and Thomas Brox1
1

University of Freiburg

2

Intel Labs

Figure 1. We provide evidence that state-of-the-art single-view 3D reconstruction methods (AtlasNet (light green, 0.38 IoU) [12], OGN
(green, 0.46 IoU) [46], Matryoshka Networks (dark green, 0.47 IoU) [37]) do not actually perform reconstruction but image classification.
We explicitly design pure recognition baselines (Clustering (light blue, 0.46 IoU) and Retrieval (dark blue, 0.57 IoU)) and show that
they produce similar or better results both qualitatively and quantitatively. For reference, we show the ground truth (white) and a nearest
neighbor from the training set (red, 0.76 IoU). The inset shows the input image.

Abstract
Convolutional networks for single-view object reconstruction have shown impressive performance and have
become a popular subject of research. All existing techniques are united by the idea of having an encoder-decoder
network that performs non-trivial reasoning about the 3D
structure of the output space. In this work, we set up two alternative approaches that perform image classification and
retrieval respectively. These simple baselines yield better
results than state-of-the-art methods, both qualitatively and
quantitatively. We show that encoder-decoder methods are
statistically indistinguishable from these baselines, thus indicating that the current state of the art in single-view object
reconstruction does not actually perform reconstruction but
image classification. We identify aspects of popular experimental procedures that elicit this behavior and discuss ways
to improve the current state of research.

1. Introduction
Object-based single-view 3D reconstruction calls for
generating the 3D model of an object given a single image.
Consider the motorcycle in Fig. 1. Inferring its 3D structure
∗ Equal contribution.

requires a complex process that combines low-level image
cues, knowledge about structural arrangement of parts, and
high-level semantic information. We refer to the extremes
of this spectrum as reconstruction and recognition. Reconstruction implies reasoning about the 3D structure of the
input image using cues such as texture, shading, and perspective effects. Recognition amounts to classifying the input image and retrieving the most suitable 3D model from
a database, in our example finding a pre-existing 3D model
of a motorcycle based on the input image.
While various architectures and 3D representations have
been proposed in the literature, existing methods for singleview 3D understanding all use an encoder-decoder structure, where the encoder maps the input image to a latent
representation and the decoder is supposed to perform nontrivial reasoning about the 3D structure of the output space.
To solve the task, the overall network is expected to incorporate low-level as well as high-level information.
In this work, we analyze the results of state-of-the-art
encoder-decoder methods [12, 37, 46] and find that they
rely primarily on recognition to address the single-view 3D
reconstruction task, while showing only limited reconstruction abilities. To support this claim, we design two pure
recognition baselines: one that combines 3D shape clustering and image classification and one that performs imagebased 3D shape retrieval. Based on these, we demonstrate

3405

