Cross-Modality Personalization for Retrieval
Nils Murrugarra-Llerena
Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
{nineil, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

(a)

Abstract
Existing captioning and gaze prediction approaches do
not consider the multiple facets of personality that affect
how a viewer extracts meaning from an image. While there
are methods that consider personalized captioning, they do
not consider personalized perception across modalities, i.e.
how a person’s way of looking at an image (gaze) affects the
way they describe it (captioning). In this work, we propose
a model for modeling cross-modality personalized retrieval.
In addition to modeling gaze and captions, we also explicitly model the personality of the users providing these samples. We incorporate constraints that encourage gaze and
caption samples on the same image to be close in a learned
space; we refer to this as content modeling. We also model
style: we encourage samples provided by the same user to
be close in a separate embedding space, regardless of the
image on which they were provided. To leverage the complementary information that content and style constraints provide, we combine the embeddings from both networks. We
show that our combined embeddings achieve better performance than existing approaches for cross-modal retrieval.

1. Introduction
We perceive the world through our five senses, but our
perception is also affected by our experiences, personality,
and bias. Thus, the meaning we attribute to the visual world
is a function not only of the image pixels but of the individual way in which we look at an image. Studies show a
variety of links between visual perception and the viewer’s
personality and emotion. For example, “open-minded” people are more likely to combine visual elements and perceive
them as a unified whole [3], disorganized people or ones
with low self-confidence have a high tolerance of visual blur
[45], and people who believe in paranormal events are more
likely to perceive actual objects in images that only contain
noise [30]. Further, people’s perception of physical properties is affected by emotions such as fear and joy [51].
This variance in perception due to variance in personality is important to consider when predicting what meaning

I should buy this car because
it’s good for my family.
I should buy this car because
it’s elegant.
I should buy this car because
it’s safe for my children.

(b)

Content

… car-seat

… family
… elegant
… children

I should buy this car because
it has a built in baby car-seat.

Style
(c)

… children … car-seat
… elegant

… family

Figure 1. People with different personalities might perceive and
describe the same image differently. A social, family person might
observe the children, and an artistic person might perceive the elegance of the vehicle, in this car ad (a). Further, we expect there is
consistency between how the same person observes and describes
images (b). To link content across modalities, but preserve different users’ styles, we combine both content and style constraints
(c). The former encourages samples provided on the same image
to be close in a learned space, while the latter encourages samples by the same user to be close. The text in (c) denotes the full
captions, and ellipses denote what part of the image the viewer
focused on. Dashed boxes denote closeby items.

viewers will extract from imagery. It is especially important to model when predicting how humans will describe
images that aim to impart opinions on the viewer in subtle
ways. Prior work has examined the meaning that the average human extracts from images, by learning to predict
what descriptive captions are appropriate for a given image. However, not all humans will describe the image in the
same manner. Further, the way they describe it depends on
how they look at it. We illustrate this in Fig. 1. When shown

6429

