MAGSAC: Marginalizing Sample Consensus
Daniel Barath12 , Jiri Matas1 , and Jana Noskova1
1
Centre for Machine Perception, Department of Cybernetics
Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
2
Machine Perception Research Laboratory, MTA SZTAKI, Budapest, Hungary
barath.daniel@sztaki.mta.hu

Abstract
A method called, σ-consensus, is proposed to eliminate the need for a user-defined inlier-outlier threshold in
RANSAC. Instead of estimating the noise σ, it is marginalized over a range of noise scales. The optimized model is
obtained by weighted least-squares fitting where the weights
come from the marginalization over σ of the point likelihoods of being inliers. A new quality function is proposed not requiring σ and, thus, a set of inliers to determine the model quality. Also, a new termination criterion
for RANSAC is built on the proposed marginalization approach. Applying σ-consensus, MAGSAC is proposed with
no need for a user-defined σ and improving the accuracy of
robust estimation significantly. It is superior to the state-ofthe-art in terms of geometric accuracy on publicly available
real-world datasets for epipolar geometry (F and E) and
homography estimation. In addition, applying σ-consensus
only once as a post-processing step to the RANSAC output
always improved the model quality on a wide range of vision problems without noticeable deterioration in processing time, adding a few milliseconds.1

1. Introduction
The RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus) algorithm proposed by Fischler and Bolles [5] in 1981 has become the most widely used robust estimator in computer
vision. RANSAC and its variants have been successfully
applied to a wide range of vision tasks, e.g. motion segmentation [25], short baseline stereo [25, 27], wide baseline
stereo matching [18, 13, 14], detection of geometric primitives [21], image mosaicing [7], and to perform [28] or initialize multi-model fitting [10, 17]. In brief, the RANSAC
approach repeatedly selects random subsets of the input
point set and fits a model, e.g. a plane to three 3D points
or a homography to four 2D point correspondences. Next,
1 The source code is at https://github.com/danini/magsac

the quality of the estimated model is measured, for instance
by the size of its support, i.e. the number of inliers. Finally,
the model with the highest quality, polished e.g. by least
squares fiting on its inliers, is returned.
Since the publication of RANSAC, a number of modifications has been proposed. NAPSAC [16], PROSAC [1]
and EVSAC [6] modify the sampling strategy to increase
the probability of selecting an all-inlier sample early.
NAPSAC assumes that the inliers are spatially coherent,
PROSAC exploits an a priori predicted inlier probability
of the points and EVSAC estimates a confidence in each
of them. MLESAC [26] estimates the model quality by a
maximum likelihood process with all its beneficial properties, albeit under certain assumptions about inlier and outlier distributions. In practice, MLESAC results are often
superior to the inlier counting of plain RANSAC and they
are less sensitive to the user-defined inlier-outlier threshold.
In MSAC [24], the robust estimation is formulated as a process that estimates both the parameters of the data distribution and the quality of the model in terms of maximum a
posteriori. timates the model quality by a maximum likelihood process with all its beneficial properties, albeit under
certain assumptions about inlier and outlier distributions.
One of the highly attractive properties of RANSAC is
its small number of control parameters. The termination
is controlled by a manually set confidence value η and the
sampling stops as soon as the probability of finding a model
with higher support falls below 1−η.2 The setting of η is not
problematic, the typical values are 0.95 or 0.99, depending
on the required confidence in the solution.
The second, and most critical, parameter is the inlier
noise scale σ that determines the inlier-outlier threshold
τ (σ) which strongly influences the outcome of the procedure. In standard RANSAC and its variants, σ must be
provided by the user which limits its fully automatic outof-the-box use and requires the user to acquire knowledge
about the problem at hand. In Fig. 1, the inlier residuals
2 Note that the probabilistic interpretation of η holds only for the standard {0, 1} cost function.

110197

