Mind Your Neighbours: Image Annotation with
Metadata Neighbourhood Graph Co-Attention Networks
∗

Junjie Zhang1,2 Qi Wu3, Jian Zhang1 Chunhua Shen3 Jianfeng Lu2
1
University of Technology Sydney, Australia 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
3
The University of Adelaide, Australia
{junjie.zhang@student., jian.zhang@}uts.edu.au lujf@njust.edu.cn
{qi.wu01, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au
Abstract
As the visual reflections of our daily lives, images are frequently shared on the social network, which generates the
abundant ‘metadata’ that records user interactions with images. Due to the diverse contents and complex styles, some
images can be challenging to recognise when neglecting the
context. Images with the similar metadata, such as ‘relevant topics and textual descriptions’, ‘common friends of
users’ and ‘nearby locations’, form a neighbourhood for
each image, which can be used to assist the annotation. In
this paper, we propose a Metadata Neighbourhood Graph
Co-Attention Network (MangoNet) to model the correlations between each target image and its neighbours. To accurately capture the visual clues from the neighbourhood,
a co-attention mechanism is introduced to embed the target
image and its neighbours as graph nodes, while the graph
edges capture the node pair correlations. By reasoning on
the neighbourhood graph, we obtain the graph representation to help annotate the target image. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets indicate that our proposed model achieves the best performance compared to the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the rise of the social network, people like to capture
vivid moments and share them on the internet. These images are generated and spread at an explosive pace, which
yields the urgent need for an efficient annotation method
to assist users to understand and retrieve images. Significant progresses have been made on the image annotation by
uncovering relationships between image pixel contents and
labels, such as the classification [3, 4], clustering [8, 32],
and graph inference [16, 27]. Most recently, deep neural
∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. For the target images with the red boxes, they are hard
to recognise on their own. However, in the context of the neighbours with the similar metadata, such as ‘vehicle, vintage, Beetle’
and ‘church, instrument, art’, it is more clear that the target images
are a car and a pipe organ. Based on this motivation, we propose a
neighbourhood graph as ‘neighbourhood watch’ to assist the image annotation.

networks [9, 24] have demonstrated advanced abilities of
the image feature learning, which inspire various networkbased models [29, 31]. These models treat the individual
image as an independent object and focus on solving the annotation without the context information. However, due to
the diverse contents and complex styles, some images are
still difficult to annotate on their own.
Social networks like the Flickr, Instagram and Facebook
record the user interactions with images as the vast amount
of the metadata, which is presented in various forms. The
most common metadata includes the collections, i.e. image groups created by users; textual descriptions, i.e. tags
and captions; as well as user profiles, i.e. user-names, locations and friends. As a means to communicate with other
users, these metadata can be as informative as visual pixels [12, 22] to understand images. See Fig. 1 as an example, images are hard to be recognised and annotated without
seeing its metadata related images. There are several lines
of works [1, 25] conducted by utilising the metadata to assist the annotation, where different types of metadata are

2956

