Progressive Feature Alignment for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Chaoqi Chen∗1 , Weiping Xie∗1 , Wenbing Huang2 , Yu Rong2 , Xinghao Ding1 ,
Yue Huang†1 , Tingyang Xu†2 , Junzhou Huang2
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
cqchen94@stu.xmu.edu.cn, xiewp@stu.xmu.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com, yu.rong@hotmail.com
dxh@xmu.edu.cn, huangyue05@gmail.com, Tingyangxu@tencent.com, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) transfers
knowledge from a label-rich source domain to a fullyunlabeled target domain. To tackle this task, recent approaches resort to discriminative domain transfer in virtue
of pseudo-labels to enforce the class-level distribution
alignment across the source and target domains. These
methods, however, are vulnerable to the error accumulation and thus incapable of preserving cross-domain category consistency, as the pseudo-labeling accuracy is not guaranteed explicitly. In this paper, we propose the Progressive
Feature Alignment Network (PFAN) to align the discriminative features across domains progressively and effectively,
via exploiting the intra-class variation in the target domain.
To be specific, we first develop an Easy-to-Hard Transfer Strategy (EHTS) and an Adaptive Prototype Alignment (APA)
step to train our model iteratively and alternatively. Moreover, upon observing that a good domain adaptation usually requires a non-saturated source classifier, we consider
a simple yet efficient way to retard the convergence speed
of the source classification loss by further involving a temperature variate into the soft-max function. The extensive
experimental results reveal that the proposed PFAN exceeds the state-of-the-art performance on three UDA datasets.

1. Introduction
Hiving large-scale labeled datasets is one of the reasons
for the recent success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [14]. Nevertheless, the collection and annotation
of numerous samples in various domains is an extremely
expensive and time-consuming process. Meanwhile, traditional CNNs trained on one large dataset show low generalization ability on another due to the data bias or shift
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors

Figure 1: (Best viewed in color.) Motivations of the proposed work (SVHN→MNIST). The classification boundaries are first drawn by the fully labeled source domain.
There is intra-class variation in the target domain.
[38]. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods
tackle the mentioned problem by transferring knowledge
from a label-rich source domain to a fully unlabeled target
domain [28, 27]. The deep UDA methods have achieved remarkable performance [40, 22, 9, 10, 2, 39, 25, 33, 30, 16],
which usually seek to jointly achieve small source generalization error and cross-domain distribution discrepancy.
Most prior efforts focus on matching global source and
target data distributions to learn domain-invariant representations. However, the learned representations may not only bring the source and target domains closer, but also mix
samples with different class labels together. Recent studies
[23, 34, 13, 32, 44, 29, 21, 35, 44, 41] started to consider learning discriminative representations for the target domain. Specifically, some of them [34, 32, 44] proposed to
use pseudo-labels to learn target discriminative representations, which encourages a low-density separation between
classes in the target domain [20]. Despite their efficacy,
these approaches faces two critical limitations. Firstly, they

627

