Fully Learnable Group Convolution for Acceleration of Deep Neural Networks
Xijun Wang1,2
Meina Kan1
Shiguang Shan1,2,3
Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai 200031, China
xijun.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn

{kanmeina,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Benefitted from its great success on many tasks, deep
learning is increasingly used on low-computational-cost devices, e.g. smartphone, embedded devices, etc. To reduce
the high computational and memory cost, in this work, we
propose a fully learnable group convolution module (FLGC
for short) which is quite efficient and can be embedded into
any deep neural networks for acceleration. Specifically, our
proposed method automatically learns the group structure
in the training stage in a fully end-to-end manner, leading to a better structure than the existing pre-defined, twosteps, or iterative strategies. Moreover, our method can be
further combined with depthwise separable convolution, resulting in 5× acceleration than the vanilla Resnet50 on single CPU. An additional advantage is that in our FLGC the
number of groups can be set as any value, but not necessarily 2k as in most existing methods, meaning better tradeoff
between accuracy and speed. As evaluated in our experiments, our method achieves better performance than existing learnable group convolution and standard group convolution when using the same number of groups.

1. Introduction
Since the Alexnet proposed by Krizhevsky et al. [23]
achieved breakthrough results in the 2012 ImageNet Challenge, deeper and larger convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have become a ubiquitous setting for better performance, especially on tasks with big data [5, 26]. However, even an ordinary CNNs is usually with dozens, hundreds or even thousands of layers and thousands of channels
[12, 35, 18]. Such huge parameters and high computational
cost make it insupportable on devices with limited hardware resources or applications with strict latency requirements. In [6], Misha Denil et al. found that there is significant redundancy in CNNs, and the accuracy will not drop

even many of the network parameters are not learned or removed. After that, various methods of reducing redundancy
have emerged. These methods can be roughly grouped into
two categories, post-processing methods such as pruning or
quantizing a pre-trained deep model, and efficient architecture design methods attempting to design fast and compact
deep network.

1.1. Post-processing methods
A straightforward strategy is to post-process a pretrained model, such as pruning the parameters, or quantizing the model by using fewer bits.
Parameter Pruning. Some fine-grained methods attempt to prune the wispy connections between two neural
nodes based on its importance, and thus convert a dense
network to a sparse one [27, 11, 10, 24]. A typical one is
[11], in which Han et al. proposed to learn the importance
of each connection and then those unimportant connections
are removed to reduce the operations. Furthermore, Guo et
al. [10] proposed an on-the-fly connection pruning method
named dynamic network surgery, which can avoid incorrect
pruning and make it as a continual network maintenance by
incorporating connection splicing into the whole process.
The sparse network achieved from the fine-grained pruning methods has much lower computation cost theoretically.
Unfortunately, there is no mature framework or hardware
for sparse network, and thus only limited speed up can be
obtained practically.
There are also some other methods attempting to do
coarse-grained pruning by cutting off the entire filters,
channels or even layers. In [14], He et al. proposed an iterative two-step algorithm to effectively prune each layer
by using a LASSO regression, which based on the channel selection and least square reconstruction. In [25], Li et
al. applied L1 regularization to prune filters to induce sparsity. More generally, Wen et al. [38] proposed a structured
sparsity learning method to reduce redundant filters, channels, and layers in a unified manner. Coarse-grained prun-

9049

