Spectral Metric for Dataset Complexity Assessment
Frédéric Branchaud-Charron1 , Andrew Achkar2 , Pierre-Marc Jodoin 1
1
Université de Sherbrooke, 2 Miovision Inc.
1
{frederic.branchaud-charron, pierre-marc.jodoin}@usherbrooke.ca, 2 aachkar@miovision.com ∗

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new measure to gauge the
complexity of image classification problems. Given an annotated image dataset, our method computes a complexity measure called the cumulative spectral gradient (CSG)
which strongly correlates with the test accuracy of convolutional neural networks (CNN). The CSG measure is derived
from the probabilistic divergence between classes in a spectral clustering framework. We show that this metric correlates with the overall separability of the dataset and thus
its inherent complexity. As will be shown, our metric can
be used for dataset reduction, to assess which classes are
more difficult to disentangle, and approximate the accuracy
one could expect to get with a CNN. Results obtained on
11 datasets and three CNN models reveal that our method
is more accurate and faster than previous complexity measures.

1. Introduction
The number of image-based datasets designed to train
deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been on
the rise in the past few years [8, 11, 23, 25, 29, 35, 44].
One reason for this is the indisputable efficiency of CNNs
at classifying image data [9, 17, 23, 39].
A common challenge that arises when building a new
image dataset for training a CNN is to identify how challenging the classification problem is, which classes are the
most difficult to disentangle, and correspondingly what is
the minimum dataset size required to train a CNN. As of
today, there is no standard framework to make such determinations. The common way to assess the complexity
of an image dataset is by training, finetuning and comparing results from several CNNs, the test accuracy being the
usual measure for complexity. However, this procedure is
time consuming and, most importantly, requires a fullyannotated dataset which is not available when in the process
of building it.
∗ This work is supported by the FQRNT B1 208594 and Mitacs acceleration IT08995.

Unfortunately, one cannot predict the accuracy of a CNN
by only looking at its architecture. As mentioned by Zhang
et al. [45] in their attempt to understand why deep neural
nets generalize well, deep neural networks can easily fit
with zero training error on any input data, including pure
random noise. This underlines the sole ability of CNNs to
project any input data into a linearly separable space (and
thus have a zero training error) while sometimes having
poor generalization abilities. Their conclusion is that the
structure of a neural net, its hyperparameters, its depth, and
its optimizer cannot be used alone to predict its generalization capabilities.
Assessing the complexity of a classification problem
may instead start from the analysis of the data at hand
with the goal of deriving useful complexity measures (cmeasures) [2, 3, 14, 18, 41]. The goal of c-measures is
to assess how entangled classes are assuming that datasets
with overlapping classes are more difficult to analyze than
those with well separated classes. C-measures have been
shown effective for a number of applications such as classifier selection [7], automatic noise-filtering adjustment [38],
dataset reduction [26], and hyperparameter tuning [31].
Unfortunately, existing c-measures have not been designed for large image datasets used to train deep neural
networks. While some c-measures assume that classes are
linearly separable in their original feature space [18], others
work only for two-class problems [2, 3, 19]. Also, some cmeasures are prohibitively slow and memory expensive as
they require the analysis of matrices whose size is in the
order to the number of training samples and/or the feature
dimension size [3, 14].
Another important limitation with existing c-measures is
the fact that they process raw input data. While this was
shown valid for some classification problems [7], it is ill
suited for deep neural nets since their learning procedure
allows them to project input data onto a different and more
easily separable space.
In this paper, we present a novel c-measure adapted to
modern image classification problems. Instead of processing raw input data like previous approaches, our method
first projects the input images onto a lower-dimensional la-

3215

