Bi-Directional Cascade Network for Perceptual Edge Detection
Jianzhong He1 ,Shiliang Zhang1 ,Ming Yang2 ,Yanhu Shan2 ,Tiejun Huang1,3
1
Peking University, 2 Horizon Robotics, Inc, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
{jianzhonghe,slzhang.jdl,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn,m-yang4@u.northwestern.edu, yanhu.shan@horizon.ai

Abstract
Exploiting multi-scale representations is critical to improve edge detection for objects at different scales. To extract edges at dramatically different scales, we propose a
Bi-Directional Cascade Network (BDCN) structure, where
an individual layer is supervised by labeled edges at its specific scale, rather than directly applying the same supervision to all CNN outputs. Furthermore, to enrich multi-scale
representations learned by BDCN, we introduce a Scale Enhancement Module (SEM) which utilizes dilated convolution to generate multi-scale features, instead of using deeper CNNs or explicitly fusing multi-scale edge maps. These
new approaches encourage the learning of multi-scale representations in different layers and detect edges that are
well delineated by their scales. Learning scale dedicated
layers also results in compact network with a fraction of
parameters. We evaluate our method on three datasets, i.e.,
BSDS500, NYUDv2, and Multicue, and achieve ODS Fmeasure of 0.828, 1.3% higher than current state-of-the art
on BSDS500. The code has been available1 .

1. Introduction
Edge detection targets on extracting object boundaries
and perceptually salient edges from natural images, which
preserve the gist of an image and ignore unintended details. Thus, it is important to a variety of mid- and high-level
vision tasks, such as image segmentation [1, 41], object detection and recognition [13, 14], etc. Thanks to research
efforts ranging from exploiting low-level visual cues with
hand-crafted features [4, 22, 1, 28, 10] to recent deep models [3, 30, 23, 47], the accuracy of edge detection has been
signiﬁcantly boosted. For example, on the Berkeley Segmentation Data Set and Benchmarks 500 (BSDS500) [1],
the detection performance has been boosted from 0.598 [7]
to 0.815 [47] in ODS F-measure.
Nevertheless, there remain some open issues worthy of
studying. As shown in Fig. 1, edges in one image stem
1 https://www.pkuvmc.com/dataset.html.

Figure 1. Some images and their ground truth edge maps in BSDS500 dataset. The scale of edges in one image varies considerably,
like the boundaries of human body and hands.

from both object-level boundaries and meaningful local details, e.g., the silhouette of human body and the shape of
hand gestures. The variety of scale of edges makes it crucial to exploit multi-scale representations for edge detection. Recent neural net based methods [2, 42, 49] utilize hierarchal features learned by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to obtain multi-scale representations. To generate
more powerful multi-scale representation, some researchers
adopt very deep networks, like ResNet50 [18], as the backbone model of the edge detector. Deeper models generally
involve more parameters, making the network hard to train
and expensive to infer. Another way is to build an image
pyramid and fuse multi-level features, which may involve
redundant computations. In another word, can we use a
shallow or light network to achieve a comparable or even
better performance?
Another issue is about the CNN training strategy for
edge detection, i.e., supervising predictions of different network layers by one general ground truth edge map [49, 30].
For instance, HED [49, 50] and RCF [30] compute edge
prediction on each intermediate CNN output to spot edges
at different scales, i.e., the lower layers are expected to detect more local image patterns while higher layers capture
object-level information with larger receptive ﬁelds. Since
different network layers attend to depict patterns at different
scales, it is not optimal to train those layers with the same
supervision. In another word, existing works [49, 50, 30]
enforce each layer of CNN to predict edges at all scales and
ignore that one speciﬁc intermeadiate layer can only focus
on edges at certain scales. Liu et al. [31] propose to relax the supervisions on intermediate layers using Canny [4]
detectors with layer-speciﬁc scales. However, it is hard to
decide layer-speciﬁc scales through human intervention.
13828

