Lifting Vectorial Variational Problems: A Natural Formulation based on
Geometric Measure Theory and Discrete Exterior Calculus
Thomas Möllenhoff and Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich
{thomas.moellenhoff,cremers}@tum.de

Abstract
Numerous tasks in imaging and vision can be formulated as variational problems over vector-valued maps. We
approach the relaxation and convexification of such vectorial variational problems via a lifting to the space of currents. To that end, we recall that functionals with polyconvex Lagrangians can be reparametrized as convex onehomogeneous functionals on the graph of the function.
This leads to an equivalent shape optimization problem
over oriented surfaces in the product space of domain and
codomain. A convex formulation is then obtained by relaxing the search space from oriented surfaces to more general currents. We propose a discretization of the resulting
infinite-dimensional optimization problem using Whitney
forms, which also generalizes recent “sublabel-accurate”
multilabeling approaches.

1. Introduction
We consider functionals of C 1 -mappings f : X → Y
Z
c (x, f (x), ∇f (x)) dx,
(1)
E(f ) =
X

where X ⊂ Rn , Y ⊂ RN are bounded and open. The cost
function c ≡ c(x, y, ξ) is assumed to be a nonnegative (possibly nonconvex) continuous function on X × Y × RN ×n
that is polyconvex (see Def. 2) in the Jacobian matrix ξ.
This work is concerned with relaxation and global optimization of (1) when, both, dimension and codimension
are possibly larger than one (n > 1, N > 1). This is expected to be difficult: In the discrete setting problems with
n = 1 or N = 1 typically correspond to polynomial-time
solvable shortest path (n = 1) or graph cut (N = 1) problems [11, 60, 24, 53], whereas for n, N > 1, the arising
multilabel problems with unordered label spaces are known
to be NP-hard - see [35]. Nevertheless, heuristic strategies
have been shown to yield excellent results in tasks such
as optical flow [10] or shape matching [55, 9]. In contrast to such well-established Markov random field (MRF)

works [30, 31, 29, 55, 39, 9, 10, 14] we consider the way
less explored continuous (infinite-dimensional) setting.
Our motivation partly stems from the fact that formulations in function space are very general and admit a variety
of discretizations. Finite difference discretizations of continuous relaxations often lead to models that are reminiscent of MRFs [70], while piecewise-linear approximations
are related to discrete-continuous MRFs [71], see [17, 40].
More recently, for the Kantorovich relaxation in optimal
transport, approximations with deep neural networks were
considered and achieved promising performance, for example in generative modeling [2, 54].
We further argue that fractional (non-integer) solutions
to a careful discretization of the continuous model can
implicitly approximate an “integer” continuous solution.
Therefore one can achieve accuracies that go substantially
beyond the mesh size. The resulting models would be
difficult to interpret and derive from a finite-dimensional
viewpoint such that the continuous considerations are required for the final implementation. Also, formulations
arising from continuous relaxations allow one to introduce
isotropic smoothness potentials without reverting to higherorder terms in the cost, and, as we show in this work, one
can impose general polyconvex regularizations using only
local constraints. An example of a polyconvex function
(which is in general nonconvex) is the surface area of the
graph, sometimes referred to as “Beltrami regularization”
in the image processing community, see e.g., [28].
In contrast to the discrete multi-labeling setting, an important question is whether variational problems involving
the energy (1) admit a minimizer. A fruitful approach to
address this question is to suitably relax the notion of solution, thereby enlarging the search space of admissible candidates (“lifting the problem to a larger space”). The origins of this idea can be traced back1 to the turn of the
century, see Hilbert’s twentieth problem [21]. An example of that principle is the celebrated Kantorovich relaxation [26] of Monge’s transportation problem [42]. There,
1 We refer the interested reader to the historical remarks in
L. C. Young’s book on the calculus of variations [69, pp. 122–123].

111117

