RL-GAN-Net: A Reinforcement Learning Agent Controlled GAN Network for
Real-Time Point Cloud Shape Completion
Muhammad Sarmad
KAIST
South Korea

Hyunjoo Jenny Lee∗
KAIST
South Korea

Young Min Kim∗
KIST, SNU
South Korea

sarmad@kaist.ac.kr

hyunjoo.lee@kaist.ac.kr

youngmin.kim@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Ground Truth
(GT)

Pin

AE

RL-GAN-Net RL-GAN-Net
and GT

We present RL-GAN-Net, where a reinforcement learning (RL) agent provides fast and robust control of a generative adversarial network (GAN). Our framework is applied
to point cloud shape completion that converts noisy, partial point cloud data into a high-fidelity completed shape by
controlling the GAN. While a GAN is unstable and hard to
train, we circumvent the problem by (1) training the GAN
on the latent space representation whose dimension is reduced compared to the raw point cloud input and (2) using
an RL agent to find the correct input to the GAN to generate the latent space representation of the shape that best
fits the current input of incomplete point cloud. The suggested pipeline robustly completes point cloud with large
missing regions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first attempt to train an RL agent to control the GAN, which
effectively learns the highly nonlinear mapping from the input noise of the GAN to the latent space of point cloud. The
RL agent replaces the need for complex optimization and
consequently makes our technique real time. Additionally,
we demonstrate that our pipelines can be used to enhance
the classification accuracy of point cloud with missing data.
Figure 1: Qualitative results of point cloud shape completion

1. Introduction
Acquisition of 3D data, either from laser scanners, stereo
reconstruction, or RGB-D cameras, is in the form of the
point cloud, which is a list of Cartesian coordinates. The
raw output usually suffers from large missing region due
to limited viewing angles, occlusions, sensor resolution, or
unstable measurement in the texture-less region (stereo reconstruction) or specular materials. To utilize the measurements, further post-processing is essential which includes
registration, denoising, resampling, semantic understanding
and eventually reconstructing the 3D mesh model.
In this work, we focus on filling the missing regions
∗ co-corresponding authors

given input data missing 70% of its original points. We present
RL-GAN-Net, which observes a partial input point cloud data
(Pin ) and completes the shape within a matter of milliseconds.
Even when input is severely distorted, our approach completes the
shape with high-fidelity compared to the previous approach using
autoencoder (AE) [1].

within the 3D data by a data-driven method. The primary
form of acquired measurements is the 3D point cloud which
is unstructured and unordered. Therefore, it is not possible to directly apply conventional convolutional neural networks (CNN) approaches which work nicely for structured
data e.g. for 2D grids of pixels [20, 21, 5]. The extensions
of CNN in 3D have been shown to work well with 3D voxel
grid [37, 7, 8]. However, the computing cost grows dras-

5898

