Dual Encoding for Zero-Example Video Retrieval
Jianfeng Dong1 , Xirong Li∗2,3 , Chaoxi Xu3 , Shouling Ji4,5 , Yuan He6 , Gang Yang3 , and Xun Wang1
1

2

College of Computer and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang University
Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, Renmin University of China
3
AI & Media Computing Lab, School of Information, Renmin University of China
4
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
5
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
6
Alibaba Group

Abstract
This paper attacks the challenging problem of zeroexample video retrieval. In such a retrieval paradigm, an
end user searches for unlabeled videos by ad-hoc queries
described in natural language text with no visual example
provided. Given videos as sequences of frames and queries
as sequences of words, an effective sequence-to-sequence
cross-modal matching is required. The majority of existing methods are concept based, extracting relevant concepts from queries and videos and accordingly establishing associations between the two modalities. In contrast,
this paper takes a concept-free approach, proposing a dual
deep encoding network that encodes videos and queries into
powerful dense representations of their own. Dual encoding is conceptually simple, practically effective and endto-end. As experiments on three benchmarks, i.e. MSRVTT, TRECVID 2016 and 2017 Ad-hoc Video Search show,
the proposed solution establishes a new state-of-the-art for
zero-example video retrieval.

Query:

Someone is making a special fruit punch by adding
different types of fruits in a glass bowl.

Rank of
Multi-level Encoding
relevant items
Query
Video

×

×

×

23

×

17

Top-1 video

13

1

Figure 1. Showcase of zero-example video retrieval with and
without the proposed encoding. The ✖ symbol indicates encoding by mean pooling. Numbers in the third column are the rank of
the relevant video returned by retrieval models subject to specific
query / video encoding strategies. The retrieval model with dual
encoding successfully answers this complex query.

1. Introduction
This paper targets at zero-example video retrieval, where
a query is described in natural language text and no visual
example is given. The topic is fundamentally interesting as
it requires establishing proper associations between visual
and linguistic information presented in temporal order.
Zero-example video retrieval attracts initial attention
in the form of zero-example multimedia event detection,
where the goal is to retrieve video shots showing specific
events such as parking a vehicle, dog show and birthday
∗ Xirong Li is the corresponding author (xirong@ruc.edu.cn).

party, but with no training videos provided [3, 6, 9, 12, 20,
31]. All these methods are concept based, i.e. describing
the video content by automatically detected concepts, which
are used to match with a target event. Such a concept-based
tradition continues. For the NIST TRECVID challenge of
zero-example video retrieval [2], we observe that the top
performers are mostly concept based [15, 22, 25, 30]. However, the concept-based paradigm faces a number of difficulties including how to specify a set of concepts, how
to train good classifiers for these concepts, and more cru19346

