LiveSketch: Query Perturbations for Guided Sketch-based Visual Search
John Collomosse1 2 , Tu Bui1 , and Hailin Jin2
1

Centre for Vision Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
2
Creative Intelligence Lab, Adobe Research

Abstract
LiveSketch is a novel algorithm for searching large image
collections using hand-sketched queries. LiveSketch tackles
the inherent ambiguity of sketch search by creating visual
suggestions that augment the query as it is drawn, making
query specification an iterative rather than one-shot process
that helps disambiguate users’ search intent. Our technical
contributions are: a triplet convnet architecture that incorporates an RNN based variational autoencoder to search
for images using vector (stroke-based) queries; real-time
clustering to identify likely search intents (and so, targets
within the search embedding); and the use of backpropagation from those targets to perturb the input stroke sequence,
so suggesting alterations to the query in order to guide the
search. We show improvements in accuracy and time-to-task
over contemporary baselines using a 67M image corpus.

1. Introduction
Determining user intent from a visual search query remains an open challenge, particularly in sketch based image
retrieval (SBIR) over millions of images where a sketched
shape can yield plausible yet unexpected matches. For example, a user’s sketch of a dog might return a map of the United
States that ostensibly resembles the shape (structure) drawn,
but is not relevant. Free-hand sketches are often incomplete
and ambiguous descriptions of desired image content [8].
This limits the ability of sketch to communicate search intent, particularly over large image datasets.
This paper proposes LiveSketch; a novel interactive SBIR
technique in which users iterate to refine their sketched
query, selecting and integrating sketch embellishments suggested by the system in order to disambiguate search intent and so improve the relevance of results (Fig. 1). A core
novelty of our approach lies within the method by which
visual suggestions are generated, exploiting the reversibility
of deep neural networks (DNNs) that are commonly used
to encode image features to create the search index in visual search systems [26, 13, 7, 6]. By identifying clusters
of likely target intents for the user’s search, we reverse the
DNN encoder to explain how such clusters could be gen-

Figure 1. LiveSketch helps disambiguate SBIR for large datasets,
where a shape sketched from scratch (top left) can yield results
that do not match the users’ search intent. LiveSketch iteratively
suggests refinements to users’ sketched queries to guide the search
(Iter.1-3), based on the user indicating relevant clusters of results
(right). This interaction disambiguates and quickly guides the
search towards results that match users’ search intent (subsec. 4.3).

erated by adapting the query. We are inspired by adversarial perturbations (APs); that use backpropagation to generate ‘adversarial’ image examples [12] that induce object
mis-classification [24, 2, 23] to a targeted category. In our
context of visual search, we similarly backpropagate to perturb the sketched query from its current state toward one (or
more) targets identified in the search embedding by the user.
As such, the query becomes a ‘living sketch’ on the canvas that reacts interactively to intents expressed by the user,
forming the basis for subsequent search iterations. The use
of a single, live sketch to collaboratively guide the search differs from prior approaches such as ShadowDraw [22] that
ghost hundreds of top results on the canvas. We propose
three technical contributions:
1) Vector Queries for Sketch based Image Retrieval. We
learn a joint search embedding that unifies vector graphic
and raster representations of visual structure, encoded by
recurrent (RNN) and convnet (CNN) branches of a novel
triplet DNN architecture. Uniquely, this embedding enables

2879

