PEPSI : Fast Image Inpainting with Parallel Decoding Network
Min-cheol Sagong1 , Yong-goo Shin1 , Seung-wook Kim1 , Seung Park1 , Sung-jea Ko2
Korea university
1

{mcsagong, ygshin, swkim, spark}@dali.korea.ac.kr
2

sjko@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, a generative adversarial network (GAN)-based
method employing the coarse-to-fine network with the contextual attention module (CAM) has shown outstanding results in image inpainting. However, this method requires
numerous computational resources due to its two-stage process for feature encoding. To solve this problem, in this paper, we present a novel network structure, called PEPSI:
parallel extended-decoder path for semantic inpainting.
PEPSI can reduce the number of convolution operations by
adopting a structure consisting of a single shared encoding
network and a parallel decoding network with coarse and
inpainting paths. The coarse path produces a preliminary
inpainting result with which the encoding network is trained
to predict features for the CAM. At the same time, the inpainting path creates a higher-quality inpainting result using refined features reconstructed by the CAM. PEPSI not
only reduces the number of convolution operation almost
by half as compared to the conventional coarse-to-fine networks but also exhibits superior performance to other models in terms of testing time and qualitative scores.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting techniques have been widely researched [1–3, 5, 6, 10, 13, 16, 17, 19, 21, 25, 26, 28] for removing an unwanted object or synthesizing missing parts
of an image in various applications such as photo editing, image-based rendering, and computational photography [15, 20, 28]. Image inpainting methods can be divided
into two groups [28]. The diffusion-based and patch-based
methods belong to the first group. The diffusion-based
method propagates the pixel information from the existing
regions of an image, i.e. background regions, to the missing
regions, i.e. hole regions [2,5,19,28]. This method performs
well on plain textures and small holes but often fails to fill
in the complex hole region such as face and objects with the
non-repetitive structures. In contrast to the diffusion-based
method, the patch-based method samples patches from the

background region and then pastes them into the hole region [22, 28]. Barnes et al. [1] proposed a fast approximate nearest neighbor patch search algorithm, called PatchMatch, which has shown notable results for image editing
applications including image inpainting. PatchMatch, however, smoothly fills in the hole region without considering
the visual semantics or the global structure of an image.
The second group is a generation-based method which
applies the deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to
predict structures for the hole regions [13, 16, 24]. Thanks
to a decade of advances in CNNs, image inpainting methods adopting an encoder-decoder structure have achieved a
significant progress [13, 24]. However, these methods often create an image with artifacts such as a blurry image
and a distorted image. To cope with this problem, Pathak et
al. [21] introduced a method called context encoder adopting the generative adversarial network (GAN) [7]. In this
method, they utilize a combined loss, the l2 pixel-wise reconstruction loss and adversarial loss, which helps the networks to generate a more natural image by minimizing
the difference between the reference and inpainted image.
However, this method has a limitation that it can fill only
square holes at the center of an image.
Iizuka et al. [10] proposed an improved network structure which can extract features in wider receptive fields by
employing the dilated convolution layers to complete hole
regions effectively. In addition, they use two sibling discriminators: global and local discriminators. The local discriminator focuses on the inpainted region to distinguish local texture consistency while the global discriminator inspects if the result is coherent in a whole image. Yu et
al. [28] have extended this work by using the coarse-tofine network and the contextual attention module (CAM).
The CAM learns the relation among background and foreground feature patches by computing the cosine similarity. To collect the background features involved with the
missing region, this method needs the features at the missing region encoded from roughly completed images. Thus,
they designed two-stage coarse-to-fine networks to produce
an intermediate result of a roughly restored image. This
111360

