Capture, Learning, and Synthesis of 3D Speaking Styles
Daniel Cudeiro∗†
Timo Bolkart∗
Cassidy Laidlaw
Anurag Ranjan
Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{tbolkart, claidlaw, aranjan, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Input: speech signal and 3D template

Output: 3D character animation

Figure 1: Given an arbitrary speech signal and a static 3D face mesh as input (left), our model, VOCA outputs a realistic 3D
character animation (right). Top: Winston Churchill. Bottom: Actor from Karras et al. [33]. See supplementary video.

Abstract
Audio-driven 3D facial animation has been widely explored, but achieving realistic, human-like performance is
still unsolved. This is due to the lack of available 3D
datasets, models, and standard evaluation metrics. To address this, we introduce a unique 4D face dataset with about
29 minutes of 4D scans captured at 60 fps and synchronized audio from 12 speakers. We then train a neural network on our dataset that factors identity from facial motion. The learned model, VOCA (Voice Operated Character Animation) takes any speech signal as input—even
speech in languages other than English—and realistically
animates a wide range of adult faces. Conditioning on subject labels during training allows the model to learn a variety of realistic speaking styles. VOCA also provides animator controls to alter speaking style, identity-dependent
facial shape, and pose (i.e. head, jaw, and eyeball rotations) during animation. To our knowledge, VOCA is
the only realistic 3D facial animation model that is read-

ily applicable to unseen subjects without retargeting. This
makes VOCA suitable for tasks like in-game video, virtual reality avatars, or any scenario in which the speaker,
speech, or language is not known in advance. We make
the dataset and model available for research purposes at
http://voca.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Teaching computers to see and understand faces is critical for them to understand human behavior. There is an
extensive literature on estimating 3D face shape, facial expressions, and facial motion from images and videos. Less
attention has been paid to estimating 3D properties of faces
from sound; however, many facial motions are caused directly by the production of speech. Understanding the correlation between speech and facial motion thus provides ad∗ Equal contribution
† Deceased, December 5, 2018

110101

