Learning Personalized Modular Network Guided by Structured Knowledge
Xiaodan Liang
Sun Yat-sen University
xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
The dominant deep learning approaches use a "one-sizefits-all" paradigm with the hope that underlying characteristics of diverse inputs can be captured via a fixed structure.
They also overlook the importance of explicitly modeling
feature hierarchy. However, complex real-world tasks often require discovering diverse reasoning paths for different inputs to achieve satisfying predictions, especially for
challenging large-scale recognition tasks with complex label
relations. In this paper, we treat the structured commonsense
knowledge (e.g. concept hierarchy) as the guidance of customizing more powerful and explainable network structures
for distinct inputs, leading to dynamic and individualized
inference paths. Give an off-the-shelf large network configuration, the proposed Personalized Modular Network (PMN)
is learned by selectively activating a sequence of network
modules where each of them is designated to recognize particular levels of structured knowledge. Learning semantic
configurations and activation of modules to align well with
structured knowledge can be regarded as a decision-making
procedure, which is solved by a new graph-based reinforcement learning algorithm. Experiments on three semantic
segmentation tasks and classification tasks show our PMN
can achieve superior performance with the reduced number of network modules while discovering personalized and
explainable module configurations for each input.

1. Introduction
Recent successes of deep neural networks in common
tasks [12, 19, 8] have been accompanied by the increasingly complex and deep network architectures tailored for
each task. Most existing works follow the “one-size-fitsall" paradigm and hope that all relationships between inputs
and targets can be learned via implicit feature propagation
along with the fixed network routine, regardless of whether
the inputs are too easy or difficult for the network capacity. However, different examples actually need specialized
network structures or feature propagation routines with respect to their distinct complexities and specific targets. This

can be well motivated by the feature visualization study
in [27] where interpretable feature hierarchy can be learned
in current neural networks. For example, in terms of image
recognition, for easy images (e.g. most common dog), network compression [22, 36, 34] can be pursued by pruning
some redundant network modules. In contrast, for difficult
images (e.g. rare concepts, such as violin), more sophisticated structures or external constraints [39, 30, 7] should
be exploited to improve the model capability. The varying
requirement of the model complexity by different instances
indicates the potential benefits of dynamic networks, where
most appropriate and explainable network structures can be
discovered for different inputs.
Some existing input-dependent networks [36, 23] are
mainly designed for compressing networks by dynamically
executing different modules of a network model. However,
their learned policies for selecting specific modules are solely
driven by the final reward (i.e. classification accuracy). Such
policy learning lacks the essential structure interpretability
to explain why a particular module is activated and results
in heavy exploration cost to find an optimal selection sequence. On the contrary, an important merit of the human
perception system [29] is its ability to adaptively allocate
time and inspection for visual recognition and exploit external knowledge for better decision-making. For example,
at the first single glimpse, it is sufficient to recognize some
coarse classes (e.g. animals, human or scenes). Based on this
impression, more time and attention are devoted to further
understand among fine-grained concepts (e.g. cat or dogs)
by associating their characteristics with those of semantic
correlated concepts (e.g. parents in concept hierarchy).
To mimic this dynamic reasoning system, we propose to
learn dynamic module configurations to infer personalized
reasoning paths for each input, named as Personalized Modular Network (PMN), as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, it is
beneficial to bridge visual feature hierarchy with commonsense human knowledge which can be formed as various
undirected graphs consisting of rich relationships among
concepts. For example, “Shetland Sheepdog" and “Husky"
share one superclass “dog" due to some common characteristics. Beyond only inferring the binary selection of each
18944

