Learning 3D Human Dynamics from Video
Angjoo Kanazawa∗ , Jason Y. Zhang∗ , Panna Felsen∗ , Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{kanazawa,zhang.j,panna,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Input

Abstract
From an image of a person in action, we can easily
guess the 3D motion of the person in the immediate past
and future. This is because we have a mental model of
3D human dynamics that we have acquired from observing visual sequences of humans in motion. We present
a framework that can similarly learn a representation of
3D dynamics of humans from video via a simple but effective temporal encoding of image features. At test time,
from video, the learned temporal representation give rise
to smooth 3D mesh predictions. From a single image, our
model can recover the current 3D mesh as well as its 3D
past and future motion. Our approach is designed so it
can learn from videos with 2D pose annotations in a semisupervised manner. Though annotated data is always limited, there are millions of videos uploaded daily on the Internet. In this work, we harvest this Internet-scale source
of unlabeled data by training our model on unlabeled video
with pseudo-ground truth 2D pose obtained from an off-theshelf 2D pose detector. Our experiments show that adding
more videos with pseudo-ground truth 2D pose monotonically improves 3D prediction performance. We evaluate
our model on the recent challenging dataset of 3D Poses in
the Wild and obtain state-of-the-art performance on the 3D
prediction task without any fine-tuning. The project website
with video can be found at https://akanazawa.github.
io/human_dynamics/.

1. Introduction
Consider the image of the baseball player mid-swing in
Figure 1. Even though we only see a flat two-dimensional
picture, we can infer the player’s 3D pose, as we can easily
imagine how his knees bend and arms extend in space. Furthermore, we can also infer his motion in the surrounding
moments as he swings the bat through. We can do this because we have a mental model of 3D human dynamics that
we have acquired from observing many examples of people
in motion.
∗ equal contribution

Predictions

Different
Viewpoint

Figure 1: 3D motion prediction from a single image. We propose a method that, given a single image of a person, predicts the
3D mesh of the person’s body and also hallucinates the future and
past motion. Our method can learn from videos with only 2D pose
annotations in a semi-supervised manner. Note our training set
does not have any ground truth 3D pose sequences of batting motion. Our model also produces smooth 3D predictions from video
input.
In this work, we present a computational framework that
can similarly learn a model of 3D human dynamics from
video. Given a temporal sequence of images, we first extract per-image features, and then train a simple 1D temporal encoder that learns a representation of 3D human dynamics over a temporal context of image features. We force
this representation to capture 3D human dynamics by predicting not only the current 3D human pose and shape, but
also changes in pose in the nearby past and future frames.
We transfer the learned 3D dynamics knowledge to static
images by learning a hallucinator that can hallucinate the
temporal context representation from a single image feature. The hallucinator is trained in a self-supervised manner
using the actual output of the temporal encoder. Figure 2
illustrates the overview of our training procedure.
At test time, when the input is a video, the temporal en15614

