Low-rank Tensor Completion with a New Tensor Nuclear Norm Induced by
Invertible Linear Transforms
Canyi Lu1 , Xi Peng2 , Yunchao Wei3,4
1

Carnegie Mellon University,

2

Sichuan University, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 4 University of Technology Sydney

canyilu@gmail.com, pengx.gm@gmail.com, wychao1987@gmail.com

Abstract
This work studies the low-rank tensor completion problem, which aims to exactly recover a low-rank tensor from
partially observed entries. Our model is inspired by the recently proposed tensor-tensor product (t-product) [9] based
on any invertible linear transforms. When the linear transforms satisfy certain conditions, we deduce the new tensor
tubal rank, tensor spectral norm, and tensor nuclear norm. Equipped with the tensor nuclear norm, we then solve
the tensor completion problem by solving a convex program
and provide the theoretical bound for the exact recovery under certain tensor incoherence conditions. The achieved
sampling complexity is order-wise optimal. Our model and
result greatly extend existing results in the low-rank matrix
[5] and tensor completion [16]. Numerical experiments
verify our results and the application on image recovery
demonstrates the superiority of our method.

ly high-dimension. But the tensor of interest is frequently
low-rank, or approximately so [11], and hence has a much
lower-dimensional structure. This motivates the low-rank
tensor estimation and recovery problem which is gaining
significant attention in many different areas, both theoretically and practically: e.g., estimating latent variable graphical models [1], classifying audio [20], image and video
completion [13, 16], to name a few.
In this paper, we focus on the low-rank tensor completion problem, which aims to exactly recover a low-rank tensor from an incomplete observation. Such a problem can
be regarded as an extension of the low-rank matrix completion problem [3, 5], which has been applied to image denoising [18] and multi-label image classification [2]. It is
shown that under certain incoherence conditions, the rank
r matrix M ∈ Rn×n with O(nr log2 n) observations, can
be recovered with high probability by solving the following
convex model [5]
min kXk∗ , s.t. PΩ (X) = PΩ (M ),
X

1. Introduction
With the availability of cheap memory and the advances
in modern computer technology, it is now possible to collect, store and process more data for science and engineering applications than ever before. The real data are usually multidimensional in nature: the information is stored
in multiway arrays, known as tensors [26], whose entries
are indexed by several continuous or discrete variables. For
example, a color image is a 3-way object with column, row
and color modes; a greyscale video is indexed by two spatial
variables and one temporal variable. There are many applications which involve the tensor representation and operation, including signal processing [6], computer vision [27],
data mining [23], and many others. A common approach in
these applications is to manipulate the tensor data by taking the advantage of its multi-dimensional structure. Collapsing the multiway data to matrices usually leads to information loss and would cause performance degradation. It
is observed that the real tensor data are often of extreme-

(1)

where PΩ (X) denotes the projection of X on the observed
set Ω, and kXk∗ is the nuclear norm of X, defined as
the sum of its singular values. The nuclear norm is the
convex envelope of the matrix rank within a certain set.
This leads to the order-wise optimal sampling complexity
O(nr log2 n) for (1), compared with the degrees of freedom
O(nr) for a rank r matrix [5].
It is expected to extend the low-rank matrix completion
model and analysis to the tensor case. There have been
several tensor recovery models proposed based on different
tensor rank definitions and convex surrogates. But they have
some limitations in real applications. The CP rank [11], defined as the smallest number of rank one tensor decomposition, is NP-hard to compute. Its convex envelope is not
clear. This makes the low CP rank tensor recovery challenging. To avoid this issue, the tractable Tucker rank [11]
and its convex relaxation are more widely used. The Sum
of Nuclear Norms (SNN) [13] is used as a convex surrogate
15996

