Informative Object Annotations: Tell Me Something I Don’t Know
Lior Bracha
Bar-Ilan University

Gal Chechik
Bar-Ilan University, NVIDIA Research

lior.bracha@live.biu.ac.il

gal.chechik@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Multiclass
classifier

Capturing the interesting components of an image is a
key aspect of image understanding. When a speaker annotates an image, selecting labels that are informative greatly
depends on the prior knowledge of a prospective listener.
Motivated by cognitive theories of categorization and communication, we present a new unsupervised approach to
model this prior knowledge and quantify the informativeness of a description. Specifically, we compute how knowledge of a label reduces uncertainty over the space of labels
and use this uncertainty reduction to rank candidate labels
for describing an image. While the full estimation problem is intractable, we describe an efficient algorithm to approximate entropy reduction using a tree-structured graphical model. We evaluate our approach on the open-images
dataset using a new evaluation set of 10K ground-truth ratings and find that it achieves ∼ 65% agreement with human
raters, close to the upper bound of inter-rater agreement
and largely outperforming other unsupervised baselines.

Label, confidence
Golden retriever, 0.9
Grass 0.8
Animal, 1
Dog toy, 0.6
Mammal, 0.9
Skin, 0.5
Green, 0.7
Lawn, 0.7
Dog,1
Nature, 0.9
Goldendoodle, 0.6
Tennis ball, 0.8

Prior knowledge

Speaker

“dog”
Select labels that are most
informative for the listener

Listener

Figure 1. The problem of informative labeling. An image is automatically annotated with multiple labels. A “speaker” is then
given these labels and their confidence scores and has to select k
labels to transmit to a listener, such that the listener finds them
informative given his prior knowledge. The prior knowledge is
assumed to be common to both the speaker and the listener.

1. Introduction
How would you label the photo in Figure 1? If you
answered “a dog”, your response agrees with what most
people would answer. Indeed, people are surprisingly
consistent when asked to describe what an image is
“about” [16]. They intuitively manage to focus on what is
“informative” or “relevant” and select terms that reflect this
information. In contrast, automated classifiers can produce
a large number of labels that are perhaps technically
correct, but are often non-interesting (Fig. 1 top right).

The principles that govern informative communication
have long been a subject of research in various fields from
philosophy of language and linguistics to computer science.
In the discipline of pragmatics, Grice’s maxims state that
“one tries to be as informative as one possibly can.” [9]. But
the question remains, “Informative about what?” How can
we build a practical theory of informative communication
that can be applied to concrete problems with real-world
data?

A natural approach to ascertain importance lies in the
context of the specific task. For instance, classifiers can be
efficiently trained to identify dog breeds or animal species.
More generally, each task defines importance through a supervision signal provided to the classifier [1, 20, 14]. Here
we are interested in a more generic setup, where no downstream task dictates the scene interpretation. This represents
the challenge that people face when describing a scene to
another person, without any specific task at hand.

In this paper, we address the following concrete learning
setup (Figure 1). A speaker receives a set of labels predicted automatically from an image by a multiclass classifier. It also receives the confidence that the classifier assigns
to each prediction. Then, it aims to select a few labels (say,
one label) to be transmitted to a listener, such that the listener will find those labels informative. The speaker and
listener also share the same prior knowledge in the form of
the distribution of labels in the image dataset.

12507

