PifPaf: Composite Fields for Human Pose Estimation
Sven Kreiss, Lorenzo Bertoni, Alexandre Alahi
EPFL VITA lab
CH-1015 Lausanne
sven.kreiss@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a new bottom-up method for multiperson 2D human pose estimation that is particularly
well suited for urban mobility such as self-driving cars
and delivery robots. The new method, PifPaf, uses a
Part Intensity Field (PIF) to localize body parts and a
Part Association Field (PAF) to associate body parts
with each other to form full human poses. Our method
outperforms previous methods at low resolution and in
crowded, cluttered and occluded scenes thanks to (i) our
new composite field PAF encoding fine-grained information and (ii) the choice of Laplace loss for regressions which incorporates a notion of uncertainty. Our
architecture is based on a fully convolutional, singleshot, box-free design. We perform on par with the existing state-of-the-art bottom-up method on the standard COCO keypoint task and produce state-of-the-art
results on a modified COCO keypoint task for the transportation domain.

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress has been made in estimating
human poses “in the wild” driven by popular data collection campaigns [1, 27]. Yet, when it comes to the
“transportation domain” such as for self-driving cars
or social robots, we are still far from matching an acceptable level of accuracy. While a pose estimate is not
the final goal, it is an effective low dimensional and interpretable representation of humans to detect critical
actions early enough for autonomous navigation systems (e.g., detecting pedestrians who intend to cross
the street). Consequently, the further away a human
pose can be detected, the safer an autonomous system will be. This directly relates to pushing the limits
on the minimum resolution needed to perceive human
poses.
In this work, we tackle the well established multiperson 2D human pose estimation problem given a sin-

Figure 1: We want to estimate human 2D poses in the
transportation domain where autonomous navigation
systems operate in crowded scenes. Humans occupy
small portion of the images and could partially occlude
each other. We show the output of our PifPaf method
with colored segments.

gle input image. We specifically address challenges that
arise in autonomous navigation settings as illustrated
in Figure 1: (i) wide viewing angle with limited resolution on humans, i.e., a height of 30-90 pixels, and
(ii) high density crowds where pedestrians occlude each
other. Naturally, we aim for high recall and precision.
Although pose estimation has been studied before
the deep learning era, a significant cornerstone is the
work of OpenPose [3], followed by Mask R-CNN [18].
The former is a bottom-up approach (detecting joints
without a person detector), and the latter is a top-down
one (using a person detector first and outputting joints
within the detected bounding boxes). While the performance of these methods is stunning on high enough
resolution images, they perform poorly in the limited
resolution regime, as well as in dense crowds where humans partially occlude each other.
In this paper, we propose to extend the notion of
fields in pose estimation [3] to go beyond scalar and
vector fields to composite fields. We introduce a new

11977

