Fast Interactive Object Annotation with Curve-GCN
Huan Ling1,2∗

Jun Gao1,2∗
Amlan Kar1,2
Wenzheng Chen 1,2
1
2
3
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
NVIDIA

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

{linghuan, jungao, amlan, wenzheng, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Curve-GCN

Abstract

Interactive Object Annotation Tool

Manually labeling objects by tracing their boundaries is
a laborious process. In [7, 2], the authors proposed PolygonRNN that produces polygonal annotations in a recurrent
manner using a CNN-RNN architecture, allowing interactive correction via humans-in-the-loop. We propose a new
framework that alleviates the sequential nature of PolygonRNN, by predicting all vertices simultaneously using a Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN). Our model is trained endto-end. It supports object annotation by either polygons or
splines, facilitating labeling efficiency for both line-based
and curved objects. We show that Curve-GCN outperforms
all existing approaches in automatic mode, including the
powerful PSP-DeepLab [8, 23] and is significantly more efficient in interactive mode than Polygon-RNN++. Our model
runs at 29.3ms in automatic, and 2.6ms in interactive mode,
making it 10x and 100x faster than Polygon-RNN++.

1. Introduction
Object instance segmentation is the problem of outlining
all objects of a given class in an image, a task that has been
receiving increased attention in the past few years [15, 36,
20, 3, 21]. Current approaches are all data hungry, and
benefit from large annotated datasets for training. However,
manually tracing object boundaries is a laborious process,
taking up to 40sec per object [2, 9]. To alleviate this problem,
a number of interactive image segmentation techniques have
been proposed [28, 23, 7, 2], speeding up annotation by a
significant factor. We follow this line of work.
In DEXTR [23], the authors build upon the Deeplab architecture [8] by incorporating a simple encoding of human
clicks in the form of heat maps. This is a pixel-wise approach, i.e. it predicts a foreground-background label for
each pixel. DEXTR showed that by incorporating user clicks
as a soft constraint, the model learns to interactively improve
its prediction. Yet, since the approach is pixel-wise, the
worst case scenario still requires many clicks.
Polygon-RNN [7, 2] frames human-in-the-loop annotation as a recurrent process, during which the model sequen∗ authors contributed equally

https://richardkleincpa.com/new-york-city-street-wallpaper/

Add box

Polygon

Spline

Figure 1: We propose Curve-GCN for interactive object annotation. In contrast to Polygon-RNN [7, 2], our model parametrizes
objects with either polygons or splines and is trained end-to-end at
a high output resolution.

tially predicts vertices of a polygon. The annotator can
intervene whenever an error occurs, by correcting the wrong
vertex. The model continues its prediction by conditioning
on the correction. Polygon-RNN was shown to produce annotations at human level of agreement with only a few clicks
per object instance. The worst case scenario here is bounded
by the number of polygon vertices, which for most objects
ranges up to 30-40 points. However, the recurrent nature
of the model limits scalability to more complex shapes, resulting in harder training and longer inference. Furthermore,
the annotator is expected to correct mistakes in a sequential
order, which is often challenging in practice.
In this paper, we frame object annotation as a regression problem, where the locations of all vertices are predicted simultaneously. We represent the object as a graph
with a fixed topology, and perform prediction using a Graph
Convolutional Network. We show how the model can be
used and optimized for interactive annotation. Our framework further allows us to parametrize objects with either
polygons or splines, adding additional flexibility and efficiency to the interactive annotation process. The proposed
approach, which we refer to as Curve-GCN, is end-to-end
differentiable, and runs in real time. We evaluate our CurveGCN on the challenging Cityscapes dataset [10], where we
outperform Polygon-RNN++ and PSP-Deeplab/DEXTR in
both automatic and interactive settings. We also show that
our model outperforms the baselines in cross-domain annotation, that is, a model trained on Cityscapes is used to
15257

