Large-scale interactive object segmentation with human annotators
Rodrigo Benenson

Stefan Popov
Google Research

Vittorio Ferrari

{benenson, spopov, vittoferrari}@google.com

Abstract
Manually annotating object segmentation masks is very
time consuming. Interactive object segmentation methods
offer a more efficient alternative where a human annotator and a machine segmentation model collaborate. In this
paper we make several contributions to interactive segmentation: (1) we systematically explore in simulation the design space of deep interactive segmentation models and report new insights and caveats; (2) we execute a large-scale
annotation campaign with real human annotators, producing masks for 2.5M instances on the OpenImages dataset.
We released this data publicly, forming the largest existing dataset for instance segmentation. Moreover, by reannotating part of the COCO dataset, we show that we can
produce instance masks 3× faster than traditional polygon
drawing tools while also providing better quality. (3) We
present a technique for automatically estimating the quality
of the produced masks which exploits indirect signals from
the annotation process.

1. Introduction
Propelled by the increased computing power, the last
years have seen a dramatic growth in the size of models for
computer vision tasks. These larger models are evermore
demanding of larger training sets to reach performance saturation [32]. This demand for data often becomes a bottleneck for practitioners. While computers become cheaper,
faster, and able to handle larger models, the cost of humans
manually annotating data remains very high. Hence, we
need new strategies to scale-up human annotations.
Amongst the traditional image understanding tasks, instance segmentation is considered one of the most expensive to annotate [8, 19, 6, 37]. For each object instance in
each class of interest, it requires annotating a mask indicating which pixels belong to the instance.
In this work we explore an interactive segmentation approach to annotate instance masks, where the human annotator focuses on correcting the output of a segmentation
model, rather than spending time blindly creating full annotations that might be redundant or already captured by
the model. Across multiple rounds the annotator provides
corrections to the current segmentation, and then the model
incorporates them to refine the segmentation.
Albeit the idea of interactive segmentation was established already a decade ago [4, 30], we make two key

Figure 1. Example of corrective clicks and their effect on the segmentation mask. Starting from a bounding box, the annotator provides up to 4 corrective clicks in each round. See section 2.

contributions: (1) through extensive simulations we systematically explore the design space of deep interactive
segmentations models and report new insights and caveats
(Sec. 3). (2) while most previous works report only simulation experiments [36, 35, 17, 20, 10, 22], we execute
a large-scale annotation campaign with real human annotators (2.5M instances, Sec. 4), we analyse the annotators
behavior (Sec. 5.2) and the resulting annotations (Sec. 5.3).
Our results show that we can make instance segmentation 3× faster than traditional polygon drawing tools [19]
while also providing better quality (Sec. 5.3). Additionally
our method can produce masks across different time budgets, and we present a new technique for automatically estimating the quality of the produced masks which exploits
indirect signals from the annotation process (Sec. 5.4).
To the best of our knowledge this is the first work exploring interactive annotations at scale. We apply our approach to collect 2.5M new masks over 300 categories of
the OpenImages dataset [14]. We released this data, making it the largest public dataset for instance segmentation (in
the number of instances).

1.1. Related work
Dataset annotations. A flurry of techniques have been
explored to annotate the location of objects in images:
bounding box annotations [8], clicks on the object extremes
[26, 22], clicks on the object centre [3, 27], bounding box
followed by edits to a generated segment [4, 30], scribbles
[3, 18], hierarchical super-pixel annotations [21], polygon
annotations [8, 9, 19], interactive polygons [1], eye gaze
[25], and touch interfaces [28], just to name a few.
Despite many explored ideas, the current most popular
datasets for object instances localization were all obtained
using purely manual annotations of boxes or (layered) polygons [8, 31, 9, 19, 6, 24, 11, 37].
111700

