Query-guided End-to-End Person Search
Bharti Munjal1,2

Sikandar Amin1
Federico Tombari2
Fabio Galasso1
1
OSRAM GmbH, 2 Technische Universität München

Abstract
Person search has recently gained attention as the novel
task of finding a person, provided as a cropped sample, from
a gallery of non-cropped images, whereby several other
people are also visible. We believe that i. person detection
and re-identification should be pursued in a joint optimization framework and that ii. the person search should leverage the query image extensively (e.g. emphasizing unique
query patterns). However, so far, no prior art realizes this.
We introduce a novel query-guided end-to-end person
search network (QEEPS) to address both aspects. We
leverage a most recent joint detector and re-identification
work, OIM [37]. We extend this with i. a query-guided
Siamese squeeze-and-excitation network (QSSE-Net) that
uses global context from both the query and gallery images,
ii. a query-guided region proposal network (QRPN) to produce query-relevant proposals, and iii. a query-guided similarity subnetwork (QSimNet), to learn a query-guided reidentification score. QEEPS is the first end-to-end queryguided detection and re-id network. On both the most recent
CUHK-SYSU [37] and PRW [46] datasets, we outperform
the previous state-of-the-art by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Person search has recently emerged as the task of finding a person, provided as a cropped exemplar, in a gallery
of non-cropped images [23, 37, 39, 46]. Person search is
challenging, since the gallery contains cluttered background
(including additional people) and occlusion. Furthermore,
the query person may appear in the gallery under different
viewpoints, poses, scale and illumination conditions. However the task is of great relevance in video surveillance,
since it enables cross-camera visual tracking [3] and person
verification [40].
Typical approaches to person search separate the problem into person localization (detection) and re-identification
(re-id), and tackle each task sequentially via separate supervised networks. One such approach is the current best performer Mask-G [4]. But when separating the two tasks, one
may remove useful contextual information for the re-id net-

Person Search

Gallery
Faster RCNN
Re-ID network

Query-guided End-to-End Person Search

Gallery
Siamese Faster RCNN (incl. QSSE, QRPN)
Re-ID network
QSimNet

Figure 1. Person search is about finding a query person (yellow rectangle) within a gallery image (the target green rectangle).
(Left) current approaches detect all people from the gallery image,
then estimate re-identification features to match the cropped query.
(Right) our proposed QEEPS guides the person search with an extensive use of the full query image, by means of a joint detection
and re-identification network, which is end-to-end trained.

work (e.g. in Fig.1(left) the query is cut out from the query
image). Also, the detection and localization task cannot exploit the information from the query, since the detection network runs independently, before the re-id network.
If we, as humans, were to search for a person in an image, we would not only look at each individual, but we
would also search for peculiar patterns in the image, e.g.
a distinct color or the texture of the person’s t-shirt, as
an additional hints. Motivated by this perspective, we introduce the first Query-guided End-to-End Person Search
work (QEEPS). We propose the joint optimization of detection and re-identification, and to condition both aspects on
the given query image, as exemplified in Fig.1(right).
Our approach is the only method which is both end-toend and query-guided. To the best of our knowledge, across
the person search approaches [23, 37, 39, 42, 46], only
OIM [37] and IAN [35] optimize jointly the detector and the
re-identification networks (end-to-end). On the other hand,
NPSM [23] is the sole to adopt a query attention mechanism, by replacing the detector RPN with an iterative queryguided search based on Conv-LSTM. In fact NPSM builds
on OIM but it is not end-to-end, since it freezes the detector and re-identification network parts to pre-trained values,

811

