Fast and Flexible Indoor Scene Synthesis via
Deep Convolutional Generative Models
Daniel Ritchie ∗
Kai Wang ∗
Brown University

Yu-an Lin

{daniel ritchie, kai wang, yu-an lin@brown.edu }

Bedrooms

Living Rooms

Offices

Bathrooms

Figure 1. Synthetic virtual scenes generated by our method. Our model can generate a large variety of such scenes, as well as complete
partial scenes, in under two seconds per scene. This performance is enabled by a pipeline of multiple deep convolutional generative models
which analyze a top-down representation of the scene.
Abstract
We present a new, fast and flexible pipeline for indoor scene synthesis that is based on deep convolutional generative models. Our method operates on a
top-down image-based representation, and inserts objects iteratively into the scene by predicting their category, location, orientation and size with separate neural network modules. Our pipeline naturally supports
automatic completion of partial scenes, as well as synthesis of complete scenes. Our method is significantly
faster than the previous image-based method and generates result that outperforms it and other state-of-theart deep generative scene models in terms of faithfulness to training data and perceived visual quality.

1. Introduction
People spend a large percentage of their lives indoors: in
bedrooms, living rooms, offices, kitchens, and other such
∗ Equal contribution

spaces. The demand for virtual versions of these real-world
spaces has never been higher. Games, virtual reality, and
augmented reality experience often take place in such environments. Architects often create virtual instantiations of
proposed buildings, which they visualize for customers using computer-generated renderings and walkthrough animations. People who wish to redesign their living spaces can
benefit from a growing array of available online virtual interior design tools [25, 21]. Furniture design companies, such
as IKEA and Wayfair, increasingly produce marketing imagery by rendering virtual scenes, as it is faster, cheaper, and
more flexible to do so than to stage real-world scenes [10].
Finally, and perhaps most significantly, computer vision and
robotics researchers have begun turning to virtual environments to train data-hungry models for scene understanding
and autonomous navigation [2, 3, 8].
Given the recent interest in virtual indoor environments,
a generative model of interior spaces would be valuable.
Such a model would provide learning agents a strong prior
over the structure and composition of 3D scenes. It could

6182

