Visual Localization by Learning Objects-of-Interest Dense Match Regression
Philippe Weinzaepfel

Gabriela Csurka
Yohann Cabon
NAVER LABS Europe

Martin Humenberger

firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel CNN-based approach for visual localization from a single RGB image that relies on densely
matching a set of Objects-of-Interest (OOIs). In this paper, we focus on planar objects which are highly descriptive in an environment, such as paintings in museums or
logos and storefronts in malls or airports. For each OOI,
we define a reference image for which 3D world coordinates are available. Given a query image, our CNN model
detects the OOIs, segments them and finds a dense set of
2D-2D matches between each detected OOI and its corresponding reference image. Given these 2D-2D matches, together with the 3D world coordinates of each reference image, we obtain a set of 2D-3D matches from which solving
a Perspective-n-Point problem gives a pose estimate. We
show that 2D-3D matches for reference images, as well
as OOI annotations can be obtained for all training images from a single instance annotation per OOI by leveraging Structure-from-Motion reconstruction. We introduce a
novel synthetic dataset, VirtualGallery, which targets challenges such as varying lighting conditions and different occlusion levels. Our results show that our method achieves
high precision and is robust to these challenges. We also
experiment using the Baidu localization dataset captured in
a shopping mall. Our approach is the first deep regressionbased method to scale to such a larger environment.

1. Introduction
Visual localization consists in estimating the 6-DoF camera pose from a single RGB image within a given area,
also referred to as map. This is particularly valuable if
no other localization technique is available, e.g. in GPSdenied environments such as indoor locations. Interesting
applications include robot navigation [8], self-driving cars
and augmented reality (AR) [6, 22]. The main challenges
include large viewpoint changes between query and train
images, incomplete maps, regions without valuable information (e.g. textureless surfaces), symmetric and repetitive
elements, varying lighting conditions, structural changes,

dynamic objects (e.g. people), and scalability to large areas.
Traditional structure-based approaches [17, 18, 24, 26,
27, 34] use feature matching between query image and map,
coping with many of the mentioned challenges. However,
covering large areas from various viewpoints and under different conditions is not feasible in terms of processing time
and memory consumption. To overcome this, image retrieval can be used to accelerate the matching for largescale localization problems [10, 29, 35]. Recently, methods based on deep learning [2, 16] have shown promising
results. PoseNet [16] and its improvements [4, 7, 15, 39]
proceed by directly regressing the camera pose from input
images. Even if a rough estimate can be obtained, learning a precise localization seems too difficult or would require a large amount of training data to cover diversities
both in terms of locations and intrinsic camera parameters.
More interestingly, Brachmann et al. [2, 3] learn dense 3D
scene coordinate regression and solve a Perspective-n-Point
(PnP) problem for accurate pose estimation. The CNN is
trained end-to-end thanks to a differentiable approximate
formulation of RANSAC, called DSAC. Scene coordinate
regression-based methods obtain outstanding performance
in static environments, i.e., without changes in terms of objects, occlusions or lighting conditions. However, they are
restricted in terms of scene scale.
The above mentioned challenges of visual localization
become even more important in very large and dynamic environments. Essential assumptions, such as static and unchanged scenes are violated and the maps become outdated
quickly while continuous retraining is challenging. This
motivated us to design an algorithm inspired by advances
on instance recognition [11] that relies on stable, predefined areas, and that can bridge the gap between precise
localization and long-term stability in very vivid scenarios.
We propose a novel deep learning-based visual localization
method that proceeds by finding a set of dense matches between some Objects-of-Interest (OOIs) in query images and
the corresponding reference images, i.e., a canonical view
of the object for which a set of 2D-3D correspondences is
available. We define an Object-of-Interest as a discriminative area within the 3D map which can be reliably detected
15634

