Co-Occurrence Neural Network
Ira Shevlev
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, Israel

Shai Avidan
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, Israel

irenably@post.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) became a very
popular tool for image analysis. Convolutions are fast to
compute and easy to store, but they also have some limitations. First, they are shift-invariant and, as a result, they
do not adapt to different regions of the image. Second, they
have a fixed spatial layout, so small geometric deformations
in the layout of a patch will completely change the filter response. For these reasons, we need multiple filters to handle
the different parts and variations in the input.
We augment the standard convolutional tools used in
CNNs with a new filter that addresses both issues raised
above. Our filter combines two terms, a spatial filter and a
term that is based on the co-occurrence statistics of input
values in the neighborhood. The proposed filter is differentiable and can therefore be packaged as a layer in CNN and
trained using back-propagation.
We show how to train the filter as part of the network
and report results on several data sets. In particular, we
replace a convolutional layer with hundreds of thousands of
parameters with a Co-occurrence Layer consisting of only a
few hundred parameters with minimal impact on accuracy.

1. Introduction
A common solution to many computer vision problems
is based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). CNNs
gained popularity, in part, because they offer a flexible architecture that can be adapted to many different tasks. At
their core, CNNs are based on simple primitives that include
convolutions, non-linearity and pooling.
A convolutional layer is the most informative layer, because it stores the parameters of the network. But convolutions (i.e., filters) are shift invariant and one needs a large
number of filters to deal with different regions of the input.
Moreover, filters depend on the spatial layout of the input
and are not suitable to deal directly with the distribution of

the input values. As a result, a small geometric deformation
in the input patch will be considered as a different pattern
that requires additional filters to deal with it.
We propose a new filter that addresses these issues. The
filter is based on the Co-occurrence Filter (CoF) [10]. CoF
combines a spatial filter and a component that is based on
the co-occurrence of pixel values. The co-occurrence component will mix (i.e., smooth) pixel values that co-occur frequently in the image plane, while pixel values that do not
co-occur frequently will not mix. This makes CoF a boundary preserving filter that can smooth textured regions while
preserving the boundaries between them. A unique property
of the co-occurrence term is that it depends on pixel values
and not on the spatial layout of pixels in the image plane.
We take this idea one step further. Instead of collecting co-occurrence statistics, as is done in CoF, we learn
weights based on co-occurrence statistics that optimize the
objective function of the network. So if values in the input
co-occur often in the training set, we learn the best weight
to take advantage of this fact and minimize the loss function of the network. This deep co-occurrence matrix differs
from a standard co-occurrence matrix in two ways. First,
the weights of a co-occurrence matrix are positive, because
they describe distributions. In contrast, the weights of the
deep co-occurrence matrix can be negative. Second, the cooccurrence matrix is symmetric by definition. This is not
necessarily the case for the deep co-occurrence matrix.
The new filter is embedded in a Co-occurrence Layer
(CoL) that can replace standard convolutional layers. CoL
offers a number of useful properties. To begin with, CoL
uses a small number of parameters to generate a large number of filters, depending on the values in a given neighborhood. In addition, the new layer is differentiable and can
be trained using back-propagation without any pre- or postprocessing. On top of that, CoL can handle different patterns of the input, as well as distributions (i.e., histograms)
or re-arrangement of values, because of its co-occurrence
term. We show how to train CoL using back-propagation
and evaluate its performance on a number of data sets.
14797

