Deformable ConvNets v2: More Deformable, Better Results
Xizhou Zhu1,2∗ Han Hu2
1

Stephen Lin2

Jifeng Dai2

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
ezra0408@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{hanhu,stevelin,jifdai}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The superior performance of Deformable Convolutional
Networks arises from its ability to adapt to the geometric variations of objects. Through an examination of its
adaptive behavior, we observe that while the spatial support for its neural features conforms more closely than regular ConvNets to object structure, this support may nevertheless extend well beyond the region of interest, causing
features to be influenced by irrelevant image content. To
address this problem, we present a reformulation of Deformable ConvNets that improves its ability to focus on pertinent image regions, through increased modeling power
and stronger training. The modeling power is enhanced
through a more comprehensive integration of deformable
convolution within the network, and by introducing a modulation mechanism that expands the scope of deformation
modeling. To effectively harness this enriched modeling capability, we guide network training via a proposed feature
mimicking scheme that helps the network to learn features
that reflect the object focus and classification power of RCNN features. With the proposed contributions, this new
version of Deformable ConvNets yields significant performance gains over the original model and produces leading
results on the COCO benchmark for object detection and
instance segmentation.

locations of standard convolution are each offset by displacements learned with respect to the preceding feature
maps. The other is deformable RoIpooling, where offsets
are learned for the bin positions in RoIpooling [15]. The
incorporation of these modules into a neural network gives
it the ability to adapt its feature representation to the configuration of an object, specifically by deforming its sampling
and pooling patterns to fit the object’s structure. With this
approach, large improvements in object detection accuracy
are obtained.
Towards understanding Deformable ConvNets, the authors visualized the induced changes in receptive field, via
the arrangement of offset sampling positions in PASCAL
VOC images [10]. It is found that samples for an activation unit tend to cluster around the object on which it
lies. However, the coverage over an object is inexact, exhibiting a spread of samples beyond the area of interest.
In a deeper analysis of spatial support using images from
the more challenging COCO dataset [28], we observe that
such behavior becomes more pronounced. These findings
suggest that greater potential exists for learning deformable
convolutions.

Geometric variations due to scale, pose, viewpoint and
part deformation present a major challenge in object recognition and detection. The current state-of-the-art method
for addressing this issue is Deformable Convolutional Networks (DCNv1) [7], which introduces two modules that
aid CNNs in modeling such variations. One of these modules is deformable convolution, in which the grid sampling

In this paper, we present a new version of Deformable
ConvNets, called Deformable ConvNets v2 (DCNv2), with
enhanced modeling power for learning deformable convolutions. This increase in modeling capability comes in two
complementary forms. The first is the expanded use of deformable convolution layers within the network. Equipping
more convolutional layers with offset learning capacity allows DCNv2 to control sampling over a broader range of
feature levels. The second is a modulation mechanism in
the deformable convolution modules, where each sample
not only undergoes a learned offset, but is also modulated
by a learned feature amplitude. The network module is thus
given the ability to vary both the spatial distribution and the
relative influence of its samples.

∗ This work is done when Xizhou Zhu is an intern at Microsoft Research
Asia.

To fully exploit the increased modeling capacity of
DCNv2, effective training is needed. Inspired by work on

1. Introduction

19308

