Memory-Attended Recurrent Network for Video Captioning
Wenjie Pei1 , Jiyuan Zhang1 , Xiangrong Wang2 , Lei Ke1 , Xiaoyong Shen1 and Yu-Wing Tai1∗
1

Tencent,

2

Southern University of Science and Technology

wenjiecoder@outlook.com, mikejyzhang@tencent.com, x.wang-2@tudelft.nl
keleiwhu@gmail.com, goodshenxy@gmail.com, yuwingtai@tencent.com

Abstract
Typical techniques for video captioning follow the
encoder-decoder framework, which can only focus on one
source video being processed. A potential disadvantage
of such design is that it cannot capture the multiple visual context information of a word appearing in more than
one relevant videos in training data. To tackle this limitation, we propose the Memory-Attended Recurrent Network
(MARN) for video captioning, in which a memory structure
is designed to explore the full-spectrum correspondence between a word and its various similar visual contexts across
videos in training data. Thus, our model is able to achieve a
more comprehensive understanding for each word and yield
higher captioning quality. Furthermore, the built memory
structure enables our method to model the compatibility between adjacent words explicitly instead of asking the model
to learn implicitly, as most existing models do. Extensive
validation on two real-word datasets demonstrates that our
MARN consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Video captioning aims to generate a sequence of words
to describe the visual content of a video in a style of natural
language. It has extensive applications such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [28, 64], video retrieval [63] and assisting visually-impaired people [49]. Video captioning is a
more challenging problem than its twin ‘image captioning’,
which has been widely studied [1, 35, 48, 60]. This is not
only because video contains substantially more information
than still image, but it is also crucial to capture the temporal
dynamics to understand the video content as a whole.
Most existing methods to video captioning follow the
encoder-decoder framework [12, 19, 23, 26, 31, 34, 39,
50, 61], which employs an encoder (typically performed
by CNNs or RNNs) to analyze and extract useful visual
context features from the source video, and a decoder to
generate the caption sequentially. The incorporation of attention mechanism into the decoding process has dramat∗ Corresponding author is Yu-Wing Tai

Source video

Basis decoder: a woman is mixing ingredients in a bowl
MARN:

a woman is pouring liquid into a bowl

Visual context
in the memory

Figure 1. The typical video captioning models based on the
encoder-decoder framework (e.g., the Basis decoder in this figure) can only focus on one source video being processed. Thus, it
is hard to explore the comprehensive context information about a
candidate word, like ‘pouring’. In contrast, our proposed MARN
is able to capture the full-spectrum correspondence between the
candidate word (‘pouring’ in this example) and its various similar visual contexts (all kinds of pouring actions) across videos in
training data , which yields more accurate caption.

ically improved the performance of video captioning due
to its capability of selective focus on the relevant visual
content [12, 23, 52, 61]. One potential limitation of the
encoder-decoder framework is that the decoder can only focus on one source video which is currently being processed
while decoding. This implies that it can only investigate the
correspondence between a word and visual features from a
single video input. However, a candidate word in the vocabulary may appear in multiple video scenes that have similar
but not identical context information. Consequently existing models cannot effectively explore the full spectrum between the word and its various similar visual contexts across
videos in training data. For instance, the basis decoder in
Figure 1, which is based on encoder-decoder framework,
cannot corresponds the action in the source video to the
word ‘pouring’ accurately because of insufficient understanding about the candidate word ‘pouring’.
Inspired by the memory scheme which is leveraged to incorporate the document context in document-level machine
translation [14], in this paper we propose a novel MemoryAttended Recurrent Network (MARN) for video captioning
which explores the captions of videos with similar visual

8347

