Semantic Alignment: Finding Semantically Consistent Ground-truth for Facial
Landmark Detection
Zhiwei Liu1,2∗, Xiangyu Zhu1∗ , Guosheng Hu4,5 , Haiyun Guo1 , Ming Tang1,3 , Zhen Lei1 , Neil M. Robertson5,4 and Jinqiao Wang1,3
1

National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing 100190, China 2 University of Chinese

Academy of Sciences 3 Visionfinity Inc., ObjectEye Inc., Universal AI Inc. 4 AnyVision 5 Queens University Belfast
1

{zhiwei.liu, xiangyu.zhu, haiyun.guo, tangm, zlei, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
4

huguosheng100@gmail.com

5

N.Robertson@qub.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently, deep learning based facial landmark detection has achieved great success. Despite this, we notice
that the semantic ambiguity greatly degrades the detection
performance. Specifically, the semantic ambiguity means
that some landmarks (e.g. those evenly distributed along
the face contour) do not have clear and accurate definition,
causing inconsistent annotations by annotators. Accordingly, these inconsistent annotations, which are usually provided by public databases, commonly work as the ground-truth
to supervise network training, leading to the degraded accuracy. To our knowledge, little research has investigated
this problem. In this paper, we propose a novel probabilistic model which introduces a latent variable, i.e. the ‘real’
ground-truth which is semantically consistent, to optimize.
This framework couples two parts (1) training landmark
detection CNN and (2) searching the ‘real’ ground-truth.
These two parts are alternatively optimized: the searched
‘real’ ground-truth supervises the CNN training; and the
trained CNN assists the searching of ‘real’ ground-truth.
In addition, to recover the unconfidently predicted landmarks due to occlusion and low quality, we propose a global heatmap correction unit (GHCU) to correct outliers by
considering the global face shape as a constraint. Extensive experiments on both image-based (300W and AFLW)
and video-based (300-VW) databases demonstrate that our
method effectively improves the landmark detection accuracy and achieves the state of the art performance.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods [25, 33, 36, 15, 7, 28, 10, 9] have
achieved great success on landmark detection and other face
analysis tasks due to the strong modeling capacity. Despite
this success, precise and credible landmark detection stil∗ equal contribution.

Semantic moving
Non semantic moving

Figure 1. The landmark updates in training after the model is
roughly converged. Due to ‘semantic ambiguity’, we can see that
many optimization directions, which are random guided by random annotation noises along with the contour and ‘non semantic’.
The others move to the semantically accurate positions. Red and
green dots denote the predicted and annotation landmarks, respectively.

l has many challenges, one of which is the degraded performance caused by ‘semantic ambiguity’. This ambiguity results from the lack of clear definition on those weak
semantic landmarks on the contours (e.g. those on face
contour and nose bridge). In comparison, strong semantic landmarks on the corners (e.g. eye corner) suffer less
from such ambiguity. The ‘semantic ambiguity’ can make
human annotators confused about the positions of weak semantic points, and it is inevitable for annotators to introduce
random noises during annotating. The inconsistent and imprecise annotations can mislead CNN training and cause
degraded performance. Specifically, when the deep model roughly converges to the ground-truth provided by public
databases, the network training is misguided by random annotation noises caused by ‘semantic ambiguity’, shown in
Fig. 1. Clearly these noises can make the network training
trapped into local minima, leading to degraded results.
In this paper, we propose a novel Semantic Alignment
method which reduces the ‘semantic ambiguity’ intrinsical-

3467

