BeautyGlow: On-Demand Makeup Transfer Framework with Reversible
Generative Network
Hung-Jen Chen, Ka-Ming Hui, Szu-Yu Wang, Li-Wu Tsao, Hong-Han Shuai, Wen-Huang Cheng
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
{hjc.eed07g,ming2242.cm06g,joey840404.eed03,leo159753.me05,hhshuai,whcheng}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
As makeup has been widely-adopted for beautification,
finding suitable makeup by virtual makeup applications becomes popular. Therefore, a recent line of studies proposes
to transfer the makeup from a given reference makeup image
to the source non-makeup one. However, it is still challenging due to the massive number of makeup combinations. To
facilitate on-demand makeup transfer, in this work, we propose BeautyGlow that decompose the latent vectors of face
images derived from the Glow model into makeup and nonmakeup latent vectors. Since there is no paired dataset, we
formulate a new loss function to guide the decomposition.
Afterward, the non-makeup latent vector of a source image
and makeup latent vector of a reference image and are effectively combined and revert back to the image domain to
derive the results. Experimental results show that the transfer quality of BeautyGlow is comparable to the state-of-theart methods, while the unique ability to manipulate latent
vectors allows BeautyGlow to realize on-demand makeup
transfer.

1. Introduction
As the slogan says, “Life isn’t perfect, but your makeup
can be.” Nowadays, makeup provides a convenient way to
improve the facial appearance, e.g., powder foundations for
hiding the skin imperfections, blushes for creating chubby
cheeks. Although makeup is ubiquitous in daily life, it is
not easy to find the best-suited makeup because 1) makeup
trials are time-consuming and inconvenient, and 2) there
are thousands and thousands of cosmetic products, varying
from brands, functions, colors, and way-to-use, which leads
to a more intractable number of the makeup style combinations. To address the first issue, virtual makeup applications
that provide beautification function come up to facilitate the
makeup trials, such as YoucamMakeup1 and Meitu2 . How1 https://www.perfectcorp.com/app/ymk
2 http://makeup.meitu.com/en/

Figure 1: The makeup features such as eyeshadows and lip
gloss are extracted from reference makeup images and are
transferred to source non-makeup images. The lightness of
the makeup can be tuned by adjusting the magnification in
the latent space.

ever, how to find suitable makeup for each user is still an
open problem.
One of the possible solutions is to let users select the
makeup styles from the reference photos of celebrities or
friends and transfer the makeup to users’ faces. For example, Guo et al. [10] propose to decompose the images into
three layers, i.e., face structure layer, skin detail layer, and
color layer, and transfer the information from each layer of
reference images to the corresponding layer of the target
images. However, the predefined layers and transfer function are not data-driven and thus are inclined to generate
artifacts in many cases. To directly learn from the data, a
dataset of photo triplets (user face, reference makeup, and
transferred results) is desirable for learning. Nevertheless,
most of the existing datasets only provide the images with
makeup and non-makeup pairs. To avoid the need for such
triplet datasets, [23] proposes to use CNN for identifying
different makeup functions and extracting the corresponding features. Afterward, different loss functions are defined
for different parts of makeup to make the after-makeup images natural, e.g., foundations are transferred by regularizing the inner product of the feature maps for smoothing the

10042

