FML: Face Model Learning from Videos
Ayush Tewari1 Florian Bernard1 Pablo Garrido2 Gaurav Bharaj2 Mohamed Elgharib1
Hans-Peter Seidel1 Patrick Pérez3 Michael Zollhöfer4 Christian Theobalt1
1

MPI Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

2

Technicolor

3

Valeo.ai

4

Stanford University

Figure 1. We propose multi-frame self-supervised training of a deep network based on in-the-wild video data for jointly learning a face
model and 3D face reconstruction. Our approach successfully disentangles facial shape, appearance, expression, and scene illumination.

Abstract
Monocular image-based 3D reconstruction of faces is
a long-standing problem in computer vision. Since image
data is a 2D projection of a 3D face, the resulting depth ambiguity makes the problem ill-posed. Most existing methods
rely on data-driven priors that are built from limited 3D face
scans. In contrast, we propose multi-frame video-based
self-supervised training of a deep network that (i) learns
a face identity model both in shape and appearance while
(ii) jointly learning to reconstruct 3D faces. Our face model
is learned using only corpora of in-the-wild video clips collected from the Internet. This virtually endless source of
training data enables learning of a highly general 3D face
model. In order to achieve this, we propose a novel multiframe consistency loss that ensures consistent shape and
appearance across multiple frames of a subject’s face, thus
minimizing depth ambiguity. At test time we can use an
arbitrary number of frames, so that we can perform both
monocular as well as multi-frame reconstruction.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of faces from visual data has a wide
range of applications in vision and graphics, including face
tracking, emotion recognition, and interactive image/video
editing tasks relevant in multimedia. Facial images and
videos are ubiquitous, as smart devices as well as consumer
and professional cameras provide a continuous and virtually
endless source thereof. When such data is captured without controlled scene location, lighting, or intrusive equipment (e.g. egocentric cameras or markers on actors), one
speaks of “in-the-wild” images. Usually in-the-wild data is
of low resolution, noisy, or contains motion and focal blur,

making the reconstruction problem much harder than in a
controlled setup. 3D face reconstruction from in-the-wild
monocular 2D image and video data [71] deals with disentangling facial shape identity (neutral geometry), skin appearance (or albedo) and expression, as well as estimating
the scene lighting and camera parameters. Some of these
attributes, e.g. albedo and lighting, are not easily separable
in monocular images. Besides, poor scene lighting, depth
ambiguity, and occlusions due to facial hair, sunglasses and
large head rotations complicates 3D face reconstruction.
In order to tackle the difficult monocular 3D face reconstruction problem, most existing methods rely on the
availability of strong prior models that serve as regularizers for an otherwise ill-posed problem [6, 20, 68]. Although
such approaches achieve impressive facial shape and albedo
reconstruction, they introduce an inherent bias due to the
used face model. For instance, the 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) by Blanz et al. [6] is based on a comparably small
set of 3D laser scans of Caucasian actors, thus limiting generalization to general real-world identities and ethnicities.
With the rise of CNN-based deep learning, various techniques have been proposed, which in addition to 3D reconstruction also perform face model learning from monocular
images [63, 62, 59, 55]. However, these methods heavily
rely on a pre-existing 3DMM to resolve the inherent depth
ambiguities of the monocular reconstruction setting. Another line of work, where 3DMM-like face models are not
required, are based on photo-collections [30, 37, 57]. However, these methods need a very large number (e.g. ≈100)
of facial images of the same subject, and thus they impose
strong demands on the training corpus.
In this paper, we introduce an approach that learns a
comprehensive face identity model using clips crawled from
in-the-wild Internet videos [19]. This face identity model

10812

