Seamless Scene Segmentation
Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota Bulò, Aleksander Colovic, Peter Kontschieder
Mapillary Research
research@mapillary.com

Abstract
In this work we introduce a novel, CNN-based architecture that can be trained end-to-end to deliver seamless scene segmentation results. Our goal is to predict
consistent semantic segmentation and detection results by
means of a panoptic output format, going beyond the simple combination of independently trained segmentation and
detection models. The proposed architecture takes advantage of a novel segmentation head that seamlessly integrates multi-scale features generated by a Feature Pyramid
Network with contextual information conveyed by a lightweight DeepLab-like module. As additional contribution we
review the panoptic metric and propose an alternative that
overcomes its limitations when evaluating non-instance categories. Our proposed network architecture yields state-ofthe-art results on three challenging street-level datasets, i.e.
Cityscapes, Indian Driving Dataset and Mapillary Vistas.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is one of the grand goals for automated perception that requires advanced visual comprehension of tasks like semantic segmentation (Which semantic category does a pixel belong to?) and detection or
instance-specific semantic segmentation (Which individual
object segmentation mask does a pixel belong to?). Solving these tasks has large impact on a number of applications, including autonomous driving or augmented reality.
Interestingly, and despite sharing some obvious commonalities, both these segmentation tasks have been predominantly
handled in a disjoint way ever since the rise of deep learning, while earlier works [49, 50, 56] already approached
them in a joint manner. Instead, independent trainings of
models, with separate evaluations using corresponding performance metrics, and final fusion in a post-processing step
based on task-specific heuristics have seen a revival.
The work in [24] introduces a so-called panoptic evaluation metric for joint assessment of semantic segmentation of stuff and instance-specific thing object categories,
to encourage further research on this topic. Stuff is defined
as non-countable, amorphous regions of similar texture or
material while things are enumerable, and have a defined
shape. Few works have started adopting the panoptic metric

in their methodology yet, but reported results remain significantly below the ones obtained from fused, individual
models. All winning entries on designated panoptic Segmentation challenges like e.g. the Joint COCO and Mapillary Recognition Workshop 20181 , were based on combinations of individual (pre-trained) segmentation and instance
segmentation models, rather than introducing streamlined
integrations that can be successfully trained from scratch.
The use of separate models for semantic segmentation
and detection obviously comes with the disadvantage of
significant computational overhead. Furthermore, and due
to a lack of cross-pollination of models, there is no way
of enforcing labeling consistency between individual models. Moreover, we argue that individual models supposedly
spend significant amounts of their capacity on modeling redundant information, whereas sensible architectural choices
in a joint setting are leading to favorable or on par results,
but at much reduced computational costs.
In this work we introduce a novel, deep convolutional
neural network based architecture for seamless scene segmentation. Our proposed network design aims at jointly
addressing the tasks of semantic segmentation and instance
segmentation. We present ideas for interleaving information
from segmentation and instance-segmentation modules and
discuss model modifications over vanilla combinations of
standard segmentation and detection building blocks. With
our findings, we are able to train high-quality, seamless
scene segmentation models without the need of pre-trained
recognition models. As result, we obtain a state-of-theart, single model that jointly produces semantic segmentation and instance segmentation results, at a fraction of
the computational cost required when combining independently trained recognition models.
We provide the following contributions in our work:
• Streamlined architecture based on a single network
backbone to generate complete semantic scene segmentation for stuff and thing classes
• A novel segmentation head integrating multi-scale features from Feature Pyramid Network, with contextual information provided by a light-weight, DeepLabinspired module
1 http://cocodataset.org/workshop/cocomapillary-eccv-2018.html

18277

