IRLAS: Inverse Reinforcement Learning for Architecture Search
Minghao Guo
SenseTime Research
guominghao@sensetime.com

Zhao Zhong
NLPR, CASIA
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhao.zhong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Wei Wu
SenseTime Research

Dahua Lin
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Junjie Yan
SenseTime Research

wuwei@sensetime.com

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

yanjunjie@sensetime.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an inverse reinforcement learning method for architecture search (IRLAS), which trains an
agent to learn to search network structures that are topologically inspired by human-designed network. Most existing
architecture search approaches totally neglect the topological characteristics of architectures, which results in complicated architecture with a high inference latency. Motivated by the fact that human-designed networks are elegant
in topology with a fast inference speed, we propose a mirror stimuli function inspired by biological cognition theory
to extract the abstract topological knowledge of an expert
human-design network (ResNet). To avoid raising a too
strong prior over the search space, we introduce inverse
reinforcement learning to train the mirror stimuli function and exploit it as a heuristic guidance for architecture
search, easily generalized to different architecture search
algorithms. On CIFAR-10, the best architecture searched
by our proposed IRLAS achieves 2.60% error rate. For ImageNet mobile setting, our model achieves a state-of-the-art
top-1 accuracy 75.28%, while being 2∼4× faster than most
auto-generated architectures. A fast version of this model
achieves 10% faster than MobileNetV2, while maintaining
a higher accuracy.

1. Introduction
The past several years have witnessed the remarkable success of convolutional neural networks in computer vision applications. Thanks to the advances in network architectures, e.g. ResNet [11], Inception [28] and
DenseNet [15], the performances on a number of key tasks,
such as image classification, object detection, and semantic
segmentation, have been taken to an amazing level. However, every step along the way of network design improve-

Figure 1. Topologies of different architectures. Human-designed
architectures have a more simple and elegant topology than existing auto-generated architectures. Our IRLAS aims to search
topologically elegant architectures guided by human-designed networks. (a) ResNeXt [32]; (b) NASNet [37]; (c) Best performed
architecture found by our IRLAS.

ment requires extensive efforts from experienced experts
and takes a long period of time. This already constitutes
a significant obstacle to further progress.
Naturally, automatically finding suitable network architectures for a given task becomes an alternative option and
is gaining ground in recent years. Along this direction,
a number of network search methods have been developed, including evolution [26, 31], surrogate model based
search [18, 21], and reinforcement learning [36, 37, 34, 4].
Whereas these methods have shown promising results and
found new architectures that surpass those crafted by experts, they are still subject to a serious limitation – autogenerated networks usually have a rather high inference latency, making them difficult to be deployed on practical system with limited computational capabilities. An important
cause to this issue is that auto-generated structures are often
excessively complicated, which, as observed in [20], tends
to adversely influence the run-time efficiency. While there
have been attempts [29] to incorporate latency information
19021

