Using Unknown Occluders to Recover Hidden Scenes
Adam B. Yedidia1

Manel Baradad1
Christos Thrampoulidis2
Gregory W. Wornell1

William T. Freeman1,3

{adamy, mbaradad, billf, gww}@mit.edu, cthrampo@ucsb.edu
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 U.C. Santa Barbara, 3 Google Research

Abstract
We consider the challenging problem of inferring a hidden moving scene from faint shadows cast on a diffuse surface. Recent work in passive non-line-of-sight (NLoS) imaging has shown that the presence of occluding objects in
between the scene and the diffuse surface significantly improves the conditioning of the problem [2]. However, that
work assumes that the shape of the occluder is known a
priori. In this paper, we relax this often impractical assumption, extending the range of applications for passive
occluder-based NLoS imaging systems.
We formulate the task of jointly recovering the unknown
scene and unknown occluder as a blind deconvolution problem, for which we propose a simple but effective two-step
algorithm. At the first step, the algorithm exploits motion in
the scene in order to obtain an estimate of the occluder. In
particular, it exploits the fact that motion in realistic scenes
is typically sparse. The second step is more standard: using
regularization, we deconvolve by the occluder estimate to
solve for the hidden scene.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method with simulations and experiments in a variety of settings.

1. Introduction
Imaging scenes that are not directly visible, also called
non-line-of-sight (NLoS) imaging, is a difficult and often
ill-posed problem. Recently, it has become an area of active
study, with broad applications including search-and-rescue,
anti-terrorism, and traffic [3, 4, 2].
Past methods that rely on human-visible light to image
hidden scenes can be divided into one of two categories.
Active methods introduce light into the scene and make use
of known or measured properties of the introduced light,
such as time of return, to image the hidden scene [28, 23, 27,
10]. Passive methods, on the other hand, rely exclusively on
ambient light from the scene, such as secondary reflections
on the observation plane, to infer the contents of the hidden
scene [25, 4, 2]. Both of these types of methods generally

Figure 1: This figure shows a hypothetical scenario to which
our method could be applied. On the left, we can see a door,
but we don’t know anything about what’s in the room it
leads to (shown on the right). Using the method we present
in this paper, an onlooker could try to reconstruct an image
of the room by observing the door, perhaps by using the occlusion provided by the chair and the motion provided by
the person. This is true even though neither the chair nor
the person is visible to the onlooker!

presume that there is something directly visible to both the
observer and the hidden scene (see Fig. 1). In this work, we
refer to this visible area as the observation plane.
Passive methods suffer from the fact that in real-world
settings, only a two-dimensional surface can be observed
(see e.g. Fig. 1), but the scene producing those observations is three-dimensional. Hence, the problem is inherently ill-posed. Past methods have resolved this issue by
either assuming the scene lies on a lower-dimensional manifold, thereby only reconstructing only a lower-dimensional
projection of the scene [25, 4], or making use of a strong
spatial prior over realistic scenes when reconstructing [2].
Our method falls into the former category, as we assume
that both the scene and occluder lie on parallel, flat planes.
This allows us to model the shadows cast on the observation
planes as a simple convolution of these two planes.
Although there has by now been plenty of previous work
demonstrating that it is possible to use the presence of an oc112231

