A Perceptual Prediction Framework for Self Supervised Event Segmentation
Sathyanarayanan N. Aakur
University of South Florida
Tampa, FL, USA

Sudeep Sarkar
University of South Florida
Tampa, FL, USA

saakur@mail.usf.edu

sarkar@usf.edu

Abstract
Temporal segmentation of long videos is an important
problem, that has largely been tackled through supervised
learning, often requiring large amounts of annotated training data. In this paper, we tackle the problem of selfsupervised temporal segmentation that alleviates the need
for any supervision in the form of labels (full supervision)
or temporal ordering (weak supervision). We introduce a
self-supervised, predictive learning framework that draws
inspiration from cognitive psychology to segment long, visually complex videos into constituent events. Learning involves only a single pass through the training data. We also
introduce a new adaptive learning paradigm that helps reduce the effect of catastrophic forgetting in recurrent neural
networks. Extensive experiments on three publicly available datasets - Breakfast Actions, 50 Salads, and INRIA
Instructional Videos datasets show the efficacy of the proposed approach. We show that the proposed approach outperforms weakly-supervised and unsupervised baselines by
up to 24% and achieves competitive segmentation results
compared to fully supervised baselines with only a single
pass through the training data. Finally, we show that the
proposed self-supervised learning paradigm learns highly
discriminating features to improve action recognition.

1. Introduction
Video data can be seen as a continuous, dynamic stream
of visual cues encoded in terms of coherent, stable structures called “events”. Computer vision research has largely
focused on the problem of recognizing and describing these
events in terms of either labeled actions [19, 18, 19, 2, 1]
or sentences (captioning) [1, 36, 35, 13, 5, 39]. Such approaches assume that the video is already segmented into
atomic, stable units sharing a semantic structure such as
“throw ball” or “pour water”. However, the problem of
temporally localizing events in untrimmed video has not
been explored to the same extent as activity recognition or
captioning. In this work, we aim to tackle the problem of

temporal segmentation of untrimmed videos into its constituent events in a self-supervised manner, without the need
for training data annotations.

Take Bowl

Crack Eggs

Spoon Flour

GT

Observed
Feature

Predicted
Feature

Self Supervised
Error
Predicted
Segments

Figure 1: Proposed Approach: Given an unsegmented input video, we encode it into a higher level feature. We predict the feature for next time instant. A self-supervised signal based on the difference between the predicted and the
observed feature gives rise to a possible event boundary.
To segment a video into its constituent events, we must
first define the term event. Drawing from cognitive psychology [42], we define an event to be a “segment of time at a
given location that is perceived by an observer to have a
beginning and an end”. Event segmentation is the process
of identifying these beginnings and endings and their relations. Based on the level of distinction, the granularity of
these events can be variable. For example, throw ball and hit
ball can be events that constitute a larger, overarching event
play baseball. Hence, each event can be characterized by a
stable, internal representation that can be used to anticipate
future visual features within the same event with high correlation, with increasing levels of error as the current transitions into the next. Self-supervised learning paradigms of
“predict, observe and learn” can then be used to provide
11197

