The Pros and Cons: Rank-aware Temporal Attention
for Skill Determination in Long Videos
Hazel Doughty
Walterio Mayol-Cuevas
Dima Damen
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
<Firstname>.<Surname>@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a new model to determine relative skill from
long videos, through learnable temporal attention modules.
Skill determination is formulated as a ranking problem,
making it suitable for common and generic tasks. However,
for long videos, parts of the video are irrelevant for assessing skill, and there may be variability in the skill exhibited
throughout a video. We therefore propose a method which
assesses the relative overall level of skill in a long video by
attending to its skill-relevant parts.
Our approach trains temporal attention modules,
learned with only video-level supervision, using a novel
rank-aware loss function. In addition to attending to taskrelevant video parts, our proposed loss jointly trains two
attention modules to separately attend to video parts which
are indicative of higher (pros) and lower (cons) skill. We
evaluate our approach on the EPIC-Skills dataset and additionally annotate a larger dataset from YouTube videos
for skill determination with five previously unexplored tasks.
Our method outperforms previous approaches and classic
softmax attention on both datasets by over 4% pairwise accuracy, and as much as 12% on individual tasks. We also
demonstrate our model’s ability to attend to rank-aware
parts of the video.

1. Introduction
Skill determination is the problem of assessing how well
a subject performs a given task. Automatic skill assessment
from video will enable us to explore the wealth of online
videos capturing daily tasks, such as crafts and cooking, for
training humans and intelligent agents - which video should
a robot imitate to prepare you scrambled eggs for breakfast?
For long videos, previous approaches make a naive assumption; the same level of skill is exhibited throughout the
video, and thus skill can be determined in any (or all) of its
parts [7, 23, 29, 38, 40]. Take for example the task of ‘tying a tie’; draping the tie around the neck or straightening
the tie may be uninformative when determining a subject’s
skill, however the way the subject crosses one side over and

Figure 1. Rank-aware attention for skill ranking. We determine
a video’s rank by using high (green) and low (red) skill attention
modules, which determine each segment’s influence to the rank.
Both modules are fused (orange) for an overall skill assessment of
the video. Line opacity indicates the attention value for a segment
and the line thickness indicates the score.

pushes the tie into the loop are key. Additionally, there may
be variation in skill across the video: when comparing two
videos, one subject may perform better at neatly crossing
the tie but worse at pulling through the loop.
Accordingly, we consider skill determination to be a
fine-grained video understanding problem, where it is important to first localize relevant temporal regions to distinguish between instances [25]. We target skill determination
for common tasks, where ranking videos [2, 7, 21] is more
suitable than estimating an objective score [23, 27, 40]. For
many tasks, objective scores would be hard to articulate or
find expert bodies to certify. Instead, crowd-sourcing can
obtain a ranking on any task, which is consistent through
consensus of judgment. Therefore, we devise a Siamese
CNN over temporal segments, including attention modules
adapted from [22], which we train to be rank-aware using
a novel loss function. This is because relevance may differ
depending on the skill displayed in the video - e.g. mistakes
may not appear in higher-ranked videos. When trained with

7862

