Unifying Heterogeneous Classifiers with Distillation
Jayakorn Vongkulbhisal1 , Phongtharin Vinayavekhin1 , Marco Visentini-Scarzanella2
1
IBM Research, Tokyo, Japan
2
Amazon, Tokyo, Japan
jayakornv@ibm.com, pvmilk@jp.ibm.com, marcovs@amazon.com

1. Introduction
The success of machine learning in image classification
tasks has been largely enabled by the availability of big
datasets, such as ImageNet [32] and MS-COCO [25]. As
the technology becomes more pervasive, data collection is
transitioning towards more distributed settings where the
data is sourced from multiple entities and then combined
to train a classifier in a central node (Fig. 1a). However,
in many cases, transfer of data between entities is not possible due to privacy concerns (e.g., private photo albums
or medical data) or bandwidth restrictions (e.g., very large

Merged Dataset

Cat, Dog

Data Sources

In this paper, we study the problem of unifying knowledge from a set of classifiers with different architectures and
target classes into a single classifier, given only a generic
set of unlabelled data. We call this problem Unifying Heterogeneous Classifiers (UHC). This problem is motivated by
scenarios where data is collected from multiple sources, but
the sources cannot share their data, e.g., due to privacy concerns, and only privately trained models can be shared. In
addition, each source may not be able to gather data to train
all classes due to data availability at each source, and may
not be able to train the same classification model due to different computational resources. To tackle this problem, we
propose a generalisation of knowledge distillation to merge
HCs. We derive a probabilistic relation between the outputs of HCs and the probability over all classes. Based on
this relation, we propose two classes of methods based on
cross-entropy minimisation and matrix factorisation, which
allow us to estimate soft labels over all classes from unlabelled samples and use them in lieu of ground truth labels
to train a unified classifier. Our extensive experiments on
ImageNet, LSUN, and Places365 datasets show that our approaches significantly outperform a naive extension of distillation and can achieve almost the same accuracy as classifiers that are trained in a centralised, supervised manner.

Central Processing Node

(a)

Cat, Dog, Giraffe,
Doll, Fruit

Giraffe, Cat, Doll

Fruit, Cat

Central Processing Node

(b)
Cat, Dog

Data Sources

Abstract

Unlabelled Data
Giraffe, Cat, Doll

HCs

Cat, Dog, Giraffe,
Doll, Fruit

Fruit, Cat

Figure 1. Unifying Heterogeneous Classifiers. (a) Common training approaches require transferring data from sources to a central processing node where a classifier is trained. (b) We propose
to train a unified classifier from pre-trained classifiers from each
source and an unlabelled set of generic data, thereby preserving
privacy. The individual pre-trained classifiers may have different
sets of target classes, hence the term Heterogeneous Classifiers
(HCs).

datasets), hampering the unification of knowledge from different sources. This has led to multiple works that propose to learn classifiers without directly sharing data, e.g.,
distributed optimisation [4], consensus-based training [12],
and federated learning [20]. However, these approaches
generally require models trained by each entity to be the
same both in terms of architecture and target classes.
In this paper, we aim to remove these limitations and
propose a system for a more general scenario consisting of
an ensemble of Heterogeneous Classifiers (HCs), as shown
in Fig. 1b. We define a set of HCs as a set of classifiers
which may have different architectures and, more importantly, may be trained to classify different sets of target
classes. To combine the HCs, each entity only needs to for13175

