Distilling Object Detectors with Fine-grained Feature Imitation
Tao Wang1
1

Li Yuan1

Xiaopeng Zhang1,2

Jiashi Feng1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2

twangnh@gmail.com

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shanghai, China

ylustcnus@gmail.com zhangxiaopeng12@huawei.com elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
State-of-the-art CNN based recognition models are often computationally prohibitive to deploy on low-end devices. A promising high level approach tackling this limitation is knowledge distillation, which let small student
model mimic cumbersome teacher model’s output to get improved generalization. However, related methods mainly focus on simple task of classification while do not consider
complex tasks like object detection. We show applying the
vanilla knowledge distillation to detection model gets minor gain. To address the challenge of distilling knowledge
in detection model, we propose a fine-grained feature imitation method exploiting the cross-location discrepancy of
feature response. Our intuition is that detectors care more
about local near object regions. Thus the discrepancy of
feature response on the near object anchor locations reveals important information of how teacher model tends
to generalize. We design a novel mechanism to estimate
those locations and let student model imitate the teacher on
them to get enhanced performance. We first validate the
idea on a developed lightweight toy detector which carries
simplest notion of current state-of-the-art anchor based detection models on challenging KITTI dataset, our method
generates up to 15% boost of mAP for the student model
compared to the non-imitated counterpart. We then extensively evaluate the method with Faster R-CNN model under
various scenarios with common object detection benchmark
of Pascal VOC and COCO, imitation alleviates up to 74%
performance drop of student model compared to teacher.
Codes released at https://github.com/twangnh/
Distilling-Object-Detectors

1. Introduction
Object detection has benefited a lot from recent advances of deep CNN architectures. However state-ofart detectors are cumbersome to deploy on low computation devices. Previous works mainly focus on Quantization [12, 14, 36, 28] which efficiently reduces computation

Teacher
Model

Near object
anchor location

High level feature
response of teacher

Student
Model

Fine-grained
imitation on those
locations

Figure 1. Illustration on principle of the proposed method. Red
and green bounding boxes on the left two images are selected
prior anchor boxes on corresponding locations. The red anchors
have the largest overlap with ground truth bounding boxes and
the green ones indicate near object samples. The motivation is
that the discrepancy of feature response on near object anchor locations reveals how a learned teacher model tends to generalize
(e.g., how the teacher responses on those intersections of crowed
objects compared to on-object locations reflects how it separates
and detects those crowded instances). Our method thus first locates these knowledge-dense locations and let the student model
imitate teacher’s high-level feature responses on them.

and model size, and network pruning [14, 13, 1, 34] that
prunes redundant connections in large models. However
these approaches may require dedicated hardware or software customization to get practical speedup.
A promising high level method to directly learn compact
models end-to-end is knowledge distillation [16]. A student
model learns the behavior of a stronger teacher network
to get enhanced generalization. However, prior works on
knowledge distillation [16, 32, 38, 6, 18] are mostly devoted
to classification and rarely consider object detection. A detection model may only involve a few classes, with which
much less knowledge can be distilled from inter-class similarity of teacher’s softened outputs. Also, detection requires
reliable localization in addition to classification, vanilla distillation can not be applied for distilling localization knowledge. Besides, the extreme imbalance of foreground and
background instances also makes bounding box annotations

4933

