Disentangling Adversarial Robustness and Generalization
David Stutz1
Matthias Hein2
Bernt Schiele1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken
3
University of Tübingen, Tübingen
{david.stutz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, matthias.hein@uni-tuebingen.de

regular
(a) adversarial example

Abstract

1. Introduction
Adversarial robustness describes a deep network’s ability to defend against adversarial examples [97], imperceptibly perturbed images causing mis-classification. These
adversarial attacks pose severe security threats, as demonstrated against Clarifai.com [57, 8] or Google Cloud Vision [37]. Despite these serious risks, defenses against such
attacks have been largely ineffective; only adversarial training, i.e., training on adversarial examples [62, 30], has been
shown to work well in practice [6, 5] – at the cost of computational overhead and reduced accuracy. Overall, the problem of adversarial robustness is left open and poorly understood – even for simple datasets such as EMNIST [19] and
Fashion-MNIST [106].
The phenomenon of adversarial examples itself, i.e.,
their mere existence, has also received considerable atten-

on-manifold
(b) adversarial example

invalid
(c) adversarial example

True
Decision
Boundary

Class Manifold “6”

Regular
Adversarial Example

On-Manifold
Adversarial Example

3

3

Coat

Dress

Perturbed Difference
Image
to Original

Perturbed Difference
Image
to Original

Class Manifold “5”

Original
Image

F-MNIST EMNIST

Obtaining deep networks that are robust against adversarial examples and generalize well is an open problem. A
recent hypothesis [102, 95] even states that both robust and
accurate models are impossible, i.e., adversarial robustness
and generalization are conflicting goals. In an effort to clarify the relationship between robustness and generalization,
we assume an underlying, low-dimensional data manifold
and show that: 1. regular adversarial examples leave the
manifold; 2. adversarial examples constrained to the manifold, i.e., on-manifold adversarial examples, exist; 3. on–
manifold adversarial examples are generalization errors,
and on-manifold adversarial training boosts generalization; 4. regular robustness and generalization are not necessarily contradicting goals. These assumptions imply that
both robust and accurate models are possible. However,
different models (architectures, training strategies etc.) can
exhibit different robustness and generalization characteristics. To confirm our claims, we present extensive experiments on synthetic data (with known manifold) as well as
on EMNIST [19], Fashion-MNIST [106] and CelebA [58].

Classifier’s
Decision
Boundary

Shirt

Figure 1: Adversarial examples, and their (normalized) difference to the original image, in the context of the underlying manifold, e.g., class manifolds “5” and “6” on EMNIST
[19], allow to study their relation to generalization. Regular
adversarial examples are not constrained to the manifold, cf.
(a), and often result in (seemingly) random noise patterns;
in fact, we show that they leave the manifold. However, adversarial examples on the manifold can be found as well,
cf. (b), resulting in meaningful manipulations of the image
content; however, care needs to be taken that the actual, true
label wrt. the manifold does not change, cf. (c).
tion. Recently, early explanations, e.g., attributing adversarial examples to “rare pockets” of the classification surface [97] or linearities in deep networks [30], have been
superseded by the manifold assumption [27, 99]: adversarial examples are assumed to leave the underlying, lowdimensional but usually unknown data manifold. However,
only [92] provide experimental evidence supporting this assumption. Yet, on a simplistic toy dataset, Gilmer et al.
[27] also found adversarial examples on the manifold, as

6976

