Bringing a Blurry Frame Alive at High Frame-Rate with an Event Camera
Liyuan Pan1,2 , Cedric Scheerlinck1,2 , Xin Yu1,2 , Richard Hartley1,2 , Miaomiao Liu1,2 , and Yuchao Dai3
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
3
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{liyuan.pan, cedric.scheerlinck}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Event-based cameras can measure intensity changes
(called ‘events’) with microsecond accuracy under highspeed motion and challenging lighting conditions. With the
active pixel sensor (APS), the event camera allows simultaneous output of the intensity frames. However, the output
images are captured at a relatively low frame-rate and often
suffer from motion blur. A blurry image can be regarded as
the integral of a sequence of latent images, while the events
indicate the changes between the latent images. Therefore,
we are able to model the blur-generation process by associating event data to a latent image. In this paper, we
propose a simple and effective approach, the Event-based
Double Integral (EDI) model, to reconstruct a high framerate, sharp video from a single blurry frame and its event
data. The video generation is based on solving a simple
non-convex optimization problem in a single scalar variable. Experimental results on both synthetic and real images demonstrate the superiority of our EDI model and optimization method in comparison to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Event cameras (such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor
(DVS) [17] and the Dynamic and Active-pixel Vision Sensor (DAVIS) [3]) are sensors that asynchronously measure
the intensity changes at each pixel independently with microsecond temporal resolution1 . The event stream encodes
the motion information by measuring the precise pixel-bypixel intensity changes. Event cameras are more robust
to low lighting and highly dynamic scenes than traditional
cameras since they are not affected by under/over exposure
or motion blur associated with a synchronous shutter.
Due to the inherent differences between event cameras
and standard cameras, existing computer vision algorithms
designed for standard cameras cannot be applied to event
1 If nothing moves in the scene, no events are triggered.

cameras directly. Although the DAVIS [3] can provide the
simultaneous output of the intensity frames and the event
stream, there still exist major limitations with current event
cameras:
• Low frame-rate intensity images: In contrast to the
high temporal resolution of event data (≥ 3µs frame
rate), the current event cameras only output low framerate intensity images (≥ 5ms time resolution).
• Inherent blurry effects: When recording highly dynamic scenes, motion blur is a common issue due to
the relative motion between the camera and the scene.
The output of the intensity image from the APS tends
to be blurry.
To address these above challenges, various methods have
been proposed by reconstructing high frame-rate videos.
The existing methods can be in general categorized as 1)
Event data only solutions [1, 27, 2], where the results
tend to lack the texture and consistency of natural videos,
as they fail to use the complementary information contained in the low frame-rate intensity image; 2) Low framerate intensity-image-only solutions [11], where an end-toend learning framework has been proposed to learn regression between a single blurry image and a video sequence,
whereas the rich event data are not used; and 3) Jointly exploiting event data and intensity images [29, 32, 4], building
upon the interaction between both sources of information.
However, these methods fail to address the blur issue associated with the captured image frame. Therefore, the reconstructed high frame-rate videos can be degraded by blur.
Although blurry frames cause undesired image degradation, they also encode the relative motion between the camera and the observed scene. Taking full advantage of the
encoded motion information would benefit the reconstruction of high frame-rate videos.
To this end, we propose an Event-based Double Integral (EDI) model to resolve the above problems by reconstructing a high frame-rate video from a single image (even

6820

