Self-Supervised Learning of 3D Human Pose using Multi-view Geometry
Muhammed Kocabas ∗
Salih Karagoz ∗
Emre Akbas
Department of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical University
{muhammed.kocabas,e234299,eakbas}@metu.edu.tr

Abstract
Training accurate 3D human pose estimators requires
large amount of 3D ground-truth data which is costly to
collect. Various weakly or self supervised pose estimation methods have been proposed due to lack of 3D data.
Nevertheless, these methods, in addition to 2D groundtruth poses, require either additional supervision in various forms (e.g. unpaired 3D ground truth data, a small subset of labels) or the camera parameters in multiview settings. To address these problems, we present EpipolarPose,
a self-supervised learning method for 3D human pose estimation, which does not need any 3D ground-truth data
or camera extrinsics. During training, EpipolarPose estimates 2D poses from multi-view images, and then, utilizes epipolar geometry to obtain a 3D pose and camera
geometry which are subsequently used to train a 3D pose
estimator. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on standard benchmark datasets (i.e. Human3.6M
and MPI-INF-3DHP) where we set the new state-of-the-art
among weakly/self-supervised methods. Furthermore, we
propose a new performance measure Pose Structure Score
(PSS) which is a scale invariant, structure aware measure
to evaluate the structural plausibility of a pose with respect to its ground truth. Code and pretrained models
are available at https://github.com/mkocabas/
EpipolarPose

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation in the wild is a challenging problem in computer vision. Although there are large-scale
datasets [2, 20] for two-dimensional (2D) pose estimation,
3D datasets [15, 23] are either limited to laboratory settings
or limited in size and diversity. Since collecting 3D human pose annotations in the wild is costly and 3D datasets
are limited, researchers have resorted to weakly or self supervised approaches with the goal of obtaining an accurate
3D pose estimator by using minimal amount of additional
∗ equal contribution

2D Pose Estimation
3D Pose
CNN

Epipolar Geometry
Self Supervision

Figure 1. EpipolarPose uses 2D pose estimation and epipolar geometry to obtain 3D poses which are subsequently used to train a
3D pose estimator.

supervision on top of the existing 2D pose datasets. Various methods have been developed to this end. These methods, in addition to ground-truth 2D poses, require either
additional supervision in various forms (such as unpaired
3D ground truth data[41], a small subset of labels [31]) or
(extrinsic) camera parameters in multiview settings [30].
To the best of our knowledge, there is only one method
[9] which can produce a 3D pose estimator by using only
2D ground-truth. In this paper, we propose another such
method.
Our method, “EpiloparPose,” uses 2D pose estimation
and epipolar geometry to obtain 3D poses, which are subsequently used to train a 3D pose estimator. EpipolarPose
works with an arbitrary number of cameras (must be at least
2) and it does not need any 3D supervision or the extrinsic
camera parameters, however, it can utilize them if provided.
On the Human3.6M [15] and MPI-INF-3DHP [23] datasets,
11077

