C-MIL: Continuation Multiple Instance Learning for
Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Fang Wan† , Chang Liu† , Wei Ke† , Xiangyang Ji‡ , Jianbin Jiao† and Qixiang Ye†§∗
†

‡

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. § Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{wanfang13,liuchang615,kewei11}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn
{jiaojb,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) is a challenging task when provided with image category supervision but required to simultaneously learn object locations
and object detectors. Many WSOD approaches adopt multiple instance learning (MIL) and have non-convex loss functions which are prone to get stuck into local minima (falsely
localize object parts) while missing full object extent during training. In this paper, we introduce a continuation
optimization method into MIL and thereby creating continuation multiple instance learning (C-MIL), with the intention of alleviating the non-convexity problem in a systematic
way. We partition instances into spatially related and class
related subsets, and approximate the original loss function
with a series of smoothed loss functions defined within the
subsets. Optimizing smoothed loss functions prevents the
training procedure falling prematurely into local minima
and facilitates the discovery of Stable Semantic Extremal
Regions (SSERs) which indicate full object extent. On the
PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 datasets, C-MIL improves the
state-of-the-art of weakly supervised object detection and
weakly supervised object localization with large margins 1 .

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) is rapidly
gaining attention in computer vision area. WSOD approaches only require image category annotations indicating the presence or absence of a category of objects in images, signiﬁcantly reducing human involvement by omitting
labor-intensive bounding-box annotations [6,12,27–29,40].
∗ Corresponding author.
1 The code for CMIL is available at github.com/Winfrand/C-MIL.

Despite extensive research over the past ﬁve years,
WSOD remains an open problem, as indicated by the large
performance gap (∼ 20%) between WSOD [34, 37, 38] and
fully supervised detection approaches [17, 30] on the PASCAL VOC detection benchmark [25].
Combined with deep neural networks, MIL has been the
main WSOD method [8, 34]. However, it is observed that
the model is prone to activate object parts instead of full
object extent, particularly during the early learning epochs,
Fig. 1(a). This phenomenon arises from non-convexity of
the objective/loss functions. Optimizing such functions can
get stuck into local minima, i.e., selecting most discriminative regions (instances) for image classiﬁcation while ignoring full object extent [7, 37].
Researchers have alleviated this problem by using spatial
regularization [8, 14, 37], context information [22, 38], and
progressive reﬁnement [14, 15, 34, 37, 40]. Despite their advances, the local minimum problem remains unsolved from
an optimization perspective.
In this paper, we introduce the continuation method
[2], which addresses a complex optimization problem by
smoothing the loss function and turning it into multiple
easier sub-problems, into multiple instance learning and
thereby creating continuation multiple instance learning (CMIL), with the purpose of alleviating the non-convexity
problem in a systematic manner. C-MIL treats images as
bags and image regions generated by an object proposal
method [24, 32] as instances. During training, unlike the
conventional MIL that pursues the most discriminative instances, C-MIL learns instance subsets, where the instances
are spatially related, i.e., overlapping with each other, and
class related, i.e., having similar object class scores. Instance subsets with proper continuation parameters are capable of collecting object parts to ﬁne-tune the network, and
activate Stable Semantic Extremal Regions (SSERs) indicating full object extent, Fig. 1(b).

2199

