Adaptive Confidence Smoothing for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Yuval Atzmon
Bar-Ilan University, NVIDIA Research

Gal Chechik
Bar-Ilan University, NVIDIA Research

yuval.atzmon@biu.ac.il

gal.chechik@biu.ac.il

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) is the problem of
learning a classifier where some classes have samples and
others are learned from side information, like semantic attributes or text description, in a zero-shot learning fashion
(ZSL). Training a single model that operates in these two
regimes simultaneously is challenging. Here we describe
a probabilistic approach that breaks the model into three
modular components, and then combines them in a consistent way. Specifically, our model consists of three classifiers: A “gating” model that makes soft decisions if a sample is from a “seen” class, and two experts: a ZSL expert,
and an expert model for seen classes. We address two main
difficulties in this approach: How to provide an accurate
estimate of the gating probability without any training samples for unseen classes; and how to use expert predictions
when it observes samples outside of its domain.
The key insight to our approach is to pass information
between the three models to improve each one’s accuracy,
while maintaining the modular structure. We test our approach, adaptive confidence smoothing (COSMO ), on four
standard GZSL benchmark datasets and find that it largely
outperforms state-of-the-art GZSL models. COSMO is also
the first model that closes the gap and surpasses the performance of generative models for GZSL, even-though it is a
light-weight model that is much easier to train and tune.

1. Introduction
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) [9] is the problem of learning to classify samples from two different domains of classes: seen classes, trained in a standard supervised way from labeled samples, and unseen classes,
learned from external knowledge, such as attributes or natural language, in a zero-shot-learning fashion. GZSL poses
a unique combination of hard challenges: First, the model
has to learn effectively for classes without samples (zeroshot). It also needs to learn well for classes with many samples. Finally, the two very different regimes should be combined in a consistent way in a single model. GZSL can be

0123315672232 $%&
'"(#)
893  
C@??,D
33
73
7






!
"
#

56722
3315672232
33
C@??,D

6789:;<=

>?@A-.B

*+,-./01
3312012331
3 741
56722443
Figure 1. A qualitative illustration of COSMO : An input image is
processed by two experts: A seen-classes expert, and an unseenclasses expert, which is a zero-shot model. (1) When an image is
from a seen class, the zero-shot expert may still produce an overlyconfident false-positive prediction. COSMO smooths the predictions of the unseen expert if it believes that the image is from a
seen class. The amount of smoothing is determined by a novel
gating classifier. (2) Final GZSL predictions are based on a soft
combination of the predictions of two experts, with weights provided by the gating module.

viewed as an extreme case of classification with unbalanced
classes, hence solving the last challenge can lead to better
ways of addressing class imbalance, which is a key problem
in learning with real-world data.
The three learning problems described above operate in
different learning setups, hence combining them into a single model is challenging. Here, we propose an architecture with three modules, each focusing on one problem. At
inference time, these modules share their prediction confidence in a principled probabilistic way in order to reach an
accurate joint decision.
One natural instance of this modular architecture is hard
gating: Given a test sample, the gate assigns it either to a
seen expert - trained as a standard supervised classifier - or
to an unseen expert - trained in a zero-shot-learning fashion [39]. Only the selected expert is used for prediction,
ignoring the other expert. Here we study a more general
case, where both the seen expert and the unseen expert process each test sample, and their predictions are combined
in a soft way. Specifically, the predictions are combined by

11671

