Efficient Parameter-free Clustering Using First Neighbor Relations
M. Saquib Sarfraz1,2 , Vivek Sharma1 , Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
2
Daimler TSS, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@kit.edu

Abstract
We present a new clustering method in the form of a
single clustering equation that is able to directly discover
groupings in the data. The main proposition is that the first
neighbor of each sample is all one needs to discover large
chains and finding the groups in the data. In contrast to most
existing clustering algorithms our method does not require
any hyper-parameters, distance thresholds and/or the need
to specify the number of clusters. The proposed algorithm
belongs to the family of hierarchical agglomerative methods.
The technique has a very low computational overhead, is
easily scalable and applicable to large practical problems.
Evaluation on well known datasets from different domains
ranging between 1077 and 8.1 million samples shows substantial performance gains when compared to the existing
clustering techniques. [code release]

1. Introduction
Discovering natural groupings in data is needed in virtually all areas of sciences. Despite half a decade of research
in devising clustering techniques there is still no universal solution that 1.) can automatically determine the true (or close
to true) clusters with high accuracy/purity; 2.) does not need
hyper-parameters or a priori knowledge of data; 3.) generalizes across different data domains; and 4.) can scale easily
to very large (millions of samples) data without requiring
prohibitive computational resources. Clustering inherently
builds on the notion of similarity. All clustering techniques
strive to capture this notion of similarity by devising a criterion that may result in a defined local optimal solution for
groupings in the data. Well known center-based methods
(e.g., Kmeans) iteratively assign points to a chosen number
of clusters based on their direct distance to the cluster center.
Agglomerative clustering methods merge points based on
predefined distance thresholds. More recent methods build
similarity graphs (e.g., spectral clustering techniques) from
the pairwise distances of the points and solve a graph partitioning problem by using these distances as edge weights

and the sample points as nodes. All existing clustering techniques use some form of prior knowledge/assumptions on
defining the similarity goal to obtain specific groupings in
the data. This prior knowledge comes in the form of setting
number of clusters in advance or setting distance thresholds
or other hyper-parameters that render a user defined notion
of similarity for obtaining groupings. These choices are
subjective and must change when the underlying data distribution changes. This means that these parameters are not
stable and need to be adjusted for each data set. This makes
the clustering problem very hard as no standard solution can
be used for different problems.
In this paper, we describe an efficient and fully parameterfree unsupervised clustering algorithm that does not suffer
from any of the aforementioned problems. By “fully”, we
mean that the algorithm does not require any user defined
parameters such as similarity thresholds, or a predefined
number of clusters, and that it does not need any a priori
knowledge on the data distribution itself. The main premise
of our proposed method is the discovery of an intriguing
behavior of chaining large number of samples based on a
simple observation of the first neighbor of each data point.
Since the groupings so obtained do not depend on any predefined similarity thresholds or other specific objectives, the
algorithm may have the potential of discovering natural clusters in the data. The proposed method has low computational
overhead, is extremely fast, handles large data and provides
meaningful groupings of the data with high purity.

2. Related Work
Books have been written to guide through a myriad
of clustering techniques [12]. The representative algorithms can largely be classified in three directions, centroid/partitioning algorithms (e.g., Kmeans, Affinity Propagation), hierarchical agglomerative/divisive methods and
methods that view clustering as a graph partitioning problem
(e.g., spectral clustering methods). For center-based clustering it is known that the Kmeans is sensitive to the selection
of the initial K centroids. The affinity propagation algorithm [13] addresses this issue by viewing each sample as an

8934

