Multi-Step Prediction of Occupancy Grid Maps with Recurrent Neural Networks
Nima Mohajerin and Mohsen Rohani∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark, Markham, ON, Canada
{nima.mohajerin, mohsen.rohani}@huawei.com

Abstract

data

We investigate the multi-step prediction of the drivable space, represented by Occupancy Grid Maps (OGMs),
for autonomous vehicles. Our motivation is that accurate multi-step prediction of the drivable space can efficiently improve path planning and navigation resulting in
safe, comfortable and optimum paths in autonomous driving. We train a variety of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
based architectures on the OGM sequences from the KITTI
dataset. The results demonstrate significant improvement
of the prediction accuracy using our proposed difference
learning method, incorporating motion related features,
over the state of the art. We remove the egomotion from
the OGM sequences by transforming them into a common
frame. Although in the transformed sequences the KITTI
dataset is heavily biased toward static objects, by learning the difference between consecutive OGMs, our proposed method provides accurate prediction over both the
static and moving objects. A video of the performance of
our method on the KITTI dataset is available at https:
//youtu.be/Bskd0Z7eLFE.

Object
Detection

1. Introduction
Determining the environment state is a crucial ability for
autonomous vehicles to have. Particularly for path planning
and navigation, the state of the environment is required to
determine safe areas to drive, that is, the drivable space. In a
driving scenario, the classic approach is to detect and track
objects, and based on the state of the tracked objects, determine the drivable space [21, 5]. Figure 1(a) illustrates the
general pipeline of the classic approach. As the new data
comes in, the objects in the environment are detected (and
classified). To keep track of objects, each object is given an
ID. The Data Association module assigns existing IDs to the
detected objects, or initiates new IDs if there is no matched
tracks. The states of the tracked objects are updated using
∗ The authors contributed equally.

Data
Association

Model
Assignment

Object
Classifier

Drivable
space

State
update

to path planning

(a) Classic approach for drivable space detection.
Predicted OGMs

data

Convert
to OGM

OGM
Multi-Step
Prediction

...

to path planning
(b) OGM multi-step prediction.

Figure 1. Classic approach versus ours for providing the drivable
space to a motion planner in autonomous driving.

models which are assigned to them based on their class. Finally, the updated states (possibly along with the assigned
models) are used to determine the drivable space.
The various stages in the classic approach require handengineered features. Additionally, any error occurred at an
early stage of the pipeline can propagate towards the next
stages leading to an overall performance degradation. An
alternative approach is to predict the drivable space at a level
closer to the sensory information, requiring fewer abstraction levels. However, for such prediction to be useful, first a
proper representation of the drivable space should be chosen
which can be directly obtained from sensor measurements.
One such proper means in this context is an Occupancy Grid
Map (OGM) [3, 24]. An OGM divides the space around
the ego-vehicle into equal cells which represent the occupancy state of surrounding regions, i.e., free or occupied.
The state of the cells can be constructed using Laser range
finders (and images [22]).
Given an OGM, methods such as Probabilistic RoadMaps and Rapidly exploring Random Trees can be employed to generate a collision-free path [24]. In the presence
of dynamic objects, however, a single OGM is insufficient
110600

