Leveraging Heterogeneous Auxiliary Tasks to Assist Crowd Counting
Muming Zhao 1,2 , Jian Zhang 2,4 , Chongyang Zhang 1,3 ∗, Wenjun Zhang 1
1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of Technology, Sydney
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
muming.zhao@student.uts.edu.au, jian.zhang@uts.edu.au, {sunny zhang, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Crowd counting is a challenging task in the presence
of drastic scale variations, the clutter background, and severe occlusions, etc. Existing CNN-based counting methods
tackle these challenges mainly by fusing either multi-scale
or multi-context features to generate robust representations.
In this paper, we propose to address these issues by leveraging the heterogeneous attributes compounded in the density map. We identify three geometric/semantic/numeric attributes essentially important to the density estimation, and
demonstrate how to effectively utilize these heterogeneous
attributes to assist the crowd counting by formulating them
into multiple auxiliary tasks. With the multi-fold regularization effects induced by the auxiliary tasks, the backbone
CNN model is driven to embed desired properties explicitly and thus gains robust representations towards more accurate density estimation. Extensive experiments on three
challenging crowd counting datasets have demonstrated the
effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting and density estimation are of great importance in computer vision due to its essential role in a
wide range of surveillance applications including physical
security, public space management, and retail space design [11, 38]. However, the presence of drastic scale variations, the clutter background, and severe occlusions make it
challenging to generate high-quality crowd density maps.
Various CNN-based counting methods [35, 36, 29, 12]
have been proposed to handle the challenging situations
mainly by fusing multi-scale or multi-context information to improve the feature representations. For example,
Zhang et al. [36] generate multi-scale features with the
multi-column network to handle scale variations. Sindagi et
∗ This is the corresponding author.

CNN

Scale
variations

Clutter
background

Global
count

Principle factors that matter to the density map
Geometric
attribute

Semantic
attribute

Numeric
attribute

Attributes extracted from the factors

Figure 1. Illustration of essential factors influencing the crowd
density estimation.

al. [29] fuse local and global features for density estimation.
Their successes demonstrate the effectiveness to incorporate information from various sources (i.e., different submodels). Motivated by these methods, we propose to leverage heterogeneous attributes of the density map as guidances to fully exploit the potential of the underlying representation, without explicit modifications to the features.
Figure 1 illustrates our motivation with the observation of three factors of the density estimation. Considering the formulation of density-estimation-based counting
paradigm [11] which sums the density values over any region to report the final count, it is desired the estimated
densities vary along with object scales given the factor of
intra-image scale variations of crowd images. Specifically,
the nearer, larger objects should have smaller density values
compared to farther objects with smaller scales. We term
this as the geometric attribute of the density map. Besides,
the clutter background is another factor that should not be
neglected. For more accurate density estimation, the density
distribution is also desired to conform with the spatial distributions of the crowd to avoid the background clutter, which
can be viewed as the semantic attribute of the density esti-

12736

