Local Relationship Learning with Person-specific Shape Regularization for
Facial Action Unit Detection
Xuesong Niu1,3 , Hu Han1,2 , Songfan Yang5,6 , Yan Huang6 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3,4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China
5
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
6
TAL Education Group, Beijing, China
1

xuesong@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {hanhu, sgshan}@ict.ac.cn, {yangsongfan, galehuang}@100tal.com

Abstract
Encoding individual facial expressions via action units (AUs) coded by the Facial Action Coding System (FACS)
has been found to be an effective approach in resolving the
ambiguity issue among different expressions. While a number of methods have been proposed for AU detection, robust
AU detection in the wild remains a challenging problem because of the diverse baseline AU intensities across individual subjects, and the weakness of appearance signal of AUs.
To resolve these issues, in this work, we propose a novel
AU detection method by utilizing local information and the
relationship of individual local face regions. Through such
a local relationship learning, we expect to utilize rich local
information to improve the AU detection robustness against
the potential perceptual inconsistency of individual local regions. In addition, considering the diversity in the baseline
AU intensities of individual subjects, we further regularize
local relationship learning via person-specific face shape
information, i.e., reducing the influence of person-specific
shape information, and obtaining more AU discriminative
features. The proposed approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods on two widely used AU detection datasets
in the public domain (BP4D and DISFA).

1. Introduction
Facial expression is a natural and powerful means for human communications, which is highly associated with human’s intention, attitude or mental state. Therefore, facial
expression analysis has wide potential applications in diagnosing mental health [32], improving e-learning experi-

AU6 (Cheek Raiser)

AU6 (Cheek Raiser)

AU4 (Brow Lowerer)

AU4 (Brow Lowerer)

Figure 1: Each single local facial region defined for AUs
in FACS (red circles) can be ambiguous because of face
variations in pose, illumination, etc.; therefore, taking into account the relationship of multiple related face regions (yellow circles) can provide more robustness than using individual single local regions separately. At the same
time, person-specific face shape information also influences the AU detection performance, i.e., detection of AU4
(Brow Lowerer) is highly influenced by the eye-eyebrow
distance, which may vary significantly among different subjects. Therefore, we expect to reduce the influence of such
person-specific shape information to the AU detection task,
i.e., through regularization during feature learning.
ences [30], and detecting deception [12]. However, direct
facial expression recognition in the wild can be challenging
because of ambiguities between several expressions. One
of the effective methods in resolving the ambiguity issue is
to represent individual expression using the Facial Action
Coding System (FACS) [10], in which each expression is
identified as a specific configuration of multiple basic fa111917

