MAN: Moment Alignment Network for Natural Language Moment Retrieval via
Iterative Graph Adjustment
Da Zhang† , Xiyang Dai‡ , Xin Wang† , Yuan-Fang Wang† , and Larry S. Davis§
†

University of California, Santa Barbara; ‡ Microsoft; § University of Maryland, College Park

{dazhang, xwang, yfwang}@cs.ucsb.edu, xiyang.dai@microsoft.com, lsd@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
This research strives for natural language moment retrieval in long, untrimmed video streams. The problem is
not trivial especially when a video contains multiple moments of interests and the language describes complex temporal dependencies, which often happens in real scenarios. We identify two crucial challenges: semantic misalignment and structural misalignment. However, existing approaches treat different moments separately and do not explicitly model complex moment-wise temporal relations. In
this paper, we present Moment Alignment Network (MAN),
a novel framework that unifies the candidate moment encoding and temporal structural reasoning in a single-shot
feed-forward network. MAN naturally assigns candidate
moment representations aligned with language semantics
over different temporal locations and scales. Most importantly, we propose to explicitly model moment-wise temporal relations as a structured graph and devise an iterative
graph adjustment network to jointly learn the best structure in an end-to-end manner. We evaluate the proposed
approach on two challenging public benchmarks DiDeMo
and Charades-STA, where our MAN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a fundamental problem in computer vision and has drawn increasing interests over the past
few years due to its vast potential applications in surveillance, robotics, etc. While fruitful progress [44, 49, 47, 4,
48, 51, 5, 52, 50, 28, 10, 41, 2, 61, 42, 53, 59] has been
made on activity detection to recognize and localize temporal segments in videos, such approaches are limited to work
on pre-defined lists of simple activities, such as playing basketball, drinking water, etc. This restrains us from moving towards real-world unconstrained activity detection. To

Query: The child touches the ground the second time.

Query: Child is running away after is closest to the camera.

Figure 1: We consider the natural language moment retrieval task in untrimmed videos. To properly localize the
moment, the retrieval model must handle both semantic
misalignment (top) with multiple moments of interests and
structural misalignment (bottom) with complex temporal
dependencies.
solve this problem, we tackle the natural language moment
retrieval task. Given a verbal description, our goal is to determine the start and end time (i.e. localization) of the temporal segment (i.e. moment) that best corresponds to this
given query. While this formulation opens up great opportunities for better video perception, it is substantially more
challenging as it needs to model not only the characteristics
of sentence and video but also their complex relations.
On one hand, a real-world video often contains multiple
moments of interests. Consider a simple query like “The
child touches the ground the second time”, shown in Figure 1, a robust model needs to scan through the video and
compare the video context to find the second occurrence of
“child touches the ground”. This raises the first challenge
for our task: semantic misalignment. A simple ordinal number will result in searching from a whole video, where a
naive sliding approach will fail. On the other hand, the language query usually describes complex temporal dependencies. Consider another query like ”Child is running away af-

1247

