EV-Gait: Event-based Robust Gait Recognition using Dynamic Vision Sensors
Yanxiang Wang1∗, Bowen Du3∗, Yiran Shen1,2†, Kai Wu4 ,
Guangrong Zhao1 , Jianguo Sun1 , Hongkai Wen3†
1
Harbin Engineering University, 2 Data61 CSIRO, 3 University of Warwick, 4 Fudan University
Email: yiran.shen@csiro.au; hongkai.wen@dcs.warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new type of sensing modality, the Dynamic Vision Sensors (Event Cameras), for the
task of gait recognition. Compared with the traditional
RGB sensors, the event cameras have many unique advantages such as ultra low resources consumption, high temporal resolution and much larger dynamic range. However,
those cameras only produce noisy and asynchronous events
of intensity changes rather than frames, where conventional
vision-based gait recognition algorithms can’t be directly
applied. To address this, we propose a new Event-based
Gait Recognition (EV-Gait) approach, which exploits motion consistency to effectively remove noise, and uses a deep
neural network to recognise gait from the event streams.
To evaluate the performance of EV-Gait, we collect two
event-based gait datasets, one from real-world experiments
and the other by converting the publicly available RGB
gait recognition benchmark CASIA-B. Extensive experiments show that EV-Gait can get nearly 96% recognition
accuracy in the real-world settings, while on the CASIA-B
benchmark it achieves comparable performance with stateof-the-art RGB-based gait recognition approaches.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the principles of biological vision, Dynamic
Vision Sensors (DVS) [27, 7, 35] are considered as a new
sensing modality for a number of tasks such as visual odometry/SLAM [22, 19, 36], robotic perception [10, 31, 9, 8]
and object recognition [39, 24]. Unlike the RGB cameras
which produce synchronised frames at fixed rates, the pixels of DVS sensors are able to capture microseconds level
intensity change independently, and generate a stream of
asynchronous “events”. The design of DVS sensors enables
many unique benefits over the conventional RGB cameras.
Firstly, DVS sensors require much less resource including

energy, bandwidth and computation as the events are sparse
and only triggered when intensity changes are detected. For
example, the DVS128 sensor platform only consumes 150
times less energy than a CMOS camera [27]. Secondly, the
temporal resolution of DVS sensors is tens of microseconds
which means the DVS sensors are able to capture detailed
motion phases or high speed movements without blur or
rolling shutter problems. Finally, DVS sensors have significantly larger dynamic range (up to 140dB [27]) than RGB
cameras (∼60dB), which allows them to work under more
challenging lighting conditions. These characteristics make
DVS sensors more appealing over RGB cameras for vision
tasks with special requirements on latency, resources consumption and operation environments.
In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of using DVS
to tackle the classic gait recognition problem. Specifically,
it aims to determine human identities based on their walking patterns captured by the sensors. This is a fundamental
building block for many real-world applications such as activity tracking, digital healthcare and security surveillance.
In those context, DVS sensors have unique advantages over
the standard RGB cameras because i) their low energy and
bandwidth footprint makes them ideal for always-on wireless monitoring; and ii) the high dynamic range allows them
to work under challenging lighting conditions without dedicated illumination control.
However as shown in Fig. 1 (a), DVS operates in a completely different way than the RGB cameras, which generates asynchronous and noisy events rather than frames
when capturing human motion. Therefore, the conventional RGB-based image processing and gait recognition
approaches can’t be applied directly on the event data. In
this paper, we propose a new Event-based Gait Recognition
approach, EV-Gait, which is able to work with the noisy
event streams and accurately infer the identities based on
gait. Concretely, the technical contributions of this paper
are as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work investigating event-based gait recognition under practical settings.

∗ Co-primary authors
† Corresponding authors

16358

