Deep Spherical Quantization for Image Search
Sepehr Eghbali and Ladan Tahvildari
University of Waterloo
{sepehr.eghbali,ladan.tahvildari}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Hashing methods, which encode high-dimensional images with compact discrete codes, have been widely applied
to enhance large-scale image retrieval. In this paper, we
put forward Deep Spherical Quantization (DSQ), a novel
method to make deep convolutional neural networks generate supervised and compact binary codes for efficient image search. Our approach simultaneously learns a mapping
that transforms the input images into a low-dimensional
discriminative space, and quantizes the transformed data
points using multi-codebook quantization. To eliminate the
negative effect of norm variance on codebook learning, we
force the network to L2 normalize the extracted features and
then quantize the resulting vectors using a new supervised
quantization technique specifically designed for points lying
on a unit hypersphere. Furthermore, we introduce an easyto-implement extension of our quantization technique that
enforces sparsity on the codebooks. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that DSQ and its sparse variant can generate
semantically separable compact binary codes outperforming many state-of-the-art image retrieval methods on three
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Nearest neighbor search is one of the fundamental problems in multimedia systems. Given a query point, the
goal entails finding the most similar item to the query in a
dataset. Accuracy and speed are two key aspects in retrieval
systems, however, with explosive growth of high dimensional items such as images, videos and documents on the
Internet, most of traditional branch and bound indexing data
structures are deemed impractical, mainly because of their
query time or memory cost that grow exponentially with
the number of dimensions. This has led to a burgeoning
field of research, Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN),
that focuses on reducing storage and computational costs
with minimal accuracy loss.
ANN problem has witnessed a great amount of research
over the past two decades. The state-of-the-art in ANN is

mainly focused on hashing (compact coding), which aims
at encoding high-dimensional media data into short binary
codes subject to preserving a given notation of similarity.
Binary-valued representation has several advantages, such
as being compact to store and faster to compare, making it
a suitable fit for large-scale nearest neighbor search. Moreover, for binary strings, one can achieve sublinear query
time using hash tables [13, 34] or tree-based indexing data
structures [11, 12]. Finding compact binary codes that better respect the given notion of similarity has been the topic
of much work over the last two decades during which a
rich set of hashing techniques has been proposed. Compact coding techniques are roughly in two streams, categorized by the way they compute distance between encoded
items: 1) Binary hashing maps high-dimensional input vectors into Hamming space where the distance between two
codes can be computed extremely fast using bitwise operators. 2) Multi-Codebook Quantization (MCQ) which, analogous to k-means algorithm, partitions the input space into
non-overlapping cells and then approximates the distance
between two points with the distance between the centers
of cell they belong to. The search speed enhancement of
MCQ stems from the fact that the distance between cells
can be pre-computed and stored in lookup tables.
Not surprisingly, with the dawn of deep learning, most of
recent research effort in compact coding has been directed
towards using deep networks for producing compact and
functional binary codes. Deep hashing methods simultaneously learn the representation and hash coding from raw
images. Similarly, deep MCQ has been the topic of study in
recent years [4, 17]. Surprisingly enough, although MCQ is
a more powerful model as it enables producing many more
possible distinct distances, due to the lack of research, its
performance in the context of deep supervised compact coding is inferior to state-of-the-art in supervised binary hashing [22].
Most of existing deep supervised MCQ techniques incorporate an unsupervised quantization (usually product quantization (PQ) [18]) on top of the features generated by a
deep architecture. Nevertheless, the adopted networks often
produce deep features with relatively high norm variance

11690

