StereoDRNet: Dilated Residual StereoNet
Rohan Chabra 1†
Julian Straub 2
Chris Sweeney2
Richard Newcombe2
Henry Fuchs1
1
2
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Facebook Reality Labs
1

{rohanc, fuchs}@cs.unc.edu

2

julian.straub@oculus.com, {sweenychris, richard.newcombe}@fb.com

Figure 1: StereoDRNet enables estimation of high quality depth maps that opens the door to high quality reconstruction by
passive stereo video. In this figure we compare the output from dense reconstruction [15] built form depth maps generated
by StereoDRNet, PSMNet [2] and a structured light system [23] (termed Ground Truth). We report and visualize point-toplane distance RMS error on the reconstructed meshes with respect to the ground truth demonstrating the improvement in
reconstruction over the state-of-the-art.

Abstract
We propose a system that uses a convolution neural network (CNN) to estimate depth from a stereo pair followed
by volumetric fusion of the predicted depth maps to produce a 3D reconstruction of a scene. Our proposed depth
refinement architecture, predicts view-consistent disparity
and occlusion maps that helps the fusion system to produce
geometrically consistent reconstructions. We utilize 3D dilated convolutions in our proposed cost filtering network
that yields better filtering while almost halving the computational cost in comparison to state of the art cost filtering
architectures. For feature extraction we use the Vortex Pooling architecture [24]. The proposed method achieves state
of the art results in KITTI 2012, KITTI 2015 and ETH 3D
stereo benchmarks. Finally, we demonstrate that our system is able to produce high fidelity 3D scene reconstructions
that outperforms the state of the art stereo system.

1. Introduction
Depth from stereo vision has been heavily studied in
computer vision field for the last few decades. Depth es†Work performed during internship at Facebook Reality Labs.

timation has various applications in autonomous driving,
dense reconstruction and 3D objects and human tracking.
Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality systems require
depth estimations to build dense spatial maps of the environment for interaction and scene understanding. For proper
rendering and interaction between virtual and real objects
in an augmented 3D world, the depth is expected to be both
dense and correct around object boundaries. Depth sensors
such as structured light and time of flight sensors are often used to build such spatial maps of indoor environments.
These sensors often use illumination sources which require
power and space that exceeds the expected budget of an envisioned AR system. Since these sensors use infrared vision, they do not work well in bright sun light environment
or in presence of other infrared sources.
On the other hand, the depth from stereo vision systems
have a strong advantage of working in both indoors and
in sunlight environments. Since these systems use passive
image data, they do not interfere with each other or with
the environment materials. Moreover, the resolution of passive stereo systems is typically greater than the sparse patterns used in structured light depth sensors, so these methods have capabilities to produce depth with accurate ob111786

