Im2Pencil: Controllable Pencil Illustration from Photographs
Yijun Li1 , Chen Fang2 , Aaron Hertzmann3 , Eli Shechtman3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,4
1
UC Merced 2 ByteDance AI 3 Adobe Research 4 Google Cloud
{yli62,mhyang}@ucmerced.edu

fangchen@bytedance.com

𝐿" : Rough

Abstract
We propose a high-quality photo-to-pencil translation
method with fine-grained control over the drawing style.
This is a challenging task due to multiple stroke types (e.g.,
outline and shading), structural complexity of pencil shading (e.g., hatching), and the lack of aligned training data
pairs. To address these challenges, we develop a twobranch model that learns separate filters for generating
sketchy outlines and tonal shading from a collection of pencil drawings. We create training data pairs by extracting
clean outlines and tonal illustrations from original pencil
drawings using image filtering techniques, and we manually
label the drawing styles. In addition, our model creates different pencil styles (e.g., line sketchiness and shading style)
in a user-controllable manner. Experimental results on different types of pencil drawings show that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against existing methods in terms
of quality, diversity and user evaluations.

1. Introduction
Pencil is a popular drawing medium often used for quick
sketching or finely-worked depiction. Notably, two main
components are the outlines that define region boundaries,
and shading that reflects differences in the amount of light
falling on a region as well as its intensity or tone and even
texture. Each of these may be applied in various different
styles. For example, pencil outlines may be more or less
“sketchy” (Figure 1(a)). Shading may be also more or less
sketchy and use different types of hatching strategies (Figure 1(b)). Hence, we seek to accurately reproduce these
drawing styles and allow users to select based on personal
preferences.
We split the task into generating the outlines and shading
separately, and express each as an image-to-image translation problem, learning the mapping from a collection of
pencil drawings. Unfortunately, gathering paired training
data for any artistic stylization task is challenging, due to
the cost, as well as the spatial distortions in drawings [6].
To avoid the burden of gathering ground-truth paired data,

{elishe,hertzman}@adobe.com

𝐿$ : Clean

(a) Pencil outlines

𝑆" : Hatching

𝑆% : Blending

𝑆$ : Crosshatching

𝑆& : Stippling

(b) Pencil shading

Figure 1. Examples of real pencil drawings in the outline (L1 ∼
L2 ) and shading (S1 ∼ S4 ) styles that we train on.

we instead propose to create data pairs. In particular, we
filter each pencil drawing with procedures that extract outlines, tone, and edges. This produces two sets of paired data
that can be used for our two subtasks, learning the outlines
and shading drawing. These filters generate the same abstractions (outlines, tone, and edges) when applied to input
photographs. Hence, at test-time, we filter an input photograph and then apply the trained model to produce pencil
illustrations in a user-selected style.
We achieve control over different pencil styles (e.g.,
sketchiness and shading) by training the model with several distinct styles, where the style label is provided as an
input selection unit. Moreover, the filtering modules contain additional controllable parameters to generate different
abstracted inputs, which are then mapped to pencil drawings with different characteristics. On the other hand, we
find that image translation architectures can often produce
undesirable hatching patterns. We describe these issues and
show how careful design of network architectures can address these problems.
A long-term goal of this research direction is to provide
more fine-grained control to neural-network stylization algorithms. Existing learning-based methods do not provide
much control over style except by changing the training input. In contrast, classical procedural stylization algorithms
can provide many different styles (e.g., [1, 35]) but without
the same quality and generality that can come from learning from examples. Our method allows fine-grained stylistic control as we focus on separating outline and shading
style, and learning several stylistic options for each.
11525

