Building Efficient Deep Neural Networks with Unitary Group Convolutions
Ritchie Zhao

Yuwei Hu

Jordan Dotzel

Christopher De Sa

Zhiru Zhang

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
{rz252, yh457, jad443}@cornell.edu, cdesa@cs.cornell.edu, zhiruz@cornell.edu

Abstract
We propose unitary group convolutions (UGConvs), a
building block for CNNs which compose a group convolution with unitary transforms in feature space to learn a
richer set of representations than group convolution alone.
UGConvs generalize two disparate ideas in CNN architecture, channel shuffling (i.e. ShuffleNet [29]) and blockcirculant networks (i.e. CirCNN [6]), and provide unifying
insights that lead to a deeper understanding of each technique. We experimentally demonstrate that dense unitary
transforms can outperform channel shuffling in DNN accuracy. On the other hand, different dense transforms exhibit comparable accuracy performance. Based on these
observations we propose HadaNet, a UGConv network using Hadamard transforms. HadaNets achieve similar accuracy to circulant networks with lower computation complexity, and better accuracy than ShuffleNets with the same
number of parameters and floating-point multiplies.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
proven extremely successful at large-scale computer vision
problems. Research over the past few years has made steady
progress on improving CNN accuracy [26]. Concurrently,
efforts have been made to reduce the number of parameters and floating-point multiplies (fpmuls) in CNNs. One
major trend in this research space is the increasing sparsity
of layer connections. Early networks such as AlexNet [13]
and VGG [19] exclusively utilize dense mappings, i.e. convolutional (conv) or fully-connected (FC) layers that form
a weight connection between every input and every output feature. More advanced architectures such as Xception [2] and MobileNets [8] make use of depthwise separable convolutions, which consist of a sparse spatial mapping
(depthwise convolution) and a dense cross-channel mapping (pointwise convolution). Even more recently, Shuf-

fleNet [29] replaces the pointwise convolutions with sparse
group convolutions, and additionally proposes a channel
shuffle to allow information to flow between groups. These
changes to layer structure look to remove weight connections while retaining accuracy performance.
A different line of efficient CNNs research looks to train
networks with circulant or block-circulant 1 weights [1, 20,
6, 22]. An n × n circulant matrix contains only n unique
elements. Moreover, every circulant matrix C can be diagonalized by the normalized discrete Fourier matrix F as
follows:
C = F∗ DF
(1)
giving rise to an asymptotically faster algorithm for matrix
multiplication via the fast Fourier transform (FFT). By exploiting these properties of circulant weights, these works
can also reduce CNN complexity and model size.
In this paper, we propose the concept of unitary group
convolution (UGConv), defined as a building block for
neural networks that combines a weight layer (most commonly a group convolution) with unitary transforms in feature space. We show that group convs with channel shuffle (ShuffleNet) and block-circulant networks (CirCNN) are
specific instances of UGConvs. By unifying two different
lines of work in CNN literature, we gain a deeper understanding into the basic underlying idea — that group convolutions exhibit improved learning ability when performed
in a transformed feature basis. Through a series of experiments, we then investigate how different transforms and
UGConv structures affect the learning performance. Specifically, our contributions are as follows:
1. We propose the concept of unitary group convolutions. We show that ShuffleNets and circulant networks, techniques from two disparate lines of research,
are in fact both instances of UGConv networks. This
lets us unify the conceptual insights of both works.
1 In this paper, block-circulant, block-diagonal, etc. refers to matrices
consisting of square sub-matrices which are circulant, diagonal, etc. This
is different from the canonical definition of a block-diagonal matrix.

11303

