Pushing the Boundaries of View Extrapolation with Multiplane Images
Pratul P. Srinivasan1
Richard Tucker2
Ravi Ramamoorthi3
Ren Ng1
1

Jonathan T. Barron2
Noah Snavely2

UC Berkeley, 2 Google Research, 3 UC San Diego

1. Introduction
View synthesis, the problem of predicting novel views
of a scene from a set of captured images, is a central problem in computer vision and graphics. The ability to render
nearby views from a single image or a stereo pair can enable compelling photography effects such as 3D parallax
and synthetic defocus blur. Furthermore, given a collection
of images of a scene taken from different viewpoints, view
synthesis could enable free-viewpoint navigation for virtual
and augmented reality.
However, there is still a long way to go. State-of-the-art
view synthesis algorithms use their input images to estimate
a 3D scene representation, which can then be reprojected to
render novel views. This approach works well for content

“Repeated Texture” Artifacts

Depth Discretization Artifacts

Original MPI [38] Novel View
Our Novel View

We explore the problem of view synthesis from a narrow baseline pair of images, and focus on generating highquality view extrapolations with plausible disocclusions.
Our method builds upon prior work in predicting a multiplane image (MPI), which represents scene content as a set
of RGBα planes within a reference view frustum and renders novel views by projecting this content into the target
viewpoints. We present a theoretical analysis showing how
the range of views that can be rendered from an MPI increases linearly with the MPI disparity sampling frequency,
as well as a novel MPI prediction procedure that theoretically enables view extrapolations of up to 4× the lateral
viewpoint movement allowed by prior work. Our method
ameliorates two specific issues that limit the range of views
renderable by prior methods: 1) We expand the range of
novel views that can be rendered without depth discretization artifacts by using a 3D convolutional network architecture along with a randomized-resolution training procedure
to allow our model to predict MPIs with increased disparity
sampling frequency. 2) We reduce the repeated texture artifacts seen in disocclusions by enforcing a constraint that the
appearance of hidden content at any depth must be drawn
from visible content at or behind that depth.

Input Images

Abstract

Figure 1. Given two input images taken from nearby viewpoints,
our algorithm predicts an MPI scene representation that can render
view extrapolations with disocclusions. Our model improves upon
prior work in two specific ways: 1) We reduce depth discretization
artifacts due to insufficient depth sampling, as seen in the red zoom
of the wood table. 2) We mitigate the repeated texture artifacts
produced by prior methods by predicting plausible hidden scene
content, as shown in the blue and green zooms where we predict
realistic textures behind the fruit bowl and lamp.

visible in the input images, but the quality of novel views
degrades rapidly as the target viewpoint moves further away
from the input views, thereby revealing more previouslyoccluded scene content. In this work, we study the problem of view extrapolation where regions of the rendered images observe disoccluded content, and focus specifically on
demonstrating view synthesis from a stereo input.
We build upon a state-of-the-art deep learning approach
for view synthesis [38] that predicts a scene representation

175

