Coordinate-based Texture Inpainting for Pose-Guided Human Image Generation
Artur Grigorev 1,2

Artem Sevastopolsky 1,2
Alexander Vakhitov 1
Victor Lempitsky 1,2
1
Samsung AI Center, Moscow, Russia
2
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow, Russia
{a.grigorev,a.sevastopol,a.vakhitov,v.lempitsky}@samsung.com
Abstract

We present a new deep learning approach to pose-guided
resynthesis of human photographs. At the heart of the new
approach is the estimation of the complete body surface texture based on a single photograph. Since the input photograph always observes only a part of the surface, we suggest a new inpainting method that completes the texture of
the human body. Rather than working directly with colors of texture elements, the inpainting network estimates an
appropriate source location in the input image for each element of the body surface. This correspondence field between the input image and the texture is then further warped
into the target image coordinate frame based on the desired
pose, effectively establishing the correspondence between
the source and the target view even when the pose change is
drastic. The final convolutional network then uses the established correspondence and all other available information
to synthesize the output image. A fully-convolutional architecture with deformable skip connections guided by the
estimated correspondence field is used. We show state-ofthe-art result for pose-guided image synthesis. Additionally,
we demonstrate the performance of our system for garment
transfer and pose-guided face resynthesis.

1. Introduction
Learning human appearance from a single image (oneshot human modeling) has recently become an area of high
research interest. One interesting kind of the problem,
which has a number of potential applications in augmented
reality and retail, is pose-guided image generation [20].
Here, the task is to resynthesize the view of a person from
a new viewpoint and in a new pose, given a single input
image. The progress in this problem benefits from the recent advances in human pose estimation and deep generative convolutional networks (ConvNets). A particular challenging setup considers humans wearing complex clothing,
such as encountered in fashion photographs.
In this work we suggest a new approach for pose-guided

person image generation. The approach is based on a
pipeline that includes two deep generative ConvNets. The
first convolutional network to estimate the texture of the human body surface from a small part of this texture (texture
completion/inpainting). This texture is then warped to the
new pose to serve as an input to the second convolutional
network that generates the new view.
One novelty of the approach lies in the texture estimation part (Figure 1), where the challenge is to utilize the
natural symmetries of the human body. This task is nontrivial since the part of the texture that is known changes
from one input image to another. As a result, straightforward image-to-image translation approaches result in very
blurred textures, where the colors predicted at unknown locations are effectively averaged over very large number of
input locations.
To solve this problem, we suggest a new method for texture completion, which we call coordinate-based texture inpainting, and which results in a significant boost of the visual quality output for the entire pipeline. The method is
based on a simple idea. Rather than working directly with
colors of texture elements, the inpainting network works
with coordinates of the texture elements in the source view.
These values are analyzed by the inpainting network and
then extended into the unknown part of the texture, so that
each unknown texture element gets assigned a coordinate
in the source view. Thus, a correspondence between source
pixels and all points on the body surface is estimated. Using the estimated correspondence, the colors of each texture element can be transferred from the source view. The
inpainting thus happens in the coordinate-space, while the
extraction of colors from the source image, which generates
the final texture, happens after the inpainting. As a result,
the inpainted textures retain high-frequency details from the
source images.
Given the detailed texture generated by the coordinatebased inpainting process, the next step of the pipeline warps
both the color texture and the source image coordinate maps
according to the target pose (which similarly to [22] is defined by the DensePose [11] descriptor). The final stage of
112135

