STGAN: A Unified Selective Transfer Network
for Arbitrary Image Attribute Editing
Ming Liu1 , Yukang Ding2 , Min Xia1 , Xiao Liu2 , Errui Ding2 , Wangmeng Zuo(
⋆

1

)1,3

, Shilei Wen2

Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
csmliu@outlook.com, csmxia@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn,
{dingyukang, liuxiao12, dingerrui, wenshilei}@baidu.com
Raw Image

Reconstruction

Add Eyeglasses

To Female

To Brown Hair

Add Mustache
To Light Eyebrows

Add Beard
To Mouth Closed

To Old
Remove Bangs

Raw Image

Reconstruction

To Bald

Add Bangs

To Mouth Open

Add Beard
To Bushy Eyebrows

To Pale Skin
To Blond Hair

To Old
Add Eyeglasses

Figure 1: High resolution (384 × 384) results of STGAN for facial attribute editing, and more results are given in the suppl.

Abstract
Arbitrary attribute editing generally can be tackled by
incorporating encoder-decoder and generative adversarial networks. However, the bottleneck layer in encoderdecoder usually gives rise to blurry and low quality editing
result. And adding skip connections improves image quality at the cost of weakened attribute manipulation ability.
Moreover, existing methods exploit target attribute vector
to guide the flexible translation to desired target domain. In
this work, we suggest to address these issues from selective
transfer perspective. Considering that specific editing task
is certainly only related to the changed attributes instead of
all target attributes, our model selectively takes the difference between target and source attribute vectors as input.
Furthermore, selective transfer units are incorporated with
encoder-decoder to adaptively select and modify encoder
feature for enhanced attribute editing. Experiments show
that our method (i.e., STGAN) simultaneously improves attribute manipulation accuracy as well as perception quality, and performs favorably against state-of-the-arts in arbitrary facial attribute editing and season translation.

⋆ Work done during an internship at Baidu.

1. Introduction
Image attribute editing, aiming at manipulating an image
to possess desired attributes, is an interesting but challenging problem with many real-world vision applications. On
one hand, it is impracticable to collect paired images with
and without desirable attributes (e.g., female and male face
images of the same person). Thus, unsupervised generative learning models, e.g., generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [9], have attracted upsurging attention in attribute
editing. On the other hand, arbitrary attribute editing actually is a multi-domain image-to-image translation task.
Learning single translation model for each specific attribute
editing task may achieve limited success [20, 29, 34]. But it
is ineffective in exploiting the entire training data, and the
learned models grows exponentially along with the number
of attributes. To handle this issue, several arbitrary attribute
editing approaches [7, 11, 26] have been developed, which
usually (i) use encoder-decoder architecture, and (ii) take
both source image and target attribute vector as input.
Albeit their extensive deployment, encoder-decoder networks remain insufficient for high quality attribute editing.
Attribute can be of either local, global, or abstract characteristic of the image. In order to properly manipulate image attribute, spatial pooling or downsampling generally are
required to obtain high-level abstraction of image content
13673

