Privacy Protection in Street-View Panoramas using Depth
and Multi-View Imagery
Ries Uittenbogaard1 , ∗ Clint Sebastian2 , Julien Vijverberg3 ,
Bas Boom3 , Dariu M. Gavrila1 , Peter H.N. de With2
1

Intelligent Vehicles Group, TU Delft,

2

VCA Group, TU Eindhoven,

3

Cyclomedia B.V

c.sebastian@tue.nl
∗

corresponding author

Abstract
The current paradigm in privacy protection in streetview images is to detect and blur sensitive information. In
this paper, we propose a framework that is an alternative to
blurring, which automatically removes and inpaints moving
objects (e.g. pedestrians, vehicles) in street-view imagery.
We propose a novel moving object segmentation algorithm
exploiting consistencies in depth across multiple street-view
images that are later combined with the results of a segmentation network. The detected moving objects are removed and inpainted with information from other views, to
obtain a realistic output image such that the moving object is not visible anymore. We evaluate our results on a
dataset of 1000 images to obtain a peak noise-to-signal
ratio (PSNR) and L1 loss of 27.2 dB and 2.5%, respectively. To assess overall quality, we also report the results
of a survey conducted on 35 professionals, asked to visually inspect the images whether object removal and inpainting had taken place. The inpainting dataset will be made
publicly available for scientific benchmarking purposes at
https://research.cyclomedia.com/.

1. Introduction
In recent years, street-view services such as Google
Street View, Bing Maps Streetside, Mapillary have systematically collected and hosted millions of images. Although
these services are useful, they have been withdrawn or not
updated in certain countries [1, 2], due to serious privacy
concerns. The conventional way of enforcing privacy in
street-view images is by blurring sensitive information such
as faces and license plates. However, this has several drawbacks. First, the blurring of an object like a face might
not ensure that the privacy of the person is sufficiently protected. The clothing, body structure, location and several
other aspects can lead to the identity of the person, even

Figure 1: Example of moving object segmentation (top) and
the results after inpainting (bottom). The regions that are
highlighted in orange are removed and inpainted.
if the face is hidden. Second, blurring objects creates artifacts that is undesirable in application when consistent view
of the infrastructure is required. For commercial purposes
such as change detection and localization of objects from
street-view imagery, blurring limits the scope of these applications.
It is therefore desirable to use a method that completely
removes the identity-related information. In this paper, we
present a method that automatically segments and replaces
moving objects from sequences of panoramic street-view
images by inserting a realistic background. Moving objects
are of primary interest because authentic information about
the background is present in the other views (we assume
that most moving objects are either vehicles or pedestrians).
110581

