Video Relationship Reasoning using Gated Spatio-Temporal Energy Graph
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai† , Santosh Divvala‡ , Louis-Philippe Morency† , Ruslan Salakhutdinov† , Ali Farhadi‡∗
†
Carnegie Mellon University, ‡ Allen Institute for AI, ∗ University of Washington
https://github.com/yaohungt/GSTEG_CVPR_2019

Abstract
Visual relationship reasoning is a crucial yet challenging task for understanding rich interactions across visual
concepts. For example, a relationship {man, open, door}
involves a complex relation {open} between concrete entities {man, door}. While much of the existing work has
studied this problem in the context of still images, understanding visual relationships in videos has received limited
attention. Due to their temporal nature, videos enable us
to model and reason about a more comprehensive set of visual relationships, such as those requiring multiple (temporal) observations (e.g., {man, lift up, box} vs. {man,
put down, box}), as well as relationships that are often
correlated through time (e.g., {woman, pay, money} followed by {woman, buy, coffee}). In this paper, we construct
a Conditional Random Field on a fully-connected spatiotemporal graph that exploits the statistical dependency between relational entities spatially and temporally. We introduce a novel gated energy function parametrization that
learns adaptive relations conditioned on visual observations. Our model optimization is computationally efficient,
and its space computation complexity is significantly amortized through our proposed parameterization. Experimental results on benchmark video datasets (ImageNet Video
and Charades) demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
across three standard relationship reasoning tasks: Detection, Tagging, and Recognition.

1. Introduction
Relationship reasoning is a challenging task that not
only involves detecting low-level entities (subjects, objects,
etc.) but also recognizing the high-level interaction between them (actions, sizes, parts, etc.). Successfully reasoning about relationships not only enables us to build
richer question-answering models (e.g., Which objects are
larger than a car?), but also helps in improving image retrieval [20](e.g., images with elephants drawing a cart),
scene graph parsing [41] (e.g., woman has helmet), captioning [42], and many other visual reasoning tasks.
Most contemporary research in visual relationship rea-

(Monkey, Creep Up, Car)
ambiguous

(Monkey, Creep Down, Car)
(Image)
(Video)

(Monkey, Creep Down, Car)
requires multiple temporal observations

(Monkey, Jump Left, Car)
contingency between temporal events

Figure 1. Visual relationship reasoning in images (top) vs. videos
(bottom): Given a single image, it is ambiguous whether the monkey is creeping up or down the car. Using a video not only helps to
unambiguously recognize a richer set of relations, but also model
temporal correlations across them (e.g., creep down and jump left).

soning has been focused in the domain of static images.
While this has resulted in several exciting and attractive reasoning modules [26, 20, 42, 18, 40, 45, 3, 17], it lacks the
ability from reasoning about complex relations that are inherently temporal and/or correlated in nature. For example,
in Fig. 1 it is ambiguous to infer from a static image whether
the monkey is creeping down or up the car. Also, it is difficult to model relations that are often correlated through
time, such as man enters room and man open door.
In this paper, we present a novel approach for reasoning about visual relationships in videos. Our proposed approach jointly models the spatial and temporal structure of
relationships in videos by constructing a fully-connected
spatio-temporal graph (see Fig. 2). We refer to our model
as a Gated Spatio-Temporal Energy Graph. In our graph,
each node represents an entity and the edges between them
denote the statistical relations. Unlike much of the previous work [15, 43, 27, 4, 31] that assumed a predefined or
globally-learned pairwise energy function, we introduce an
observation-gated version that allows us to make the statistical dependency between entities adaptive (conditioned on
the observation).
Our adaptive parameterization of energy function helps
us model the natural diversification of relationships in
110424

