Viewport Proposal CNN for 360° Video Quality Assessment
Chen Li†, Mai Xu†‡,* Lai Jiang†, Shanyi Zhang† and Xiaoming Tao§
† School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡ Hangzhou Innovation Institute (HZII), Beihang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
§ Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
†{jnlichen123, maixu, jianglai.china, shanyi zhang}@buaa.edu.cn

Input: 360 video frame Viewport proposals

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the growing interest in visual quality assessment (VQA) for 360° video. Unfortunately, the existing VQA approaches do not consider the
facts that: 1) Observers only see viewports of 360° video,
rather than patches or whole 360° frames. 2) Within the
viewport, only salient regions can be perceived by observers
with high resolution. Thus, this paper proposes a viewportbased convolutional neural network (V-CNN) approach for
VQA on 360° video, considering both auxiliary tasks of
viewport proposal and viewport saliency prediction. Our
V-CNN approach is composed of two stages, i.e., viewport
proposal and VQA. In the first stage, the viewport proposal
network (VP-net) is developed to yield several potential
viewports, seen as the first auxiliary task. In the second
stage, a viewport quality network (VQ-net) is designed to
rate the VQA score for each proposed viewport, in which
the saliency map of the viewport is predicted and then utilized in VQA score rating. Consequently, another auxiliary
task of viewport saliency prediction can be achieved. More
importantly, the main task of VQA on 360° video can be
accomplished via integrating the VQA scores of all viewports. The experiments validate the effectiveness of our VCNN approach in significantly advancing the state-of-theart performance of VQA on 360° video. In addition, our
approach achieves comparable performance in two auxiliary tasks. The code of our V-CNN approach is available at
https://github.com/Archer-Tatsu/V-CNN .

1. Introduction
Nowadays, 360° video has become part of our daily
life. Typically, people watch 360° video through a headmounted display (HMD), resulting in that only the content
within the viewport is visible. They can obtain immersive experience by changing their viewports in the range of
* Mai Xu is the corresponding author of this paper.

1

2

Alignment

Saliency maps
Output:

0~1
VQA score

3

0~1
0~1
0~1

1

Viewport quality

Tasks:
1 Viewport proposal

2 Viewport saliency prediction

3 VQA score rating

Figure 1. Brief framework of the proposed V-CNN for 360° video
quality assessment with multiple tasks.

360 × 180°. Therefore, 360° video covers the 360 × 180°
content, requiring extremely high resolution for clear representation. To deliver high-resolution 360° video over the
bandwidth-limited channel, compression is urgently needed
[4, 37] to save encoding bit-rates, meanwhile causing dramatic degradation on visual quality. Moreover, the quality
degradation in the viewport can be more noticeable, since
people only watch a small part of the original frame. It is
thus necessary to study objective visual quality assessment
(VQA) for 360° video, which can be used as the guidance
for processing 360° video.
Recently, there has been increasing interest in assessing the visual quality of 360° image/video [19, 21, 38, 39,
32, 28]. For example, based on peak signal-to-noise ratio
(PSNR), Yu et al. [38] proposed sphere-based PSNR (SPSNR) to calculate PSNR by considering uniform sampling
on sphere. They also provide an alternative VQA approach
that calculates PSNR in the ground-truth viewports; however, it is not practical as the viewport is not available when

10177

