Feature Denoising for Improving Adversarial Robustness
Cihang Xie1,2∗

Yuxin Wu2
Laurens van der Maaten2
Alan Yuille1
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
Facebook AI Research
Abstract

Adversarial attacks to image classification systems
present challenges to convolutional networks and opportunities for understanding them. This study suggests that
adversarial perturbations on images lead to noise in the
features constructed by these networks. Motivated by this
observation, we develop new network architectures that
increase adversarial robustness by performing feature
denoising. Specifically, our networks contain blocks that
denoise the features using non-local means or other filters;
the entire networks are trained end-to-end. When combined
with adversarial training, our feature denoising networks
substantially improve the state-of-the-art in adversarial
robustness in both white-box and black-box attack settings. On ImageNet, under 10-iteration PGD white-box
attacks where prior art has 27.9% accuracy, our method
achieves 55.7%; even under extreme 2000-iteration PGD
white-box attacks, our method secures 42.6% accuracy.
Our method was ranked first in Competition on Adversarial
Attacks and Defenses (CAAD) 2018 — it achieved 50.6%
classification accuracy on a secret, ImageNet-like test
dataset against 48 unknown attackers, surpassing the
runner-up approach by ∼10%. Code is available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/
ImageNet-Adversarial-Training.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks to image classification systems [20]
add small perturbations to images that lead these systems
into making incorrect predictions. While the perturbations are often imperceptible or perceived as small “noise”
in the image, these attacks are highly effective against
even the most successful convolutional network based systems [11, 14]. The success of adversarial attacks leads to
security threats in real-world applications of convolutional
networks, but equally importantly, it demonstrates that these
networks perform computations that are dramatically different from those in human brains.
Figure 1 shows a randomly selected feature map of a
ResNet [9] applied on a clean image (top) and on its ad∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

Kaiming He2

4

3

2

1

0

clean
4

3

2

1

0

adversarial

Figure 1. Feature map in the res3 block of an ImageNet-trained
ResNet-50 [9] applied on a clean image (top) and on its adversarially perturbed counterpart (bottom). The adversarial perturbation
was produced using PGD [16] with maximum perturbation ǫ =16
(out of 256). In this example, the adversarial image is incorrectly
recognized as “space heater”; the true label is “digital clock”.

versarially perturbed counterpart (bottom). The figure suggests that adversarial perturbations, while small in the pixel
space, lead to very substantial “noise” in the feature maps
of the network. Whereas the features for the clean image
appear to focus primarily on semantically informative content in the image, the feature maps for the adversarial image
are activated across semantically irrelevant regions as well.
Figure 2 displays more examples with the same pattern.
Motivated by this observation, we explore feature
denoising approaches to improve the robustness of convolutional networks against adversarial attacks. We develop new
convolutional network architectures equipped with building
blocks designed to denoise feature maps. Our networks are
trained end-to-end on adversarially generated samples, allowing them to learn to reduce feature-map perturbations.
Empirically, we find that the best performance is
achieved by networks using non-local means [2] for feature denoising, leading to models that are related to selfattention [23] and non-local networks [24]. Our ablation
studies show that using mean filters, median filters, and
bilateral filters [21] for feature denoising also improves
adversarial robustness, suggesting that feature denoising is
a good design principle.

501

