A Generative Adversarial Density Estimator
M. Ehsan Abbasnejad, Javen Shi, Anton van den Hengel, Lingqiao Liu
{ehsan.abbasnejad,javen.shi,anton.vandenhengel,lingqiao.liu}@adelaide.edu.au

Australian Institute of Machine Learning & The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Density estimation is a challenging unsupervised learning problem. Current maximum likelihood approaches for
density estimation are either restrictive or incapable of producing high-quality samples. On the other hand, likelihoodfree models such as generative adversarial networks, produce sharp samples without a density model. The lack of
a density estimate limits the applications to which the sampled data can be put, however. We propose a Generative Adversarial Density Estimator, a density estimation approach
that bridges the gap between the two. Allowing for a prior
on the parameters of the model, we extend our density estimator to a Bayesian model where we can leverage the
predictive variance to measure our confidence in the likelihood. Our experiments on challenging applications such
as visual dialog where the density and the confidence in predictions are crucial shows the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Generative modelling is amongst the longest-standing
problems in machine learning, and one that has been drawing increasing attention. This is at least partly due to
the shortcomings of the predominant discriminative deep
learning-based models. These shortcomings include the
failure to generalise, a lack of robustness to data distribution
changes, and the need for large volumes of training data.
Deep generative models have been successful in addressing some of these shortcomings. In particular, deep maximum likelihood models such as deep Boltzmann machines
[40], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [23], autoregressive
models [17, 36], real non-volume preserving transformations [13] etc. have demonstrated an impressive ability to
model complex densities.
Likelihood-free approaches [20, 16] such as generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [16] have outperformed previous deep generative models in their ability to model complex distributions. In image-based problems they have
shown a particular ability to consistently generate sharp and

realistic looking samples [22, 48, 34]. GANs are one of the
implicit generative models wherein density is not explicitly
defined [11]. Unfortunately, GANs are incapable of evaluating densities by-design.
Maximum likelihood models have the advantage that
they are able to represent probability density explicitly, but
either perform poorly in terms of the quality of samples they
generate or are relatively inefficient to train.
As modern datasets are typically large, high-dimensional
and highly structured, the challenge is building models that
are powerful enough to capture the underlying complexity
yet still efficient to train in estimating the density of instances.
Density estimates are essential in a wide range of practical problems in Computer Vision, particularly when likelihoods over the generated samples are critical. This occurs,
for example, when it is important to both explore and optimise over a search space, when confidence estimates about
a hypothesis are required, or when control over the level
of generalisation is important. The typical sample quality metrics are inadequate since the generative model may
simply memoraize the data or miss important modes [45].
Moreover, in an application such as one where the virtual
agent is engaged in a dialog with the user about an image, the estimate of how likely an answer is in addition to
the agent’s confidence improves both dialogue fluidity and
method performance. Alternatively, density estimates such
as autoregressive models [17], flow-based methods [12, 13]
or non-parameteric methods such as kernel density estimation (KDE) [16] are either overly computationally demanding or rely on heavy engineering of the neural networks involved.
In this paper, we introduce a Generative Adversarial
Density Estimator that is both easy to train and expressive enough to model high-dimensional data. In particular, we bridge the gap between the maximum likelihood
and likelihood-free models by explicitly modeling the likelihood while using adversarial samples to compute the normalizer. As a by-product of this model, we show the local
properties of the density function are captured and allow
for diverse samples to be generated. Further, we show our
110782

