Predicting Future Frames using Retrospective Cycle GAN
Yong-Hoon Kwon
Advanced Camera Lab, LG Electronics, Korea

Min-Gyu Park
Korea Electronics Technology Institute

yonghoon.kwon@lge.com

mpark@keti.re.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have significantly improved the performance of video prediction, however, topperforming algorithms start to generate blurry predictions
as they attempt to predict farther future frames. In this paper, we propose a unified generative adversarial network
for predicting accurate and temporally consistent future
frames over time, even in a challenging environment. The
key idea is to train a single generator that can predict both
future and past frames while enforcing the consistency of
bi-directional prediction using the retrospective cycle constraints. Moreover, we employ two discriminators not only
to identify fake frames but also to distinguish fake contained
image sequences from the real sequence. The latter discriminator, the sequence discriminator, plays a crucial role in
predicting temporally consistent future frames. We experimentally verify the proposed framework using various realworld videos captured by car-mounted cameras, surveillance cameras, and arbitrary devices with state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is the problem of generating future
frames given a set of consecutive frames, which can be used
for abnormal event detection [17], video coding [19], video
completion, robotics [6], and autonomous driving. This
problem has long been studied, and recently, deep learning
has substantially improved the performance of video prediction algorithms, based on the deep architecture models
such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs).
Conventional video prediction approaches [25] generally
compute pixel-wise motion, and then, predict the motion of
pixels in the future frame assuming the linearity of motions.
A number of deep learning-based methods [16, 29, 31] inherit this idea. They explicitly compute pixel-wise motion
through deep networks, e.g., FlowNet [18], and then, the
motion information is used to generate future frames together with training images. Although the idea is similar

Figure 1. A comparison of predicted frames in a driving environment [5]. The state-of-the-art method, PredNet [17], predicts
blurry images as the time step increases, whereas the proposed
method shows relatively sharp and accurate images. Here, PredNet
uses ten images as input whereas our method takes four images to
predict future.

to the conventional approach, deep networks show promising results while handling complex motions in a dynamic
scene. One major drawback of this approach is that computing pixel-wise motion is prone to errors owing to illumination change, occlusion, and abrupt camera motion.
A number of studies [2, 11, 13, 19, 24, 32] confirmed
that deep networks can predict realistic future images without explicitly computing pixel-wise motion. The majority
of them takes CNNs to predict future frames [2, 11, 13, 19],
however, CNN-based methods often give blurry predictions
because they minimize the loss against all the training images [15]. To avoid the blurry artifact, Byeon et al. [2] exploited the convolutional long term short memory (ConvLSTM) to capture both past and spatial contexts, which currently shows the best performance for a few of datasets. On
the other hand, GANs have received a considerable attention in predicting future frames [16, 24, 32], which simultaneously train a discriminator network and a generator net11811

