BubbleNets: Learning to Select the Guidance Frame in
Video Object Segmentation by Deep Sorting Frames
Brent A. Griffin Jason J. Corso
University of Michigan
{griffb,jjcorso}@umich.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised video object segmentation has made
significant progress on real and challenging videos in recent years. The current paradigm for segmentation methods and benchmark datasets is to segment objects in video
provided a single annotation in the first frame. However, we
find that segmentation performance across the entire video
varies dramatically when selecting an alternative frame for
annotation. This paper addresses the problem of learning to suggest the single best frame across the video for
user annotation—this is, in fact, never the first frame of
video. We achieve this by introducing BubbleNets, a novel
deep sorting network that learns to select frames using a
performance-based loss function that enables the conversion of expansive amounts of training examples from already existing datasets. Using BubbleNets, we are able to
achieve an 11% relative improvement in segmentation performance on the DAVIS benchmark without any changes to
the underlying method of segmentation.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS), the dense separation
of objects in video from background, remains a hotly studied area of video understanding. Motivated by the high cost
of densely-annotated user segmentations in video [5, 38],
our community is developing many new VOS methods that
are regularly evaluated on the benchmark datasets supporting VOS research [22, 31, 33, 37, 45]. Compared to unsupervised VOS [12, 21, 29, 44], semi-supervised VOS, the
problem of segmenting objects in video given a single userannotated frame, has seen rampant advances, even within
just the past year [2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 25, 28, 30, 35, 46].
The location and appearance of objects in video can
change significantly from frame-to-frame, and, from our
own analysis, we find that using different frames for annotation changes performance dramatically, as shown in Figure 1. Annotating video data is an arduous process, so it

Frame 1: Baseline

Frame 12: +69%

Frame 20: -53%

Figure 1. The current paradigm for video object segmentation is
to segment an object annotated in the first frame of video (yellow,
left). However, selecting a different frame for annotation changes
performance across the entire video [for better (green) or worse
(red)]. To best use an annotator’s time, our deep sorting framework
suggests a frame that will improve segmentation performance.

is critical that we improve performance of semi-supervised
VOS methods by providing the best single annotation frame
possible. However, we are not aware of any work that seeks
to learn which frame to annotate for VOS.
To that end, this paper addresses the problem of selecting a single video frame for annotation that will lead to
greater performance. Starting from an untouched video, we
select an annotation frame using our deep bubble sorting
framework, which makes relative performance predictions
between pairs of frames using our custom network, BubbleNets. BubbleNets iteratively compares and swaps adjacent video frames until the frame with the greatest predicted
performance is ranked highest, at which point, it is selected
for the user to annotate and use for VOS. To train BubbleNets, we use an innovative relative-performance-based
loss that increases the number of training examples by orders of magnitude without increasing frame labeling requirements. Finally, we evaluate BubbleNets annotation
frame selection on multiple VOS datasets and achieve as
much as an 11% relative improvement in combined Jaccard
18914

