Conditional Adversarial Generative Flow for Controllable Image Synthesis
Rui Liu1 Yu Liu1 Xinyu Gong2 Xiaogang Wang1 Hongsheng Li1
1
2
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, Chinese University of Hong Kong
Texas A&M University
ruiliu@cuhk.edu.hk xy gong@tamu.edu
{yuliu, xgwang, hsli}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Flow-based generative models show great potential in
image synthesis due to its reversible pipeline and exact loglikelihood target, yet it suffers from weak ability for conditional image synthesis, especially for multi-label or unaware conditions. This is because the potential distribution of image conditions is hard to measure precisely from
its latent variable z. In this paper, based on modeling a
joint probabilistic density of an image and its conditions, we
propose a novel flow-based generative model named conditional adversarial generative flow (CAGlow). Instead of
disentangling attributes from latent space, we blaze a new
trail for learning an encoder to estimate the mapping from
condition space to latent space in an adversarial manner.
Given a specific condition c, CAGlow can encode it to a
sampled z, and then enable robust conditional image synthesis in complex situations like combining person identity
with multiple attributes. The proposed CAGlow can be implemented in both supervised and unsupervised manners,
thus can synthesize images with conditional information
like categories, attributes, and even some unknown properties. Extensive experiments show that CAGlow ensures
the independence of different conditions and outperforms
regular Glow to a significant extent.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1, 11, 27, 32]
and variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [18] are two types
of the most popular generative models due to their solid
theoretic foundation and excellent results. Also, the performance of conditional image synthesis by these models
improves rapidly with the fast development of deep learning. However, GANs have no explicit encoder to map images into a latent space, which is useful for many downstream tasks while the generated images by VAEs tend to
be blurry. These problems remain for conditional versions
of these models [30, 31, 36, 37]. Recently flow-based generative models draw increasing attention due to its natural

(a) Inferred

(b) Sampled

Figure 1. Barnes-Hut t-SNE [40] visualization of 6, 000 latent vectors on 200 identities of CGlow [17]. (a) latent vectors inferred by
forward CGlow; (b) randomly sampled latent vectors by inverse
CGlow. Best viewed in color.

reversibility of mapping between image space and latent
space, exact log-likelihood, and its great potential in image
synthesis [7, 8, 12, 17]. In this work we focus on conditional
image synthesis by flow-based generative model.
Unfortunately, conditional image synthesis is a challenging task for flow-based generative models, as these models
are forced to have a bijective mapping between the distributions of images and latent vectors according to their definitions [7], which means that their latent dimension must
match visible dimension [10]. So there is no way to concatenate conditional information with images into the intact
model like CGAN [30], CVAE [36] and CVAE-GAN [2].
Another straight-forward idea is to add a discriminative regularization to the optimization objective like [5, 28] with a
class dependent prior, as mentioned in the work of original
Glow [17]. We name this incremental variant of Glow as
CGlow in this paper. But it tends to fail when meeting complicated conditions, for example, a face dataset with 200
identities. As shown in Figure 1, the distribution of real
latent vectors inferred by forward CGlow has very close
clusters, but the clusters of sampled latent vectors keep far
apart and have a large divergence from the real distribution,
which leads to artifacts in its generated images, as shown in
Figure 3. This phenomenon results from that the underlying
distribution of image conditions is difficult to measure precisely on the latent space, not to mention some multi-target

7992

