Dynamic Scene Deblurring with Parameter Selective Sharing and
Nested Skip Connections

1

Hongyun Gao1,2 Xin Tao2 Xiaoyong Shen2 Jiaya Jia1,2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent

{hygao,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk {xintao,dylanshen}@tencent.com

Abstract
Dynamic Scene deblurring is a challenging low-level vision task where spatially variant blur is caused by many
factors, e.g., camera shake and object motion. Recent study has made significant progress. Compared with the
parameter independence scheme [19] and parameter sharing scheme [33], we develop the general principle for constraining the deblurring network structure by proposing the
generic and effective selective sharing scheme. Inside the
subnetwork of each scale, we propose a nested skip connection structure for the nonlinear transformation modules to
replace stacked convolution layers or residual blocks. Besides, we build a new large dataset of blurred/sharp image
pairs towards better restoration quality. Comprehensive experimental results show that our parameter selective sharing scheme, nested skip connection structure, and the new
dataset are all significant to set a new state-of-the-art in
dynamic scene deblurring.

1. Introduction
Image blur, caused by camera shake, object motion or
out-of-focus, is one of the most common visual artifacts
when taking photos. Image deblurring, i.e., restoring the
sharp image from the blurred one, has been an important
research area since decades ago. Due to the ill-posed nature, particular assumptions are required to model different
types of uniform, non-uniform, and depth-aware blur. Many
natural image priors [1, 27, 2, 35, 36, 21, 22] were proposed
to regularize the solution space and advance the deblurring
research.
Compared with the blur caused by only camera translation or rotation, dynamic blur is more realistic and also
very challenging since spatially variant blur is the combined effect of multiple factors. Previous dynamic scene
deblurring methods [12, 13, 20] usually rely on an accurate
image segmentation mask to estimate different blur kernels
for corresponding image regions, and employ complex op-

timization methods to restore the latent image. Recently,
learning-based methods were proposed to facilitate the deblurring process by either replacing some steps in the traditional framework [31, 26, 5] or learning the end-to-end
mapping from blurred to latent images [19, 33, 37].
Parameter Selective Sharing Nah et al. [19] first proposed the “coarse-to-fine” deblurring neural network by
progressively restoring the sharp image in a coarse-to-fine
manner. This approach built a deep neural network with
independent parameters for each scale. It does not consider the parameter relation across scales. Tao et al. [33]
advanced a scale-recurrent network to perform deblurring
in different scales by shared parameters. Albeit concise
and compact, this parameter sharing scheme neglects scalevariant property of features, which are crucial for respective
restoration in each scale.
We believe scale-recurrent structure belongs to a broader
set of parameter selective sharing strategies. The rationale
behind it is that image blur is highly dependent on scale –
large blur in a fine scale could be invisible when the image
is downsampled to coarse scales. Particular modules perform scale-variant operations and thus cannot be shared, while
others perform similar scale-invariant transform that benefit from shared parameters. We delve deep into this selective sharing strategy, and elaborate on why specific modules
can or cannot be shared. We also discuss various sharing strategies across and within scales. These findings lead to
the general principle of selective parameter sharing that can
benefit deblurring system design in future.
Nested Skip Connections Skip connection was widely
used in recent CNNs. In ResNet [7] and ResBlocks [19, 17],
the short-term skip connection that adds the input to the output after two or more convolution layers, is the key factor
to produce superior results in object detection, deblurring
and super resolution. With this short-term skip connection, the gradient-vanishing issue can be largely overcome;
very deep networks can thus be built and optimized easily. The long-term skip connection, common in encoderdecoder networks, links feature maps from bottom layers to
13848

