GSPN: Generative Shape Proposal Network for 3D Instance Segmentation in
Point Cloud
Li Yi1
1

Wang Zhao2

Stanford University

He Wang1
2

Minhyuk Sung1

Tsinghua University

3

Leonidas Guibas1,3

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We introduce a novel 3D object proposal approach
named Generative Shape Proposal Network (GSPN) for instance segmentation in point cloud data. Instead of treating
object proposal as a direct bounding box regression problem, we take an analysis-by-synthesis strategy and generate proposals by reconstructing shapes from noisy observations in a scene. We incorporate GSPN into a novel 3D instance segmentation framework named Region-based PointNet (R-PointNet) which allows flexible proposal refinement
and instance segmentation generation. We achieve state-ofthe-art performance on several 3D instance segmentation
tasks. The success of GSPN largely comes from its emphasis
on geometric understandings during object proposal, which
greatly reducing proposals with low objectness.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the key perception tasks
in computer vision, which requires delineating objects of
interests in a scene and also classifying the objects into a
set of categories. 3D instance segmentation, with a huge
amount of applications in robotics and augmented reality, is
in tremendous demand these days. However, the progress
of 3D instance segmentation lags far behind its 2D counterpart [15, 24, 20], partially because of the expensive computation and memory cost of directly applying 2D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) approaches to 3D volumetric data [39, 7]. Recently, [33, 34] proposed efficient and
powerful deep architectures to directly process point cloud,
which is the most common form of 3D sensor data and is
very efficient at capturing details in large scenes. This opens
up new opportunities for 3D instance segmentation and motivates us to work with 3D point clouds.
The great advance in 2D instance segmentation is largely
driven by the success of object proposal methods [41],
where object proposals are usually represented as 2D
bounding boxes. Thus it is natural to seek for an effective way of representing and generating object proposals
in the 3D point cloud. But, this is indeed very challenging since 3D object proposal approaches need to establish
the understanding of semantics and objectness for a wide
range of object categories with various scales in a cluttered

Figure 1. The flexibility of our instance segmentation framework
R-PointNet allows it to well handle various types of input data
including (a) a complete reconstruction for a real indoor scene,
(b) objects with fine-grained part instances, (c) partial point cloud
captured from a single view point.

scene under heavy sensor noise and data incompleteness. A
straightforward method is to directly estimate simple geometric approximations to the objects such like 3D bounding
boxes [39, 48]. These approximations are simple and not
very faithful to most objects, meaning generating such proposals does not require a strong understanding of the underlying object geometry. This makes it easy to produce blind
box proposals which either contain multiple objects or just a
part of an object, influencing the differentiation among object instances. Moreover, we hardly know how well the 3D
object proposer understands objectness.
In contrast, we take a different perspective for object proposal which emphasizes more on the geometric understanding. It is a commonplace that perception is in part constructive [16]. Therefore we leverage an analysis-by-synthesis
strategy where we propose objects by first reconstructing
them. Specifically, we leverage a generative model to explicitly depict the natural object distribution and propose
candidate objects by drawing samples from the object distribution. The noisy observations in a scene will guide the
proposal generation process by indicating where to sample
in the object distribution. This idea is especially appealing
in 3D since unlike 2D images, objects are more canonical
in the 3D world with the right physical scale and more com-

3947

