Metric Learning for Image Registration
Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill

Roland Kwitt
University of Salzburg

François-Xavier Vialard
LIGM, UPEM

mn@cs.unc.edu

roland.kwitt@gmail.com

francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

Abstract
Image registration is a key technique in medical image
analysis to estimate deformations between image pairs. A
good deformation model is important for high-quality estimates. However, most existing approaches use ad-hoc
deformation models chosen for mathematical convenience
rather than to capture observed data variation. Recent
deep learning approaches learn deformation models directly from data. However, they provide limited control over
the spatial regularity of transformations. Instead of learning the entire registration approach, we learn a spatiallyadaptive regularizer within a registration model. This allows controlling the desired level of regularity and preserving structural properties of a registration model. For
example, diffeomorphic transformations can be attained.
Our approach is a radical departure from existing deep
learning approaches to image registration by embedding
a deep learning model in an optimization-based registration algorithm to parameterize and data-adapt the registration model itself. Source code is publicly-available at
https://github.com/uncbiag/registration.

1. Introduction
Image registration is important in medical image analysis
tasks to capture subtle, local deformations. Consequently,
transformation models [21], which parameterize these deformations, have large numbers of degrees of freedom,
ranging from B-spline models with many control points, to
non-parametric approaches [30] inspired by continuum mechanics. Due to the large number of parameters of such
models, deformation fields are typically regularized by directly penalizing local changes in displacement or, more indirectly, in velocity field(s) parameterizing a deformation.
Proper regularization is important to obtain high-quality deformation estimates. Most existing work simply imposes
the same spatial regularity everywhere in an image. This
is unrealistic. For example, consider registering brain images with different ventricle sizes, or chest images with a
moving lung, but a stationary rib cage, where different de-

et I1
Targ
ce I0
Sour

/
iction
Pred

tion
miza
Opti
m
entu
Mom
ocus

∗ Our F

r θ
larize
Regu

..
M, .
LDDM
el
SVF,
Mod
−1

Φ

...
NCC,
SSD,
arity
Simil

Figure 1: Architecture of our registration approach. We jointly
optimize over the momentum, parameterizing the deformation Φ,
and the parameters, θ, of a convolutional neural net (CNN). The
CNN locally predicts multi-Gaussian kernel pre-weights which
specify the regularizer. This approach constructs a metric such that
diffeomorphic transformations can be assured in the continuum.

formation scales are present in different image regions. Parameterizing such deformations from first principles is difficult and may be impossible for between-subject registrations. Hence, it is desirable to learn local regularity from
data. One could replace the registration model entirely and
learn a parameterized regression function fΘ from a large
dataset. At inference time, this function then maps a moving image to a target image [12]. However, regularity of
the resulting deformation does not arise naturally in such an
approach and typically needs to be enforced after the fact.
Existing non-parametric deformation models already yield
good performance, are well understood, and use globally
parameterized regularizers. Hence, we advocate building
upon these models and to learn appropriate localized parameterizations of the regularizer by leveraging large samples of training data. This strategy not only retains theoretical guarantees on deformation regularity, but also makes it
possible to encode, in the metric, the intrinsic deformation
model as supported by the data.
Contributions. Our approach deviates from current approaches for (predictive) image registration in the following
sense. Instead of replacing the entire registration model by
18463

