Fast and Robust Multi-Person 3D Pose Estimation from Multiple Views
Junting Dong1∗ Wen Jiang1 Qixing Huang2 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1
2
Zhejiang University
University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D pose estimation
for multiple people in a few calibrated camera views. The
main challenge of this problem is to find the cross-view correspondences among noisy and incomplete 2D pose predictions. Most previous methods address this challenge by directly reasoning in 3D using a pictorial structure model,
which is inefficient due to the huge state space. We propose a fast and robust approach to solve this problem. Our
key idea is to use a multi-way matching algorithm to cluster
the detected 2D poses in all views. Each resulting cluster encodes 2D poses of the same person across different
views and consistent correspondences across the keypoints,
from which the 3D pose of each person can be effectively inferred. The proposed convex optimization based multi-way
matching algorithm is efficient and robust against missing
and false detections, without knowing the number of people in the scene. Moreover, we propose to combine geometric and appearance cues for cross-view matching. The
proposed approach achieves significant performance gains
from the state-of-the-art (96.3% vs. 90.6% and 96.9% vs.
88% on the Campus and Shelf datasets, respectively), while
being efficient for real-time applications.

Camera 1

Camera 4

Camera 2

Camera 3

3D pose

Camera 5

Figure 1: This work proposes a novel approach for fast and
robust recovery of 3D poses of multiple people from a few
camera views. The main challenge is to establish consistent
correspondences of 2D observations among multiple views,
e.g., 2D human-body keypoints in images, which may be
noisy and incomplete.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D human pose and motion from videos has
been a long-standing problem in computer vision, which
has a variety of applications such as human-computer interaction, video surveillance and sports broadcasting. In
particular, this paper focuses on the setting where there
are multiple people in a scene, and the observations come
from a few calibrated cameras (Figure 1). While remarkable advances have been made in multi-view reconstruction of a human body, there are fewer works that address
a more challenging setting where multiple people interact
with each other in crowded scenes, in which there are significant occlusions.
∗ The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG and the ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† Corresponding author.

Existing methods typically solve this problem in two
stages. The first stage detects human-body keypoints or
parts in separate 2D views, which are aggregated in the
second stage to reconstruct 3D poses. Given the fact that
deep-learning based 2D keypoint detection techniques have
achieved remarkable performance [8, 30], the remaining
challenge is to find cross-view correspondences between
detected keypoints as well as which person they belong to.
Most previous methods [1, 2, 21, 12] employ a 3D pictorial structure (3DPS) model that implicitly solves the correspondence problem by reasoning about all hypotheses in
3D that are geometrically compatible with 2D detections.
However, this 3DPS-based approach is computationally expensive due to the huge state space. In addition, it is not
robust particularly when the number of cameras is small, as
it only uses multi-view geometry to link the 2D detections
17792

