Efficient Decision-based Black-box Adversarial Attacks on Face Recognition
Yinpeng Dong1 , Hang Su1 , Baoyuan Wu2 , Zhifeng Li2 , Wei Liu2 , Tong Zhang3 , Jun Zhu1∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
1
Institute for AI, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
dyp17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, suhangss@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, wubaoyuan1987@gmail.com
michaelzfli@tencent.com, wl2223@columbia.edu, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Face recognition has obtained remarkable progress in
recent years due to the great improvement of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, deep CNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial examples, which can cause fateful
consequences in real-world face recognition applications
with security-sensitive purposes. Adversarial attacks are
widely studied as they can identify the vulnerability of the
models before they are deployed. In this paper, we evaluate
the robustness of state-of-the-art face recognition models in
the decision-based black-box attack setting, where the attackers have no access to the model parameters and gradients, but can only acquire hard-label predictions by sending
queries to the target model. This attack setting is more practical in real-world face recognition systems. To improve the
efficiency of previous methods, we propose an evolutionary
attack algorithm, which can model the local geometry of the
search directions and reduce the dimension of the search
space. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method that induces a minimum perturbation to an input face image with fewer queries. We also apply the proposed method to attack a real-world face recognition system successfully.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [26, 29, 11] has led to substantial performance improvements in a broad range of computer vision tasks. Face
recognition, as one of the most important computer vision
tasks, has been greatly facilitated by deep CNNs [31, 28, 23,
33, 16, 32, 5]. There are usually two sub-tasks in face recognition: face verification and face identification [12, 15]. The
former distinguishes whether a pair of face images represent the same identity, while the latter classifies an image
∗ Corresponding author.

Original
Images

False

1,000
Queries

True

10,000
Queries

True

100,000
Queries

True
A “Black-box” Model

Figure 1. Demonstration of the decision-based black-box attack
setting. Given a black-box model, the attackers use queries to generate adversarial examples with minimum perturbations.

to an identity. The state-of-the-art face recognition models
realize these two tasks by using deep CNNs to extract face
features that have minimum intra-class variance and maximum inter-class variance. Due to the excellent performance
of these models, face recognition has been widely used for
identity authentication in enormous applications, such as finance/payment, public access, criminal identification, etc.
Despite the great success in various applications, deep
CNNs are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [30, 9, 19, 6]. These maliciously generated adversarial
examples are often indistinguishable from legitimate ones
for human observers by adding small perturbations. But
they can make deep models produce incorrect predictions.
The face recognition systems based on deep CNNs have
also been shown their vulnerability against such adversarial examples. For instance, adversarial perturbations can
be made to the eyeglass that, when worn, allows attackers
to evade being recognized or impersonate another individual [24, 25]. The insecurity of face recognition systems in
real-world applications, especially those with sensitive purposes, can cause severe consequences and security issues.
To evaluate the robustness of face recognition systems in
real-world applications, adversarial attacks can serve as an
important surrogate, as they can identify the vulnerability of

7714

