A Poisson-Gaussian Denoising Dataset with Real Fluorescence Microscopy
Images
Yide Zhang*, Yinhao Zhu*, Evan Nichols, Qingfei Wang, Siyuan Zhang, Cody Smith, Scott Howard
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
{yzhang34, yzhu10, enichol3, qwang9, szhang8, csmith67, showard}@nd.edu

1. Introduction
Fluorescence microscopy is a powerful technique that
permeates all of biomedical research [15]. Confocal [23],
two-photon [9], and wide-field [26] microscopes are the
most widely used fluorescence microscopy modalities that
are vital to the development of modern biology. Fluorescence microscopy images, however, are inherently noisy
because the number of photons captured by a microscopic
* Equal contribution.

Full Frame

ROI

Single-Channel

ROI

Multi-Channel

Fluorescence microscopy has enabled a dramatic development in modern biology. Due to its inherently weak signal, fluorescence microscopy is not only much noisier than
photography, but also presented with Poisson-Gaussian
noise where Poisson noise, or shot noise, is the dominating
noise source. To get clean fluorescence microscopy images,
it is highly desirable to have effective denoising algorithms
and datasets that are specifically designed to denoise fluorescence microscopy images. While such algorithms exist,
no such datasets are available. In this paper, we fill this gap
by constructing a dataset - the Fluorescence Microscopy
Denoising (FMD) dataset - that is dedicated to PoissonGaussian denoising. The dataset consists of 12,000 real
fluorescence microscopy images obtained with commercial
confocal, two-photon, and wide-field microscopes and representative biological samples such as cells, zebrafish, and
mouse brain tissues. We use image averaging to effectively
obtain ground truth images and 60,000 noisy images with
different noise levels. We use this dataset to benchmark
10 representative denoising algorithms and find that deep
learning methods have the best performance. To our knowledge, this is the first real microscopy image dataset for
Poisson-Gaussian denoising purposes and it could be an
important tool for high-quality, real-time denoising applications in biomedical research.

Full Frame

Abstract

Raw

2×Average

4×Average

8×Average 16×Average Ground Truth

Figure 1. Examples of images with different noise levels and
ground truth. The single-channel (gray) images are acquired with
two-photon microscopy on fixed mouse brain tissues. The multichannel (color) images are obtained with two-photon microscopy
on fixed BPAE cells. The ground truth images are estimated by
averaging 50 noisy raw images.

detector, such as a photomultiplier tube (PMT) or a charge
coupled device (CCD) camera, is extremely weak (∼ 102
per pixel) compared to that in photography (∼ 105 per
pixel [21]). Consequently, the measured optical signal in
fluorescence microscopy is quantized due to the discrete nature of photons, and fluorescence microscopy images are
dominated by Poisson noise, instead of Gaussian noise that
denominates in photography [22]. One way to obtain clean
images is to increase the power of the excitation laser or
lamp, but the excitation power is not only limited by the
dosage of light a biological sample can receive, but also
fundamentally limited by the fluorescence saturation rate;
i.e., the fluorescence signal will stop to increase when the
excitation power is too high [32]. Alternatively, one can
get clean images by increasing the imaging time, e.g., pixel
dwell time, exposure time, number of line or frame averages; this, however, may cause photodamage to the sample.
Moreover, for dynamic or real-time imaging, increasing the
111710

