World from Blur
Jiayan Qiu1
Xinchao Wang2
Stephen J. Maybank3
Dacheng Tao1
UBTECH Sydney AI centre, School of Compurter Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck College, University of London, UK
1

jqiu3225@uni.sydney.edu.au

xinchao.w@gmail.com

sjmaybank@dcs.bbk.ac.uk

dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Figure 1: Revealing the hidden 3D world in a blurred image. The proposed model, once trained, takes as input a single
blurred image and produces the reconstructed 3D scene concealed in the blurs.

Abstract
What can we tell from a single motion-blurred image?
We show in this paper that a 3D scene can be revealed. Unlike prior methods that focus on producing a deblurred image, we propose to estimate and take advantage of the hidden message of a blurred image, the relative motion trajectory, to restore the 3D scene collapsed during the exposure
process. To this end, we train a deep network that jointly
predicts the motion trajectory, the deblurred image, and the
depth one, all of which in turn form a collaborative and
self-supervised cycle that supervise one another to reproduce the input blurred image, enabling plausible 3D scene
reconstruction from a single blurred image. We test the proposed model on several large-scale datasets we constructed
based on benchmarks, as well as real-world blurred images,
and show that it yields very encouraging quantitative and
qualitative results.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is caused by the relative motion between
the scene objects and the camera during the exposure process. When the motion of the scene objects, or the camera,

or both, is signiﬁcant during the exposure time, the image
tends to appear smeared along the direction of the relative
motion. Motion-blurred images are in many cases favored
by photographers and artists for aesthetic purpose, but seldom by computer vision researchers, as many standard vision tools including detectors, trackers, and feature extractors have a hard time dealing with the blurs.
Much effort has thus been made in the image processing
and computer vision community to remove the “negative”
inﬂuences of the blurs. A straightforward and crude way is
to ignore blurred images, as done in SLAM systems [52]
because matching algorithms tend to fail on blurred images. Another more analytical way is to conduct deblurring,
which recovers a deblurred image from a blurred one. Over
the past decades, there has been a series of seminal work
along this line, demonstrating very promising and visuallypleasing results.
Despite the excellent results achieved, deblurring methods limit its goal to producing a blur-free image and omit
the physical rationale behind the blurs. Since a blurred image is the result of relative motions, it actually encodes the
motion information, though in a degraded way. The work
of [35] pioneered to extract a sequence of deblurred images
from a blurred one, yet still overlooked the motions con4321
8493

