REPAIR: Removing Representation Bias by Dataset Resampling
Yi Li
UC San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

yil898@ucsd.edu

nvasconcelos@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Modern machine learning datasets can have biases for
certain representations that are leveraged by algorithms to
achieve high performance without learning to solve the underlying task. This problem is referred to as “representation bias”. The question of how to reduce the representation biases of a dataset is investigated and a new dataset
REPresentAtion bIas Removal (REPAIR) procedure is proposed. This formulates bias minimization as an optimization problem, seeking a weight distribution that penalizes
examples easy for a classifier built on a given feature representation. Bias reduction is then equated to maximizing
the ratio between the classification loss on the reweighted
dataset and the uncertainty of the ground-truth class labels. This is a minimax problem that REPAIR solves by
alternatingly updating classifier parameters and dataset resampling weights, using stochastic gradient descent. An experimental set-up is also introduced to measure the bias of
any dataset for a given representation, and the impact of
this bias on the performance of recognition models. Experiments with synthetic and action recognition data show
that dataset REPAIR can significantly reduce representation bias, and lead to improved generalization of models
trained on REPAIRed datasets. The tools used for characterizing representation bias, and the proposed dataset REPAIR algorithm, are available at https://github.com/
JerryYLi/Dataset-REPAIR/.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, deep neural networks (DNNs) have
enabled transformational advances in various fields, delivering superior performance on large-scale benchmarks. However like any other machine learning systems, the quality of
DNNs is only as good as that of the datasets on which they
are trained. In this regard, there are at least two sources of
concern. First, they can have limited generalization beyond
their training domain [32, 2]. This is classically known as
dataset bias. Second, the learning procedure could give rise
to biased deep learning algorithms [3, 25]. Representation
bias is an instance of this problem, that follows from train-

ing on datasets that favor certain representations over others [22]. When a dataset is easily solved by adoption of a
specific feature representation φ, it is said to be biased towards φ. Bias is by itself not negative: If the classification
of scenes, within a certain application context, is highly dependent on the detection of certain objects, successful scene
recognition systems are likely to require detailed object representations. In this application context, scene recognition
datasets should exhibit object bias. However, in the absence
of mechanisms to measure and control bias, it is unclear if
conclusions derived from experiments are tainted by undesirable biases. When this is the case, learning algorithms
could simply overfit to the dataset biases, hampering generalization beyond the specific dataset.
This problem is particularly relevant for action recognition, where a wide range of diverse visual cues can be
informative of action class labels, and leveraged by different algorithms. In the literature, different algorithms
tend to implement different representations. Some models infer action categories from one or a few video frames
[27, 14, 40], while others attempt to model long-term dependencies [35, 37, 9]; some focus on modeling human
pose [15], and some prefer to incorporate contextual information [10]. In general, two algorithms that perform
equally well on a dataset biased towards a representation,
e.g. a dataset with static or single frame bias, can behave
in a drastically different manner when the dataset is augmented with examples that eliminate this bias, e.g. by requiring more temporal reasoning. Without the ability to
control the static bias of the dataset, it is impossible to rule
out the possibility that good performance is due to the ability of algorithms to pick up spurious static visual cues (e.g.
backgrounds, objects, etc.) instead of modeling action.
In this work, we investigate the question of how to reduce
the representation biases of a dataset. For this, we introduce
a new REPresentAtion bIas Removal (REPAIR) procedure
for dataset resampling, based on an a formulation of bias
minimization as an optimization problem. REPAIR seeks a
set of example-level weights penalizing examples that are
easy for a classifier built on a given feature representation.
This is implemented by using a DNN as feature extractor for

9572

