T-Net: Parametrizing Fully Convolutional Nets with a Single High-Order Tensor
Jean Kossaifi∗

Adrian Bulat∗

Georgios Tzimiropoulos

Maja Pantic

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
United Kingdom
{j.kossaifi, adrian.bulat, georgios.t, maja.pantic}@samsung.com

Abstract
Recent findings indicate that over-parametrization,
while crucial for successfully training deep neural networks, also introduces large amounts of redundancy. Tensor methods have the potential to efficiently parametrize
over-complete representations by leveraging this redundancy. In this paper, we propose to fully parametrize Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with a single highorder, low-rank tensor. Previous works on network tensorization have focused on parametrizing individual layers (convolutional or fully connected) only, and perform
the tensorization layer-by-layer separately. In contrast, we
propose to jointly capture the full structure of a neural network by parametrizing it with a single high-order tensor,
the modes of which represent each of the architectural design parameters of the network (e.g. number of convolutional blocks, depth, number of stacks, input features, etc).
This parametrization allows to regularize the whole network and drastically reduce the number of parameters. Our
model is end-to-end trainable and the low-rank structure
imposed on the weight tensor acts as an implicit regularization. We study the case of networks with rich structure,
namely Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs), which we
propose to parametrize with a single 8th –order tensor. We
show that our approach can achieve superior performance
with small compression rates, and attain high compression
rates with negligible drop in accuracy for the challenging
task of human pose estimation.

1. Introduction
For a wide range of challenging tasks, including recognition [22, 34, 13], detection [32], semantic segmentation
[25, 12] and human pose estimation [26], the state-of-the-art
is currently attained with Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). There is evidence that a key feature behind the success of these methods is over-parametrization, which helps
∗ Equal contribution.

find good local minima [11, 35]. However, at the same time,
over-parametrization leads to a great amount of redundancy,
and from a statistical perspective, it might hinder generalization because it excessively increases the number of parameters. Furthermore, models with an excessive number
of parameters have increased storage and computation requirements, rendering them problematic for deployment on
devices with limited computational resources. This paper
focuses on a novel way of leveraging the redundancy in the
parameters of CNNs by jointly parametrizing the whole network using tensor methods.
There is a significant amount of recent work on using
tensors to reduce the redundancy and improve the efficiency
of CNNs, mostly focusing on re-parametrizing individual
layers. For example, [36, 17] treat a convolutional layer as a
4D tensor and then compute a decomposition of the 4D tensor into a sum of a small number of low-rank tensors. Similarly, [27] proposes tensorizing the fully-connected layers.
The bulk of these methods focus on tensorizing individual
layers only, and perform the tensorization layer-by-layer
disjointly, usually by applying a tensor decomposition to
the pre-trained weights and then fine-tuning to compensate
for the performance loss. For example, [36] tensorizes the
second convolutional layer of AlexNet [22].
Our paper primarily departs from prior work by using
a single high-order tensor to parametrize the whole CNN
as opposed to using different tensors to parametrize the individual layers. In particular, we propose to parametrize
the network with a single high-order tensor, each dimension of which represents a different architectural design
parameter of the network. For the case of Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) with an encoder-decoder structure considered herein (see also Fig. 1), each dimension
of the 8−dimensional tensor represents a different architectural design parameter of the network such as the number of
(stacked) FCNs used, the depth of each network, the number of input and output features for each convolutional block
and the spatial dimensions of each of the convolutional kernels. By modelling the whole FCN with a single tensor,
our approach allows for learning correlations between the

7822

