Searching for A Robust Neural Architecture in Four GPU Hours
Xuanyi Dong1,2 , Yi Yang1
1
University of Technology Sydney 2 Baidu Research
xuanyi.dong@student.uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Conventional neural architecture search (NAS) approaches are based on reinforcement learning or evolutionary strategy, which take more than 3000 GPU hours to find
a good model on CIFAR-10. We propose an efficient NAS
approach learning to search by gradient descent. Our approach represents the search space as a directed acyclic
graph (DAG). This DAG contains billions of sub-graphs,
each of which indicates a kind of neural architecture. To
avoid traversing all the possibilities of the sub-graphs, we
develop a differentiable sampler over the DAG. This sampler is learnable and optimized by the validation loss after
training the sampled architecture. In this way, our approach
can be trained in an end-to-end fashion by gradient descent,
named Gradient-based search using Differentiable Architecture Sampler (GDAS). In experiments, we can finish one
searching procedure in four GPU hours on CIFAR-10, and
the discovered model obtains a test error of 2.82% with only
2.5M parameters, which is on par with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Designing an efficient and effective neural architecture
requires substantial human effort and takes a long time [7,
9, 10, 12, 14, 20, 37, 44]. Since the birth of AlexNet [20]
in 2012, human experts have conducted a huge number of
experiments, and consequently devised several useful structures, such as attention [7] and residual connection [12].
However, the infinite possible choices of network architecture make the manual search unfeasible [1]. Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) has increasingly attracted the
interest of researchers [1, 6, 17, 22, 25, 31, 46]. These approaches learn to automatically discover good architectures.
They can thus reduce the labour of human experts and find
better neural architectures than the human-invented archi∗ Part of this work was done when Xuanyi Dong was a research intern
with Baidu Research. Code is publicly available on GitHub: https:
//github.com/D-X-Y/GDAS.
† Corresponding Author: Yi Yang

0

: input

3

: output
: sampled
: unsampled

0

GDAS
on a
DAG

1

2

3
Figure 1. We utilize a DAG to represent the search space of a neural cell. Different operations (colored arrows) transform one node
(square) to its intermediate features (little circles). Meanwhile,
each node is the sum of the intermediate features transformed from
the previous nodes. As indicated by the solid connections, the
neural cell in the proposed GDAS is a sampled sub-graph of this
DAG. Specifically, among the intermediate features between every
two nodes, GDAS samples one feature in a differentiable way.

tectures. Therefore, NAS is an important research topic in
machine learning.
Most NAS approaches apply evolutionary algorithms
(EA) [32, 23, 33] or reinforcement learning (RL) [46, 47, 3]
to design neural architectures automatically. In both RLbased and EA-based approaches, their searching procedures
require the validation accuracy of numerous architecture
candidates, which is computationally expensive [47, 32].
For example, the typical RL-based method utilizes the validation accuracy as a reward to optimize the architecture
generator [46]. An EA-based method leverages the validation accuracy to decide whether a model will be removed
from the population or not [33]. These approaches use a
large amount of computational resources, which is inefficient and unaffordable. This motivates researchers to reduce
the computational cost.

1761

