Tell Me Where I Am: Object-level Scene Context Prediction
Xiaotian Qiao

Quanlong Zheng

Ying Cao

Rynson W.H. Lau

City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Contextual information has been shown to be effective
in helping solve various image understanding tasks. Previous works have focused on the extraction of contextual
information from an image and use it to infer the properties
of some object(s) in the image. In this paper, we consider
an inverse problem of how to hallucinate missing contextual information from the properties of a few standalone
objects. We refer to it as scene context prediction. This
problem is difficult as it requires an extensive knowledge
of complex and diverse relationships among different objects in natural scenes. We propose a convolutional neural
network, which takes as input the properties (i.e., category,
shape, and position) of a few standalone objects to predict
an object-level scene layout that compactly encodes the semantics and structure of the scene context where the given
objects are. Our quantitative experiments and user studies show that our model can generate more plausible scene
context than the baseline approach. We demonstrate that
our model allows for the synthesis of realistic scene images
from just partial scene layouts and internally learns useful
features for scene recognition.

1. Introduction
Scene context refers to how the objects of interest are related to the environment surrounding them. Context information plays an important role in modern computer vision
systems. Recent works have leveraged the scene context to
improve object detection [15, 24], recognition and segmentation [9, 27, 34, 36], and learn visual feature representation
[28]. The prior works attempted to utilize the context information existed in an image to infer the properties of some
objects of interest in the image. However, an unexplored
problem is to predict the unknown context of some objects
in the image (i.e., to anticipate what and where the missing
objects are). Given several foreground objects, humans are
remarkably capable of inferring their unknown full scene
context, by relying on extensive commonsense knowledge
of our visual world. For example, given a foreground obYing Cao is the corresponding author. This work was led by Rynson Lau.

sky
person

person

?

snowboard

Standalone object

grass

sky

tree

person

sky

person
snowboard

pavement

snow

Inferred scene context

Figure 1. Inferring scene context from a standalone object. A standalone object provides rich information for predicting its scene
context (i.e., other objects co-occurring with it and their spatial
relations). While the pose and position of the person in the image suggest that the scene may be related to sports activities, the
presence and position of the person provide hints as to what and
where other objects can appear (e.g., the sky in the upper part of
the image, and the pavement in the lower part of the image).

ject in a photo frame as shown in Figure 1, we can reason
about multiple plausible environments surrounding it. The
properties of the given object provide strong hints about the
scene environment, as well as what and where other objects
may appear in the scene.
We are thus interested in a fundamental question of
whether machines can replicate such scene context inference capability. We believe that the capability of machines
to predict where objects are can benefit many scene generation and recognition tasks. However, developing a predictive model for scene context can be challenging, as natural
scenes contain a rich variety of semantic objects with complex spatial relations among them. Objects can be at various locations with different scales and shapes. Further, this
problem is inherently ambiguous, as the same objects can
have multiple semantically plausible scene contexts.
In this paper, for the first time, we address the problem
of scene context prediction from standalone objects. To this
end, we propose a novel model, which takes as input the
categories, shapes, and positions of one or more objects,
and predicts the scene context for the given objects. Instead
of directly hallucinating low level pixels, our model predicts the context in the form of an object-level scene layout.
Although lacking detailed appearances, such a representation captures the important semantics that has been shown
to be sufficient to reconstruct photo-realistic images [16]

2633

