An End-to-End Network for Generating Social Relationship Graphs
Arushi Goel1 , Keng Teck Ma1,2 , and Cheston Tan2
1

A*STAR Artificial Intelligence Initiative, Singapore, 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore

goela@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, ma ken teck@scei.a-star.edu.sg, cheston-tan@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Image grounded with people and social
relationships

Abstract
Socially-intelligent agents are of growing interest in artificial intelligence. To this end, we need systems that can
understand social relationships in diverse social contexts.
Inferring the social context in a given visual scene not only
involves recognizing objects, but also demands a more indepth understanding of the relationships and attributes of
the people involved. To achieve this, one computational approach for representing human relationships and attributes
is to use an explicit knowledge graph, which allows for
high-level reasoning. We introduce a novel end-to-endtrainable neural network that is capable of generating a Social Relationship Graph – a structured, unified representation of social relationships and attributes – from a given input image. Our Social Relationship Graph Generation Network (SRG-GN) is the first to use memory cells like Gated
Recurrent Units (GRUs) to iteratively update the social relationship states in a graph using scene and attribute context. The neural network exploits the recurrent connections
among the GRUs to implement message passing between
nodes and edges in the graph, and results in significant
improvement over previous methods for social relationship
recognition.

1. Introduction
The understanding of human relationships in computer
vision research is in its nascent stage. In comparison, significant efforts have been made by social psychologists and
other researchers to study social relationships in humans
[8, 12]. The pioneering work of Sun et al. [24] proposes
a social relationship framework based on Bugental’s Social
Domain Theory [3] to classify social relationships and domains. In this paper, we take a step further in understanding
social relationships from images by generating a Social Relationship Graph (SRG), as illustrated in Figure 1.
In recent computer vision research, predicting relationships of the “subject-predicate-object” kind have gained
major research attention. These can be used for multiple
high-level tasks like image retrieval, image captioning, and

person_1

lovers

person_2
mother-child
father-child

person

young_adult

Social Relationship
Graph
male

male

child

young_adult

person_2
lovers

female

father-child
person

mother-child

person_1

Figure 1: For a given scene, our network generates a structured
representation – a Social Relationship Graph. Graph representations have shown good results on a variety of high-level vision
tasks, e.g. image retrieval and visual Q&A.

visual question answering [10, 25, 2]. The recent work for
the generation of scene graphs using an end-to-end model
[28, 13, 29] gives the best results on the Visual Genome
Dataset [11]. Since such graphs are human-interpretable,
we propose to build a Social Relationship Graph, which
encodes relationship and attribute information and captures
the rich semantic structure of a scene.
The task of understanding human relationships is a challenging problem given the wide variations that humans pose
in their environments. There is unobservable, latent information in images which we as humans find easy to interpret. For developing human-level understanding in such situations, computational models are based on the theories of
social and cognitive psychology [23]. Based on the social
psychology theories of Bugental [3], we focus on human
attributes and environments for social relationships.
Scene and global contextual cues have the best results for
social relationships [12]. Furthermore, the activity that peo-

11186

