OCGAN: One-class Novelty Detection Using GANs with Constrained Latent
Representations
Pramuditha Perera∗
Johns Hopkins University

Ramesh Nallapati
AWS AI

Bing Xiang
AWS AI

pperera3@jhu.edu

rnallapa@amazon.com

bxiang@amazon.com

Abstract
We present a novel model called OCGAN for the classical problem of one-class novelty detection, where, given a
set of examples from a particular class, the goal is to determine if a query example is from the same class. Our solution
is based on learning latent representations of in-class examples using a denoising auto-encoder network. The key contribution of our work is our proposal to explicitly constrain
the latent space to exclusively represent the given class. In
order to accomplish this goal, firstly, we force the latent
space to have bounded support by introducing a tanh activation in the encoder’s output layer. Secondly, using a
discriminator in the latent space that is trained adversarially, we ensure that encoded representations of in-class examples resemble uniform random samples drawn from the
same bounded space. Thirdly, using a second adversarial
discriminator in the input space, we ensure all randomly
drawn latent samples generate examples that look real. Finally, we introduce a gradient-descent based sampling technique that explores points in the latent space that generate potential out-of-class examples, which are fed back to
the network to further train it to generate in-class examples
from those points. The effectiveness of the proposed method
is measured across four publicly available datasets using
two one-class novelty detection protocols where we achieve
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
One-class novelty detection tackles the problem of quantifying the probability that a test example belongs to the distribution defined by training examples [21]. Different from
other machine learning tasks [12],[15], in one-class novelty
detection, examples of only a single class are observed at
training time. During inference, the trained model is expected to accept in-class examples and reject out-of-class
∗ This work was conducted as part of the first author’s internship at AWS

AI.

Figure 1. Limitations of in-class representation based novelty detection. Top: Input images; Middle: Output of an auto-encoder
network trained on digit 8. Bottom: Output produced by OCGAN, the proposed method. Even though auto-encoder network
is trained only on digits of 8, it provides good reconstruction for
digits from classes 1,5,6 and 9. In contrast, OCGAN forces the
latent representation of any example to reconstruct a digit 8. As a
result, all out-of-class examples produce high Mean Squared Error (MSE). The intensity of red color in the bottom two rows is
proportional to the MSE.

examples. Since the problem formulation assumes unavailability of any negative training data, it is a difficult problem
to solve in practice. Nevertheless, it has a number of applications including abnormality detection [24],[14] intruder
detection [17],[13],[16], bio-medical data processing [20]
and imbalance learning [10].
With the advent of deep learning, one-class novelty detection has received considerable amount of attention in the
literature. Contemporary works in one-class novelty detection focus on learning a representative latent space for the
given class [23, 18]. Once such a space is learned, novelty
detection is performed based on the projection of a query
image onto the learned latent space. Two distinct strategies
are commonly used for this purpose in the literature. In the
first strategy, the difference between the query image and
its inverse image (reconstruction) is used as a novelty detector. Various distance measures ranging from mean squared
error [23] to discriminator output [22] have been used in
the literature for this purpose. In comparison, the second
strategy explicitly models the learned latent space using a
distribution [1, 18, 21, 16]. In this work, we consider the
former strategy for novelty detection. We investigate limitations of existing representation learning techniques and
propose learning a latent space that exclusively generates
12898

