Two Body Problem: Collaborative Visual Task Completion
Unnat Jain1∗†
Svetlana Lazebnik1
1

Legend

UIUC

Luca Weihs2∗
Ali Farhadi2,3,4
2

Eric Kolve2
Mohammad Rastegari2,4
Alexander Schwing1
Aniruddha Kembhavi2
3

PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI

Message 1
Oracle
Observation Message 2

Action

Oracle
Observations

University of Washington

Messages
TV

No TV

Activate
Deactivate

4

Xnor.ai

Actions
Straight

Right

Left

Pass

Pick Up

With communication

No communication

Episode Length = 35

Episode Length = 250

Motion Failures = 4

Motion Failures = 33

False pickups = 0

False pickups = 21

Success = True

Success = False

Goal
Goal

Figure 1: Two agents learn to successfully navigate through a previously unseen environment to find, and jointly lift, a heavy
TV. Without learned communication, agents attempt many failed actions and pickups. With learned communication, agents
send a message when they observe or when they intend to interact with the TV. The agents also learn to grab the opposite
ends of the TV and coordinate to do so.

Abstract
Collaboration is a necessary skill to perform tasks that
are beyond one agent’s capabilities. Addressed extensively
in both conventional and modern AI, multi-agent collaboration has often been studied in the context of simple grid
worlds. We argue that there are inherently visual aspects
to collaboration which should be studied in visually rich
environments. A key element in collaboration is communication that can be either explicit, through messages, or
implicit, through perception of the other agents and the visual world. Learning to collaborate in a visual environment
entails learning (1) to perform the task, (2) when and what
to communicate, and (3) how to act based on these communications and the perception of the visual world. In this
paper we study the problem of learning to collaborate directly from pixels in AI2-THOR and demonstrate the benefits of explicit and implicit modes of communication to perform visual tasks. Refer to our project page for more details: https://prior.allenai.org/projects/
two-body-problem
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† work partially done as an intern at Allen Institute for AI

1. Introduction
Developing collaborative skills is known to be more cognitively demanding than learning to perform tasks independently. In AI, multi-agent collaboration has been studied in more conventional [32, 43, 9, 58] and modern settings [53, 28, 79, 35, 56, 61]. These studies have mainly
been performed on grid-worlds and have factored out the
role of perception in collaboration.
In this paper we argue that there are aspects of collaboration that are inherently visual. Studying collaboration in
simplistic environments does not permit to observe the interplay between perception and communication, which is
necessary for effective collaboration. Imagine moving a
piece of furniture with a friend. Part of the collaboration is
rooted in explicit communication through exchanging messages, and some part of it is done through implicit communication through interpreting perceivable cues about the
other agents behavior. If you see your friend going around
the furniture to grab it, you would naturally stay on the opposite side to avoid toppling it over. Additionally, communication and collaboration should be considered jointly with
the task itself. The way you communicate, either explicitly
or implicitly, in a soccer game is very different from when
you move furniture. This suggests that factoring out per16689

