A Content Transformation Block For Image Style Transfer
Dmytro Kotovenko
Artsiom Sanakoyeu
Pingchuan Ma
Sabine Lang
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, IWR, Heidelberg University

Abstract
Style transfer has recently received a lot of attention,
since it allows to study fundamental challenges in image
understanding and synthesis. Recent work has significantly
improved the representation of color and texture and computational speed and image resolution. The explicit transformation of image content has, however, been mostly neglected: while artistic style affects formal characteristics of
an image, such as color, shape or texture, it also deforms,
adds or removes content details. This paper explicitly focuses on a content-and style-aware stylization of a content
image. Therefore, we introduce a content transformation
module between the encoder and decoder. Moreover, we
utilize similar content appearing in photographs and style
samples to learn how style alters content details and we
generalize this to other class details. Additionally, this work
presents a novel normalization layer critical for high resolution image synthesis. The robustness and speed of our
model enables a video stylization in real-time and high definition. We perform extensive qualitative and quantitative
evaluations to demonstrate the validity of our approach.

1. Introduction
Style transfer renders the content of a real photograph
in the style of an artist using either a single style sample [11] or a set of images [28]. Initial work on style
transfer by Gatys et al. [9] proposed a method which exploits a deep CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) pretrained on a large dataset of natural images. Their costly
computational optimization process has been replaced by
an efficient encoder-decoder architecture in recent works
[18, 28, 7, 2, 13] that efficiently generate the stylized output
in a single feed-forward pass. While [18] has proven that
an encoder-decoder architecture is both fast and effective
for transferring style, it acts as a black-box model, lacking
interpretability and accurate control of style injection: content transformation is performed indirectly, meaning there
is no explicit control which part of the network carries out
the stylization of photos and to what extend. To address this

Figure 1. Examples of generated images using our approach in the
style of (from top) Vincent van Gogh, Pablo Picasso, Paul Cezanne
and Wassily Kandinsky. More stylization examples of images and
videos can be found on the project page2 .

2 compvis.github.io/content-targeted-style-transfer/

10032

