An Iterative and Cooperative Top-down and Bottom-up Inference Network for
Salient Object Detection
Wenguan Wang 1 , Jianbing Shen∗1 , Ming-Ming Cheng 2 , Ling Shao 1
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

2

CS, Nankai University, China

wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com, shenjianbingcg@gmail.com, cmm@nankai.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
This paper presents a salient object detection method
that integrates both top-down and bottom-up saliency inference in an iterative and cooperative manner. The topdown process is used for coarse-to-fine saliency estimation,
where high-level saliency is gradually integrated with finer
lower-layer features to obtain a fine-grained result. The
bottom-up process infers the high-level, but rough saliency
through gradually using upper-layer, semantically-richer
features. These two processes are alternatively performed,
where the bottom-up process uses the fine-grained saliency
obtained from the top-down process to yield enhanced highlevel saliency estimate, and the top-down process, in turn,
is further benefited from the improved high-level information. The network layers in the bottom-up/top-down processes are equipped with recurrent mechanisms for layerwise, step-by-step optimization. Thus, saliency information
is effectively encouraged to flow in a bottom-up, top-down
and intra-layer manner. We show that most other saliency
models based on fully convolutional networks (FCNs) are
essentially variants of our model. Extensive experiments on
several famous benchmarks clearly demonstrate the superior performance, good generalization, and powerful learning ability of our proposed saliency inference framework.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to highlight the
most visually important object(s) during human perception
of a visual stimulus. This task is essential for understanding
the visual world from the perspective of human visual attention behavior. This paper proposes a novel, biologicallyinspired network architecture: an iterative top-down and
bottom-up saliency inference network, which imitates the
interactive top-down and bottom-up processes of human
perception. During the top-down inference, the rough highlevel saliency (Fig. 1(a)) from the semantically-rich, upper∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

Figure 1: High-layer saliency (a) is used to guide fine-grained
saliency estimation in a top-down fashion. The finest saliency (b)
is then adapted to refine higher-layer saliency (c) in a bottom-up
manner. Alternating these two processes (1)→(2)→· · · →(N ) results in an iterative and cooperative top-down and bottom-up inference network.

layer features is improved by progressively integrating finer,
low-level features. The resulting finest saliency (Fig. 1(b))
is then leveraged, in turn, to guide improved high-level
saliency estimation in a bottom-up way. This produces a
new high-level estimate (Fig. 1(c)), which is better than the
original (Fig. 1(a)) and further guides a more accurate finest
saliency estimation (Fig. 1(d)) in a new top-down process.
This whole procedure can be repeated, alternating between
the top-down and bottom-up processes, until the final, optimal saliency estimate is obtained (Fig. 1(f)). In this way, the
top-down and bottom-up inferences are interlaced to work
in an iterative and cooperative fashion. In particular, two
aspects inspire our network design, as follows.
Firstly, our model is motivated by studies of the human perception system by the psychology and cognitive communities. To explain human visual informationprocessing, two types of perceptive processes are distinguished: bottom-up and top-down processing. In the
top-down procedure [8], high-level semantic knowledge
or contextual information guides information processing.
The bottom-up process [7], in contrast, is carried out in

5968

