Fully Quantized Network for Object Detection
Rundong Li ∗ †‡

Yan Wang ∗ ‡ Feng Liang ‡
†
ShanghaiTech University

Hongwei Qin ‡ Junjie Yan ‡
‡
SenseTime Research

Rui Fan †

{lird, fanrui}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{wangyan1, liangfeng, qinhongwei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Efficient neural network inference is important in a number of practical domains, such as deployment in mobile
settings. An effective method for increasing inference efficiency is to use low bitwidth arithmetic, which can subsequently be accelerated using dedicated hardware. However, designing effective quantization schemes while maintaining network accuracy is challenging. In particular, current techniques face difficulty in performing fully end-toend quantization, making use of aggressively low bitwidth
regimes such as 4-bit, and applying quantized networks to
complex tasks such as object detection. In this paper, we
demonstrate that many of these difficulties arise because of
instability during the fine-tuning stage of the quantization
process, and propose several novel techniques to overcome
these instabilities. We apply our techniques to produce fully
quantized 4-bit detectors based on RetinaNet and Faster RCNN, and show that these achieve state-of-the-art performance for quantized detectors. The mAP loss due to quantization using our methods is more than 3.8× less than the
loss from existing methods.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art object detectors are based on powerful
convolution neural network (CNN) architectures [26, 21,
23, 25]. While CNNs achieve remarkable accuracy, their
high computational cost during inference restricts their usage on resource-limited devices such as mobile phones,
smart cameras and drones.
To perform efficient inference on complex networks,
several techniques have been proposed. These include improved network designs [12, 15, 32] and network search
[36], network pruning [9, 8] and network quantization. Current research areas in network quantization include reducing
the bitwidth of network parameters to decrease model mem∗ Equal contributions. This work was done when Rundong, Yan and
Feng were interns at SenseTime Research.

ory usage [33, 11, 30], quantizing both network parameters
and activations to accelerate specific types of layers in the
network using bitwise operations [35, 31, 14, 4], and quantizing network gradients to speed up distributed training [2].
Although promising results on tasks such as image classification have been reported [31, 4, 35, 33, 24] using the
aforementioned quantization techniques, using quantized
networks for more complex tasks such as object detection
remains a challenge. Issues faced by current methods include:
Hardware-friendly end-to-end quantization Many
current quantization techniques [14, 35] focus on specific
types of operations such as convolutions or matrix multiplication, while leaving other operations and network layers in
full precision. This introduces two problems. The first is
that critical operations such as batch normalization are either not handled [35] or ablated [29] during training, leading to a mismatch between training and evaluation behaviors, or causing training convergence difficulties. Another
problem is that when deployed on real hardware, both integer and floating point arithmetic units are needed for performing network inference. This causes data exchange between different arithmetic units that may sometimes negate
the speedups achieved by quantization.
Low bitwidth quantization on complex tasks Current
quantization research mostly falls into two categories. The
first focuses on performing aggressive bit-width compression, e.g. using ternary [19, 1] or even binary [13, 24] values, and applies this to relatively simple tasks such as classification, where high accuracy is not required. Another type
of research uses relatively conservative quantization, e.g. 8
bits, but can be applied to a broader range of more complex
tasks such as neural language processing [11], face attribute
extraction [17] and object detection [18]. Detection is complex because given a candidate region, the detector needs to
not only classify whether this region contains a target object
class, but also accurately regress a bounding box if an object
is convincingly detected. There have been several works on
quantizing detectors to use 8 bits [17, 28]. However, as the
computational complexity of multiplication grows superlin-

2810

