PDE Acceleration for Active Contours
Anthony Yezzi1∗ , Ganesh Sundaramoorthi2 , Minas Benyamin1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology
1
{ay10, mbenyamin3}@gatech.edu, 2 ganesh.sun@gmail.com
Abstract
Following the seminal work of Nesterov, accelerated
optimization methods have been used to powerfully boost
the performance of first-order, gradient-based parameter
estimation in scenarios where second-order optimization
strategies are either inapplicable or impractical. Accelerated gradient descent converges faster and performs a more
robust local search of the parameter space by initially overshooting then oscillating back into minimizers which have
a basis of attraction large enough to contain the overshoot.
Recent work has demonstrated how a broad class of accelerated schemes can be cast in a variational framework leading to continuum limit ODE’s. We extend their formulation
to the PDE framework, specifically for the infinite dimensional manifold of continuous curves, to introduce acceleration, and its added robustness, into the broad range of
PDE based active contours.

1. Introduction
Accelerated and stochastic gradient search methods have
been utilized extensively within the machine learning community [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Not only does accelerated gradient descent converge considerably faster than
traditional gradient descent, but it also performs a more robust local search of the parameter space by initially overshooting and then oscillating back as it settles into a final
configuration, thereby selecting only local minimizers with
a basis of attraction large enough to contain the initial overshoot. So far, however, accelerated optimization methods
have been restricted to searches over finite dimensional parameter spaces.
Recently, however, Wibisono, Wilson, and Jordan outlined a variational ODE framework in [12] (which we will
summarize briefly in Section 2.4) formulated around the
Bregman divergence and which yields the continuum limit
of a broad class of accelerated optimization schemes, including that of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method [13]
whose continuum ODE limit was also demonstrated by Su,
Boyd, and Candes in [14]. We adapt this approach to the in-

finite dimensional PDE framework through the formulation
of a generalized time-explicit action which can be viewed
as a specialization of the Bregman Lagrangian presented
in [12]. While the extension we outline from the ODE
framework into the PDE framework is general enough to be
applied to a variety of infinite-dimensional or distributedparameter optimization problems, the focus of this paper
will be on optimization using active contours.
Active contours and surfaces (e.g., [15, 16, 17, 18, 18])
have been widely used for the problem of segmentation and
3D dense reconstruction in computer vision, as they provide a powerful mechanism for modeling object shape and
geometry. Curves or surfaces are driven to segment images
typically by the optimization of an energy functional, which
in general are non-convex infinite-dimensional problems.
Due to this non-convexity, traditional active contour models are sensitive to initialization and clutter in the image.
The past decade has attempted to reduce this sensitivity by
formulating active contour energies in terms of relaxed indicator functions, which under some particular active contour
models, reduce to convex problems [19, 20, 21, 22] that can
be solved efficiently. While this has greatly advanced active contours, such approaches do not extend to non-convex
problems. Thus, we reduce active contour sensitivity by
constructing a general method valid for any non-convex active contour model. Furthermore, these methods remain relevant in the era of deep learning, as there are a number of
problems where the large training set requirement of current
deep learning systems cannot be met, and common tricks
for small datasets (e.g., transfer learning, fine tuning, etc)
are also not possible. Thus, there is a need for explicit models that reduce the training requirement. Active contours
offer such explicit models, and can be complementary to
deep learning (see [23, 24]).
Moving into the infinite dimensional framework for accelerated approaches introduces additional mathematical,
numerical, and computational challenges and technicalities
which do not arise in finite dimensions. For example, the
evolving parameter vector in finite dimensional optimization can naturally be interpreted as a single moving particle
in Rn with a constant mass which, in accelerated optimiza-

12318

