Min-Max Statistical Alignment for Transfer Learning
Samitha Herath1,4 , Mehrtash Harandi2,4 , Basura Fernando1,5 , and Richard Nock1,3,4
1
The Australian National University, 2 Monash University, 3 The University of Sydney
4
DATA61-CSIRO, Australia
5
Human-Centric AI Programme, A*STAR, Singapore
Samitha.Herath@data61.csiro.au, Mehrtash.Harandi@monash.edu,
Fernando Basura@scei.a-star.edu.sg, Richard.Nock@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
A profound idea in learning invariant features for transfer learning is to align statistical properties of the domains.
In practice, this is achieved by minimizing the disparity between the domains, usually measured in terms of their statistical properties. We question the capability of this school
of thought and propose to minimize the maximum disparity between domains. Furthermore, we develop an end-toend learning scheme that enables us to benefit from the proposed min-max strategy in training deep models. We show
that the min-max solution can outperform the existing statistical alignment solutions, and can compete with state-ofthe-art solutions on two challenging learning tasks, namely,
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) and Zero-Shot
Learning (ZSL).

1. Introduction
Minimizing the statistical disparity between distributions
is a fundamental approach used to learn domain invariant
features [25, 26, 14]. In this work and in contrast to the previous attempts, we propose to learn features by minimizing
the maximum statistical disparity. We show that by minimizing the maximum (i.e., min-max) statistical disparity,
we can learn better domain invariant features (compared to
features attained by only minimizing the disparities). In particular, we demonstrate that in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [8, 24] and Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [31],
the learned features by min-max alignment lead to comparable performances to the very involved state-of-the-art
methods specifically designed to address each task (e.g., adversarial solutions).
Recent techniques for UDA and ZSL aim to learn taskindependent and discriminative features through end-to-end
learning [9, 26, 30]. A prominent idea here is to learn a mutual space where examples from the source and target do-

mains behave similarly from a statistical point of view. For
example, the CORrelation ALignment (CORAL) [25] and
its variants [27, 26] opt to minimize the statistical disparity
of data measured by the second order statistics.
Our idea goes beyond minimizing statistical disparities
and makes use of a novel structure, namely the confusion
network to align distributions in a min-max framework. The
confusion network, as the name implies, is by itself a neural
network. Therefore, the proposed min-max solution can be
seamlessly used in deep learning frameworks for end-to-end
training (see Fig. 1). Our code is available at https://
bitbucket.org/sherath.
One may wonder why min-max? In other words, what
power such a solution endows that a min solution does not.
In learning theory, methods such as SVM [3] , aim at minimizing the maximal loss. Nevertheless, very few studies
in deep learning [23, 20] make use of the min-max framework, our paper being one. This can be attributed to the fact
that minimizing a loss can be conveniently achieved using
stochastic techniques.
For the problem of interest in this paper, the min-max
solution has a somehow intuitive meaning. We are interested in finding invariant features across domains with mismatched statistics. Learning representations by minimization may result in degeneracy (e.g., by collapsing the space
into a point). On the other hand, maximization can preserve
the variance of the distributions, avoiding degeneracies.
To visualize the difference between min and min-max
frameworks, we designed a toy example (see Fig. 1) where
the task is to align an input distribution (given in purple,
yellow and red points) to a fixed target distribution (given in
blue). The top row shows the alignment by minimization
according to [26]. In the second row, we aligned the yellow
points, again by minimizing the disparities using the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence. Finally, the third row shows
our min-max alignment. The figure is self-explanatory, with
the proposed min-max solution showing the most consistent
alignment on all studied cases.

9288

