All You Need is a Few Shifts: Designing Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks
for Image Classification
Weijie Chen, Di Xie, Yuan Zhang, Shiliang Pu
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{chenweijie5, xiedi, zhangyuan, pushiliang}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Shift operation is an efficient alternative over depthwise
separable convolution. However, it is still bottlenecked by
its implementation manner, namely memory movement. To
put this direction forward, a new and novel basic component named Sparse Shift Layer (SSL) is introduced in this
paper to construct efficient convolutional neural networks.
In this family of architectures, the basic block is only composed by 1x1 convolutional layers with only a few shift operations applied to the intermediate feature maps. To make
this idea feasible, we introduce shift operation penalty during optimization and further propose a quantization-aware
shift learning method to impose the learned displacement
more friendly for inference. Extensive ablation studies indicate that only a few shift operations are sufficient to provide spatial information communication. Furthermore, to
maximize the role of SSL, we redesign an improved network
architecture to Fully Exploit the limited capacity of neural Network (FE-Net). Equipped with SSL, this network can
achieve 75.0% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with only 563M
M-Adds. It surpasses other counterparts constructed by
depthwise separable convolution and the networks searched
by NAS in terms of accuracy and practical speed.

1. Introduction
Owing to the amazing performance of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), it becomes a big trend to apply
CNNs to practical application scenarios. However, it is hindered by their substantial computational cost and storage
overhead, which motivates lots of researchers and engineers
to gush into this subject.
One of the useful solutions to tackle this problem is to
design accurate and compact neural network architectures
directly. A well-designed network topology as well as a
hardware-friendly basic component can bring about surprising breakthroughs. Recently, a popular basic component named depthwise separable convolution is welcomed

( a ) Grouped Shift

( b ) Active Shift

( c ) Sparse Shift

Figure 1. The comparison of different shift operations applied to
feature maps.

to design lightweight architectures, such as MobileNet [10]
and ShuffleNet [40]. Despite its lower float point operations (FLOPs), it is inefficient to implement in practice because of the fragmented memory footprints. To jump out of
the constraint of depthwise separable convolution, ShiftNet
[37] propose another alternative, say shift operation, to construct architectures cooperated with point-wise convolution.
In this network, shift operation provides spatial information
communication through shifting feature maps, which makes
the followed point-wise convolution layer not only available
for channel information aggregation but also available for
spatial information aggregation.
In order to compare these two basic components, we
decompose the occupied time of each basic component of
ShiftNet for detailed analysis on both compute-bound and
memory-bound computation platforms. As illustrated in
Fig.2 (a) and (b), shift operation occupies 3.6% of runtime
on CPU, but occupies 28.1% on GPU, indicating that shift
operation still occupies considerable runtime on memorybound computation platforms due to memory movement.
As for depthwise separable convolution, in MobileNetV2, it
occupies about 36% runtime on GPU. However, it is unfair
to compare these two components in two different architec17241

