Bidirectional Learning for Domain Adaptation of Semantic Segmentation
Yunsheng Li ∗
UC San Diego

Lu Yuan
Microsoft

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

yul554@eng.ucsd.edu

luyuan@microsoft.com

nvasconcelos@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Domain adaptation for semantic image segmentation is
very necessary since manually labeling large datasets with
pixel-level labels is expensive and time consuming. Existing domain adaptation techniques either work on limited datasets, or yield not so good performance compared
with supervised learning. In this paper, we propose a
novel bidirectional learning framework for domain adaptation of segmentation. Using the bidirectional learning,
the image translation model and the segmentation adaptation model can be learned alternatively and promote to
each other. Furthermore, we propose a self-supervised
learning algorithm to learn a better segmentation adaptation model and in return improve the image translation
model. Experiments show that our method is superior to
the state-of-the-art methods in domain adaptation of segmentation with a big margin. The source code is available
at https://github.com/liyunsheng13/BDL.

1. Introduction
Recent progress on image semantic segmentation [18]
has been driven by deep neural networks trained on large
datasets. Unfortunately, collecting and manually annotating large datasets with dense pixel-level labels has been extremely costly due to large amount of human effort is required. Recent advances in computer graphics make it possible to train CNNs on photo-realistic synthetic images with
computer-generated annotations [27, 28]. Despite this, the
domain mismatch between the real images (target) and the
synthetic data (source) cripples the models’ performance.
Domain adaptation addresses this domain shift problem.
Specifically, we focus on the hard case of the problem where
no labels from the target domain are available. This class of
techniques is commonly referred to as Unsupervised Domain Adaptation.
Traditional methods for domain adaptation involve minimizing some measure of distance between the source and
∗ This work was done when Yunsheng Li is an intern at Microsoft Cloud
& AI

the target distributions. Two commonly used measures are
the first and second order moment [2], and learning the distance metrics using Adversarial approaches [34, 35]. Both
approaches have had good success in the classification problems (e.g., MNIST [16], USPS [7] and SVHN [22]); however, as pointed out in [37], their performance is quite limited on the semantic segmentation problem.
Recently, domain adaptation for semantic segmentation
has made good progress by separating it into two sequential
steps. It firstly translates images from the source domain to
the target domain with an image-to-image translation model
(e.g., CycleGAN [38]) and then add a discriminator on top
of the features of the segmentation model to further decrease the domain gap [12, 36]. When the domain gap is
reduced by the former step, the latter one is easy to learn
and can further decrease the domain shift. Unfortunately,
the segmentation model very relies on the quality of imageto-image translation. Once the image-to-image translation
fails, nothing can be done to make it up in the following
stages.
In this paper, we propose a new bidirectional learning
framework for domain adaptation of image semantic segmentation. The system involves two separated modules:
image-to-image translation model and segmentation adaptation model similar to [12, 36], but the learning process
involves two directions (i.e., “translation-to-segmentation”
and “segmentation-to-translation”). The whole system
forms a closed-loop learning. Both models will be motivated to promote each other alternatively, causing the domain gap to be gradually reduced. Thus, how to allow one
of both modules providing positive feedbacks to the other is
the key to success.
On the forward direction (i.e., “translation-tosegmentation”, similar to [12, 36]), we propose a
self-supervised learning (SSL) approach in training our
segmentation adaptation model.
Different from segmentation models trained on real data, the segmentation
adaptation model is trained on both synthetic and real
datasets, but the real data has no annotations. At every
time, we may regard the predicted labels for real data with
high confidence as the approximation to the ground truth

6936

