FlowNet3D: Learning Scene Flow in 3D Point Clouds
Xingyu Liu∗1
Charles R. Qi∗2
Leonidas J. Guibas1,2
1
2
Stanford University
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Many applications in robotics and human-computer interaction can benefit from understanding 3D motion of
points in a dynamic environment, widely noted as scene
flow. While most previous methods focus on stereo and
RGB-D images as input, few try to estimate scene flow directly from point clouds. In this work, we propose a novel
deep neural network named FlowNet3D that learns scene
flow from point clouds in an end-to-end fashion. Our network simultaneously learns deep hierarchical features of
point clouds and flow embeddings that represent point motions, supported by two newly proposed learning layers for
point sets. We evaluate the network on both challenging
synthetic data from FlyingThings3D and real Lidar scans
from KITTI. Trained on synthetic data only, our network
successfully generalizes to real scans, outperforming various baselines and showing competitive results to the prior
art. We also demonstrate two applications of our scene flow
output (scan registration and motion segmentation) to show
its potential wide use cases.

1. Introduction
Scene flow is the 3D motion field of points in the
scene [27]. Its projection to an image plane becomes 2D
optical flow. It is a low-level understanding of a dynamic
environment, without any assumed knowledge of structure
or motion of the scene. With this flexibility, scene flow can
serve many higher level applications. For example, it provides motion cues for object segmentation, action recognition, camera pose estimation, or even serve as a regularization for other 3D vision problems.
However, for this 3D flow estimation problem, most previous works rely on 2D representations. They extend methods for optical flow estimation to stereo or RGB-D images,
and usually estimate optical flow and disparity map separately [33, 28, 16], not directly optimizing for 3D scene
flow. These methods cannot be applied to cases where point
clouds are the only input.
Very recently, researchers in the robotics community
started to study scene flow estimation directly in 3D point
* indicates equal contributions.

FlowNet3D

point cloud 1: !1×3
point cloud 2: !2×3

scene flow: !1×3

Figure 1: End-to-end scene flow estimation from point
clouds. Our model directly consumes raw point clouds
from two consecutive frames, and outputs dense scene flow
(as translation vectors) for all points in the 1st frame.
clouds (e.g. from Lidar) [7, 25]. But those works did not
benefit from deep learning as they built multi-stage systems
based on hand-crafted features, with simple models such as
logistic regression. There are often many assumptions involved such as assumed scene rigidity or existence of point
correspondences, which make it hard to adapt those systems
to benefit from deep networks. On the other hand, in the
learning domain, Qi et al. [19, 20] recently proposed novel
deep architectures that directly consume point clouds for
3D classification and segmentation. However, their work
focused on processing static point clouds.
In this work, we connect the above two research frontiers
by proposing a deep neural network called FlowNet3D that
learns scene flow in 3D point clouds end-to-end. As illustrated in Fig. 1, given input point clouds from two consecutive frames (point cloud 1 and point cloud 2), our network
estimates a translational flow vector for every point in the
first frame to indicate its motion between the two frames.
The network, based on the building blocks from [19], is
able to simultaneously learn deep hierarchical features of
point clouds and flow embeddings that represent their motions. While there are no correspondences between the
two sampled point clouds, our network learns to associate
points from their spatial localities and geometric similarities, through our newly proposed flow embedding layer.
Each output embedding implicitly represents the 3D motion of a point. From the embeddings, the network further
up-samples and refines them in an informed way through
another novel set upconv layer. Compared to direct feature
1529

