In the Wild Human Pose Estimation Using
Explicit 2D Features and Intermediate 3D Representations
Ikhsanul Habibie, Weipeng Xu, Dushyant Mehta, Gerard Pons-Moll, Christian Theobalt
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrucken, Germany
{ihabibie, wxu, dmehta, gpons, theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.org

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Network based approaches for
monocular 3D human pose estimation usually require a
large amount of training images with 3D pose annotations.
While it is feasible to provide 2D joint annotations for large
corpora of in-the-wild images with humans, providing accurate 3D annotations to such in-the-wild corpora is hardly
feasible in practice. Most existing 3D labelled data sets are
either synthetically created or feature in-studio images. 3D
pose estimation algorithms trained on such data often have
limited ability to generalize to real world scene diversity.
We therefore propose a new deep learning based method for
monocular 3D human pose estimation that shows high accuracy and generalizes better to in-the-wild scenes. It has
a network architecture that comprises a new disentangled
hidden space encoding of explicit 2D and 3D features, and
uses supervision by a new learned projection model from
predicted 3D pose. Our algorithm can be jointly trained
on image data with 3D labels and image data with only 2D
labels. It achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on challenging
in-the-wild data.

1. Introduction
Human motion capture has a wide range of applications
in computer animation and also other areas such as biomechanics, medicine, and human-computer interaction. However, the standard 3D human motion capture systems typically require marker suits and/or multiple cameras recording in a controlled setting which are expensive and complicated to set up, and are impractical outside of the lab or studio environments. Methods that infer 3D pose only from
monocular images overcome many such limitations and
make 3D pose estimation more widely applicable. However, due to the under-constrained nature of monocular 3D
pose estimation, achieving accurate 3D prediction is still a
challenging task.
Recent progress of Convolutional Neural Networks

Figure 1: 3D pose prediction using our method for general
scenes. Please refer to Sec. 3 for the details of our method
and Sec. 4 for results and evaluations.

(CNN) [17] has enabled promising learning-based methods
for 3D human pose estimation from a single color image.
Training such methods typically requires a large amount of
RGB images annotated with reference 3D poses from either
marker-based or markerless multi-camera motion capture
systems [31, 8, 28, 15], synthetic data [6], or IMU-based
systems [10, 38, 37]. Owing to this complex reference data
capturing, diversity in real world appearance or pose is hard
to achieve in training data, which limits the generalization
of trained networks on in-the-wild scenes.
To improve in-the-wild generalization, previous work
has leveraged features learned on in-the-wild annotated 2D
pose data. Some methods [21, 22] proposed to finetune this
learned representation on 3D pose prediction using 3D pose
datasets captured in a studio. Others [43] use this learned
representation as an initialization to jointly predict both 2D
key points and depth information. For images where the 3D
annotations are available, both 2D keypoints and depth are
supervised, with supervision coming from geometric constraints otherwise. In this way, networks carry over features
useful for in-the-wild 2D for better 3D pose estimation in
out-of-studio settings.
Using a strong pre-existing pose prior, like a parametric
body model, can also help a network to predict more accurate 3D poses if labelled 3D training data is scarce [41, 16].
Since 3D pose labels on general scene images are hard to
obtain while larger annotated 2D training corpora exist, several deep learning based methods resort to using 2D pose as
the target prediction, followed by an additional 3D pose lift110905

