ADCrowdNet: An Attention-Injective Deformable Convolutional Network for
Crowd Understanding
Ning Liu1,2

Yongchao Long1,2

Changqing Zou3

Qun Niu1,2

Li Pan4

Hefeng Wu1,5,6 ∗

1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology 3 University of Maryland
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Guangdong University of Foreign Studies 6 WINNER Technology
2

liuning2@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {longych3, niuqun}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
cqzou@umiacs.umd.edu, panli@sjtu.edu.cn, wuhefeng@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose an attention-injective deformable convolutional network called ADCrowdNet for crowd understanding that can address the accuracy degradation problem of
highly congested noisy scenes. ADCrowdNet contains two
concatenated networks. An attention-aware network called
Attention Map Generator (AMG) first detects crowd regions
in images and computes the congestion degree of these regions. Based on detected crowd regions and congestion
priors, a multi-scale deformable network called Density
Map Estimator (DME) then generates high-quality density
maps. With the attention-aware training scheme and multiscale deformable convolutional scheme, the proposed ADCrowdNet achieves the capability of being more effective
to capture the crowd features and more resistant to various noises. We have evaluated our method on four popular crowd counting datasets (ShanghaiTech, UCF CC 50,
WorldEXPO’10, and UCSD) and an extra vehicle counting
dataset TRANCOS, and our approach beats existing stateof-the-art approaches on all of these datasets.

1. Introduction
Crowd understanding has attracted much attention recently because of its wide range of applications like public
safety, congestion avoidance, and flow analysis. The current research trend for crowd understanding has developed
from counting the number of people to displaying distribution of crowd through density map. Generally, generating
accurate crowd density maps and performing precise crowd
counting for highly congested noisy scenes is challenging
∗ The corresponding author is Hefeng Wu. This research is supported

by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 91746204
and 61876045), and Opening Project of Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology (Grant No. 2017B030314131).

due to the complexity of crowd scenes caused by various
factors including background noises, occlusions, and diversified crowd distributions.
Researchers recently have leveraged deep neural networks (DNN) for accurate crowd density map generation
and precise crowd counting. Although these DNNs-based
methods [37, 25, 29, 18, 2, 17] have made significant success in solving the above issues, they still have the problem
of accuracy degradation when applied in highly congested
noisy scenes. As shown in Figure 1, the state-of-the-art approach [17], which has achieved much lower Mean Absolute Error (MAE) than the previous state-of-the-art methods, is still severely affected by background noises, occlusions, and non-uniform crowd distributions.
In this paper, we aim at an approach which is capable of dealing with highly congested noisy scenes for the
crowd understanding problem. To achieve this, we designed
an attention-injective deformable convolutional neural network called ADCrowdNet which is empowered by a visual
attention mechanism and a multi-scale deformable convolution scheme. The visual attention mechanism is delicately
designed for alleviating the effects from various noises in
the input. The multi-scale deformable convolution scheme
is specially introduced for the congested environments. The
basic principle of visual attention mechanism is to use the
pertinent information rather than all available information
in the input image to compute the neural response. This
principle of focusing on specific parts of the input has been
successfully applied in various deep learning models for images classification [11], semantic segmentation [24], image
deblurring [22], and visual pose estimation [6], which also
suits our problem where the interest regions containing the
crowd need to be recognized and highlighted out from noisy
scenes. The multi-scale deformable convolution scheme
takes as input the information of the dynamic sampling locations, other than evenly distributed locations, which has

3225

