Characterizing and Avoiding Negative Transfer
Zirui Wang, Zihang Dai, Barnabás Póczos, Jaime Carbonell
Cargenie Mellon University
{ziruiw,dzihang,bapoczos,jgc}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
When labeled data is scarce for a specific target task,
transfer learning often offers an effective solution by utilizing data from a related source task. However, when transferring knowledge from a less related source, it may inversely hurt the target performance, a phenomenon known
as negative transfer. Despite its pervasiveness, negative
transfer is usually described in an informal manner, lacking rigorous definition, careful analysis, or systematic treatment. This paper proposes a formal definition of negative transfer and analyzes three important aspects thereof.
Stemming from this analysis, a novel technique is proposed
to circumvent negative transfer by filtering out unrelated
source data. Based on adversarial networks, the technique
is highly generic and can be applied to a wide range of
transfer learning algorithms. The proposed approach is
evaluated on six state-of-the-art deep transfer methods via
experiments on four benchmark datasets with varying levels of difficulty. Empirically, the proposed method consistently improves the performance of all baseline methods and
largely avoids negative transfer, even when the source data
is degenerate.

1. Introduction
The development of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
improved the state-of-the-art performance on a wide range
of machine learning problems and applications. However, DNNs often require a large amount of labeled data to
train well-generalized models and as more classical methods, DNNs rely on the assumption that training data and
test data are drawn from the same underlying distribution.
In some cases, collecting large volumes of labeled training data is expensive or even prohibitive. Transfer learning [20] addresses this challenge of data scarcity by utilizing
previously-labeled data from one or more source tasks. The
hope is that this source domain is related to the target domain and thus transferring knowledge from the source can
improve the performance within the target domain. This
powerful paradigm has been studied under various settings
[35] and has been proven effective in a wide range of appli-

cations [39, 16, 17].
However, the success of transfer learning is not always
guaranteed. If the source and target domains are not sufficiently similar, transferring from such weakly related source
may hinder the performance in the target, a phenomenon
known as negative transfer. The notion of negative transfer has been well recognized within the transfer learning
community [20, 35]. An early paper [24] has conducted
empirical study on a simple binary classification problem to
demonstrate the existence of negative transfer. Some more
recent work [7, 10, 3] has also observed similar negative
impact while performing transfer learning on more complex
tasks under different settings.
Despite these empirical observations, little research
work has been published to analyze or predict negative
transfer, and the following questions still remain open:
First, while the notion being quite intuitive, it is not clear
how negative transfer should be defined exactly. For example, how should we measure it at test time? What type of
baseline should we compare with? Second, it is also unknown what factors cause negative transfer, and how to exploit them to determine that negative transfer may occur.
Although the divergence between the source and target domain is certainly crucial, we do know how large it must be
for negative transfer to occur, nor if it is the only factor.
Third and most importantly, given limited or no labeled target data, how to detect and/or avoid negative transfer.
In this work, we take a step towards addressing these
questions. We first derive a formal definition of negative transfer that is general and tractable in practice. Here
tractable means we can explicitly measure its effect given
the testing data. This definition further reveals three underlying factors of negative transfer that give us insights on
when it could occur. Motivated by these theoretical observations, we develop a novel and highly generic technique based on adversarial networks to combat negative
transfer. In our approach, a discriminator estimating both
marginal and joint distributions is used as a gate to filter
potentially harmful source data by reducing the bias between source and target risks, which corresponds to the
idea of importance reweighting [5, 38]. Our experiments
111293

