Vision-based Navigation with Language-based Assistance
via Imitation Learning with Indirect Intervention
Khanh Nguyen
University of Maryland, College Park

Debadeepta Dey, Chris Brockett, Bill Dolan
Microsoft Research, Redmond

kxnguyen@cs.umd.edu

{dedey,Chris.Brockett,billdol}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present Vision-based Navigation with Languagebased Assistance (VNLA), a grounded vision-language task
where an agent with visual perception is guided via language to find objects in photorealistic indoor environments.
The task emulates a real-world scenario in that (a) the requester may not know how to navigate to the target objects
and thus makes requests by only specifying high-level endgoals, and (b) the agent is capable of sensing when it is lost
and querying an advisor, who is more qualified at the task,
to obtain language subgoals to make progress. To model
language-based assistance, we develop a general framework termed Imitation Learning with Indirect Intervention
(I3L), and propose a solution that is effective on the VNLA
task. Empirical results show that this approach significantly
improves the success rate of the learning agent over other
baselines in both seen and unseen environments.
Our code and data are publicly available at https:
//github.com/debadeepta/vnla.

1. Introduction
Rich photorealistic simulators are finding increasing use
as research testbeds and precursors to real-world embodied agents such as self-driving cars and drones [53, 22, 33].
Recently, growing interest in grounded visual navigation
from natural language is facilitated by the development
of more realistic and complex simulation environments
[2, 35, 9, 46, 59, 58, 51] in place of simple toy environments [5, 12, 39, 8, 7]. Several variants of this task have
been proposed. In [2], agents learn to execute natural language instructions crowd-sourced from humans. [18] train
agents to navigate to answer questions about objects in the
environment. [21] present a scenario where a guide and a
tourist chat to direct the tourist to a destination.
In this paper, we present Vision-based Navigation with
Language-based Assistance (VNLA), a grounded visionlanguage task that models a practical scenario: a mobile

agent, equipped with monocular visual perception, is requested via language to assist humans with finding objects
in indoor environments. A realistic setup of this scenario
must (a) not assume the requester knows how to accomplish a task before requesting it, and (b) provide additional
assistance to the agent when it is completely lost and can no
longer make progress on a task. To accomplish (a), instead
of using detailed step-by-step instructions, we request tasks
through high-level instructions that only describe end-goals
(e.g. “Find a pillow in one of the bedrooms”). To fulfill (b),
we introduce into the environment an advisor who is present
at all times to assist the agent upon request with low-level
language subgoals such as “Go forward three steps, turn
left”. In VNLA, therefore, the agent must (a) ground the
object referred with the initial end-goal in raw visual inputs,
(b) sense when it is lost and use an assigned budget for requesting help, and (c) execute language subgoals to make
progress.
VNLA motivates a novel imitation learning setting that
we term Imitation Learning with Indirect Intervention
(I3L). In conventional Imitation Learning (IL), a learning
agent learns to mimic a teacher, who is only available at
training time, by querying the teacher’s demonstrations on
situations the agent encounters. I3L extends this framework
in two ways. First, an advisor is present in the environment
to assist the agent not only during training time but also at
test time. Second, the advisor assists the agent not by directly making decisions on the agent’s behalf, but by modifying the environment to influence its decisions. I3L models
assistance via language subgoals by treating the subgoals
as extra information added to the environment. We devise
an algorithm for the I3L setting that yields significant improvements over baselines on the VNLA task on both seen
and unseen environments.
The contributions of this paper are: (a) a new task
VNLA that represents a step closer to real-world applications of mobile agents accomplishing indoor tasks (b) a
novel IL framework that extends the conventional framework to modeling indirect intervention, and (c) a general
solution to I3L that is shown to be effective on the VNLA
112527

