Hierarchy Denoising Recursive Autoencoders for 3D Scene Layout Prediction
Yifei Shi1 , Angel Xuan Chang2 , Zhelun Wu3 , Manolis Savva2 and Kai Xu* 1
1

National University of Defense Technology
2
Simon Fraser University
3
Princeton University

Abstract
Indoor scenes exhibit rich hierarchical structure in 3D
object layouts. Many tasks in 3D scene understanding can
beneﬁt from reasoning jointly about the hierarchical context
of a scene, and the identities of objects. We present a variational denoising recursive autoencoder (VDRAE) that generates and iteratively reﬁnes a hierarchical representation
of 3D object layouts, interleaving bottom-up encoding for
context aggregation and top-down decoding for propagation. We train our VDRAE on large-scale 3D scene datasets
to predict both instance-level segmentations and a 3D object detections from an over-segmentation of an input point
cloud. We show that our VDRAE improves object detection
performance on real-world 3D point cloud datasets compared to baselines from prior work.

1. Introduction
The role of context in 3D scene understanding is central.
Much prior work has focused on leveraging contextual cues
to improve performance on various perception tasks such as
object categorization [12], semantic segmentation [35], and
object relation graph inference from images [62]. However,
the beneﬁt of hierarchical context priors in 3D object detection and 3D instance-level segmentation using deep learning is signiﬁcantly less explored. A key challenge in using
deep network formulations for capturing the patterns of hierarchical object layout is that these patterns involve changing numbers of objects with varying semantic identities and
relative positions. In this paper, we propose a recursive autoencoder1 (RAE) approach that is trained to predict and
iteratively “denoise” a hierarchical 3D object layout for an
entire scene, inducing 3D object detections and object instance segmentations on an input point cloud.
* corresponding author
1 Also known as a recursive neural network (RvNN) autoencoder.

chair

desk

lamp

cabinet

TV

Figure 1: We present a hierarchy-aware variational denoising recursive autoencoder (VDRAE) for predicting 3D object layouts. The input is a point cloud which we oversegment (top left). Our VDRAE constructs and reﬁnes a
3D object hierarchy, inducing semantic segmentations (top
right, category-colored point cloud), and 3D instance oriented bounding boxes (bottom). The reﬁned 3D bounding
boxes tightly and fully contain observed objects.
Recent work has demonstrated that encoding the context
in 3D scene layouts using a set of pre-speciﬁed “scene templates” with restricted sets of present objects can lead to
improvements in 3D scene layout estimation and 3D object
detection [63]. However, manually specifying templates of
scene layouts to capture the diversity of real 3D environments is a challenging and expensive endeavor. Real environments are hierarchical: buildings contain rooms such as
kitchens, rooms contain functional regions such as dining
table arrangements, and functional regions contain arrangements of objects such as plates and cutlery. This implies
that explicit representation of the hierarchy structure of 3D
scenes can beneﬁt 3D scene understanding tasks such as object detection and 3D layout prediction.
11771

