P2SGrad: Refined Gradients for Optimizing Deep Face Models
Xiao Zhang1 Rui Zhao2 Junjie Yan2 Mengya Gao2 Yu Qiao3 Xiaogang Wang1 Hongsheng Li1
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
3
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhangx9411@gmail.com

Abstract
Cosine-based softmax losses [20, 29, 27, 3] significantly improve the performance of deep face recognition
networks. However, these losses always include sensitive
hyper-parameters which can make training process unstable, and it is very tricky to set suitable hyper parameters
for a specific dataset. This paper addresses this challenge
by directly designing the gradients for training in an adaptive manner. We first investigate and unify previous cosine softmax losses from the perspective of gradients. This
unified view inspires us to propose a novel gradient called
P2SGrad (Probability-to-Similarity Gradient), which leverages a cosine similarity instead of classification probability to control the gradients for updating neural network parameters. P2SGrad is adaptive and hyper-parameter free,
which makes training process more efficient and faster. We
evaluate our P2SGrad on three face recognition benchmarks, LFW [7], MegaFace [8], and IJB-C [16]. The results show that P2SGrad is stable in training, robust to
noise, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the
three benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, deep convolutional neural networks have significantly boosted the face recognition accuracy. State-of-the-art approaches are based on deep neural networks and adopt the following pipeline: training a
classification model with different types of softmax losses
and use the trained model as a feature extractor to test unseen samples. Then the cosine similarities between testing
faces’ features, are exploited to determine whether these
features belong to the same identity. Unlike other vision
tasks, such as object detection, where training and testing
have the same objectives and evaluation procedures, conventional face recognition systems were trained with softmax losses but tested with cosine similarities. In other
words, there is a gap between the softmax probability in
training and inner product similarity in testing.
This problem is not well addressed in the classical softmax cross-entropy loss function (softmax loss for short

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

in the remaining part), which mainly considers probability distributions of training classes and ignores the testing setup. In order to bridge this gap, cosine softmax
losses [28, 13, 14] and their angular margin based variants [29, 27, 3] directly use cosine distances instead of inner products as the input raw classification scores, namely
logits. Specially, the angular margin based variants aim to
learn the decision boundaries with a margin between different classes. These methods improve the face recognition
performance in the challenging setup.
In spite of their successes, cosine-based softmax loss is
only a trade-off: the supervision signals for training are still
classification probabilities, which are never evaluated during testing. Considering the fact that the similarity between
two testing face images is only related to themselves while
the classification probabilities are related to all the identities, cosine softmax losses are not the ideal training measures in face recognition.
This paper aims to address these problems from a different perspective. Deep neural networks are generally trained
with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithms where
gradients play an essential role in this process. In addition
to the loss function, we focus on the gradients of cosine
softmax loss functions. This new perspective not only allows us to analyze the relations and problems of previous
methods, but also inspires us to develop a novel form of
adaptive gradients, P2SGrad, which mitigates the problem
of training-testing mismatch and further improves the face
recognition performance in practice.
To be more specific, P2SGrad optimizes deep models by
well-designed gradients. Compared with the conventional
gradients in cosine-based softmax losses, P2SGrad uses cosine distances to replace the probabilities in the original gradients. P2SGrad decouples gradients from hyperparameters
and the number of classes, and matches testing targets.
This paper mainly contributes in the following aspects:
1. We analyze the recent cosine softmax losses and their
angular-margin based variants from the perspective of
gradients, and propose a general formulation to unify
different cosine softmax cross-entropy losses;
2. With this unified model, we propose an adaptive

9906

