Semantic Graph Convolutional Networks for 3D Human Pose Regression
Long Zhao1

Xi Peng2 Yu Tian1 Mubbasir Kapadia1 Dimitris N. Metaxas1
1
Rutgers University 2 Binghamton University

{lz311,yt219,mk1353,dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu, xpeng@binghamton.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) for regression. Current architectures of GCNs are limited to the small receptive field
of convolution filters and shared transformation matrix for
each node. To address these limitations, we propose Semantic Graph Convolutional Networks (SemGCN), a novel neural network architecture that operates on regression tasks
with graph-structured data. SemGCN learns to capture semantic information such as local and global node relationships, which is not explicitly represented in the graph. These
semantic relationships can be learned through end-to-end
training from the ground truth without additional supervision or hand-crafted rules. We further investigate applying
SemGCN to 3D human pose regression. Our formulation is
intuitive and sufficient since both 2D and 3D human poses
can be represented as a structured graph encoding the relationships between joints in the skeleton of a human body.
We carry out comprehensive studies to validate our method.
The results prove that SemGCN outperforms state of the art
while using 90% fewer parameters.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have successfully tackled classic computer vision problems such as image classification [12, 29, 31, 52], object detection [19, 46,
55, 63, 74, 79] and generation [43, 58, 71, 73, 80], where the
input image has a grid-like structure. However, many realworld tasks, e.g., molecular structures, social networks and
3D meshes, can only be represented in the form of irregular
structures, where CNNs have limited applications.
In order to address this limitation, Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) [17, 28, 49] have been introduced recently as a generalization of CNNs that can directly deal
with a general class of graphs. They have achieved stateof-the-art performance when applied to 3D mesh deformation [45, 64], image captioning [70], scene understanding [68], and video recognition [66, 67]. These works utilize GCNs to model relations of visual objects for classifi-

cation. In this paper, we investigate using deep GCNs for
regression, which is another core problem of computer vision with many real-world applications.
However, GCNs cannot be directly applied to regression
problems due to the following limitations in baseline methods [28, 64, 67]. First, to handle the issue that graph nodes
may have various numbers of neighborhoods, the convolution filter shares the same weight matrix for all nodes, which
is not comparable with CNNs. Second, previous methods
are simplified by restricting the filters to operate in a onestep neighborhood around each node according to the guidance of [28]. The receptive field of the convolution kernel
is limited to one due to this formulation, which severely
impairs the efficiency of information exchanging especially
when the network goes deeper.
In this work, we propose a novel graph neural network
architecture for regression called Semantic Graph Convolutional Networks (SemGCN) to address the above limitations. Specifically, we investigate learning semantic information encoded in a given graph, i.e., the local and
global relations of nodes, which is not well-studied in previous works. SemGCN does not rely on hand-crafted constraints [10, 13, 51] to analyze the patterns for a specific application, and thus can be easily generalized to other tasks.
In particular, we study SemGCN for 2D to 3D human
pose regression. Given a 2D human pose (and the optional
relevant image) as input, we aim to predict the locations
of its corresponding 3D joints in a certain coordinate space.
Using SemGCN to formulate this problem is intuitive. Both
2D and 3D poses are able to be naturally represented by
a canonical skeleton in the form of 2D or 3D coordinates,
and SemGCN can explicitly exploit their spatial relations,
which are crucial for understanding human actions [67].
Our work makes the following contributions. First, we
propose an improved graph convolution operation called Semantic Graph Convolution (SemGConv) which is derived
from CNNs. The key idea is to learn channel-wise weights
for edges as priors implied in the graph, and then combine them with kernel matrices. This significantly improves
the power of graph convolutions. Second, we introduce
SemGCN where SemGConv and non-local [65] layers are
13425

