Refine and Distill: Exploiting Cycle-Inconsistency and Knowledge
Distillation for Unsupervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Andrea Pilzer1 , Stéphane Lathuilière1 , Nicu Sebe1,2 , and Elisa Ricci1,3
1
DISI, University of Trento, via Sommarive 14, Povo (TN), Italy
2
Huawei Technologies Ireland, Dublin, Ireland
3
Technologies of Vision, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, via Sommarive 18, Povo (TN), Italy
{andrea.pilzer, stephane.lathuiliere, niculae.sebe, e.ricci}@unitn.it

Abstract
Nowadays, the majority of state of the art monocular
depth estimation techniques are based on supervised deep
learning models. However, collecting RGB images with associated depth maps is a very time consuming procedure.
Therefore, recent works have proposed deep architectures
for addressing the monocular depth prediction task as a
reconstruction problem, thus avoiding the need of collecting ground-truth depth. Following these works, we propose
a novel self-supervised deep model for estimating depth
maps. Our framework exploits two main strategies: refinement via cycle-inconsistency and distillation. Specifically,
first a student network is trained to predict a disparity map
such as to recover from a frame in a camera view the associated image in the opposite view. Then, a backward cycle
network is applied to the generated image to re-synthesize
back the input image, estimating the opposite disparity. A
third network exploits the inconsistency between the original and the reconstructed input frame in order to output
a refined depth map. Finally, knowledge distillation is exploited, such as to transfer information from the refinement
network to the student. Our extensive experimental evaluation demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework which outperforms state of the art unsupervised methods on the KITTI benchmark.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, deep learning-based approaches for
depth estimation [4, 20, 24, 37, 12, 42, 27, 31] have attracted a growing interest, motivated, on the one hand, by
their ability to predict very accurate depth maps and, on
the other hand, by the importance of recovering depth information in several applications, such as robot navigation,
autonomous driving, virtual reality and 3D reconstruction.
Exploiting the availability of very large annotated

Figure 1. Outline of the proposed approach: from the right view
image, we predict the left image from which we re-synthesize the
right image. The inconsistencies are used by the inconsistencymodule to improve the depth estimation. The refined depth maps
are used to improve the Student Network via knowledge distillation.

datasets, Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets)
trained in a supervised setting are now state-of-the-art in
many computer vision tasks such as object detection [10],
instance segmentation [30], human pose estimation [29].
However, a major weakness of these approaches is the
need of collecting large-scale labeled datasets. In the case
of depth estimation, acquiring data is especially costly.
For instance, in the scenario of depth estimation for autonomous driving, it implies driving a car equipped with
a laser LiDaR scanner for hours under diverse lighting and
weather conditions. Self-supervised depth estimation, also
referred to as unsupervised, recently emerged as an interesting paradigm and an effective alternative to supervised
methods [26, 7, 28, 12, 33]. Roughly speaking, in the selfsupervised setting, stereo image pairs are considered as input and a deep predictor is learned in order to estimate the
associated disparity maps. Specifically, the predicted disparity is employed to synthesize, from a frame in a camera
view (e.g. from the left camera), the opposite view through
warping. The deep network is trained via gradient descent
by minimizing the discrepancy between the original and
19768

