MS-TCN: Multi-Stage Temporal Convolutional Network for Action
Segmentation
Yazan Abu Farha and Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
{abufarha,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Predict: Y

Abstract
Temporally locating and classifying action segments in
long untrimmed videos is of particular interest to many applications like surveillance and robotics. While traditional
approaches follow a two-step pipeline, by generating framewise probabilities and then feeding them to high-level temporal models, recent approaches use temporal convolutions
to directly classify the video frames. In this paper, we introduce a multi-stage architecture for the temporal action
segmentation task. Each stage features a set of dilated temporal convolutions to generate an initial prediction that is
refined by the next one. This architecture is trained using a
combination of a classification loss and a proposed smoothing loss that penalizes over-segmentation errors. Extensive
evaluation shows the effectiveness of the proposed model in
capturing long-range dependencies and recognizing action
segments. Our model achieves state-of-the-art results on
three challenging datasets: 50Salads, Georgia Tech Egocentric Activities (GTEA), and the Breakfast dataset.

1. Introduction
Analyzing activities in videos is of significant importance for many applications ranging from video indexing to
surveillance. While methods for classifying short trimmed
videos have been very successful [3, 9], detecting and temporally locating action segments in long untrimmed videos
is still challenging.
Earlier approaches for action segmentation can be
grouped into two categories:
sliding window approaches [22, 11, 19], that use temporal windows of different scales to detect action segments, and hybrid approaches
that apply a coarse temporal modeling using Markov models on top of frame-wise classifiers [13, 16, 21]. While these
approaches achieve good results, they are very slow as they
require solving a maximization problem over very long sequences.
Motivated by the advances in speech synthesis, recent

Stage N

LN

Stage 1

L1

Input: x

Figure 1. Overview of the multi-stage temporal convolutional network. Each stage generates an initial prediction that is refined by
the next stage. At each stage, several dilated 1D convolutions are
applied on the activations of the previous layer. A loss layer is
added after each stage.

approaches rely on temporal convolutions to capture long
range dependencies between the video frames [15, 17, 5]. In
these models, a series of temporal convolutions and pooling
layers are adapted in an encoder-decoder architecture for
the temporal action segmentation. Despite the success of
such temporal models, these approaches operate on a very
low temporal resolution of a few frames per second.
In this paper, we propose a new model that also uses
temporal convolutions which we call Multi-Stage Temporal
Convolutional Network (MS-TCN). In contrast to previous
approaches, the proposed model operates on the full temporal resolution of the videos and thus achieves better results.
Our model consists of multiple stages where each stage out13575

