Semantically Aligned Bias Reducing Zero Shot Learning
Akanksha Paul
Indian Institute of Technology
Ropar

Narayanan C. Krishnan
Indian Institute of Technology
Ropar

Prateek Munjal
Indian Institute of Technology
Ropar

akanksha.paul@iitrpr.ac.in

ckn@iitrpr.ac.in

2017csm1009@iitrpr.ac.in

Abstract
Zero shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize unseen
classes by exploiting semantic relationships between seen
and unseen classes. Two major problems faced by ZSL algorithms are the hubness problem and the bias towards the
seen classes. Existing ZSL methods focus on only one of
these problems in the conventional and generalized ZSL setting. In this work, we propose a novel approach, Semantically Aligned Bias Reducing (SABR) ZSL, which focuses on
solving both the problems. It overcomes the hubness problem by learning a latent space that preserves the semantic
relationship between the labels while encoding the discriminating information about the classes. Further, we also propose ways to reduce bias of the seen classes through a simple cross-validation process in the inductive setting and a
novel weak transfer constraint in the transductive setting.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets suggest
that the proposed model significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-art algorithms by ∼1.5-9% in the conventional
ZSL setting and by ∼2-14% in the generalized ZSL for both
the inductive and transductive settings.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has achieved state-of-theart performance across a wide range of computer vision
tasks such as image classification task [13]. However, these
deep learning methods rely on enormous amount of labeled data which is scarce for dynamically emerging objects. Practically, it is unrealistic to annotate everything
around us. Thus, making the conventional object classification methods infeasible. In this work, we focus on the
extreme case when there is no labeled data, i.e., Zero-shot
learning (ZSL), where the task is to recognize the unseen
class instances by relying on the labeled set of seen classes.
ZSL assumes that the semantic label embeddings of both
seen and unseen classes are known apriori. ZSL thus learns
to identify unseen classes by leveraging the semantic relationship between seen and unseen classes.

On the basis of data available during the training phase,
ZSL can be divided into two categories: Inductive and
Transductive ZSL. In inductive ZSL [10, 14, 12, 2, 17,
23, 29, 3, 25], we are provided with the labeled seen class
instances and the semantic embedding of unseen class labels during training. While in transductive ZSL [21, 28],
in addition to the labeled seen class data and the semantic
embedding of all labels, we are also provided with the unlabeled instances of unseen classes data. ZSL can also be
categorized into Conventional and Generalized ZSL depending on the data that is presented to the model during
the testing phase. In Conventional ZSL, data emerges only
from unseen classes at test time. While Generalized ZSL
[8] is a more realistic setting where the data during testing
comes from both seen and unseen classes.
Generally, ZSL approaches project the seen and unseen class data into a latent space that is robust for learning unseen class labels. One approach is to learn a latent
space that is aligned towards the semantic label embedding
[10, 12, 14, 17, 19, 23]. The input data is transformed into
this latent space for learning the classification models over
seen and unseen classes. This approach leads to the well
known hubness problem [18, 16, 9] where the transformed
data become hubs for the nearby class embeddings leading
to performance deterioration in both conventional and generalized ZSL. To alleviate the hubness problem, the other
approaches [29, 5, 31, 18] learn a latent visual space for
recognizing the seen class labels by aligning the semantic
class embeddings towards this latent space. Irrespective of
the latent space for transforming the data, there is an inherent bias in the model towards seen classes, which we refer to
as the bias problem. Due to this bias the models generally
perform poorly on unseen classes.
Existing ZSL methods focus on addressing only one of
these problems. In this work, we propose a novel method Semantically Aligned Bias Reducing (SABR) ZSL to alleviate both the hubness and bias problems. We propose
two versions of SABR - SABR-I and SABR-T for the inductive and the transductive ZSL settings respectively. Both
these versions have a common first step that learns an inter-

7056

