Gaussian Temporal Awareness Networks for Action Localization∗
Fuchen Long† , Ting Yao‡ , Zhaofan Qiu† , Xinmei Tian† , Jiebo Luo§ and Tao Mei‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
§
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY USA
{longfc.ustc, tingyao.ustc, zhaofanqiu}@gmail.com; xinmei@ustc.edu.cn;
jluo@cs.rochester.edu; tmei@live.com

Abstract
Temporally localizing actions in a video is a fundamental
challenge in video understanding. Most existing approaches have often drawn inspiration from image object detection
and extended the advances, e.g., SSD and Faster R-CNN, to
produce temporal locations of an action in a 1D sequence.
Nevertheless, the results can suffer from robustness problem due to the design of predetermined temporal scales,
which overlooks the temporal structure of an action and
limits the utility on detecting actions with complex variations. In this paper, we propose to address the problem
by introducing Gaussian kernels to dynamically optimize
temporal scale of each action proposal. Specifically, we
present Gaussian Temporal Awareness Networks (GTAN) —
a new architecture that novelly integrates the exploitation
of temporal structure into an one-stage action localization
framework. Technically, GTAN models the temporal structure through learning a set of Gaussian kernels, each for a
cell in the feature maps. Each Gaussian kernel corresponds
to a particular interval of an action proposal and a mixture
of Gaussian kernels could further characterize action proposals with various length. Moreover, the values in each
Gaussian curve reflect the contextual contributions to the
localization of an action proposal. Extensive experiments
are conducted on both THUMOS14 and ActivityNet v1.3
datasets, and superior results are reported when comparing
to state-of-the-art approaches. More remarkably, GTAN
achieves 1.9% and 1.1% improvements in mAP on testing
set of the two datasets.

1. Introduction
With the tremendous increase of online and personal media archives, people are generating, storing and consuming
a large collection of videos. The trend encourages the devel∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

1D conv

1D conv

1D conv

1D conv

1D conv

1D conv

Pole vault
0.21

Pole vault
0.32

Pole vault
0.61

Pole vault
0.83

Pole vault
0.51

Pole vault
0.31

Pole vault
0.23

Pole vault
0.45

Pole vault 0.96

Pole vault
0.33

Figure 1. The intuition of a typical one-stage action localization
(upper) and our GTAN (lower). The typical method fixes temporal
scale in each feature map and seldom explores temporal structure
of an action. In contrast, temporal structure is taken into account
in our GTAN through learning a set of Gaussian kernels.

opment of effective and efficient algorithms to intelligently
parse video data. One fundamental challenge that underlies
the success of these advances is action detection in videos
from both temporal aspect [6, 9, 17, 30, 39, 43] and spatiotemporal aspect [11, 18]. In this work, the main focus is
temporal action detection/localization, which is to locate
the exact time stamps of the starting and the ending of an
action, and recognize the action with a set of categories.
One natural way of temporal action localization is to extend image object detection frameworks, e.g., SSD [23] or
Faster R-CNN [27], for producing spatial bounding boxes in
a 2D image to temporal localization of an action in a 1D sequence [4, 19]. The upper part of Figure 1 conceptualizes a
typical process of one-stage action localization. In general,
the frame-level or clip-level features in the video sequence
are first aggregated into one feature map, and then multiple
1D temporal convolutional layers are devised to increase the

344

