Monocular Total Capture: Posing Face, Body, and Hands in the Wild ∗
Donglai Xiang Hanbyul Joo Yaser Sheikh
Carnegie Mellon University
{donglaix,hanbyulj,yaser}@cs.cmu.edu

Figure 1: We present the first method to simultaneously capture the 3D total body motion of a target person from a monocular
view input. For each example, (left) input image and (right) 3D total body motion capture results overlaid on the input.

Abstract
We present the first method to capture the 3D total motion of a target person from a monocular view input. Given
an image or a monocular video, our method reconstructs
the motion from body, face, and fingers represented by a
3D deformable mesh model. We use an efficient representation called 3D Part Orientation Fields (POFs), to encode
the 3D orientations of all body parts in the common 2D image space. POFs are predicted by a Fully Convolutional
Network, along with the joint confidence maps. To train our
network, we collect a new 3D human motion dataset capturing diverse total body motion of 40 subjects in a multiview
system. We leverage a 3D deformable human model to reconstruct total body pose from the CNN outputs with the aid
of the pose and shape prior in the model. We also present
a texture-based tracking method to obtain temporally coherent motion capture output. We perform thorough quantitative evaluations including comparison with the existing
body-specific and hand-specific methods, and performance
analysis on camera viewpoint and human pose changes. Finally, we demonstrate the results of our total body motion
capture on various challenging in-the-wild videos.

∗ Website: http://domedb.perception.cs.cmu.edu/mtc

1. Introduction
Human motion capture is essential for many applications
including visual effects, robotics, sports analytics, medical applications, and human social behavior understanding.
However, capturing 3D human motion is often costly, requiring a special motion capture system with multiple cameras. For example, the most widely used system [2] needs
multiple calibrated cameras with reflective markers carefully attached to the subjects’ body. The actively-studied
markerless approaches are also based on multi-view systems [21, 29, 19, 25, 26] or depth cameras [50, 7]. For this
reason, the amount of available 3D motion data is extremely
limited. Capturing 3D human motion from single images or
videos can provide a huge breakthrough for many applications by increasing the accessibility of 3D human motion
data, especially by converting all human-activity videos on
the Internet into a large-scale 3D human motion corpus.
Reconstructing 3D human pose or motion from a monocular image or video, however, is extremely challenging due
to the fundamental depth ambiguity. Interestingly, humans
are able to almost effortlessly reason about the 3D human
body motion from a single view, presumably by leveraging strong prior knowledge about feasible 3D human motions. Inspired by this, several learning-based approaches
have been proposed over the last few years to predict 3D
human body motion (pose) from a monocular video (im110965

