CLEVR-Ref+: Diagnosing Visual Reasoning with Referring Expressions
Runtao Liu1 , Chenxi Liu2( ) , Yutong Bai3 , Alan Yuille2
1
Peking University 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
runtao219@gmail.com

cxliu@jhu.edu

ytongbai@gmail.com

Abstract
Referring object detection and referring image segmentation are important tasks that require joint understanding
of visual information and natural language. Yet there has
been evidence that current benchmark datasets suffer from
bias, and current state-of-the-art models cannot be easily
evaluated on their intermediate reasoning process. To address these issues and complement similar efforts in visual
question answering, we build CLEVR-Ref+, a synthetic diagnostic dataset for referring expression comprehension.
The precise locations and attributes of the objects are readily available, and the referring expressions are automatically associated with functional programs. The synthetic
nature allows control over dataset bias (through sampling
strategy), and the modular programs enable intermediate
reasoning ground truth without human annotators.
In addition to evaluating several state-of-the-art models
on CLEVR-Ref+, we also propose IEP-Ref, a module network approach that significantly outperforms other models
on our dataset. In particular, we present two interesting and
important findings using IEP-Ref: (1) the module trained to
transform feature maps into segmentation masks can be attached to any intermediate module to reveal the entire reasoning process step-by-step; (2) even if all training data has
at least one object referred, IEP-Ref can correctly predict
no-foreground when presented with false-premise referring
expressions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
direct and quantitative proof that neural modules behave in
the way they are intended.1

1. Introduction
There has been significant research interest in the joint
understanding of vision and natural language. While image
captioning [17, 5, 25, 22] focuses on generating a sentence
with image being the only input, visual question answering
(VQA) [2, 6, 37] and referring expressions (REF) [24, 13]
require comprehending both an image and a sentence, before generating an output. In this paper, we focus on refer1 All data and code concerning CLEVR-Ref+ and IEP-Ref have been
released at https://cs.jhu.edu/˜cxliu/2019/clevr-ref+

alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

ring expressions, which is to identify the particular objects
(in the form of segmentation mask or bounding box) in a
given scene from natural language.
In order to study referring expressions, various datasets
have been proposed [24, 34, 18]. These are real-world images annotated by crowdsource workers. The advantage of
these datasets is that they, to a certain extent, reflect the
complexity and nuances of the real world. Yet inevitably,
they also have limitations. First, they usually exhibit strong
biases that may be exploited by the models [3]. Roughly
speaking, this means simply selecting the salient foreground
object (i.e., discarding the referring expression) will yield a
much higher baseline than random. This casts doubts on
the true level of understanding within current REF models.
Second, evaluation can only be conducted on the final segmentation mask or bounding box, but not the intermediate
step-by-step reasoning process. For example, for the referring expression “Woman to the left of the red suitcase”, a
reasonable reasoning process should be first find all suitcases in the image, then identify the red one among them,
finally segment the woman to its left. Clearly this requires
significantly more high-quality annotations, which are currently unavailable and hard to collect.
To address these concerns and echo similar efforts in visual question answering (i.e., CLEVR [15]), we propose
CLEVR-Ref+, a synthetic diagnostic dataset for referring
expressions. The advantage of using a synthetic dataset is
that we have full control over the scene, and dataset bias
can be minimized by employing a uniform sampling strategy. Also, the referring expressions are now automatically
annotated with the true underlying reasoning process, so a
step-by-step analysis becomes much more plausible.
We make much effort in constructing CLEVR-Ref+ to
make sure it is well adapted and applicable to the referring expression task. First, we turn the original questions in
CLEVR into their corresponding referring expression format. Second, we change the output space from textual answers (in the form of a word) to referred objects (in the
form of segmentation mask or bounding box). Third, we
analyzed statistics from real-world REF datasets and found
that there are some common types of referring expressions
14185

