ELASTIC: Improving CNNs with Dynamic Scaling Policies
Huiyu Wang1 * Aniruddha Kembhavi2 Ali Farhadi2,3,4 Alan Yuille1 Mohammad Rastegari2,4
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
3
University of Washington 4 Xnor.ai
huiyu@jhu.edu

{anik,mohammadr}@allenai.org

ali@cs.uw.edu

alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

Abstract
Image

Scale variation has been a challenge from traditional to
modern approaches in computer vision. Most solutions to
scale issues have a similar theme: a set of intuitive and
manually designed policies that are generic and fixed (e.g.
SIFT or feature pyramid). We argue that the scaling policy should be learned from data. In this paper, we introduce E LASTIC, a simple, efficient and yet very effective approach to learn a dynamic scale policy from data. We formulate the scaling policy as a non-linear function inside
the network’s structure that (a) is learned from data, (b) is
instance specific, (c) does not add extra computation, and
(d) can be applied on any network architecture. We applied
E LASTIC to several state-of-the-art network architectures
and showed consistent improvement without extra (sometimes even lower) computation on ImageNet classification,
MSCOCO multi-label classification, and PASCAL VOC semantic segmentation. Our results show major improvement
for images with scale challenges. Our code is available
here: https://github.com/allenai/elastic

1. Introduction
Scale variation has been one of the main challenges in
computer vision. There is a rich literature on different approaches to encoding scale variations in computer vision
algorithms [20]. In feature engineering, there have been
manually prescribed solutions that offer scale robustness.
For example, the idea of searching for scale first and then
extracting features based on a known scale used in SIFT or
the idea of using feature pyramids are examples of these
prescribed solutions. Some of these ideas have also been
migrated to feature learning using deep learning in modern
recognition solutions.
The majority of the solutions in old-school and even
modern approaches to encode scale are manually designed
and fixed solutions. For example, most state-of-the-art im* Work done while an intern at AI2.

Category
ResNeXt.50

cock

crutch

golf ball

honeycomb
X

L

pop bottle

candle
M

S

Top 1
ResNeXt.50
+ Elastic

Top 1

Figure 1: Dynamic scale policy. Scaling policies in CNNs
are typically integrated into the network architecture manually in a pyramidal fashion. The color bar in this figure
(second row) shows the scales at different blocks of the
ResNext50 architecture. The early layers receive eXtralarge resolutions and in the following layers resolutions decrease as Large, Medium, and Small. We argue that scaling
policies in CNNs should be instance-specific. Our Elastic
model (the third row) allows different scaling policies for
different input images and it learns from the training data
how to pick the best policy. For scale challenging images
e.g. images with lots of small(or diverse scale) objects, it
is crucial that network can adapt its scale policy based on
the input. As it can be seen in this figure, Elastic gives a
better prediction for these scale challenging images. (See
section 4.1.1 for more details)
age classification networks [16, 31, 10, 14, 38, 42] use the
feature pyramid policy where a network looks at the larger
resolution first and then goes to smaller ones as it proceeds
through the layers. Despite the fact that this common practice seems to be a natural and intuitive choice, we argue that
this scale policy is not necessarily the best one for all possible scale variations in images. We claim that an ideal scale
policy should (1) be learned from the data; (2) be instance
specific; (3) not add extra computational burden; and (4) be
12258

