Shape Unicode: A Unified Shape Representation
Sanjeev Muralikrishnan1∗

Vladimir G. Kim1
Matthew Fisher1
1
Adobe Research 2 IIT Bombay

Abstract
3D shapes come in varied representations from a set of
points to a set of images, each capturing different aspects of
the shape. We propose a unified code for 3D shapes, dubbed
Shape Unicode, that imbibes shape cues across these representations into a single code, and a novel framework to
learn such a code space for any 3D shape dataset. We discuss this framework as a single go-to training model for
any input representation, and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the learned code space by applying it directly to common
shape analysis tasks – discriminative and generative. In this
work, we use three common representations – voxel grids,
point clouds and multi-view projections – and combine them
into a single code. Note that while we use all three representations at training time, the code can be derived from
any single representation during testing. We evaluate this
code space on shape retrieval, segmentation and correspondence, and show that the unified code performs better than
the individual representations themselves. Additionally,
this code space compares quite well to the representationspecific state-of-the-art in these tasks. We also qualitatively
discuss linear interpolation between points in this space, by
synthesizing from intermediate points.

1. Introduction
With advances in low-cost sensing devices and 3D authoring tools, repositories of naturally acquired and synthesized 3D shapes have steadily grown. This influx of 3D
shape data has brought about advancements in shape analysis and synthesis, and has led to several efficient ways of
storing and representing shapes, such as polygon meshes,
voxel grids, point clouds, depth maps, projected images,
and implicit functions. Each representation is best suited
to specific tasks, but none for all such tasks.
As shape data structures, different representations are designed to optimize tasks such as efficient rendering, interactive manipulation, level-of-detail retrieval, and functionality
analysis. The advent of deep learning has favoured representations amenable to analysis and generation by neural
∗ Corresponding author: samk@adobe.com

Siddhartha Chaudhuri1,2

Voxel Cross-Entropy

Chamfer Distance

Mean Squared Error

DVoxel

DPoints

DViews

Unicode

Unicode

Unicode

μ,σ

μ,σ

μ,σ

EVoxel

EPoints

EViews

Binary
Cross
Entropy
P(Car)=0.9

Figure 1: Overview of our Shape Unicode architecture. Different base shape representations (bottom) – voxel grids,
point clouds and multi-view images – are processed through
three encoder/decoder pairs that are trained to project all
three representations to the same unified code (middle).
We show that this code is a richly informative input for
a range of unified geometry processing pipelines – translation, synthesis, segmentation, correspondences, and retrieval/classification – and can be computed even if only one
base representation is available at test time.
networks. Further, 3D sensing of real objects added easeof-acquisition and completeness-of-information to the mix,
ranging from single images or depth maps of objects, to full
scans from all directions capturing both color and geometry.
Product applications and academic research have chosen shape representations suited for each task and tailored
frameworks around them. When applied to deep networks,
this has produced modules specialized to each representation, including specialized convolution operations, architectures, loss functions, and training procedures (e.g.
meshes [20], point clouds [23], voxels [38], multi-view images [34], octrees [26, 35]). These pipelines are specific
to the associated representations and technical innovations
developed for one representation rarely carry over to others. Thus, the design cost of analysing data in different

3790

