Improving Semantic Segmentation via Video Propagation and Label Relaxation
Yi Zhu1∗

Karan Sapra2∗ Fitsum A. Reda2 Kevin J. Shih2 Shawn Newsam1
Andrew Tao2 Bryan Catanzaro2
1
University of California at Merced 2 Nvidia Corporation

{yzhu25,snewsam}@ucmerced.edu

{ksapra,freda,kshih,atao,bcatanzaro}@nvidia.com

Abstract

Video
Prediction

Video
Prediction
I͠ t+1

It

Semantic segmentation requires large amounts of pixelwise annotations to learn accurate models. In this paper, we
present a video prediction-based methodology to scale up
training sets by synthesizing new training samples in order
to improve the accuracy of semantic segmentation networks.
We exploit video prediction models’ ability to predict future
frames in order to also predict future labels. A joint propagation strategy is also proposed to alleviate mis-alignments
in synthesized samples. We demonstrate that training segmentation models on datasets augmented by the synthesized samples leads to significant improvements in accuracy. Furthermore, we introduce a novel boundary label relaxation technique that makes training robust to annotation
noise and propagation artifacts along object boundaries.
Our proposed methods achieve state-of-the-art mIoUs of
83.5% on Cityscapes and 82.9% on CamVid. Our single
model, without model ensembles, achieves 72.8% mIoU on
the KITTI semantic segmentation test set, which surpasses
the winning entry of the ROB challenge 2018.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task of dense per pixel predictions of semantic labels. Large improvements in model
accuracy have been made in recent literature [44, 14, 10],
in part due to the introduction of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for feature learning, the task’s utility for selfdriving cars, and the availability of larger and richer training datasets (e.g., Cityscapes [15] and Mapillary Vista [32]).
While these models rely on large amounts of training data
to achieve their full potential, the dense nature of semantic
segmentation entails a prohibitively expensive dataset annotation process. For instance, annotating all pixels in a
1024 × 2048 Cityscapes image takes on average 1.5 hours
[15]. Annotation quality plays an important role for training
better models. While coarsely annotating large contiguous
∗ indicates equal contribution.

Joint
Propagation

Augmented
Training Set

t+2

…

Joint
Propagation
͠

Lt

͠I

Lt+1

Boundary Label
Relaxation

͠
L
t+2

Segmentation Network

Figure 1: Framework overview. We propose joint image-label
propagation to scale up training sets for robust semantic segmentation. The green dashed box includes manually labelled samples,
and the red dashed box includes our propagated samples. T is the
transformation function learned by the video prediction models to
perform propagation. We also propose boundary label relaxation
to mitigate label noise during training. Our framework can be used
with most semantic segmentation and video prediction models.

regions can be performed quickly using annotation toolkits,
finely labeling pixels along object boundaries is extremely
challenging and often involves inherently ambiguous pixels.
Many alternatives have been proposed to augment training processes with additional data. For example, Cords et
al. [15] provided 20K coarsely annotated images to help
train deep CNNs, an annotation cost effective alternative
used by all top 10 performers on the Cityscapes benchmark.
Nevertheless, coarse labeling still takes, on average, 7 minutes per image. An even cheaper way to obtain more labeled
samples is to generate synthetic data [35, 36, 18, 47, 45].
However, model accuracy on the synthetic data often does
not generalize to real data due to the domain gap between
synthetic and real images. Luc et al. [28] use a state-of-theart image segmentation method [42] as a teacher to generate extra annotations for unlabelled images. However,
their performance is bounded by the teacher method. Another approach exploits the fact that many semantic segmentation datasets are based on continuous video frame
sequences sparsely labeled at regular intervals. As such,
several works [2, 9, 31, 16, 33] propose to use temporal

8856

