See More, Know More: Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation with
Co-Attention Siamese Networks
Xiankai Lu1∗, Wenguan Wang1∗ , Chao Ma2 , Jianbing Shen1†, Ling Shao1 , Fatih Porikli3
1
2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3

Australian National University, Australia

carrierlxk@gmail.com wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn
shenjianbingcg@gmail.com ling.shao@ieee.org fatih.porikli@anu.edu.au
https://github.com/carrierlxk/COSNet

Abstract
We introduce a novel network, called CO-attention
Siamese Network (COSNet), to address the unsupervised
video object segmentation task from a holistic view. We emphasize the importance of inherent correlation among video
frames and incorporate a global co-attention mechanism
to improve further the state-of-the-art deep learning based
solutions that primarily focus on learning discriminative
foreground representations over appearance and motion in
short-term temporal segments. The co-attention layers in
our network provide efficient and competent stages for capturing global correlations and scene context by jointly computing and appending co-attention responses into a joint
feature space. We train COSNet with pairs of video frames,
which naturally augments training data and allows increased learning capacity. During the segmentation stage,
the co-attention model encodes useful information by processing multiple reference frames together, which is leveraged to infer the frequently reappearing and salient foreground objects better. We propose a unified and end-to-end
trainable framework where different co-attention variants
can be derived for mining the rich context within videos.
Our extensive experiments over three large benchmarks
manifest that COSNet outperforms the current alternatives
by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised video object segmentation (UVOS) aims
to automatically separate primary foreground object(s) from
their background in a video. Since UVOS does not require
manual interaction, it has significant value in both academic
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.

Figure 1. Illustration of our intuition. Given an input frame (b),
our method leverages information from multiple reference frames
(d) to better determine the foreground object (a), through a coattention mechanism. (c) An inferior result without co-attention.

and applied fields, especially in this era of informationexplosion. However, due to the lack of prior knowledge
about the primary object(s), in addition to the typical challenges for semi-supervised video object segmentation (e.g.,
object deformation, occlusion, and background clutters),
UVOS suffers from another difficult problem, i.e., how to
correctly distinguish the primary objects from a complex
and diverse background.
We argue that the primary objects in UVOS settings
should be the most (i) distinguishable in an individual frame
(locally salient), and (ii) frequently appearing throughout
the video sequence (globally consistent). These two properties are essential for determining the primary objects. For
instance, by only glimpsing a short video clip as illustrated
in Fig. 1(b), it is hard to determine the primary objects. Instead, if we view the entire video (or a sufficiently long sequence) as in Fig. 1(d), the foreground can be easily discovered. Although primary objects tend to be highly correlated at a macro level (entire video), they often exhibit
different appearances at a micro level (shorter video clips)
due to articulated body motions, occlusions, out-of-view
movements, camera movements, and environment varia-

3623

