Attention-based Adaptive Selection of Operations for Image Restoration
in the Presence of Unknown Combined Distortions

1

Masanori Suganuma1,2 Xing Liu1 Takayuki Okatani1,2
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University 2 RIKEN Center for AIP
{suganuma,ryu,okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
Many studies have been conducted so far on image
restoration, the problem of restoring a clean image from
its distorted version. There are many different types of distortion which affect image quality. Previous studies have
focused on single types of distortion, proposing methods for
removing them. However, image quality degrades due to
multiple factors in the real world. Thus, depending on applications, e.g., vision for autonomous cars or surveillance
cameras, we need to be able to deal with multiple combined
distortions with unknown mixture ratios. For this purpose,
we propose a simple yet effective layer architecture of neural networks. It performs multiple operations in parallel,
which are weighted by an attention mechanism to enable
selection of proper operations depending on the input. The
layer can be stacked to form a deep network, which is differentiable and thus can be trained in an end-to-end fashion by gradient descent. The experimental results show that
the proposed method works better than previous methods by
a good margin on tasks of restoring images with multiple
combined distortions.

1. Introduction
The problem of image restoration, which is to restore a
clean image from its degraded version, has a long history
of research. Previously, researchers tackled the problem by
modeling (clean) natural images, where they design image
prior, such as edge statistics [7, 34] and sparse representation [1, 45], based on statistics or physics-based models
of natural images. Recently, learning-based methods using
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [18, 16] have been
shown to work better than previous methods that are based
on the hand-crafted priors, and have raised the level of performance on various image restoration tasks, such as denoising [44, 50, 39, 51], deblurring [29, 38, 17], and superresolution [6, 19, 53].
There are many types of image distortion, such as

Gaussian/salt-and-pepper/shot noises, defocus/motion blur,
compression artifacts, haze, raindrops, etc. Then, there are
two application scenarios for image restoration methods.
One is the scenario where the user knows what image distortion he/she wants to remove; an example is a deblurring
filter tool implemented in a photo editing software. The
other is the scenario where the user does not know what
distortion(s) the image undergoes but wants to improve its
quality, e.g., applications to vision for autonomous cars and
surveillance cameras.
In this paper, we consider the latter application scenario.
Most of the existing studies are targeted at the former scenario, and they cannot be directly applied to the latter. Considering that real-world images often suffer from a combination of different types of distortion, we need image
restoration methods that can deal with combined distortions
with unknown mixture ratios and strengths.
There are few works dealing with this problem. A notable exception is the work of Yu et al. [48], which proposes a framework in which multiple light-weight CNNs
are trained for different image distortions and are adaptively
applied to input images by a mechanism learned by deep reinforcement learning. Although their method is shown to be
effective, we think there is room for improvements. One is
its limited accuracy; the accuracy improvement gained by
their method is not so large, as compared with application
of existing methods for a single type of distortion to images
with combined distortions. Another is its inefficiency; it
uses multiple distortion-specific CNNs in parallel, each of
which also needs pretraining.
In this paper, we show that a simple attention mechanism
can better handle aforementioned combined image distortions. We design a layer that performs many operations
in parallel, such as convolution and pooling with different
parameters. We equip the layer with an attention mechanism that produces weights on these operations, intending
to make the attention mechanism to work as a switcher of
these operations in the layer. Given an input feature map,
the proposed layer first generates attention weights on the
multiple operations. The outputs of the operations are mul-

9039

