Box-driven Class-wise Region Masking and Filling Rate Guided Loss for
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Chunfeng Song1,2
Yan Huang1,2
Wanli Ouyang3
Liang Wang1,2,4,5
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
5
Chinese Academy of Sciences - Artificial Intelligence Research (CAS-AIR)
{chunfeng.song, yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

horse

person

horse
horse

Semantic segmentation has achieved huge progress via
adopting deep Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN). However, the performance of FCN based models severely rely
on the amounts of pixel-level annotations which are expensive and time-consuming. To address this problem, it is a
good choice to learn to segment with weak supervision from
bounding boxes. How to make full use of the class-level and
region-level supervisions from bounding boxes is the critical challenge for the weakly supervised learning task. In
this paper, we first introduce a box-driven class-wise masking model (BCM) to remove irrelevant regions of each class.
Moreover, based on the pixel-level segment proposal generated from the bounding box supervision, we could calculate
the mean filling rates of each class to serve as an important prior cue, then we propose a filling rate guided adaptive
loss (FR-Loss) to help the model ignore the wrongly labeled
pixels in proposals. Unlike previous methods directly training models with the fixed individual segment proposals, our
method can adjust the model learning with global statistical
information. Thus it can help reduce the negative impacts
from wrongly labeled proposals. We evaluate the proposed
method on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2012 benchmark
and compare with other methods. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed method is effective and
achieves the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation refers to classifying each
pixel in an image. Recently, semantic segmentation has

(a)
person
person

Image

Box-like proposal

Box-driven class-wise masking

(b)

FR of bus: ~80% sheep: ~ 60%

airplane: ~ 40%
Top 60%

bicycle: ~ 20%
Bicycle Top 20%
Person Top 80%

(c)

Image

Score map

Global top scores FR guided top scores

Figure 1. Weakly supervised segmentation with the box-level annotations. (a) The box-driven class-wise masking (BCM) model
can learn specific masks for each class in region-level, and help
remove the irrelevant regions of each class softly. (b) Based on the
pixel-level segment proposals and the bounding boxes, we could
calculate the mean pixel filling rates of each class, e.g., the sheep
fills roughly 60% pixels of the box. (c) Via ranking the values of
the score map, we can select the most confident locations for back
propagation and ignore the weak ones. As shown in the picture,
filling rate guided top scores selection is better than the global one.

achieved a series of progress [27, 38, 43, 8, 25, 30, 48, 17],
among which [27] is the first to introduce Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) structure into segmentation field.
Following this work, there are some improvements through
redesigning or adjusting the FCN structures [44, 18, 5, 31,
47, 7]. However, these works are designed for fully super-

3136

