SFNet: Learning Object-aware Semantic Correspondence
Junghyup Lee1, *

Dohyung Kim1, *
1

Yonsei University

Jean Ponce2,3
2

DI ENS

Abstract

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences across images is one
of the fundamental tasks in computer vision [5, 30, 36]. Early
works have focussed on handling different views of the same
scene (stereo matching [19, 36]) or adjacent frames (optical
flow [4, 5]) in a video sequence. Semantic correspondence
algorithms (e.g., SIFT Flow [30]) go one step further, finding a dense flow field between images depicting different
instances of the same object or scene category. This is very
challenging especially in the presence of large changes in
appearance/scene layout and background clutter. Classical
approaches to semantic correspondence [3, 20, 26, 30, 47]
typically use an objective function involving fidelity and
regularization terms. The fidelity term encourages hand* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
1 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul,

Korea.
2 Département d’Informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris, France.

INRIA

Training pair

Test pair

Object-aware
semantic flow

Synthetic warp

We address the problem of semantic correspondence, that
is, establishing a dense flow field between images depicting
different instances of the same object or scene category. We
propose to use images annotated with binary foreground
masks and subjected to synthetic geometric deformations
to train a convolutional neural network (CNN) for this task.
Using these masks as part of the supervisory signal offers a
good compromise between semantic flow methods, where the
amount of training data is limited by the cost of manually
selecting point correspondences, and semantic alignment
ones, where the regression of a single global geometric transformation between images may be sensitive to image-specific
details such as background clutter. We propose a new CNN
architecture, dubbed SFNet, which implements this idea. It
leverages a new and differentiable version of the argmax
function for end-to-end training, with a loss that combines
mask and flow consistency with smoothness terms. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach,
which significantly outperforms the state of the art on standard benchmarks.

3

Bumsub Ham1,†

Figure 1: We use pairs of warped foreground masks obtained from
a single image (left) as a supervisory signal to train our model.
This allows us to establish object-aware semantic correspondences
across images depicting different instances of the same object or
scene category (right). No masks are required at test time. (Best
viewed in color.)

crafted features (e.g., SIFT [32], HOG [7], DAISY [45])
to be matched along a dense flow field between images,
and the regularization term makes it smooth while aligning
discontinuities to object boundaries. Although they have
proven useful in various computer vision tasks including
object recognition [10, 30], semantic segmentation [26],
co-segmentation [44], image editing [8], and scene parsing [26, 50], hand-crafted features do not capture high-level
semantics (e.g., appearance and shape variations), and are
not robust to image-specific details (e.g., texture, background
clutter, occlusion).
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have allowed remarkable advances in semantic correspondence in the past
few years. Recent methods using CNNs [6, 16, 23, 24, 27,
35, 40, 41, 42, 51] benefit from rich semantic features invariant to intra-class variations, achieving state-of-the-art results.
Semantic flow approaches [6, 16, 27, 35, 51] attempt to find
correspondences for individual pixels or patches. They are
not seriously affected by non-rigid deformations, but are
easily distracted by background clutter. They also require
a large amount of data with ground-truth correspondences

2278

