Probabilistic Permutation Synchronization using the Riemannian Structure of
the Birkhoff Polytope
Tolga Birdal 1, 2
Umut Şimşekli 3
1
Computer Science Department, Stanford University, CA 94305 Stanford, US
2
Fakultät für Informatik, Technische Universität München, 85748 München, Germany
3
LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 75013 Paris, France
Probability Simplex Δ

Orthogonal Hypersphere

:

Birkhoff Polytope

Permutation Matrices
Tangent Space

=

∩

Common center of mass

(a) Initialization

Abstract
We present an entirely new geometric and probabilistic approach to synchronization of correspondences across
multiple sets of objects or images. In particular, we present
two algorithms: (1) Birkhoff-Riemannian L-BFGS for optimizing the relaxed version of the combinatorially intractable cycle consistency loss in a principled manner, (2)
Birkhoff-Riemannian Langevin Monte Carlo for generating
samples on the Birkhoff Polytope and estimating the confidence of the found solutions. To this end, we first introduce the very recently developed Riemannian geometry of
the Birkhoff Polytope. Next, we introduce a new probabilistic synchronization model in the form of a Markov Random
Field (MRF). Finally, based on the first order retraction operators, we formulate our problem as simulating a stochastic differential equation and devise new integrators. We
show on both synthetic and real datasets that we achieve
high quality multi-graph matching results with faster convergence and reliable confidence/uncertainty estimates.

1. Introduction
Correspondences fuel a large variety of computer vision applications such as structure-from-motion (SfM) [62],
SLAM [53], 3D reconstruction [20, 8, 6], camera relocalization [60], image retrieval [44] and 3D scan stitching [38, 22]. In a typical scenario, given two scenes, an
initial set of 2D/3D keypoints is first identified. Then the
neighborhood of each keypoint is summarized with a local descriptor [47, 23] and keypoints in the given scenes
are matched by associating the mutually closest descriptors. In a majority of practical applications, multiple images
or 3D shapes are under consideration and ascertaining such
two-view or pairwise correspondences is simply not sufficient. This necessitates a further refinement ensuring global
consistency. Unfortunately, at this stage even the well developed pipelines acquiesce either heuristic/greedy refinement [21] or incorporate costly geometric cues related to
the linking of individual correspondence estimates into a

(b) Solution

(c) Certainty/Confidence

(d) Multiple Hypotheses Solution

Top-N
Certainty

Top-2
Certainty

Figure 1. Our algorithm robustly solves the multiway image
matching problem (a, b) and provides confidence maps (c) that
can be of great help in further improving the estimates (d). The
bar on the right is used to assign colors to confidences. For the
rest, incorrect matches are marked in red and correct ones in blue.

globally coherent whole [30, 62, 73].
In this paper, by using the fact that correspondences
are cycle consistent 1 , we propose two novel algorithms
for refining the assignments across multiple images/scans
(nodes) in a multi-way graph and for estimating assignment
confidences, respectively. We model the correspondences
between image pairs as relative, total permutation matrices and seek to find absolute permutations that re-arrange
the detected keypoints to a single canonical, global order.
This problem is known as map or permutation synchronization [56, 70]. Even though in many practical scenarios matches are only partially available, when shapes are
complete and the density of matches increases, total permutations can suffice [36].
Similar to many well received works [84, 61], we relax the sought permutations to the set of doubly-stochastic
(DS) matrices. We then consider the geometric structure of
DS, the Birkhoff Polytope [9]. We are - to the best of our
knowledge, for the first time introducing and applying the
recently developed Riemannian geometry of the Birkhoff
Polytope [26] to tackle challenging problems of computer
vision. Note that lack of this geometric understanding
caused plenty of obstacles for scholars dealing with our
problem [61, 77]. By the virtue of a first order retraction, we
1 Composition of correspondences for any circular path arrives back at
the start node.

111105

