Libra R-CNN: Towards Balanced Learning for Object Detection
Jiangmiao Pang†

Kai Chen§
†

Jianping Shi‡

Wanli Ouyang♭

Huajun Feng†

Dahua Lin§

Zhejiang University § The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡
SenseTime Research ♭ The University of Sydney

pjm@zju.edu.cn
fenghj@zju.edu.cn

ck015@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

shijianping@sensetime.com

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

(c)

Compared with model architectures, the training process, which is also crucial to the success of detectors, has
received relatively less attention in object detection. In this
work, we carefully revisit the standard training practice of
detectors, and find that the detection performance is often
limited by the imbalance during the training process, which
generally consists in three levels – sample level, feature
level, and objective level. To mitigate the adverse effects
caused thereby, we propose Libra R-CNN, a simple but effective framework towards balanced learning for object detection. It integrates three novel components: IoU-balanced
sampling, balanced feature pyramid, and balanced L1 loss,
respectively for reducing the imbalance at sample, feature,
and objective level. Benefitted from the overall balanced design, Libra R-CNN significantly improves the detection performance. Without bells and whistles, it achieves 2.5 points
and 2.0 points higher Average Precision (AP) than FPN
Faster R-CNN and RetinaNet respectively on MSCOCO. 1

&

1 Code is available at https://github.com/OceanPang/
Libra_R-CNN.

𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑐

* ∈ 𝒔𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆𝒔

Loss

𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑖)

𝐿𝑐𝑙 𝑠
Imbalance
𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑐

Box Head
Epoch
(b)

(a)

High Level

Detect

✓

Balanced

Detect

✓✓

Low Level

Detect

✗

Numbers
Random
Sampling

1. Introduction
Along with the advances in deep convolutional networks,
recent years have seen remarkable progress in object detection. A number of detection frameworks such as Faster RCNN [28], RetinaNet [20], and Cascaded R-CNN [3] have
been developed, which have substantially pushed forward
the state of the art. Despite the apparent differences in the
pipeline architectures, e.g. single-stage vs. two-stage, modern detection frameworks mostly follow a common training paradigm, namely, sampling regions, extracting features therefrom, and then jointly recognizing the categories
and refining the locations under the guidance of a standard
multi-task objective function.

𝐿𝑐𝑙 𝑠

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Imbalance

Regions
Easy

Hard

Figure 1: Imbalance consists in (a) sample level (b) feature level and (c) objective level, which prevents the welldesigned model architectures from being fully exploited.
Based on this paradigm, the success of the object detector training depends on three key aspects: (1) whether the
selected region samples are representative, (2) whether the
extracted visual features are fully utilized, and (3) whether
the designed objective function is optimal. However, our
study reveals that the typical training process is significantly
imbalanced in all these aspects. This imbalance issue prevents the power of well-designed model architectures from
being fully exploited, thus limiting the overall performance,

821

