Recurrent Back-Projection Network for Video Super-Resolution
Muhammad Haris1 , Greg Shakhnarovich2 , and Norimichi Ukita1
1
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, United States
{mharis, ukita}@toyota-ti.ac.jp, greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
We proposed a novel architecture for the problem of
video super-resolution. We integrate spatial and temporal
contexts from continuous video frames using a recurrent
encoder-decoder module, that fuses multi-frame information with the more traditional, single frame super-resolution
path for the target frame. In contrast to most prior work
where frames are pooled together by stacking or warping,
our model, the Recurrent Back-Projection Network (RBPN)
treats each context frame as a separate source of information. These sources are combined in an iterative refinement framework inspired by the idea of back-projection in
multiple-image super-resolution. This is aided by explicitly representing estimated inter-frame motion with respect
to the target, rather than explicitly aligning frames. We
propose a new video super-resolution benchmark, allowing
evaluation at a larger scale and considering videos in different motion regimes. Experimental results demonstrate
that our RBPN is superior to existing methods on several
datasets.

1. Introduction
The goal of super-resolution (SR) is to enhance a lowresolution (LR) image to higher resolution (HR) by filling
missing fine details in the LR image. This field can be divided into Single-Image SR (SISR) [4, 8, 9, 19, 21, 29],
Multi-Image SR (MISR) [5, 6], and Video SR (VSR) [2,
30, 27, 16, 13, 25], the focus of this paper.
Consider a sequence of LR video frames
It−n , . . . , It , . . . , It+n , where we super-resolve a target
frame, It . While It can be super-resolved independently
of other frames as SISR, this is wasteful of missing details
available from the other frames. In MISR, the missing
details available from the other frames are fused for
super-resolving It . For extracting these missing details, all
frames must be spatially aligned explicitly or implicitly.
By separating differences between the aligned frames from
missing details observed only in one or some of the frames,
the missing details are extracted. This alignment is required

to be very precise (e.g., sub-pixel accuracy) for SR. In
MISR, however, the frames are aligned independently with
no cue given by temporal smoothness, resulting in difficulty
in the precise alignment. Yet another approach is to align
the frames in temporal smooth order as VSR.
In recent VSR methods using convolutional networks,
the frames are concatenated [22, 16] or fed into recurrent
networks (RNNs) [13]) in temporal order; no explicit alignment is performed. The frames can be also aligned explicitly, using motion cues between temporal frames with
the alignment modules [25, 2, 30, 27]. These latter methods generally produce results superior to those with no explicit spatial alignment [22, 13]. Nonetheless, these VSR
methods suffer from a number of problems. In the frameconcatenation approach [2, 16, 25], many frames are processed simultaneously in the network, resulting in difficulty
in training the network. In RNNs [30, 27, 13], it is not easy
to jointly model subtle and significant changes (e.g., slow
and quick motions of foreground objects) observed in all
frames of a video even by those designed for maintaining
long-term temporal dependencies such as LSTMs [7].
Our method proposed in this paper is inspired by “backprojection” originally introduced in [14, 15] for MISR.
Back-projection iteratively calculates residual images as reconstruction error between a target image and a set of its
corresponding images. The residuals are back-projected to
the target image for improving its resolution. The multiple residuals can represent subtle and significant differences
between the target frame and other frames independently.
Recently, Deep Back-Projection Networks (DBPN) [8] extended back-projection to Deep SISR under the assumption
that only one LR image is given for the target image. In that
scenario, DBPN produces a high-resolution feature map, iteratively refined through multiple up- and down-sampling
layers. Our method, Recurrent Back-Projection Networks
(RBPN), integrates the benefits of the original, MISR back
projection and DBPN, for VSR. Here we use other video
frames as corresponding LR images for the original MISR
back-projection. In addition, we use the idea of iteratively
refining HR feature maps representing missing details by
up- and down-sampling processes to further improve the
13897

