Modeling Local Geometric Structure of
3D Point Clouds using Geo-CNN

1

Shiyi Lan1 Ruichi Yu1 Gang Yu2
University of Maryland, College Park

Larry S. Davis1
Megvii Inc (Face++)

2

sylan@cs.umd.edu, {yrcbsg, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu, yugang@megvii.com

Abstract
Recent advances in deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have motivated researchers to adapt CNNs to directly model points in 3D point clouds. Modeling local
structure has been proven to be important for the success of
convolutional architectures, and researchers exploited the
modeling of local point sets in the feature extraction hierarchy. However, limited attention has been paid to explicitly model the geometric structure amongst points in a
local region. To address this problem, we propose GeoCNN, which applies a generic convolution-like operation
dubbed as GeoConv to each point and its local neighborhood. Local geometric relationships among points are captured when extracting edge features between the center and
its neighboring points. We first decompose the edge feature extraction process onto three orthogonal bases, and
then aggregate the extracted features based on the angles
between the edge vector and the bases. This encourages the
network to preserve the geometric structure in Euclidean
space throughout the feature extraction hierarchy. GeoConv
is a generic and efficient operation that can be easily integrated into 3D point cloud analysis pipelines for multiple
applications. We evaluate Geo-CNN on ModelNet40 and
KITTI and achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With the development of popular sensors such as RGBD cameras and LIDAR, 3D point clouds can be easily
acquired and directly processed in many computer vision
tasks [64, 19, 38, 30, 55, 28, 16, 56, 8, 61]. Although
hand-crafted features on point clouds have been utilized for
many years, recent breakthroughs came with the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) inspiring
researchers to adapt insights from 2D image analysis with
CNNs to point clouds.
One intuitive idea is to convert irregular point clouds into
regular 3D grids by voxelization [31, 63, 51, 5], which en-

z
z

pp

xx

qq

*
y

y Decompose

*

Aggregate

*
Edge Feature

Figure 1. Modeling Geometric Structure between Points via Vector Decomposition. We first decompose the edge features along
three orthogonal directions and apply direction-associated weights
to extract directional descriptions. Then we aggregate them according to the vector’s orientation to construct compact edge features between point p and q.

ables CNN-like operations to be applied. However, volumetric methods suffer from insufficient resolution, due to
sparsely-occupied 3D grids and the exponentially increasing memory cost associated with making the grid finer. To
learn 3D representation at high resolution, kd-tree and octree based methods hierarchically partition space to exploit
input sparsity [24, 39]. But those methods focus more on
subdivision of a volume rather than local geometric structure. An important architectural model that directly processes point sets is PointNet [33], which aggregates features from points using a symmetric function. To improve the ability to handle local feature extraction, PointNet++ [35] aggregates features in local regions hierarchically. However, these methods still ignore the geometric
structure amongst points by treating points independently
in the global or local point sets.
One recent attempt to model geometric relationships
between points is EdgeConv [50], which extracts features from each point and its local k-nearest-neighborhood.
EdgeConv extracts edge features between a center point and
its neighboring points. The geometric structure between
two points p and q is represented by the vector ~
pq. However, EdgeConv only models the distance between points
(which is the norm of ~
pq) when constructing the neighborhood, and it ignores the direction of the vector, which leads
to loss of local geometric information. Considering that
3D coordinates are given at the input level of most point
1998

