Incremental Object Learning from Contiguous Views
Stefan Stojanov1 , Samarth Mishra∗1 , Ngoc Anh Thai∗1 , Nikhil Dhanda1 , Ahmad Humayun1 ,
Chen Yu2 , Linda B. Smith2 , James M. Rehg1
Georgia Institute of Technology1
Indiana University Bloomington2
{sstojanov, smishra, athai6, nn3, ahmadh, rehg}@gatech.edu
{chenyu, smith4}@indiana.edu
Abstract

Object Naming Event

Pick up

Put down

Time

In this work, we present CRIB (Continual Recognition
Inspired by Babies), a synthetic incremental object learning environment that can produce data that models visual
imagery produced by object exploration in early infancy.
CRIB is coupled with a new 3D object dataset, Toys-200,
that contains 200 unique toy-like object instances, and is
also compatible with existing 3D datasets. Through extensive empirical evaluation of state-of-the-art incremental
learning algorithms, we find the novel empirical result that
repetition can significantly ameliorate the effects of catastrophic forgetting. Furthermore, we find that in certain
cases repetition allows for performance approaching that
of batch learning algorithms. Finally, we propose an unsupervised incremental learning task with intriguing baseline
results.

1. Introduction
Children are amazing learning machines.1 Infants acquire extensive object knowledge through self-directed play
with minimal supervision, a fact which is remarkable in
contrast to the quantity of labeled data required by current
deep learning methods. During play, infants pick up, examine, and put down toys of their own volition. The moments
in which a supervisory signal is available, for example when
an adult names an object, are extremely rare in comparison to the huge volume of unlabeled perceptual inputs. See
Fig. 1 for a schematic of this play process.
Research in child development [8, 49, 22] has identified
five key properties of infants’ play experiences. First, while
infants become experts at object categorization, the bulk of
their early visual experience involves object instances, in

Object 7

Object 4

Object 7

Figure 1: Schematic of incremental object learning based
on infant play. Objects occur sequentially as exposures consisting of sets of frames with contiguous viewpoints. A
sparse and noisy supervisory signal for category learning
(naming events), accompanies the wealth of visual data.
the form of toys and everyday objects. Second, their exposure to object instances is highly repetitive, with many
objects (e.g. a favorite sippy cup) recurring over and over
again [8]. Third, when infants hold and manipulate objects,
they generate extended, contiguous views that may help in
revealing 3D object shape [49, 21, 37]. Fourth, infant learning is fundamentally incremental, as objects are held and
examined in sequence, and once an object has been put
down, its imagery is no longer available for learning. Fifth,
infants must provide their own supervision when learning
about instances, and leverage a sparse, noisy, and unsynchronized supervisory signal when learning object names.2
These properties of the infant learning environment stand
in stark contrast to current methods for object learning
in computer vision, which are based on processing minibatches of randomly-sampled, labelled frames that cover
a significant subset of the label space. This approach ensures that gradient updates do not favor one class over
another in moving collectively towards higher accuracy.
However, when data is processed incrementally in standard
deep learning architectures, the result is catastrophic forgetting, in which object representations developed early in
training are forgotten at the expense of more recent examples [14, 17]. Recent works on incremental learning have

∗ Equal contribution.
1 In the domain of word learning, for example, children acquire an average of 8 to 10 new words per day and reach a vocabulary of 60,000 words
by adulthood [34].

2 While there is a debate in developmental science about the extent to
which children’s knowledge is innate versus learned, in this paper we focus
on the task of learning from visual experience.

18777

