Blind Visual Motif Removal from a Single Image
Amir Hertz

Sharon Fogel

Rana Hanocka

Raja Giryes

Daniel Cohen-Or

Tel Aviv University

Figure 1: Blind visual motif removal results on images unseen during training. Top: test images embedded with semitransparent motifs. Bottom: our reconstructed results. Our network was trained on Latin characters, yet successfully identifies
and removes the Hindi and Japanese characters (left three images). Similarly, the overlaid visual motifs on the right three
images differ semantically from the motifs used during training.

Abstract
Many images shared over the web include overlaid objects, or visual motifs, such as text, symbols or drawings,
which add a description or decoration to the image. For
example, decorative text that specifies where the image was
taken, repeatedly appears across a variety of different images. Often, the reoccurring visual motif, is semantically
similar, yet, differs in location, style and content (e.g., text
placement, font and letters). This work proposes a deep
learning based technique for blind removal of such objects.
In the blind setting, the location and exact geometry of the
motif are unknown. Our approach simultaneously estimates
which pixels contain the visual motif, and synthesizes the
underlying latent image. It is applied to a single input image, without any user assistance in specifying the location
of the motif, achieving state-of-the-art results for blind removal of both opaque and semi-transparent visual motifs.

1. Introduction
Images shared over the web often contain overlaid objects, or visual motifs, such as text, symbols or drawings,

which can serve a variety of purposes. For example, adding
university emblems or team logos can instill an image with
pride, or, text with temperature information can add extra
information to an image. In a subset of cases, motifs are
used as a protection of image ownership, e.g., with digital
watermarks. However, in many cases, one may want to remove these visual motifs and reconstruct the original image
without the existing occlusions.
The removal of these visual motifs and the recovery of
a pristine image can be an extremely challenging task. The
structure, size and location of these objects varies between
different images, making them difficult to detect without
user guidance or assumptions about the underlying image.
Previous methods have relied on information about the location of the corrupted pixels to be restored [21, 20, 24, 36].
Dekel et al. [5] remove watermarks using large image collections, which contain the same watermark, as well as
some minimal user guidance about the watermark location.
We present a method for completely blind visual motif
removal. In the blind setting, the exact location, structure
and size of these motifs is unknown. The generalization
ability of our network is demonstrated by removing visual
motifs that are not seen during training, e.g., watermark re-

6858

