Ranked List Loss for Deep Metric Learning
Xinshao Wang1,2 , Yang Hua1 , Elyor Kodirov2 , Guosheng Hu2,1 , Romain Garnier2 , Neil M. Robertson1,2
1
School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
2
Anyvision Research Team, UK
{xwang39, y.hua, n.robertson}@qub.ac.uk, {elyor, guosheng.hu, romaing}@anyvision.co
Abstract
The objective of deep metric learning (DML) is to learn
embeddings that can capture semantic similarity information among data points. Existing pairwise or tripletwise
loss functions used in DML are known to suffer from slow
convergence due to a large proportion of trivial pairs or
triplets as the model improves. To improve this, rankingmotivated structured losses are proposed recently to incorporate multiple examples and exploit the structured information among them. They converge faster and achieve
state-of-the-art performance. In this work, we present two
limitations of existing ranking-motivated structured losses
and propose a novel ranked list loss to solve both of them.
First, given a query, only a fraction of data points is incorporated to build the similarity structure. Consequently,
some useful examples are ignored and the structure is less
informative. To address this, we propose to build a setbased similarity structure by exploiting all instances in the
gallery. The samples are split into a positive set and a negative set. Our objective is to make the query closer to the positive set than to the negative set by a margin. Second, previous methods aim to pull positive pairs as close as possible in
the embedding space. As a result, the intraclass data distribution might be dropped. In contrast, we propose to learn a
hypersphere for each class in order to preserve the similarity structure inside it. Our extensive experiments show that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on three widely used benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning (DML) plays a crucial role in a variety of applications in computer vision, such as image retrieval [28, 19], clustering [10], and transfer learning [20].
In addition, DML is a good solution for challenging extreme
classification settings [22, 40], in which there exist an enormous number of classes and only a few images per class.
For example, by using DML, FaceNet [24] achieves superhuman performance on face verification with 260M face images of 8M identities.

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed RLL. Given a query
and its ranked list, RLL aims to make the query closer to the
positive set than to the negative set by a margin m. Circle
and triangle represent two different classes. The blue circle
is a query. The yellow shapes represent nontrivial examples
while the red shapes represent trivial examples. The arrow
indicates the query’s gradient direction determined by the
corresponding non-trivial examples. The final gradient direction of the query is a weighted combination of them. The
optimised ranked list is shown in the bottom.
Loss function plays a key role in successful DML frameworks and a large variety of loss functions have been proposed in the literature. Contrastive loss [2, 6] captures the
relationship between pairwise data points, i.e., similarity or
dissimilarity. Triplet-based losses are also widely studied
[24, 33, 3]. A triplet is composed of an anchor point, a similar (positive) data point and dissimilar (negative) data point.
The purpose of triplet loss is to learn a distance metric by
which the anchor point is closer to the similar point than
the dissimilar one by a margin. In general, the triplet loss
outperforms the contrastive loss [20, 24] because the relationship between positive and negative pairs is considered.
Inspired by this, recent work [24, 28, 20, 29, 16, 19] proposes to take into consideration the richer structured information among multiple data points and achieve impressive

5207

