GQA: A New Dataset for Real-World Visual Reasoning
and Compositional Question Answering
visualreasoning.net
Drew A. Hudson
Stanford University
353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

dorarad@cs.stanford.edu

manning@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce GQA, a new dataset for real-world visual
reasoning and compositional question answering, seeking
to address key shortcomings of previous VQA datasets. We
have developed a strong and robust question engine that
leverages Visual Genome scene graph structures to create
22M diverse reasoning questions, which all come with functional programs that represent their semantics. We use the
programs to gain tight control over the answer distribution
and present a new tunable smoothing technique to mitigate
question biases. Accompanying the dataset is a suite of new
metrics that evaluate essential qualities such as consistency,
grounding and plausibility. A careful analysis is performed
for baselines as well as state-of-the-art models, providing
fine-grained results for different question types and topologies. Whereas a blind LSTM obtains a mere 42.1%, and
strong VQA models achieve 54.1%, human performance
tops at 89.3%, offering ample opportunity for new research
to explore. We hope GQA will provide an enabling resource
for the next generation of models with enhanced robustness,
improved consistency, and deeper semantic understanding
of vision and language.

1. Introduction
It takes more than a smart guess to answer a good question. The ability to assimilate knowledge and use it to draw
inferences is among the holy grails of artificial intelligence.
A tangible form of this goal is embodied in the task of Visual Question Answering (VQA), where a system has to answer free-form questions by reasoning about presented images. The task demands a rich set of abilities as varied as
object recognition, commonsense understanding and relation extraction, spanning both the visual and linguistic domains. In recent years, it has sparked substantial interest
throughout the research community, becoming extremely

Figure 1: Examples from the new GQA dataset for visual reasoning and compositional question answering:
Is the bowl to the right of the green apple?
What type of fruit in the image is round?
What color is the fruit on the right side, red or green?
Is there any milk in the bowl to the left of the apple?

popular across the board, with a host of datasets being constructed [3, 9, 13, 36, 17] and numerous models being proposed [4, 33, 5, 8, 10].
The multi-modal nature of the task and the diversity of
skills required to address different questions make VQA
particularly challenging. Yet, designing a good test that will
reflect its full qualities and complications may not be that
trivial. Despite the great strides that the field recently made,
it has been established through a series of studies that existing benchmarks suffer from critical vulnerabilities that render them highly unreliable in measuring the actual degree
of visual understanding capacities [34, 9, 1, 7, 2, 11, 16].
Most notable among the flaws of current benchmarks
is the strong and prevalent real-world priors displayed
throughout the data [34, 9, 2] – most tomatoes are red and
most tables are wooden. These in turn are exploited by

6700

