Deep Defocus Map Estimation using Domain Adaptation
Junyong Lee1
POSTECH
1

Sungkil Lee2
Sungkyunkwan University

Sunghyun Cho3
DGIST

2

3

{junyonglee, leesy}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the first end-to-end convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, Defocus Map
Estimation Network (DMENet), for spatially varying defocus map estimation. To train the network, we produce a novel
depth-of-field (DOF) dataset, SYNDOF, where each image
is synthetically blurred with a ground-truth depth map. Due
to the synthetic nature of SYNDOF, the feature characteristics of images in SYNDOF can differ from those of real
defocused photos. To address this gap, we use domain adaptation that transfers the features of real defocused photos into
those of synthetically blurred ones. Our DMENet consists
of four subnetworks: blur estimation, domain adaptation,
content preservation, and sharpness calibration networks.
The subnetworks are connected to each other and jointly
trained with their corresponding supervisions in an end-toend manner. Our method is evaluated on publicly available
blur detection and blur estimation datasets and the results
show the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
A defocus map contains the amount of defocus blur or
the size of circle of confusion (COC) per pixel for a defocusblurred (in short, defocused) image. Estimation of a defocus
map from a defocused image can greatly facilitate highlevel visual information processing, including saliency detection [12], depth estimation [40], foreground/background
separation [22], and deblurring [39]. A typical approach for
defocus map estimation first detects edges from a blurred
image, then measures the amounts of blur around the edges,
and finally interpolates the estimated blur amounts at edges
to determine the blur amounts in homogeneous regions.
The previous edge-driven approach has a few limitations.
First, the edges in a blurred image are often ambiguous,
leading to inaccurate detection. Second, blur estimation for
edges are inherently prone to errors, as a pixel at object
boundary with depth discontinuity contains a mixture of different COCs in a defocused image [18]. Third, this instability

sungkil@skku.edu

Seungyong Lee1
POSTECH

scho@dgist.ac.kr

of blur estimation at edges would result in less reliable prediction in homogeneous regions. That is, the blur amounts
estimated at different parts of an object boundary could be
incoherent and then their interpolation toward the homogeneous object interior would produce only smooth but less
accurate blur estimation. For example, the estimated blur
amounts of an object with a single depth may not be constant, because the blur amounts separately measured at the
opposite edges could not be the same when the edges have
different depth discontinuities with nearby objects.
In this paper, we present DMENet (Defocus Map Estimation Network), the first end-to-end CNN framework, which
directly estimates a defocus map given a defocused image.
Our work is distinguished from the previous ones for its
clear definition on which COC we try to estimate among
the mixture of COCs, where we infer the COC size of a
pixel using the depth value in the corresponding pinhole
image. The network trained with our COC definition leads to
more robust estimation of blur amounts, especially at object
boundaries. The network also better handles homogeneous
regions by enlarging its receptive field so that object edges
and interior information are used together to resolve ambiguity. As a result, our network significantly improves the blur
estimation accuracy in the presence of mixtures of COCs.
To enable such network learning, a high-quality dataset
is crucial. However, currently available datasets [29, 4] are
not enough, as they are either for blur detection [29], instead
of blur estimation, or of a small size [4]. To this end, we
generate a defocus-blur dataset, which we call “SYNDOF”
dataset. It would be almost impossible, even manually, to
generate ground-truth defocus maps for defocused photos.
So we use pinhole image datasets, where each image is accompanied by a depth map, to synthesize defocused images
with corresponding ground-truth defocus maps.
One limitation of our dataset is that defocus blurs are
synthetic, and there could be domain difference [9] between
the characteristics of real and synthetic defocused images.
To resolve this, we design our network to include domain
adaptation, which is capable of adapting the features of real
defocused images to those of synthetic ones, so that the network can estimate the blur amounts of real images with the
112222

