The Regretful Agent: Heuristic-Aided Navigation through Progress Estimation
Chih-Yao Ma∗† , Zuxuan Wu‡ , Ghassan AlRegib† , Caiming Xiong§ , Zsolt Kira†
†

1st step

20%

Georgia Institute of Technology, ‡ University of Maryland, College Park, § Salesforce Research
Instruction: Exit the room. Walk past the display case
and into the kitchen. Stop by the table.
4th

I know I came from there.
Where should I go next?

5th step

5th

13%

60%

1st step
2nd

7th

6th

25%

75%
My estimated
confidence decreased.
Something went wrong.
Let’s learn this lesson
and go back.

42%

90%

Figure 1: Vision-and-Language Navigation task and our proposed regretful navigation agent. The agent leverages the selfmonitoring mechanism [13] through time to decide when to roll back to a previous location and resume the instructionfollowing task. Our code is available at https://github.com/chihyaoma/regretful-agent.

Abstract
As deep learning continues to make progress for challenging perception tasks, there is increased interest in combining vision, language, and decision-making. Specifically,
the Vision and Language Navigation (VLN) task involves
navigating to a goal purely from language instructions
and visual information without explicit knowledge of the
goal. Recent successful approaches have made in-roads in
achieving good success rates for this task but rely on beam
search, which thoroughly explores a large number of trajectories and is unrealistic for applications such as robotics.
In this paper, inspired by the intuition of viewing the problem as search on a navigation graph, we propose to use a
progress monitor developed in prior work as a learnable
heuristic for search. We then propose two modules incorporated into an end-to-end architecture: 1) A learned mechanism to perform backtracking, which decides whether to
continue moving forward or roll back to a previous state
(Regret Module) and 2) A mechanism to help the agent decide which direction to go next by showing directions that
are visited and their associated progress estimate (Progress
∗ Work partially done while the author was a research intern at Salesforce Research.

Marker). Combined, the proposed approach significantly
outperforms current state-of-the-art methods using greedy
action selection, with 5% absolute improvement on the test
server in success rates, and more importantly 8% on success rates normalized by the path length.

1. Introduction
Building on the success of deep learning in solving various computer vision tasks, several new tasks and corresponding benchmarks have been proposed to combine visual perception and decision-making [2, 22, 7, 12, 17, 23,
5]. One such task is the Vision-and-Language Navigation
task (VLN), where an agent must navigate to a goal purely
from language instructions and visual input without explicit
knowledge of the goal. This task has a number of applications, including service robotics where it would be preferable if humans interacted naturally with the robot by instructing it to perform various tasks.
Recently, there have been several approaches proposed
to solve this task. The dominant approaches frame the navigation task as a sequence to sequence problem [2]. Several
enhancements such as synthetic data augmentation [11],
pragmatic inference [11], and combinations of model-free
and model-based reinforcement learning techniques [19]
16732

