Local Temporal Bilinear Pooling for Fine-Grained Action Parsing
Yan Zhang1,2 , Siyu Tang2,3 , Krikamol Muandet2 , Christian Jarvers1 , and Heiko Neumann1
1

Institute of Neural Information Processing, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Fine-grained temporal action parsing is important in
many applications, such as daily activity understanding, human motion analysis, surgical robotics and others requiring subtle and precise operations over a long-term period.
In this paper we propose a novel bilinear pooling operation, which is used in intermediate layers of a temporal
convolutional encoder-decoder net. In contrast to previous
work, our proposed bilinear pooling is learnable and hence
can capture more complex local statistics than the conventional counterpart. In addition, we introduce exact lowerdimension representations of our bilinear forms, so that the
dimensionality is reduced without suffering from information loss nor requiring extra computation. We perform extensive experiments to quantitatively analyze our model and
show the superior performances to other state-of-the-art
pooling work on various datasets.

1 Introduction
Parsing fine-grained actions over time is important in many
applications, which require understanding of subtle and precise operations over long-term periods, e.g. daily activities [1], surgical robots [2], human motion analysis [3] and
animal behavior analysis in the lab [4]. Given a video or a
generic time sequence of feature vectors, an action parsing
algorithm aims at assigning each frame an action label, such
that the entire sequence is partitioned into several disjoint
semantic action primitives. Thus, tasks of action recognition, temporal semantic segmentation and action detection
in untrimmed videos can be solved in one framework.
Recently, fine-grained action parsing algorithms based
on deep convolutional nets are highly effective. For example, the method proposed in [5] and [6] first extracts framewise feature vectors via a spatial convolutional net, and then

assigns action labels to individual frames via a temporal
convolutional encoder-decoder (TCED) architecture. As reported, such TCED net outperforms other methods on challenging fine-grained action datasets of various scenarios.
While being straightforward, a notable caveat of the
TCED architecture in [6] is that the max pooling operation
embedded between convolutional layers in the encoder ignores high-order temporal structures, and hence cannot differentiate two fine-grained actions with identical first-order
but different second-order statistics. Taking grasping object by hand as an example, when the feature vector of
each frame is the concatenation of 3D positions of the finger tips, max pooling on several consecutive frames yields
the hand position, and hence tells where to grasp the object. In parallel, the second-order information can indicate
the finger scatter, and hence tells how to grasp the object.
Thus, different orders of information are rather independent
and complementary to precisely describe an action. Without the second-order information, it is hardly able to distinguish whether to grasp a coin or a book at the same position.
Motivated by this example, as well as several recent studies
showing that bilinear pooling outperforms first-order pooling on fine-grained tasks (e.g. [7–9]), we aim at introducing
bilinear pooling into the TCED net, so that second-order
statistics can be incorporated to produce better fine-grained
action parsing results. We refer to Sec. 4.3 for detailed
analysis of the benefits of second-order information.
However, combining such two methods is highly nontrivial, which requires to overcome drawbacks of conventional bilinear pooling: (1) The conventional bilinear pooling is designed for visual classification. Thus, it aggregates
all the features globally, destroying the local data structure
which is important for semantic segmentation. (2) The conventional bilinear pooling aggregates the outer products of
the feature vectors by averaging, and hence loses representativeness when the real data distribution is complex. (3)
The conventional bilinear pooling lifts the feature dimension from d to d2 , causing parameter proliferation in the

12005

