Show, Control and Tell:
A Framework for Generating Controllable and Grounded Captions
Marcella Cornia Lorenzo Baraldi Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image captioning brings vision and language together
in a generative way. As a fundamental step towards machine intelligence, this task has been recently gaining much
attention thanks to the spread of Deep Learning architectures which can effectively describe images in natural language [42, 18, 46, 43]. Image captioning approaches are
usually capable of learning a correspondence between an
input image and a probability distribution over time, from
which captions can be sampled either using a greedy decoding strategy [43], or more sophisticated techniques like
beam search and its variants [1].
As the two main components of captioning architectures
are the image encoding stage and the language model, re-

Standard
Captioning Model

A girl is flying
a kite in a
field.

b)

Up-Down
Captioning Model

A girl is flying
a kite in a
field.

Controllable
Captioning Model

A girl standing
on a hill
flying kites.

Controllable
Captioning Model

A girl is flying
a kite with a
group of
people.

…

Current captioning approaches can describe images using black-box architectures whose behavior is hardly controllable and explainable from the exterior. As an image can
be described in infinite ways depending on the goal and the
context at hand, a higher degree of controllability is needed
to apply captioning algorithms in complex scenarios. In
this paper, we introduce a novel framework for image captioning which can generate diverse descriptions by allowing both grounding and controllability. Given a control signal in the form of a sequence or set of image regions, we
generate the corresponding caption through a recurrent architecture which predicts textual chunks explicitly grounded
on regions, following the constraints of the given control.
Experiments are conducted on Flickr30k Entities and on
COCO Entities, an extended version of COCO in which we
add grounding annotations collected in a semi-automatic
manner. Results demonstrate that our method achieves state
of the art performances on controllable image captioning,
in terms of caption quality and diversity. Code and annotations are publicly available at: https://github.
com/aimagelab/show-control-and-tell.

a)

Detection Sequence

c)
Detection Set

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) captioning models with
global visual feature [43], (b) attentive models which integrate features from image regions [3] and (c) our Show,
Control and Tell. Our method can produce multiple captions for a given image, depending on a control signal
which can be either a sequence or a set of image regions.
Moreover, chunks of the generated sentences are explicitly
grounded on regions.
searchers have focused on improving both phases, which
resulted in the emergence of attentive models [46] on one
side, and of more sophisticated interactions with the language model on the other [25, 5]. Recently, attentive models
have been improved by replacing the attention over a grid
of features with attention over image regions [3, 44, 50]. In
these models, the generative process attends a set of regions
which are softly selected while generating the caption.
Despite these advancements, captioning models still lack
controllability and explainability – i.e., their behavior can
hardly be influenced and explained. As an example, in the
case of attention-driven models, the architecture implicitly
selects which regions to focus on at each timestep, but it
cannot be supervised from the exterior. While an image
can be described in multiple ways, such an architecture provides no way of controlling which regions are described and
what importance is given to each region. This lack of controllability creates a distance between human and machine

8307

