Strand-accurate Multi-view Hair Capture
Chenglei Wu2
Min H. Kim1
Yaser Sheikh2
1
2
KAIST
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh

Giljoo Nam∗1

Abstract
Hair is one of the most challenging objects to reconstruct due to its micro-scale structure and a large number
of repeated strands with heavy occlusions. In this paper,
we present the first method to capture high-fidelity hair geometry with strand-level accuracy. Our method takes three
stages to achieve this. In the first stage, a new multi-view
stereo method with a slanted support line is proposed to
solve the hair correspondences between different views. In
detail, we contribute a novel cost function consisting of
both photo-consistency term and geometric term that reconstructs each hair pixel as a 3D line. By merging all
the depth maps, a point cloud, as well as local line directions for each point, is obtained. Thus, in the second stage,
we feature a novel strand reconstruction method with the
mean-shift to convert the noisy point data to a set of strands.
Lastly, we grow the hair strands with multi-view geometric constraints to elongate the short strands and recover
the missing strands, thus significantly increasing the reconstruction completeness. We evaluate our method on both
synthetic data and real captured data, showing that our
method can reconstruct hair strands with sub-millimeter accuracy.

1. Introductoin
Hair is an important way to define a person’s look, an
indispensable part of virtual human, and a key component
for many VR and AR applications. While there has been
great progress in capturing high-quality face [3], body [35]
or even teeth [37], not much attention has been paid to capturing hair geometry. Owing to the microscale geometry of
hair strands, the large number of strands, and the heavy occlusions and high similarity between strands, hair is probably one of the most challenging objects to capture for computer vision methods, especially if our goal is for strandaccurate reconstructions. Due to these challenges, directly
applying the traditional multi-view stereo (MVS) methods [10, 33] on the multi-view image data cannot achieve
satisfactory results, as MVS methods, to achieve a robust
correspondence matching, usually assume the local patch
to be a plane, which is obviously invalid for hair. There∗ Work done during an internship at Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh.

photograph

COLMAP

ours

Figure 1. (Left) One of the photographs from multi-view capture.
(Middle) Final geometry by traditional MVS (COLMAP [33]).
(Right) Final geometry by our method. Our method can produce
high-fidelity hair geometry with strand-level accuracy.

fore, they are not able to reconstruct the fine-grained strand
structures, like flying strands against the background in Figure 1. Thus, to recover the strand structures, many hair capture techniques [15, 26] run the second step of strand fitting
to the reconstructed point cloud from MVS. Although the
previous methods properly capture the overall shape of hair
wisps, the reconstructed geometries often lack small-scale
details, e.g., flying strands.
To achieve strand-accurate capture, in this work we rethink the right way for multi-view hair capture, and propose a new pipeline to reconstruct hair metrically. As a
first step, we reformulate the traditional multi-view stereo
algorithm with the strand-line assumption, specifically targeting microscale thin geometry of hair. We propose to
use a local line support for effectively matching strand features across views. Note that although hair is a 3D curve,
it can be seen as a connected strand of short line segments.
To help for matching, we design our novel cost function
to not only rely on the color correlation but also a new
geometry-consistency term enforcing the projected 2D line
from predicted 3D line to be consistent with 2D orientations detected in the images. This cost function is effi-

155

