All-Weather Deep Outdoor Lighting Estimation
Jinsong Zhang1* , Kalyan Sunkavalli† , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy† , Sunil Hadap† ,
Jonathan Eisenman† , Jean-François Lalonde*
Université Laval* , Adobe Research†
jinsong.zhang.1@ulaval.ca, {sunkaval,holdgeof,hadap,eisenman}@adobe.com, jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca
http://www.jflalonde.ca/projects/allweather

Abstract
We present a neural network that predicts HDR outdoor
illumination from a single LDR image. At the heart of our
work is a method to accurately learn HDR lighting from
LDR panoramas under any weather condition. We achieve
this by training another CNN (on a combination of synthetic
and real images) to take as input an LDR panorama, and
regress the parameters of the Lalonde-Matthews outdoor
illumination model [17]. This model is trained such that it
a) reconstructs the appearance of the sky, and b) renders the
appearance of objects lit by this illumination. We use this network to label a large-scale dataset of LDR panoramas with
lighting parameters and use them to train our single image
outdoor lighting estimation network. We demonstrate, via
extensive experiments, that both our panorama and single
image networks outperform the state of the art, and unlike
prior work, are able to handle weather conditions ranging
from fully sunny to overcast skies.

1. Introduction
Estimating outdoor illumination is critical for a number
of tasks such as outdoor scene understanding, image editing, and augmented reality. However, images are formed
by illumination interacting with other scene properties like
geometry and surface reflectance, thus making the inversion
of this process to recover lighting a highly ill-posed problem.
Prior work on this problem has used heuristics to map
image features to lighting [16]. Instead of using handcrafted features, a recent approach proposed learning the
mapping from image appearance to outdoor illumination [9]
using a deep neural network. In particular, they propose a
non-linear optimization scheme to fit the parameters of the
Hošek-Wilkie (HW) HDR sky model [10, 11] to SUN360—a
large dataset of outdoor, low dynamic range (LDR) panoramas [24]. From this set of panoramas with (now labeled)
parameters, they extract limited field of view crops, and train
a CNN to regress the HW parameters from a single crop.
1

Research partly done when Jinsong Zhang was an intern at Adobe Research.

(a) Input

(b) [9]

(c) Our lighting

Figure 1. We estimate HDR outdoor lighting from a single image
(a) and use it to render a car into the scene. The state-of-the-art
method of [9] (b) produces sunny estimates for both clear (top)
and overcast scenes (bottom). Our method (c) produces accurate
estimates for both conditions leading to more realistic composites.

The accuracy of [9] thus rests on a) the ability of the
HW model to represent outdoor illumination, and b) the
ability to reliably fit the HW model to sky pixels in an outdoor panorama. Unfortunately, both of these steps have
limitations. Indeed, the HW sky model was designed to
accurately represent a subset of possible weather conditions,
specifically, completely clear skies with varying amounts
of turbidity (amount of atmospheric aerosol) [13]. Moreover, the optimization scheme to fit the HW model to LDR
panoramas can be sensitive to issues like arbitrary camera
processing and outliers like patches of clouds. This leads to a
clear bias towards sunny skies in their results (see fig. 1(b)).
Other recent approaches to estimating outdoor illumination have eschewed parametric models in favor of completely
data-driven models. Zhang et al. [26] learn to hallucinate
HDR outdoor environment maps from LDR panoramas by
training an encoder-decoder on synthetic data. Calian et
al. [2] learn a data-driven sky model by training an autoencoder on HDR sky panoramas [15, 17], and use this representation in an inverse rendering framework to recover
outdoor lighting from a single image of a face. While these
learned models can better approximate outdoor lighting conditions, they conflate many of the “intuitive” sky parameters

10158

