Joint Representation and Estimator Learning for Facial
Action Unit Intensity Estimation

1

Yong Zhang1 , Baoyuan Wu1∗, Weiming Dong2 , Zhifeng Li1 , Wei Liu1 , Bao-Gang Hu2 , and Qiang Ji3
Tencent AI Lab, 2 National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, 3 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
{zha6.5ngyong201303,wubaoyuan1987}@gmail.com, weiming.dong@ia.ac.cn
michaelzfli@tencent.com, wl2223@columbia.edu, hubg@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Facial action unit (AU) intensity is an index to characterize human expressions. Accurate AU intensity estimation depends on three major elements: image representation, intensity estimator, and supervisory information. Most
existing methods learn intensity estimator with fixed image
representation, and rely on the availability of fully annotated supervisory information. In this paper, a novel general
framework for AU intensity estimation is presented, which
differs from traditional estimation methods in two aspects. First, rather than keeping image representation fixed, it
simultaneously learns representation and intensity estimator to achieve an optimal solution. Second, it allows incorporating weak supervisory training signal from human
knowledge (e.g. feature smoothness, label smoothness, label ranking, and positive label), which makes our model
trainable even fully annotated information is not available.
More specifically, human knowledge is represented as either soft or hard constraints which are encoded as regularization terms or equality/inequality constraints, respectively. On top of our novel framework, we additionally propose
an efficient algorithm for optimization based on Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM). Evaluations
on two benchmark databases show that our method outperforms competing methods under different ratios of AU intensity annotations, especially for small ratios.

1. Introduction
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [7] defines AUs to
depict facial muscle movements. It quantifies AU intensities into 6 ordinal levels and provides instructions for annotation. AU intensity estimation is challenging partially due
to the lack of annotations. Reliable AU intensity labels can
be annotated by trained human coders. It is convenient to
capture a large set of expression sequences through digital
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1: The diagram of joint learning for AU intensity estimation. It simultaneously learns image representation and intensity
estimator with limited annotations. Human knowledge is incorporated as hard or soft constraints to provide weak supervision.

cameras. However, it requires great effort to annotate every
frame, which makes it difficult to construct a large database.
The performance of AU intensity estimation is determined by several factors, including image representation,
intensity estimator, and supervisory information. Most existing methods [16, 10] focus on estimator learning, regardless of image representation and unlabeled frames. Representation is firstly learned by an unsupervised or supervised
method. Then, the estimator is trained in the pre-learned
feature space. However, the pre-learned feature space is
not guaranteed to fit well the estimator learning since they
are learned separately without considering their connections. Recently, deep learning provides an end-to-end strategy
to learn a mapping from the input to the output [8]. It can
be treated as a joint representation and estimator learning
method. But deep models require a large amount of labeled
samples to avoid overfitting. Though [41] learns a weakly
supervised deep model, it still requires thousands of images.
Besides, few works focus on intensity estimation with
limited annotations except for [26, 43, 42, 41]. Human
knowledge such as label smoothness or label ranking are
exploited to compensate the lack of annotations. [26] encodes label smoothness through the structure of dynamic
models while [42] emphasizes the smoothness on relevance

3457

