From Coarse to Fine: Robust Hierarchical Localization at Large Scale
Paul-Edouard Sarlin1 Cesar Cadena1 Roland Siegwart1 Marcin Dymczyk1,2
1
Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zürich 2 Sevensense Robotics AG

Abstract
Robust and accurate visual localization is a fundamental
capability for numerous applications, such as autonomous
driving, mobile robotics, or augmented reality. It remains,
however, a challenging task, particularly for large-scale
environments and in presence of significant appearance
changes. State-of-the-art methods not only struggle with
such scenarios, but are often too resource intensive for certain real-time applications. In this paper we propose HFNet, a hierarchical localization approach based on a monolithic CNN that simultaneously predicts local features and
global descriptors for accurate 6-DoF localization. We
exploit the coarse-to-fine localization paradigm: we first
perform a global retrieval to obtain location hypotheses
and only later match local features within those candidate
places. This hierarchical approach incurs significant runtime savings and makes our system suitable for real-time
operation. By leveraging learned descriptors, our method
achieves remarkable localization robustness across large
variations of appearance and sets a new state-of-the-art on
two challenging benchmarks for large-scale localization.1

1. Introduction
The precise 6-Degree-of-Freedom (DoF) localization of
a camera within an existing 3D model is one of the core
computer vision capabilities that unlocks a number of recent applications. These include autonomous driving in
GPS-denied environments [7, 29, 31, 5] and consumer
devices with augmented reality features [30, 22], where
a centimeter-accurate 6-DoF pose is crucial to guarantee reliable and safe operation and fully immersive experiences,
respectively. More broadly, visual localization is a key component in computer vision tasks such as Structure-fromMotion (SfM) or SLAM. This growing range of applications of visual localization calls for reliable operation both
indoors and outdoors, irrespective of the weather, illumination, or seasonal changes.
Robustness to such large variations is therefore critical,
along with limited computational resources. Maintaining
a model that allows accurate localization in multiple con1 Code available at https://github.com/ethz-asl/hf_net

Query

Hierarchical
Localization

3) 6-DoF
pose

Sparse 3D model

1) Global
Matching

2) Local
Matching
Retrieved

Direct
Matching

Query

Figure 1. Hierarchical localization. A global search first retrieves
candidate images, which are subsequently matched using powerful
local features to estimate an accurate 6-DoF pose. This two-step
process is both efficient and robust in challenging situations.

ditions, while remaining compact, is thus of utmost importance. In this work, we investigate whether it is actually possible to robustly localize in large-scale changing environments with constrained resources of mobile devices.
More specifically, we aim at estimating the 6-DoF pose of a
query image w.r.t. a given 3D model with the highest possible accuracy.
Current leading approaches mostly rely on estimating
correspondences between 2D keypoints in the query and
3D points in a sparse model using local descriptors. This
direct matching is either robust but intractable on mobile [48, 51, 41], or optimized for efficiency but fragile [27].
In both cases, the robustness of classical localization methods is limited by the poor invariance of hand-crafted local
features [8, 26]. Recent features emerging from convolutional neural networks (CNN) exhibit unrivalled robustness
at a low compute cost [12, 13, 32]. They have been, however, only recently [49] applied to the visual localization
problem, and only in a dense, expensive manner. Learned
sparse descriptors [12, 36] promise large benefits that remain yet unexplored in localization.
Alternative localization approaches based on image retrieval have recently shown promising results in terms of
robustness and efficiency, but are not competitive in terms
of accuracy. The benefits of an intermediate retrieval step
have been demonstrated earlier [40], but fall short of reach-

12716

