IM-Net for High Resolution Video Frame Interpolation
Tomer Peleg

Pablo Szekely
Doron Sabo
Samsung Israel R&D Center

Omry Sendik

{tomer.peleg,pablo.sz,doron.sabo,omry.sendik}@samsung.com

Abstract
Video frame interpolation is a long-studied problem in
the video processing field. Recently, deep learning approaches have been applied to this problem, showing impressive results on low-resolution benchmarks. However,
these methods do not scale-up favorably to high resolutions.
Specifically, when the motion exceeds a typical number of
pixels, their interpolation quality is degraded. Moreover,
their run time renders them impractical for real-time applications. In this paper we propose IM-Net: an interpolated
motion neural network. We use an economic structured architecture and end-to-end training with multi-scale tailored
losses. In particular, we formulate interpolated motion estimation as classification rather than regression. IM-Net outperforms previous methods by more than 1.3dB (PSNR) on
a high resolution version of the recently introduced Vimeo
triplet dataset. Moreover, the network runs in less than
33msec on a single GPU for HD resolution.

1. Introduction
In video frame interpolation (VFI) one synthesizes middle non-existing frames from the original input frames. This
is a well-known problem in the field of video processing. A classical application requiring VFI is frame rate upconversion [3, 4, 12, 14, 16] for handling issues like display
motion blur and judder in LED/LCD displays. Other applications include frame recovery in video coding and streaming [10, 11], slow motion effects [13] and novel view synthesis [7, 26].
Conventional approaches to VFI typically consist of the
following steps: bi-directional motion estimation (ME),
motion interpolation (MI) and occlusion reasoning, and
motion-compensated frame interpolation (MC-FI). Such
approaches are prone to various artifacts, such as halos,
ghosts and break-ups due to insufficient quality of any of
the components mentioned above.
In the past few years deep learning and specifically convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have emerged as the
leading method for numerous image processing and com-

Figure 1. Example results from our high resolution in-house clips
(best viewed in color), from top to bottom: previous input frame,
current input frame, middle frame generated by TOFlow [31], SepConv [24] and IM-Net.

puter vision tasks. Many computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation, require accurate and exhaustive labeling. VFI however can be readily learned by simply watching videos [18].
Straightforward sub-sampling of videos can provide frame
triplets, in which every middle frame can serve as ground
truth for interpolation given the two other input frames.
The self-supervised nature of VFI makes it appealing for
deep learning approaches. Indeed, a long series of works
[13, 17–20, 22–24, 27, 31] have attempted to replace all or
some of the steps in the VFI’s algorithmic flow with CNNs.

2398

