Understanding the Limitations of CNN-based Absolute Camera Pose Regression
Torsten Sattler1
Qunjie Zhou2
1
Chalmers University of Technology

Abstract
Visual localization is the task of accurate camera pose
estimation in a known scene. It is a key problem in computer vision and robotics, with applications including selfdriving cars, Structure-from-Motion, SLAM, and Mixed Reality. Traditionally, the localization problem has been tackled using 3D geometry. Recently, end-to-end approaches
based on convolutional neural networks have become popular. These methods learn to directly regress the camera
pose from an input image. However, they do not achieve the
same level of pose accuracy as 3D structure-based methods. To understand this behavior, we develop a theoretical
model for camera pose regression. We use our model to predict failure cases for pose regression techniques and verify
our predictions through experiments. We furthermore use
our model to show that pose regression is more closely related to pose approximation via image retrieval than to accurate pose estimation via 3D structure. A key result is that
current approaches do not consistently outperform a handcrafted image retrieval baseline. This clearly shows that
additional research is needed before pose regression algorithms are ready to compete with structure-based methods.

1. Introduction
Visual localization algorithms enable a camera to determine its absolute pose, i.e., its position and orientation,
in a scene and are a core component of intelligent systems [24, 38] and Augmented Reality applications [15, 48].
State-of-the-art algorithms for localization follow a 3D
structure-based approach [8, 10, 16, 46, 59, 63, 68, 69]. They
first establish correspondences between pixels in a test image and 3D points in the scene. These 2D-3D matches are
then used to estimate the camera pose by applying an npoint-pose (PnP) solver [2, 31–34] inside a RANSAC [18,
22, 36, 54] loop. Traditionally, the first stage is based on
matching descriptors extracted in the test image against descriptors associated with the 3D points. Alternatively, machine learning techniques can be used to directly regress 3D
point positions from image patches [8,10,16,43,46,47,65].
In recent years, absolute pose regression (APR) approaches to visual localization have become popular [11,

Marc Pollefeys3,4
Laura Leal-Taixé2
2
TU Munich 3 ETH Zürich 4 Microsoft

12, 28–30, 44, 50, 53, 74, 76, 78]. Rather than using machine
learning only for parts of the localization pipeline, e.g., local features [63, 79], outlier filtering [49, 70], or scene coordinate regression [10, 46], these approaches aim to learn the
full localization pipeline. Given a set of training images and
their corresponding poses, APR techniques train Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to directly regress the camera pose from an image. APR techniques are computationally efficient, given a powerful enough GPU, as only a single forward pass through a CNN is required. Yet, they are
also significantly less accurate than structure-based methods [10, 63, 76]. In addition, updating the map, e.g., when
adding new data, requires expensive retraining of the CNN.
Rather than proposing a new APR variant, this paper
focuses on understanding APR techniques and their performance. To this end, we make the following contributions: i) We develop a theoretical model for absolute pose
regression (Sec. 3). To the best of our knowledge, ours is
the first work that aims at looking at the inner workings
of APR techniques. Based on this model, we show that
APR approaches are more closely related to approximate
pose estimation via image retrieval (Sec. 5) than to accurate pose estimation via 3D geometry (Sec. 4). ii) Using
our theory, we show both theoretically and through experiments that there is no guarantee that APR methods, unlike
structure-based approaches, generalize beyond their training data (Sec. 4). iii) Given the close relation between APR
and image retrieval, we show that current APR approaches
are much closer in performance to a handcrafted retrieval
baseline [71] than to structure-based methods. We show
that no published single image pose regression approach is
able to consistently outperform this baseline. This paper
thus introduces a highly necessary sanity check for judging
the performance of pose regression techniques.
In summary, this work closes an important gap in the understanding of absolute pose regression methods to visual
localization: It clearly demonstrates their short-comings
and more clearly positions them against other ways to approach the visual localization problem. Overall, we show
that a significant amount of research is still necessary before absolute pose regression techniques can be applied in
practical applications that require accurate pose estimates.

3302

