Parallel Optimal Transport GAN∗
Gil Avraham†
Yan Zuo†
Tom Drummond
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision, Monash University, Australia
{gil.avraham, yan.zuo, tom.drummond}@monash.edu

Abstract
Although Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are
known for their sharp realism in image generation, they often fail to estimate areas of the data density. This leads to
low modal diversity and at times distorted generated samples. These problems essentially arise from poor estimation of the distance metric responsible for training these
networks. To address these issues, we introduce an additional regularisation term which performs optimal transport in parallel within a low dimensional representation
space. We demonstrate that operating in a low dimension representation of the data distribution benefits from
convergence rate gains in estimating the Wasserstein distance, resulting in more stable GAN training. We empirically show that our regulariser achieves a stabilising effect
which leads to higher quality of generated samples and increased mode coverage of the given data distribution. Our
method achieves significant improvements on the CIFAR10, Oxford Flowers and CUB Birds datasets over several
GAN baselines both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport theory has found widespread applications in numerous fields, including various applications in
statistics and machine learning domains. Despite some difficulties accompanying the optimal transport approach, it
offers a solution that is both intuitive and numerically wellbehaved. This makes it a compelling approach for large
scale problems which are unstable in nature; of note, optimal transport has been recently employed in the domain of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12] with great
success.
Generative Adversarial Networks are generative models
where a density function is not explicitly approximated but
∗ This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Centre
of Excellence for Robotic Vision (project number CE1401000016).
† Authors contributed equally

a sampling mechanism is provided. A GAN framework typically has two components: a Discriminator for estimating
a family of f -divergences [26] between a model distribution Pg and the data distribution Pr , and a Generator that
provides a mapping between a known noise distribution Pz
to the model distribution Pg . The framework is optimised
through a minimax two-step procedure where each network
is responsible for training its counterpart. In practice, the
family of f -divergences suffers from numerical instabilities
and brittle parameter selection, giving rise to many regularisation methods [22, 23, 28]; ultimately leading to training
instability issues such as vanishing gradients and mode collapse [1, 6, 21, 29].
Optimal transport has played a key role in alleviating
these instability issues in GANs [2, 30]. Most notably, [2]
proposed an alternative to the value function being optimised by GANs. This approach utilised ideas from transportation theory, leveraging the Wasserstein distance to produce a value function which was shown to be less fragile and better fitted as a GAN value function when using
gradient-based optimisation methods. Whilst use of the
Wasserstein distance was shown to help stabilise training
of GANs, its convergence rate was still directly dependent
on the dimensionality of the problem [8, 11], making it
a less reliable distance when measuring high dimensional
data [5,31] (as is often the case in images). Additionally, the
current solution exists in the dual formulation, which imposes the constraint that the Discriminator must lie within
the space of 1-Lipschitz functions. Enforcement of this constraint requires regularising divergence or distance used for
GAN training which is imposed via gradient penalty [13].
We propose the Parallel Optimal Transport GAN (POTGAN), an unsupervised approach which regularises the
Generator using the Wasserstein distance in a low dimensional latent representation of the data distribution and
model distribution Pr , Pg respectively. We show that significant convergence gains are achieved by reducing the dimensionality of the problem when estimating the Wasserstein distance. This allows for the direct computation of the
primal form of the optimal transportation problem, avoiding

4411

