Dual Attention Network for Scene Segmentation
1,3

1

1

Jun Fu
Jing Liu*
Haijie Tian
Yong Li
2
1,3
1
Yongjun Bao Zhiwei Fang
Hanqing Lu
1

2

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Business Growth BU, JD.com 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

{jun.fu,jliu,zhiwei.fang,luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,hjtian bit@163.com,{liyong5,baoyongjun}@jd.com

Abstract
In this paper, we address the scene segmentation task
by capturing rich contextual dependencies based on the
self-attention mechanism. Unlike previous works that capture contexts by multi-scale feature fusion, we propose a
Dual Attention Network (DANet) to adaptively integrate local features with their global dependencies. Specifically,
we append two types of attention modules on top of dilated
FCN, which model the semantic interdependencies in spatial and channel dimensions respectively. The position attention module selectively aggregates the feature at each
position by a weighted sum of the features at all positions.
Similar features would be related to each other regardless
of their distances. Meanwhile, the channel attention module selectively emphasizes interdependent channel maps by
integrating associated features among all channel maps.
We sum the outputs of the two attention modules to further
improve feature representation which contributes to more
precise segmentation results. We achieve new state-of-theart segmentation performance on three challenging scene
segmentation datasets, i.e., Cityscapes, PASCAL Context
and COCO Stuff dataset. In particular, a Mean IoU score
of 81.5% on Cityscapes test set is achieved without using
coarse data.1 .

1. Introduction
Scene segmentation is a fundamental and challenging
problem, whose goal is to segment and parse a scene image into different image regions associated with semantic
categories including stuff (e.g. sky, road, grass) and discrete objects (e.g. person, car, bicycle). The study of this
task can be applied to potential applications, such as auto* Corresponding Author
1 Links can be found at https://github.com/junfu1115/DANet/

Figure 1: The goal of scene segmentation is to recognize
each pixel including stuff, diverse objects. The various
scales, occlusion and illumination changing of objects/stuff
make it challenging to parsing each pixel.
matic driving, robot sensing and image editing. In order to
accomplish the task of scene segmentation effectively, we
need to distinguish some confusing categories and take into
account objects with different appearance. For example, regions of ’field’ and ’grass’ are often indistinguishable, and
the objects of ’cars’ may often be affected by scales, occlusion and illumination. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance the discriminative ability of feature representations
for pixel-level recognition.
Recently, state-of-the-art methods based on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [13] have been proposed to address the above issues. One way is to utilize the multi-scale
context fusion. For example, some works [3, 4, 29] aggregate multi-scale contexts via combining feature maps generated by different dilated convolutions and pooling operations. And some works [15, 27] capture richer global context information by enlarging the kernel size with a decomposed structure or introducing an effective encoding layer
on top of the network. In addition, the encoder-decoder
structures [6, 10, 16] are proposed to fuse mid-level and

3146

