DuLa-Net: A Dual-Projection Network for Estimating Room Layouts from a
Single RGB Panorama
Shang-Ta Yang1,2

Fu-En Wang1

Chi-Han Peng2

sundadenny@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

fulton84717@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

pchihan@asu.edu

Peter Wonka2

Min Sun1

Hung-Kuo Chu1

pwonka@gmail.com

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

hkchu@cs.nthu.edu.tw

1

National Tsing Hua University

2

KAUST

Abstract
We present a deep learning framework, called DuLa-Net,
to predict Manhattan-world 3D room layouts from a single RGB panorama. To achieve better prediction accuracy,
our method leverages two projections of the panorama at
once, namely the equirectangular panorama-view and the
perspective ceiling-view, that each contains different clues
about the room layouts. Our network architecture consists of two encoder-decoder branches for analyzing each
of the two views. In addition, a novel feature fusion structure is proposed to connect the two branches, which are
then jointly trained to predict the 2D floor plans and layout heights. To learn more complex room layouts, we introduce the Realtor360 dataset that contains panoramas
of Manhattan-world room layouts with different numbers
of corners. Experimental results show that our work outperforms recent state-of-the-art in prediction accuracy and
performance, especially in the rooms with non-cuboid layouts.

1. Introduction
Inferring high-quality 3D room layouts from indoor
panoramic images plays a crucial role in indoor scene understanding and can be beneficial to various applications,
including virtual/augmented reality and robotics. To that
end, recent methods recover 3D room layouts by using deep
learning to predict the room corners and boundaries on the
input panorama. For example, LayoutNet [33] achieved
impressive reconstruction accuracy for Manhattan worldconstrained rooms. However, the clutter in the room, e.g.
furniture, poses a challenge to extract critical corners and
edges that are occluded in the input panorama. In addition,
estimating 3D layouts from 2D corner and edge maps is an
ill-posed problem and thus imposing extra constraints in the

Figure 1. 3D room layouts with different complexity are estimated
from a single RGB panorama using our system. (Left to right)
Room layout with a floor plan of 6 corners, 8 corners, and 10 corners. The checkerboard patterns on the walls indicate the missing
textures due to occlusion.

optimization. Therefore, it remains challenging to process
complex room layouts.
In this work, we present a novel end-to-end framework
to estimate a 3D room layout from a single RGB panorama.
By the intuition that a neural network may extract different kinds of features given the same panorama but in different projections, we propose to predict the room layouts from two distinct views of the panoramas, namely the
equirectangular panorama-view and the perspective ceilingview. The network architecture follows the encoder-decoder
scheme and consists of two branches, the panorama-branch
and the ceiling-branch, for respectively analyzing images
of the panorama-view and the ceiling-view. The outputs
of panorama-branch include a floor-ceiling probability map
and a layout height, while the ceiling-branch outputs a
floor plan probability map. To share information between
13363

