Mode Seeking Generative Adversarial Networks for Diverse Image Synthesis
Qi Mao∗1 , Hsin-Ying Lee∗2 , Hung-Yu Tseng∗2 , Siwei Ma1,3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2,4
1

Institute of Digital Media, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
cGANs

2

4

University of California, Merced
Google Cloud

Input

MSGANs

Image

Latent code z
This bird has
feathers that are
black and has a red
belly
Text

Figure 1: Mode seeking generative adversarial networks (MSGANs). (Left) Existing conditional generative adversarial
networks tend to ignore the input latent code z and generate images of similar modes. (Right) We propose a simple yet
effective mode seeking regularization term that can be applied to arbitrary conditional generative adversarial networks in
different tasks to alleviate the mode collapse issue and improve the diversity.

Abstract
Most conditional generation tasks expect diverse outputs given a single conditional context. However, conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs) often focus
on the prior conditional information and ignore the input
noise vectors, which contribute to the output variations. Recent attempts to resolve the mode collapse issue for cGANs
are usually task-specific and computationally expensive. In
this work, we propose a simple yet effective regularization
term to address the mode collapse issue for cGANs. The
proposed method explicitly maximizes the ratio of the distance between generated images with respect to the corresponding latent codes, thus encouraging the generators
to explore more minor modes during training. This mode
seeking regularization term is readily applicable to various conditional generation tasks without imposing training
overhead or modifying the original network structures. We
validate the proposed algorithm on three conditional image
synthesis tasks including categorical generation, image-toimage translation, and text-to-image synthesis with different
baseline models. Both qualitative and quantitative results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed regularization
method for improving diversity without loss of quality.
∗ Equal contribution

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] have been
shown to capture complex and high-dimensional image data
with numerous applications effectively. Built upon GANs,
conditional GANs (cGANs) [20] take external information
as additional inputs. For image synthesis, cGANs can be
applied to various tasks with different conditional contexts.
With class labels, cGANs can be applied to categorical image generation. With text sentences, cGANs can be applied
to text-to-image synthesis [22, 29]. With images, cGANs
have been used in tasks including image-to-image translation [10, 11, 14, 16, 31, 32], semantic manipulation [28] and
style transfer [15].
For most conditional generation tasks, the mappings are
in nature multimodal, i.e., a single input context corresponds to multiple plausible outputs. A straightforward approach to handle multimodality is to take random noise vectors along with the conditional contexts as inputs, where the
contexts determine the main content and noise vectors are
responsible for variations. For instance, in the dog-to-cat
image-to-image translation task [14], the input dog images
decide contents like orientations of heads and positions of
facial landmarks, while the noise vectors help the generation of different species. However, cGANs usually suffer
from the mode collapse [8, 24] problem, where generators

1429

