Towards VQA Models That Can Read
Amanpreet Singh1 , Vivek Natarajan, Meet Shah1 , Yu Jiang1 , Xinlei Chen1 ,
Dhruv Batra1,2 , Devi Parikh1,2 , and Marcus Rohrbach1
1

Facebook AI Research, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Studies have shown that a dominant class of questions
asked by visually impaired users on images of their surroundings involves reading text in the image. But today’s
VQA models can not read! Our paper takes a first step towards addressing this problem. First, we introduce a new
“TextVQA” dataset to facilitate progress on this important
problem. Existing datasets either have a small proportion
of questions about text (e.g., the VQA dataset) or are too
small (e.g., the VizWiz dataset). TextVQA contains 45,336
questions on 28,408 images that require reasoning about
text to answer. Second, we introduce a novel model architecture that reads text in the image, reasons about it in the
context of the image and the question, and predicts an answer which might be a deduction based on the text and the
image or composed of the strings found in the image. Consequently, we call our approach Look, Read, Reason & Answer (LoRRA). We show that LoRRA outperforms existing
state-of-the-art VQA models on our TextVQA dataset. We
find that the gap between human performance and machine
performance is significantly larger on TextVQA than on
VQA 2.0, suggesting that TextVQA is well-suited to benchmark progress along directions complementary to VQA 2.0.

1. Introduction
The focus of this paper is endowing Visual Question Answering (VQA) models a new capability – the ability to read
text in images and answer questions by reasoning over the
text and other visual content.
VQA has witnessed tremendous progress. But today’s
VQA models fail catastrophically on questions requiring
reading!1 This is ironic because these are exactly the questions visually-impaired users frequently ask of their assistive devices. Specifically, the VizWiz study [5] found that
up to 21% of these questions involve reading and reasoning
about the text captured in the images of a user’s surround1 All top entries in the CVPR VQA Challenges (2016-18) struggle to
answer questions in category requiring reading correctly.

Figure 1: Examples from our TextVQA dataset that require VQA
models to understand text embedded in images to answer the questions correctly. Ground truth answers are shown in green and the
answers predicted by a state-of-the-art VQA model (Pythia [17])
are shown in red. Clearly, today’s VQA models fail at answering
questions that involve reading and reasoning about text in images.

ings – ‘what temperature is my oven set to?’, ‘what denomination is this bill?’.
Consider the question in Fig. 1(a) – ‘What does it say
near the star on the tail of the plane?’ from the TextVQA
dataset. With a few notable exceptions, today’s state-ofart VQA models are predominantly monolithic deep neural networks (without any specialized components). Consider what we are asking such models to learn to answer
this question – the model must learn to
• realize when the question is about text (‘What . . . say?’),
• detect image regions containing text ( ‘15:20’, ‘500’ ),

8317

