PIEs: Pose Invariant Embeddings
Chih-Hui Ho

Pedro Morgado
Amir Persekian
University of California, San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos

{chh279,pmaravil,aperseki,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The role of pose invariance in image recognition and
retrieval is studied. A taxonomic classification of embeddings, according to their level of invariance, is introduced
and used to clarify connections between existing embeddings, identify missing approaches, and propose invariant
generalizations. This leads to a new family of pose invariant
embeddings (PIEs), derived from existing approaches by a
combination of two models, which follow from the interpretation of CNNs as estimators of class posterior probabilities: a view-to-object model and an object-to-class model.
The new pose-invariant models are shown to have interesting properties, both theoretically and through experiments,
where they outperform existing multiview approaches. Most
notably, they achieve good performance for both 1) classification and retrieval, and 2) single and multiview inference.
These are important properties for the design of real vision
systems, where universal embeddings are preferable to task
specific ones, and multiple images are usually not available
at inference time. Finally, a new multiview dataset of real
objects, imaged in the wild against complex backgrounds,
is introduced. We believe that this is a much needed complement to the synthetic datasets in wide use and will contribute to the advancement of multiview recognition and retrieval.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are frequently
used for classification and metric learning, among other
tasks. Classification is the central problem of important
computer vision applications, such as object and action
recognition or detection. Metric learning plays a similar
role for image retrieval, face recognition and identification,
or zero shot learning. Despite the many different applications, the two tasks are closely related, since they both learn
an embedding g : X → G that maps images x ∈ X into
features g(x) ∈ G and are implemented with several CNN
layers. Classification aims to produce a discriminant feature
space F, which separates the different classes, while metric

Figure 1. Taxonomy of embeddings learned by different methods
according to different level of invariance. Green solid boxes represent methods in the literature and yellow dashed boxes represent methods proposed in this work. The proposed pose invariant
embedding incorporates single view and multiview invariance and
can be applied to different methods, including CNN, proxy-NCA
and triplet center. While CNN is designed for classification, the
other two aim for metric learning (retrieval task).

learning aims to produce a feature space F with a certain
metric structure, where similarity can be captured by some
distance function, typically the Euclidean distance.
As shown in the bottom row of Figure 1, classification
and metric learning have evolved in lockstep. While details
of the architecture of g(.) may favor one or the other, approaches to the two problems have differed mostly in the
subsequent network layers and loss function. Classifiers
complement the embedding g with a softmax layer trained
with the logistic loss. Classic metric learning uses no additional layers and a different loss. While several variants
have been proposed [5, 10, 21, 15], the most popular is the
triplet loss of [27, 26, 1, 19]. In practice, however, the differences can be significant. Since triplets raise the dataset
size to its cube, metric learning networks are more difficult
to train than classifiers. To address this, much of the embedding literature has been devoted to triplet sampling strategies [26, 1, 19, 17, 21], aimed to increase training speed.
Recently however, [15] has shown that much faster training
is possible by using proxy embeddings, which make metric
learning a lot more like classification. Inspired by a metric learning approach known as neighborhood component
analysis (NCA) [9], it adds a layer that resembles a soft-

12377

