Deep Metric Learning Beyond Binary Supervision
Sungyeon Kim†
Minkyo Seo†
POSTECH, Pohang, Korea†

Ivan Laptev‡
Minsu Cho†
Suha Kwak†
Inria / École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France‡

{tjddus9597, mkseo, mscho, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr, ivan.laptev@inria.fr

Abstract
Metric Learning for visual similarity has mostly adopted
binary supervision indicating whether a pair of images are
of the same class or not. Such a binary indicator covers only
a limited subset of image relations, and is not sufficient to
represent semantic similarity between images described by
continuous and/or structured labels such as object poses,
image captions, and scene graphs. Motivated by this, we
present a novel method for deep metric learning using continuous labels. First, we propose a new triplet loss that allows distance ratios in the label space to be preserved in
the learned metric space. The proposed loss thus enables
our model to learn the degree of similarity rather than just
the order. Furthermore, we design a triplet mining strategy
adapted to metric learning with continuous labels. We address three different image retrieval tasks with continuous
labels in terms of human poses, room layouts and image
captions, and demonstrate the superior performance of our
approach compared to previous methods.

1. Introduction
The sense of similarity has been known as the most basic component of human reasoning [36]. Likewise, understanding similarity between images has played essential roles in many areas of computer vision including image
retrieval [19, 43, 44, 50], face identification [12, 39, 46],
place recognition [4], pose estimation [45], person reidentification [10, 40], video object tracking [42, 47], local feature descriptor learning [25, 58], zero-shot learning [7, 57], and self-supervised representation learning [52].
Also, the perception of similarity has been achieved by
learning similarity metrics from labeled images, which is
called metric learning.
Recent approaches in metric learning have improved
performance dramatically by adopting deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) as their embedding functions.
Specifically, such methods train CNNs to project images
onto a manifold where two examples are close to each
other if they are semantically similar and far apart other-

Figure 1. A conceptual illustration for comparing existing methods [4, 16, 27, 32, 45] and ours. Each image is labeled by human
pose, and colored in red if its pose similarity to the anchor is high.
(a) Existing methods categorize neighbors into positive and negative classes, and learn a metric space where positive images are
close to the anchor and negative ones far apart. In such a space,
the distance between a pair of images is not necessarily related to
their semantic similarity since the order and degrees of similarities
between them are disregarded. (b) Our approach allows distance
ratios in the label space to be preserved in the learned metric space
so as to overcome the aforementioned limitation.

wise. While in principle such a metric can be learned using
any type of semantic similarity labels, previous approaches
typically rely on binary labels over image pairs indicating
whether the image pairs are similar or not. In this aspect,
only a small subset of real-world image relations has been
addressed by previous approaches. Indeed, binary similarity labels are not sufficient to represent sophisticated relations between images with structured and continuous labels,
such as image captions [30, 35, 56], human poses [3, 21],
camera poses [5, 13], and scene graphs [24, 31]. Met12288

