Object-driven Text-to-Image Synthesis via Adversarial Training
Wenbo Li†∗1,2 Pengchuan Zhang∗2 Lei Zhang3
Qiuyuan Huang2 Xiaodong He4 Siwei Lyu1 Jianfeng Gao2
1
University at Albany, SUNY 2 Microsoft Research AI 3 Microsoft 4 JD AI Research
{wli20,slyu}@albany.edu, {penzhan,leizhang,qihua,jfgao}@microsoft.com, xiaodong.he@jd.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Object-driven Attentive Generative Adversarial Newtorks (Obj-GANs) that allow
object-centered text-to-image synthesis for complex scenes.
Following the two-step (layout-image) generation process,
a novel object-driven attentive image generator is proposed to synthesize salient objects by paying attention to
the most relevant words in the text description and the
pre-generated semantic layout. In addition, a new Fast
R-CNN based object-wise discriminator is proposed to
provide rich object-wise discrimination signals on whether
the synthesized object matches the text description and the
pre-generated layout. The proposed Obj-GAN significantly
outperforms the previous state of the art in various metrics
on the large-scale COCO benchmark, increasing the
Inception score by 27% and decreasing the FID score by
11%. A thorough comparison between the traditional grid
attention and the new object-driven attention is provided
through analyzing their mechanisms and visualizing their
attention layers, showing insights of how the proposed
model generates complex scenes in high quality.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing images from text descriptions (known as
Text-to-Image synthesis) is an important machine learning
task, which requires handling ambiguous and incomplete
information in natural language descriptions and learning
across vision and language modalities. Approaches based
on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5] have recently achieved promising results on this task [23, 22, 32,
33, 29, 16, 9, 12, 34]. Most GAN based methods synthesize the image conditioned only on a global sentence vector, which may miss important fine-grained information at
the word level, and prevents the generation of high-quality
images. More recently, AttnGAN [29] is proposed which
introduces the attention mechanism [28, 30, 2, 27] into the
GAN framework, thus allows attention-driven, multi-stage
† Work was performed when was an intern with Microsoft Research AI.
* indicates equal contributions.

Figure 1: Top: AttnGAN [29] and its grid attention visualization.
Middle: our modified implementation of two-step (layout-image)
generation proposed in [9]. Bottom: our Obj-GAN and its objectdriven attention visualization. The middle and bottom generations
use the same generated semantic layout, and the only difference is
the object-driven attention.
refinement for fine-grained text-to-image generation.
Although images with realistic texture have been synthesized on simple datasets, such as birds [29, 16] and flowers [33], most existing approaches do not specifically model objects and their relations in images and thus have difficulties in generating complex scenes such as those in
the COCO dataset [15]. For example, generating images
from a sentence “several people in their ski gear are in the
snow” requires modeling of different objects (people, ski
gear) and their interactions (people on top of ski gear), as
well as filling the missing information (e.g., the rocks in the
background). In the top row of Fig. 1, the image generated by AttnGAN does contain scattered texture of people
and snow, but the shape of people are distorted and the picture’s layout is semantically not meaningful. [9] remedies
this problem by first constructing a semantic layout from the
text and then synthesizing the image by a deconvolutional
112174

