Peeking into the Future:
Predicting Future Person Activities and Locations in Videos
Junwei Liang1∗
Lu Jiang2
Juan Carlos Niebles3,2
Alexander Hauptmann1
Li Fei-Fei3,2
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Google AI
Stanford University
{junweil,alex}@cs.cmu.edu, lujiang@google.com, {feifeili,jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Deciphering human behaviors to predict their future
paths/trajectories and what they would do from videos is important in many applications. Motivated by this idea, this
paper studies predicting a pedestrian’s future path jointly
with future activities. We propose an end-to-end, multi-task
learning system utilizing rich visual features about human
behavioral information and interaction with their surroundings. To facilitate the training, the network is learned with
an auxiliary task of predicting future location in which the
activity will happen. Experimental results demonstrate our
state-of-the-art performance over two public benchmarks
on future trajectory prediction. Moreover, our method is
able to produce meaningful future activity prediction in addition to the path. The result provides the first empirical
evidence that joint modeling of paths and activities benefits
future path prediction. 1

1. Introduction
With the advancement in deep learning, systems now are
able to analyze an unprecedented amount of rich visual information from videos. An important analysis is forecasting the future path of pedestrians, called future person trajectory prediction. This problem has received increasing
attention in the computer vision community [13, 1, 7]. It
is regarded as an essential building block in video understanding because looking at the visual information from the
past to predict the future is useful in many applications like
self-driving cars, socially-aware robots [19], etc.
Humans navigate through public spaces often with specific purposes in mind, ranging from simple ones like entering a room to more complicated ones like putting things
into a car. Such intention, however, is mostly neglected in
existing work. Consider the example in Fig. 1, the person
(at the top-right corner) might take different paths depending on their intention, e.g., they might take the green path
to transfer object or the yellow path to load object into the
∗ Work partially done during a part-time research program at Google.
1 Code and models are released at https://next.cs.cmu.edu

Person

Future Activity Object Transfer
Future Activity Loading
Future path
Future activity

Figure 1. Our goal is to jointly predict a person’s future path and
activity. The green and yellow line show two possible future trajectories and two possible activities are shown in the green and
yellow boxes. Depending on the future activity, the person (top
right) may take different paths, e.g. the yellow path for “loading”
and the green path for “object transfer”.

car. Inspired by this, this paper is interested in modeling the
future path jointly with such intention in videos. We model
the intention in terms of a predefined set of 29 activities provided by the NIST such as “loading”, “object transfer”, etc.
See supplementary material for the full list.
The joint prediction model can have two benefits. First,
learning the activity together with the path may benefit the
future path prediction. Intuitively, humans are able to read
from others’ body language to anticipate whether they are
going to cross the street or continue walking along the sidewalk. In the example of Fig. 1, the person is carrying a
box, and the man at the bottom left corner is waving at the
person. Based on common sense, we may agree that the
person will take the green path instead of the yellow path.
Second, the joint model advances the capability of understanding not only the future path but also the future activity
by taking into account the rich semantic context in videos.
This increases the capabilities of automated video analytics
for social good, such as safety applications like anticipating pedestrian movement at traffic intersections or a road
robot helping humans transport goods to a car. Note that
our techniques focus on predicting a few seconds into the
future, and should not be useful for non-routine activities.
To this end, we propose a multi-task learning model
called Next which has prediction modules for learning fu15725

