Creative Flow+ Dataset
Maria Shugrina1,2,3

Ziheng Liang1,4

Amlan Kar1,2

Jiaman Li1,2

www.shumash.com

zhliang@cs.ubc.ca

amlan@cs.toronto.edu

ljm@cs.toronto.edu

Angad Singh1,5

Karan Singh1

angad.singh@alum.utoronto.ca

karan@dgp.toronto.edu

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
fidler@cs.toronto.edu
1

2
3
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
NVIDIA
4
5
University of British Columbia
Evertz Microsystems

Abstract
We present the Creative Flow+ Dataset, the first diverse multi-style artistic video dataset richly labeled with
per-pixel optical flow, occlusions, correspondences, segmentation labels, normals, and depth. Our dataset includes 3000 animated sequences rendered using styles randomly selected from 40 textured line styles and 38 shading styles, spanning the range between flat cartoon fill and
wildly sketchy shading. Our dataset includes 124K+ train
set frames and 10K test set frames rendered at 1500x1500
resolution, far surpassing the largest available optical flow
datasets in size. While modern techniques for tasks such as
optical flow estimation achieve impressive performance on
realistic images and video, today there is no way to gauge
their performance on non-photorealistic images. Creative
Flow+ poses a new challenge to generalize real-world
Computer Vision to messy stylized content. We show that
learning-based optical flow methods fail to generalize to
this data and struggle to compete with classical approaches,
and invite new research in this area. Our dataset and a
new optical flow benchmark will be publicly available at:
www.cs.toronto.edu/creativeflow/. We further release the complete dataset creation pipeline, allowing the community to generate and stylize their own data on
demand.

1. Introduction
For millenia, humans have used drawings, paintings,
sketches and diagrams to demonstrate their ideas, plan engineering designs and tell stories. Human vision is impressively robust to abstraction and lack of detail. Without any
prior training, a person can easily recognize an object in a

Figure 1: Creative Flow+ Dataset contains extensive per-pixel
ground truth data for frames rendered in 24 shading styles and 40
line styles and sourced from a variety of 3D animated sequences.1

15384

