R3 Adversarial Network for Cross Model Face Recognition
Ken Chen*

Yichao Wu∗

Haoyu Qin
Ding Liang
Sensetime Group Limited

Xuebo Liu

Junjie Yan

kenchen1024@gmail.com {wuyichao,qinhaoyu,liangding,liuxuebo,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
In this paper, we raise a new problem, namely cross
model face recognition (CMFR), which has considerable
economic and social significance. The core of this problem
is to make features extracted from different models comparable. However, the diversity, mainly caused by different
application scenarios, frequent version updating, and all
sorts of service platforms, obstructs interaction among different models and poses a great challenge. To solve this
problem, from the perspective of Bayesian modelling, we
propose R3 Adversarial Network (R3 AN) which consists of
three paths: Reconstruction, Representation and Regression. We also introduce adversarial learning into the reconstruction path for better performance. Comprehensive
experiments on public datasets demonstrate the feasibility
of interaction among different models with the proposed
framework. When updating the gallery, R3 AN conducts the
feature transformation nearly 10 times faster than ResNet101. Meanwhile, the transformed feature distribution is
very close to that of target model, and its error rate is incredibly reduced by approximately 75% compared with a
naive transformation model. Furthermore, we show that
face feature can be deciphered into original face image
roughly by the reconstruction path, which may give valuable hints for improving the original face recognition models.

1. Introduction
Face recognition models, due to their superior performance, have been widely applied in practical applications.
Currently, face recognition approaches generally learn face
representations through a cascade of blocks of several processing units for feature extraction [27, 25, 28, 26, 29, 24].
The trained systems successfully obtain generalization ability by embedding the input images into a feature space,
where features are clustered in a sufficiently low intrasubject variation as well as high inter-subject variation.
∗ Contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: The application of cross model face recognition.
Meanwhile, pursuing interaction between information
collected from various terminals is a new trend. Our daily
life quality would be greatly heightened and safety in society would be ensured if practical connections among the
images obtained from different scenarios, such as mobile
devices, entrance guards and video surveillance, can be established, as shown in Fig. 1. This new kind of application
has brought forth a new problem called cross model face
recognition (CMFR), which is defined as recognizing feature extracted from one model with another model’s gallery.
On the other hand, feature space is highly related to the
corresponding model. As shown in Fig. 2, features learned
by different systems often lie in diverse distributions, causing boundaries between different models that obstruct the
interaction of their features. Therefore, as the feature distribution varies a lot, direct CMFR usually makes no sense.
Uploading all the captured face images to the server and
using an unified model to extract features seems to be an
alternative solution. However, following reasons reject this
method:
• Single model lacks the ability to achieve satisfactory
performance when various domains, applications and
response time requirement are taken into account.
• It violates privacy policy in common sense. Uploading
and storing user’s face images are generally forbidden
in industrial community.
Another solution is to model a mapping function from
one model’s feature space to another. However this map-

9868

