Unsupervised Event-based Learning of Optical Flow, Depth, and Egomotion
Alex Zihao Zhu, Liangzhe Yuan, Kenneth Chaney, Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
{alexzhu, lzyuan, chaneyk, kostas}@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel framework for unsupervised learning for event cameras that learns motion information from only the event stream. In particular, we propose an input representation of the events in the form of a
discretized volume that maintains the temporal distribution
of the events, which we pass through a neural network to
predict the motion of the events. This motion is used to attempt to remove any motion blur in the event image. We then
propose a loss function applied to the motion compensated
event image that measures the motion blur in this image.
We train two networks with this framework, one to predict
optical flow, and one to predict egomotion and depths, and
evaluate these networks on the Multi Vehicle Stereo Event
Camera dataset, along with qualitative results from a variety of different scenes.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are a neuromorphically inspired, asynchronous sensing modality, that detect changes in log light
intensity. When a change is detected in a pixel, the camera
immediately returns an event, e = {x, y, t, p}, consisting
of the position of the pixel, x, y, timestamp of the change,
t, accurate to microseconds, and the polarity of the change,
p, corresponding to whether the pixel became brighter or
darker. The asynchronous nature of the camera, and the
tracking in the log image space, provide numerous benefits
over traditional frame based cameras, such as extremely low
latency for tracking very fast motions, very high dynamic
range, and significantly lower power consumption.
However, the novel output of the cameras provide new
challenges in algorithm development. As the events simply reflect whether a change has occurred at a given pixel, a
model of photoconsistency, as used traditional motion estimation tasks such as optical flow or structure from motion
(SFM), applied directly on the events is no longer valid. As
a result, there has been a significant research drive to deAssociated video: https://youtu.be/cdcg-CdV7TU.

Figure 1: Our network learns to predict motion from motion
blur by predicting optical flow (top) or egomotion and depth
(bottom) from a set of input, blurry, events from an event
camera (left), and minimizing the amount of motion blur
after deblurring with the predicted motion to produce the
deblurred image (right). Best viewed in color.

velop new algorithms for event cameras to solve these traditional robotics problems.
There have been recent works by Zhu et al. [24] and
Ye et al. [20] that train neural networks to learn to estimate these motion tasks in a self and unsupervised manner.
These networks abstract away the difficult problem of modeling and algorithm development. However, both works still
rely on photoconsistency based principles, applied to the
grayscale image and an event image respectively, and, as a
result, the former work relies on the presence of grayscale
images, while the latter’s photoconsistency assumption may
not hold valid in very blurry scenes. In addition, both works
take inputs that attempt to summarize the event data, and as
a result lose temporal information.
In this work, we resolve these deficiencies by proposing a novel input representation that captures the full spatiotemporal distribution of the events, and a novel set of
unsupervised loss functions that allows for efficient learning of motion information from only the event stream. Our
input representation, a discretized event volume, discretizes
the time domain, and then accumulates events in a linearly
weighted fashion similar to interpolation. This representation encodes the distribution of all of the events within the
spatiotemporal domain. We train two networks to predict
optical flow and ego-motion and depth, and use the predictions to attempt to remove the motion blur generated when
1989

