Acoustic Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
David B. Lindell∗
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract

1. Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging techniques aim to recover 3D shape and reflectance information of objects hidden from sight by analyzing multiply scattered light, i.e.
light that bounces off of visible parts of a scene, interacts
with hidden scene parts, and then reflects back into the line
of sight of the detector. With important applications in remote sensing, robotic vision, autonomous vehicle navigation, and medical imaging, NLOS imaging has the potential
to unlock unprecedented imaging modalities in a wide range
of application scenarios.
Some of the most promising approaches to NLOS imaging use ultra-fast light sources and single-photon-sensitive
detectors [9, 10, 15, 17, 21, 23, 27, 33, 34, 36, 38, 39]. Unfortunately, the specialized hardware required for these setups is extremely expensive. Moreover, acquisition times
for hidden diffuse objects are very long due to the rapid
signal falloff at increasing distances. Alternatively, inexpensive continuous wave (CW) time-of-flight systems
∗ Work performed during an internship at Intel Labs.

speaker

microphone
wall

occluder
hidden object
A
B
Magnitude

Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging enables unprecedented capabilities in a wide range of applications, including robotic and machine vision, remote sensing, autonomous vehicle navigation, and medical imaging. Recent approaches to solving this challenging problem employ
optical time-of-flight imaging systems with highly sensitive
time-resolved photodetectors and ultra-fast pulsed lasers.
However, despite recent successes in NLOS imaging using
these systems, widespread implementation and adoption of
the technology remains a challenge because of the requirement for specialized, expensive hardware. We introduce
acoustic NLOS imaging, which is orders of magnitude less
expensive than most optical systems and captures hidden
3D geometry at longer ranges with shorter acquisition times
compared to state-of-the-art optical methods. Inspired by
hardware setups used in radar and algorithmic approaches
to model and invert wave-based image formation models
developed in the seismic imaging community, we demonstrate a new approach to seeing around corners.

0

z
y
x

C

5
10
Time (ms)

15

30 cm

Figure 1. Overview of acoustic NLOS imaging. Modulated sound
waves are emitted from a speaker, travel around the corner to a hidden object, and are then recorded by a microphone as they reflect
back. The processed measurements (bottom left) contain peaks
indicating the path lengths of sound which travels directly from
the speaker to the microphone (A, peak is clipped), to the wall
and back (B), and also to the hidden object and back (C). Such
measurements are captured for a range of speaker and microphone
positions to reconstruct the 3D geometry of the hidden object (bottom right).

have been used for NLOS imaging, but require strong priors and significant compute time to reconstruct the hidden
scene [16, 18]. Intensity-only information has been used
for tracking NLOS objects [22] or estimating limited scene
information [7]; however, high-quality 3D NLOS scene reconstruction remains challenging due to the limited amount
of information in the measurements.
We demonstrate acoustic non-line-of-sight imaging,
which uses readily available, low-cost microphones and
speakers to image and resolve 3D shapes hidden around corners. The key motivation of our work is that the reflection
16780

