Shapes and Context: In-the-Wild Image Synthesis & Manipulation
Aayush Bansal
Yaser Sheikh
Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
{aayushb,yaser,deva}@cs.cmu.edu

input

output

input

output

input

output

Figure 1. Our approach synthesizes images from a label mask by non-parametric matching of shapes, parts, and pixels. We show
example results for diverse “in-the-wild” scenes containing large amounts of variation in object composition and deformation.

Abstract
We introduce a data-driven model for interactively synthesizing in-the-wild images from semantic label input
masks. Our approach is dramatically different from recent work in this space, in that we make use of no learning. Instead, our approach uses simple but classic tools
for matching scene context, shapes, and parts to a stored
library of exemplars. Though simple, this approach has
several notable advantages over recent work: (1) because
nothing is learned, it is not limited to specific training data
distributions (such as cityscapes, facades, or faces); (2) it
can synthesize arbitrarily high-resolution images, limited
only by the resolution of the exemplar library; (3) by appropriately composing shapes and parts, it can generate
an exponentially large set of viable candidate output images (that can say, be interactively searched by a user). We
present results on the diverse COCO dataset, significantly
outperforming learning-based approaches on standard image synthesis metrics. Finally, we explore user-interaction
and user-controllability, demonstrating that our system can
be used as a platform for user-driven content creation.

1. Introduction
We introduce a data-driven model for interactively synthesizing diverse images from semantic label input masks.
Specifically, we seek to design a system for in-the-wild image synthesis that is controllable and interpretable. While
content creation is a compelling task in of itself (a classic

goal of computer graphics), image synthesis is also useful
for generating data that can be used to train discriminative
visual recognition systems [29]. Synthesized data can be
used to explore scenarios that are difficult or too dangerous
to sample directly (e.g., training an autonomous perception
system on unsafe urban scenes [31]). Figure 1 shows images synthesized using our approach, where the input is a
semantic label image.
Parametric vs Nonparametric: Current approaches for
image synthesis and editing can be broadly classified into
three categories. The first category uses parametric machine
learning models. The current state-of-the-art [10, 33, 55]
relies on deep neural networks [39] trained with adversarial losses (GANs) [21] or perceptual losses [34] to create
images. These approaches work remarkably well when
trained on datasets with somewhat limited diversity, such
as cityscapes [11], faces [2, 52], or facades [54]. But it
is unclear how to extend such approaches for “in-the-wild”
image synthesis or editing: parametric models trained on
one data distribution (e.g. cityscapes) do not seem to generalize to others (e.g. facades), a problem widely known as
dataset bias [53]. The second category of work [1, 14, 15,
27, 38, 48] uses non-parametric nearest neighbors to create
content.These approaches have been demonstrated on interactive image editing tasks such as object insertion [38] or
scene completion [25]. Though a large inspiration for our
own work, such approaches have interestingly fallen out of
favor in recent history.
Does more data help? A peculiar property of many
parametric synthesis methods is that they do better with less
data [2, 21, 33, 45, 58, 62]. The culprit seems to be that such
12317

