Deep Exemplar-based Video Colorization
Bo Zhang1 ∗, Mingming He1,5 , Jing Liao2 , Pedro V. Sander1 , Lu Yuan3,4 , Amine Bermak1,6 , Dong Chen3
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
Microsoft Research Asia 4 Microsoft AI Perception and Mixed Reality
5
USC Institute for Creative Technologies 6 Hamad Bin Khalifa University

Abstract
This paper presents the first end-to-end network for
exemplar-based video colorization. The main challenge
is to achieve temporal consistency while remaining faithful to the reference style. To address this issue, we introduce a recurrent framework that unifies the semantic correspondence and color propagation steps. Both steps allow a provided reference image to guide the colorization
of every frame, thus reducing accumulated propagation errors. Video frames are colorized in sequence based on the
colorization history, and its coherency is further enforced
by the temporal consistency loss. All of these components,
learnt end-to-end, help produce realistic videos with good
temporal stability. Experiments show our result is superior
to the state-of-the-art methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Prior to the advent of automatic colorization algorithms,
artists revived legacy images or videos through a careful
manual process. Early image colorization methods relied on
user-guided scribbles [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] or a sample reference [6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] to address this ill-posed problem, and
more recent deep-learning works [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]
directly predict colors by learning color-semantic relationships from a large database.
A more challenging task is to colorize legacy videos. Independently applying image colorization (e.g., [15, 16, 17])
on each frame often leads to flickering and false discontinuities. Therefore there have been some attempts to impose
temporal constraints on video colorization. A naı̈ve approach is to run a temporal filter on the per-frame colorization results during post-processing [21, 22], which can alleviate the flickering but cause color fading and blurring. Another set of approaches propagate the color scribbles across
∗ Author did this work during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Email: zhangboknight@gmail.com

frames using optical flow [1, 2, 23, 24, 25]. However, scribbles propagation may be not perfect due to flow error, which
will induce some visual artifacts. The most recent methods
assume that the first frame is colorized and then propagate
its colors to the following frames [26, 27, 28, 29]. This is
effective to colorize a short video clip, but the errors will
progressively accumulate when the video is long. These existing techniques are generally based on color propagation
and do not consider the content of all frames when determining the colors.
We instead propose a method to colorize video frames
jointly considering three aspects, instead of solely relying
on the previous frame. First, our method takes the result
of the previous frame as input to preserve temporal consistency. Second, our method performs colorization using an
exemplar, allowing a provided reference image to guide the
colorization of every frame and reduce accumulation error.
Thus, finding semantic correspondence between the reference and every frame is essential to our method. Finally,
our method leverages large-scale data from learning, so that
it can predict natural colors based on the semantics of the input grayscale image when no proper matching is available
in either the reference image or the previous frame.
To achieve the above objectives, we present the first endto-end convolutional network for exemplar-based video colorization. It is a recurrent structure that allows history information for maintaining temporal consistency. Each state
consists of two major modules: a correspondence subnet to
align the reference to the input frame based on dense semantic correspondences, and a colorization subnet to colorize a
frame guided by both the colorized result of its previous
frame and the aligned reference. All subnets are jointly
trained, yielding multiple benefits. First, the jointly trained
correspondence subnet is tailored for the colorization task,
thus achieving higher quality. Second, it is two orders of
magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art exemplar-based
colorization method [30] where the reference is aligned in
a pre-processing step using a slow iterative optimization algorithm [31]. Moreover, the joint training allows adding
temporal constraints on the alignment as well, which is es18052

