Dense Classification and Implanting for Few-Shot Learning
Yann Lifchitz1,2

Yannis Avrithis1

Sylvaine Picard2

1 Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA

Abstract
Few-shot learning for deep neural networks is a highly
challenging and key problem in many computer vision tasks.
In this context, we are targeting knowledge transfer from
a set with abundant data to other sets with few available
examples. We propose two simple and effective solutions:
(i) dense classification over feature maps, which for the
first time studies local activations in the domain of fewshot learning, and (ii) implanting, that is, attaching new
neurons to a previously trained network to learn new, taskspecific features. Implanting enables training of multiple
layers in the few-shot regime, departing from most related
methods derived from metric learning that train only the final layer. Both contributions show consistent gains when
used individually or jointly and we report state of the art
performance on few-shot classification on miniImageNet.

1. Introduction
Current state of the art on image classification [40,
11, 15], object detection [21, 35, 10], semantic segmentation [51, 2, 20], and practically most tasks with some degree
of learning involved, rely on deep neural networks. Those
are powerful high-capacity models with trainable parameters ranging from millions to tens of millions, which require
vast amounts of annotated data to fit. When such data is
plentiful, supervised learning is the solution of choice.
Tasks and classes with limited available data, i.e. from
the long-tail [47], are highly problematic for this type of approaches. The performance of deep neural networks poses
several challenges in the low-data regime, in particular in
terms of overfitting and generalization. The subject of fewshot learning is to learn to recognize previously unseen
classes with very few annotated examples. This is not a
new problem [4], yet there is a recent resurgence in interest
through meta-learning [18, 43, 38, 1, 5] inspired by early
work in learning-to-learn [42, 13].
In meta-learning settings, even when there is single large
training set with a fixed number of class, it is treated as a
collection of datasets of different classes, where each class
has a few annotated examples. This is done so that both

2 Safran

Andrei Bursuc3
3 valeo.ai

meta-learning and meta-testing are performed in a similar
manner [43, 38, 5]. However this choice does not always
come with best performance. We argue that a simple conventional pipeline using all available classes and data with
a parametric classifier is effective and appealing.
Most few-shot learning approaches do not deal explicitly
with spatial information since feature maps are usually flattened or pooled before the classification layer. We show that
performing dense classification over feature maps leads to
more precise classification and consistently improves performance on standard benchmarks.
While incremental learning touches similar aspects with
few-shot learning by learning to adapt to new tasks using
the same network [26, 25] or extending an existing network
with new layers and parameters for each new task [37], few
of these ideas have been adopted in few shot learning. The
main impediment is the reduced number of training examples which make it difficult to properly define a new task.
We propose a solution for leveraging incremental learning
ideas for few-shot learning.
Contributions: We make the following contributions.
First, we propose a simple extension for few-shot learning pipelines consisting of dense classification over feature
maps. Through localized supervision, it enables reaping additional knowledge from the limited training data. Second,
we introduce neural implants, which are layers attached to
an already trained network, enabling it to quickly adapt to
new tasks with few examples. Both are easy to implement
and show consistent performance gains.

2. Problem formulation and background
Problem formulation. We are given a collection of training examples X := (x1 , . . . , xn ) with each xi ∈ X , and
corresponding labels Y := (y1 , . . . , yn ) with each yi ∈ C,
where C := [c]1 is a set of base classes. On this training
data we are allowed to learn a representation of the domain
X such that we can solve new tasks. This representation
learning we shall call stage 1.
In few-shot learning, one new task is that we are given a
collection of few support examples X ′ := (x′1 , . . . , x′n′ )
1 We use the notation [i] := {1, . . . , i} for i ∈ N.

19258

