DeepLiDAR: Deep Surface Normal Guided Depth Prediction for Outdoor Scene
from Sparse LiDAR Data and Single Color Image
Jiaxiong Qiu1∗ Zhaopeng Cui2∗ Yinda Zhang3∗
Xingdi Zhang1 Shuaicheng Liu1,4† Bing Zeng1 Marc Pollefeys2,5
1
UESTC 2 ETH Zürich 3 Google 4 Megvii Technology 5 Microsoft
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a deep learning architecture
that produces accurate dense depth for the outdoor scene
from a single color image and a sparse depth. Inspired
by the indoor depth completion, our network estimates surface normals as the intermediate representation to produce
dense depth, and can be trained end-to-end. With a modified
encoder-decoder structure, our network effectively fuses the
dense color image and the sparse LiDAR depth. To address
outdoor specific challenges, our network predicts a confidence mask to handle mixed LiDAR signals near foreground
boundaries due to occlusion, and combines estimates from
the color image and surface normals with learned attention maps to improve the depth accuracy especially for distant areas. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
model improves upon the state-of-the-art performance on
KITTI depth completion benchmark. Ablation study shows
the positive impact of each model components to the final
performance, and comprehensive analysis shows that our
model generalizes well to the input with higher sparsity or
from indoor scenes.

1. Introduction
Measuring dense and accurate depth for outdoor environment is critically important for various applications,
such as autonomous driving and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Most of the active depth sensing solutions for indoor environment fail due to strong interference of the passive illumination [11, 41], and stereo methods usually become less accurate for distant areas due to lower resolutions and smaller
triangulation angles compared to the close areas [45]. As
a result, LiDAR is the dominating reliable solution for the
outdoor environment. However, the high-end LiDAR is
prohibitively expensive, and the commodity level devices
suffer from the notorious low resolution [27] which causes
troubles for perception in middle or long range area. Spa∗ indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.

Color Image

Sparse Data from LiDAR

DeepLiDAR: Our Dense Prediction (colored with input color image)

DeepLiDAR: Our Dense Prediction (colored with surface normal)

Figure 1. Our system takes as input a color image and a sparse
depth image from the LiDAR (Row 1), and output a dense depth
map (Row 2). Rather than directly producing the complete depth,
our model estimates surface normals (Row 3) as the intermediate
representation which is helpful to produce accurate depth.

tial and temporal fusion provide denser depth but either requires multiple devices or suffers from dynamic objects and
latency. An affordable solution for immediate access of the
dense and accurate depth still does not exist.
One promising attempt is to take a sparse but accurate depth from a low-cost LiDAR and make it dense with
the help of an aligned color image. With the great success
of deep learning, an obvious approach is to directly feed
the sparse depth and color image into a neural network and
regress for the dense depth. Unfortunately, such a black-box
does not work equally well compared to interpretable models, where local depth affinity is learned from color image
to interpolate the sparse signal. For indoor scenes, Zhang
et al. [55] estimated the surface normals as the intermediate
representation and solved for depth via a separate optimization, which achieved superior results. However, it is not
well studied if the surface normal is a reasonable representation for the outdoor scene and how such system performs.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end deep learning
system to produce dense depth from sparse LiDAR data and
a color image taken from outdoor on-road scenes leveraging
13313

