Deep Network Interpolation
for Continuous Imagery Effect Transition
Xintao Wang1

Ke Yu1

Chao Dong2

Xiaoou Tang1

Chen Change Loy3

1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wx016, yk017, xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
chao.dong@siat.ac.cn ccloy@ntu.edu.sg
2

photo

MSE

GAN

Van Gogh

Ukiyo-e

night

day

shallow DoF
deep DoF
Figure 1. Deep network interpolation is capable of generating continuous imagery effect transitions. (1st row) from MSE effect to GAN
effect in super-resolution; (2nd row) from Van Gogh style to Ukiyo-e style; (3rd row) from day photo to night one; (4th row) from deep
depth of field (DoF) to shallow one. More applications are provided in Sec. 4. (Zoom in for best view)

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural network has demonstrated its
capability of learning a deterministic mapping for the desired imagery effect. However, the large variety of user
flavors motivates the possibility of continuous transition
among different output effects. Unlike existing methods that
require a specific design to achieve one particular transition
(e.g., style transfer), we propose a simple yet universal approach to attain a smooth control of diverse imagery effects
in many low-level vision tasks, including image restoration,
image-to-image translation, and style transfer. Specifically,
our method, namely Deep Network Interpolation (DNI), applies linear interpolation in the parameter space of two or
more correlated networks. A smooth control of imagery
effects can be achieved by tweaking the interpolation coefficients. In addition to DNI and its broad applications,
we also investigate the mechanism of network interpolation
from the perspective of learned filters.

Project page: https://xinntao.github.io/projects/DNI/.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural (CNN) network has achieved
a great success in many low-level vision tasks, such as image restoration [3, 18, 20, 1, 44, 2, 28], image-to-image
translation [15, 37, 26, 47] and image style transfer [8, 17,
6]. For each specific task, the deep network learns a deterministic mapping and outputs a fixed image for the same
inputs. However, one determined output is unable to satisfy
diverse user flavors and meet the needs in various scenarios,
limiting the applicability for practical use.
In many real-world applications, it is desired to have a
smooth control for continuous transition among different
output effects. For instance, 1) in super-resolution, models trained with the mean-square-error (MSE) loss [34] tend
to produce over-smooth images while those with the generative adversarial network (GAN) [20] generate vivid details but with some unpleasant noise (e.g., Fig 1, 1st row).
A balanced result between these two different effects would
be more visual-pleasing with reduced artifacts. 2) Many image restoration tasks deal with multiple degradation levels,
such as different noise levels and blur kernels. Most ex-

1692

