Geometry-Aware Distillation for Indoor Semantic Segmentation
Jianbo Jiao1 , Yunchao Wei2∗, Zequn Jie3 , Honghui Shi4 , Rynson Lau5 , Thomas S. Huang2
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
2
UIUC, 3 Tencent AI Lab, 4 IBM Research, 5 City University of Hong Kong
jianbo@robots.ox.ac.uk, {wychao1987, zequn.nus, shihonghui3}@gmail.com
rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk, t-huang1@illinois.edu

Abstract
It has been shown that jointly reasoning the 2D appearance and 3D information from RGB-D domains is beneficial
to indoor scene semantic segmentation. However, most existing approaches require accurate depth map as input to
segment the scene which severely limits their applications.
In this paper, we propose to jointly infer the semantic and
depth information by distilling geometry-aware embedding
to eliminate such strong constraint while still exploiting the
helpful depth domain information. In addition, we use this
learned embedding to improve the quality of semantic segmentation, through a proposed geometry-aware propagation framework followed by several multi-level skip feature
fusion blocks. By decoupling the single task prediction network into two joint tasks of semantic segmentation and geometry embedding learning, together with the proposed information propagation and feature fusion architecture, our
method is shown to perform favorably against state-of-theart methods for semantic segmentation on publicly available challenging indoor datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation that infers semantic labels of every pixel in an indoor scene is a fundamental yet challenging problem in computer vision. Obtaining better scene understanding by semantic segmentation benefits many applications like robotics, visual SLAM and virtual/augmented
reality. Compared with RGB image based methods, RGB
with depth (RGB-D) based methods can leverage additional 3D geometry information from the scene to effectively tackle ambiguities that are challenging for 2D appearance solely approaches, e.g., some pillows on a bed with
similar color as the bed (Figure 1).
Prior RGB-D semantic segmentation methods have
achieved promising performance by incorporating the depth
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

Ground-truth

DepEm

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration on the effectiveness of (b) distilling
geometry-aware depth embeddings compared to (a) the traditional
RGB, for semantic segmentation.

information [33, 12, 34, 13, 11, 6, 32]. There are mainly
two types of approaches to achieve the goal: using handcrafted features or deploying CNN-based models. Earlier
works use handcrafted image descriptors like SIFT or HOG
to extract features from the RGB images. Some specially
designed features (e.g., surface normal [34], depth gradient or spin [33]) for depth description are also used to assist the final segmentation. For CNN-based models, fully
convolutional networks (FCN) [28] greatly improve the performance for semantic segmentation due to the highly representative features extracted by a learning manner. In
general, two separate FCNs are utilized to extract features
from RGB and depth channels, followed by a simple fusion [28, 11] for semantic label prediction.
All the aforementioned approaches require ground-truth
depth map associated with the input RGB images. However,
collecting depth data from the scene is not convenient compared to RGB image capturing and the alignment between
depth and RGB is a challenging problem itself. Therefore,
we are interested in such a question: is that possible to incorporate the geometry information for semantic segmentation with only one single RGB image as input?
Some research attempts [37] have been proposed to pre-

2869

