ATOM: Accurate Tracking by Overlap Maximization
Martin Danelljan∗,1,2
1

Goutam Bhat∗,1,2

CVL, Linköping University, Sweden

2

Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3

CVL, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

3

Michael Felsberg1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Abstract
While recent years have witnessed astonishing improvements in visual tracking robustness, the advancements in
tracking accuracy have been limited. As the focus has been
directed towards the development of powerful classifiers,
the problem of accurate target state estimation has been
largely overlooked. In fact, most trackers resort to a simple
multi-scale search in order to estimate the target bounding
box. We argue that this approach is fundamentally limited
since target estimation is a complex task, requiring highlevel knowledge about the object.
We address this problem by proposing a novel tracking architecture, consisting of dedicated target estimation
and classification components. High level knowledge is incorporated into the target estimation through extensive offline learning. Our target estimation component is trained
to predict the overlap between the target object and an
estimated bounding box. By carefully integrating targetspecific information, our approach achieves previously unseen bounding box accuracy. We further introduce a classification component that is trained online to guarantee
high discriminative power in the presence of distractors.
Our final tracking framework sets a new state-of-the-art
on five challenging benchmarks. On the new large-scale
TrackingNet dataset, our tracker ATOM achieves a relative gain of 15% over the previous best approach, while
running at over 30 FPS. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/visionml/pytracking.

1. Introduction
Generic online visual tracking is a hard and ill-posed
problem. The tracking method must learn an appearance
model of the target online based on minimal supervision,
often a single starting frame in the video. The model then
needs to generalize to unseen aspects of the target appearance, including different poses, viewpoints, lightning conditions etc. The tracking problem can be decomposed into
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

ATOM

DaSiamRPN

UPDT

Figure 1. A comparison of our approach with state-of-the-art trackers. UPDT [3], based on correlation filters, lacks an explicit target state estimation component, performing a brute-force multiscale search instead. Consequently, it does not handle aspect-ratio
changes, which can lead to tracking failure (second row). DaSiamRPN [39] employs a bounding box regression strategy to estimate the target state, but still struggles in cases of out-of-plane
rotation, deformation, etc. Our approach ATOM, employing an
overlap prediction network, successfully handles these challenges
and provides accurate bounding box predictions.

a classification task and an estimation task. In the former
case, the aim is to robustly provide a coarse location of the
target in the image by categorizing image regions into foreground and background. The second task is then to estimate
the target state, often represented by a bounding box.
In recent years, the focus of tracking research has been
on target classification. Much attention has been invested
into constructing robust classifiers, based on e.g. correlation filters [6, 22, 31], and exploiting powerful deep feature
representations [3, 34] for this task. On the other hand, target estimation has seen below expected progress. This trend
is clearly observed in the recent VOT2018 challenge [17],
where older trackers such as KCF [13] and MEEM [37] still
obtain competitive accuracy while exhibiting vastly inferior
robustness. In fact, most current state-of-the-art trackers
[3, 4, 31] still rely on the classification component for target estimation by performing a multi-scale search. How-

4660

