Normalized Diversification
Shaohui Liu1∗ Xiao Zhang2∗ Jianqiao Wangni2 Jianbo Shi2
1
2
Tsinghua University
University of Pennsylvania
b1ueber2y@gmail.com, {zhang7, wnjq, jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Generating diverse yet specific data is the goal of the
generative adversarial network (GAN), but it suffers from
the problem of mode collapse. We introduce the concept of
normalized diversity which force the model to preserve the
normalized pairwise distance between the sparse samples
from a latent parametric distribution and their corresponding high-dimensional outputs. The normalized diversification aims to unfold the manifold of unknown topology and
non-uniform distribution, which leads to safe interpolation
between valid latent variables. By alternating the maximization over the pairwise distance and updating the total
distance (normalizer), we encourage the model to actively
explore in the high-dimensional output space. We demonstrate that by combining the normalized diversity loss and
the adversarial loss, we generate diverse data without suffering from mode collapsing. Experimental results show
that our method achieves consistent improvement on unsupervised image generation, conditional image generation
and hand pose estimation over strong baselines.

1. Introduction
Diversity is an important concept in many areas, e.g.
portfolio analysis [33], ecological science [26] and recommendation system [45]. This concept is also crucial to generative models which have wide applications in machine
learning and computer vision. Several representative examples include Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [21] and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [14], which are capable
of modeling complicated data. One ideal principle shared
by all generative models, simple or complex, is quite similar, that the generated data should be diverse. Otherwise,
the model may have a so-called problem of mode collapse,
where all generated outputs are highly similar. This problem is more common in GAN [14] since the objective function is mostly about the validity of generated samples but
not the diversity of them.
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1: Comparison of generative models’ capability to
learn from sparse samples with unknown topology (a donut
shape). Generated samples from GAN [14], BourGAN [39]
and ours are illustrated. GAN [14] suffers from mode collapse. BourGAN [39] concentrates tightly around the training data points. Ours generates dense coverage around the
training samples with limited outliers.
Our goal is to learn a generative model for highdimensional image data which are non-uniformly distributed over a space with unknown topology, only using
very sparse samples. These conditions stated above, even
one of them being removed, may result in a much easier
problem to solve. We formulate the solution as learning a
mapping from a low-dimensional variable in latent space Z
to an image defined in output space Y. However, we face
a dilemma that, in order to fit the complicated topology of
output data, we need the learned mapping to be complex
and highly expressive, which actually requires dense samples from real-world. This problem might be alleviated if
the topology is simpler since a parametrized function of
smaller VC dimension might be able to fit. This situation
however is most likely not the case if we need to deal with
arbitrary images.
We start from an idea that is orthogonal to previous research: that we aim to expand as well as unfold the manifold of generated images, actively and safely. We want to
model the data with complex topology in output space using a parametrized mapping from a latent space with simple topology. To learn a model that is specific to training
images and also generalizable, we wish to achieve that the
interpolation and extrapolation on a pair of latent variables
should generate valid samples in output space. This requires
the generative model, globally, to generate diverse and valid
images via exploration, which we refer to as safe extrapolation, and locally, to preserve the neighbouring relation so
that interpolation is also safe.

10306

