CrossInfoNet: Multi-Task Information Sharing Based Hand Pose Estimation
Kuo Du1 Xiangbo Lin2* Yi Sun2 Xiaohong Ma2
Dalian University of Technology, China
1

dumyy2728@mail.dlut.edu.cn, 2 {linxbo,lslwf,maxh}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

CNN has showed strong abilities and has become the leading method at present.

This paper focuses on the topic of vision based hand pose
estimation from single depth map using convolutional neural network (CNN). Our main contributions lie in designing
a new pose regression network architecture named CrossInfoNet. The proposed CrossInfoNet decomposes hand pose
estimation task into palm pose estimation sub-task and finger pose estimation sub-task, and adopts two-branch crossconnection structure to share the beneficial complementary
information between the sub-tasks. Our work is inspired
by multi-task information sharing mechanism, which has
been few discussed in hand pose estimation using depth
data in previous publications. In addition, we propose a
heat-map guided feature extraction structure to get better
feature maps, and train the complete network end-to-end.
The effectiveness of the proposed CrossInfoNet is evaluated
with extensively self-comparative experiments and in comparison with state-of-the-art methods on four public hand
pose datasets. The code is available in1 .

In 2017, Hands in the Million Challenge (HIM2017) [44]
on depth maps based hand pose estimation attracted the attentions of many research teams. The issues discussed in
the competition summary paper [43] are also our concerns.

1. Introduction
The research of vision based 3D hand pose estimation
is a hotspot in the field of computer vision, virtual reality and robotics. It has been studied for decades and has
made significant progress in recent years [3, 6, 19]. Nevertheless, it is still far from a solved problem due to the
challenges of high joint flexibility, local self-similarity and
severe occlusions. Different efforts have been made in vision based hand pose estimation. The input data changed
from single RGB [2, 7], stereo RGB [24, 27], to depth maps
which have made many achievements [26, 30, 39]. Recently, there seems to be a renewed interest to RGB images [24, 48, 18, 25]. The published hand pose estimation methods can be categorized into two main categories
as either generative model-based [29, 35] or discriminative
learning-based methods [11, 32, 36, 38]. Benefit from the
increase of data amounts and computational ability, deep
1 https://github.com/dumyy/handpose

Firstly, treating depth maps as 2D images and regressing
3D joint coordinates directly is a commonly used hand pose
estimation pipeline. Although converting the 2.5D depth
maps into 3D voxelized forms will reserve more information [12, 17], it suffers from heavy parameter loads and still
exists information defect. In our work, we tend to be in
line with the argument of [39] to leverage the advances of
2D CNNs, and try to excavate more information from 2D
inputs.
Secondly, designing effective networks receives the most
attentions. In machine learning, by sharing information,
multi-task learning has the advantages of reserving more
intrinsic information than single task learning. Learning
multiple tasks simultaneously will be helpful to enforce a
model with better generalizing ability [28]. However, multitask learning has not been paid enough attention in CNN
based hand pose estimation yet. As [39] claimed, they
did the first attempt to fuse the hand pose estimation results of the holistic regression and the heat-map detection
in a multi-task setup. Inspired by their achievements, we
design a new CNN structure for hand pose estimation in a
multi-task setup. Hierarchical model is one of hand pose estimation networks and has shown excellent performance in
competition. It usually divides the pose estimation problem
into sub-tasks by separately dealing with different fingers
or different type of joints [4, 16, 47]. Intuitively, it would
be easily understood that palm joints have closer tie-ups
than those more flexible finger joints. The global hand pose
will be mostly determined by the status of the palm joints,
while the local hand pose will be reflected by the actions
of the finger joints. Based on these knowledge, we design
a new hierarchical model in a multi-task setup. The proposed architecture has two branches corresponding to the
palm joint regression sub-task and the finger joint regression sub-task, respectively. By cross-connections between

9896

