Divergence Prior and Vessel-tree Reconstruction
Zhongwen Zhang1 Dmitrii Marin1 Egor Chesakov2
Marc Moreno Maza2 Maria Drangova3 Yuri Boykov1
1

University of Waterloo, Canada

2

Western University, Canada

Abstract
We propose a new geometric regularization principle for
reconstructing vector fields based on prior knowledge about
their divergence. As one important example of this general
idea, we focus on vector fields modelling blood flow pattern
that should be divergent in arteries and convergent in veins.
We show that this previously ignored regularization constraint can significantly improve the quality of vessel tree
reconstruction particularly around bifurcations where nonzero divergence is concentrated. Our divergence prior is
critical for resolving (binary) sign ambiguity in flow orientations produced by standard vessel filters, e.g. Frangi. Our
vessel tree centerline reconstruction combines divergence
constraints with robust curvature regularization. Our unsupervised method can reconstruct complete vessel trees with
near-capillary details on synthetic and real 3D volumes.

1. Background on vessel detection
There is a large body of prior work on estimation of vessels in computer vision and biomedical imaging communities [19]. Typically, pixel-level detection of tubular structures is based on multiscale eigen analysis of raw intensity
Hessians developed by Frangi et al. [11] and other research
groups [10]. At any given point (pixel/voxel) such vessel
enhancement filters output a tubularness measure and estimates of the vessel’s scale and orientation, which describes
the flow direction upto to a sign. While such local analysis of Hessians is very useful, simple thresholding of points
with large-enough vesselness measure is often unreliable as
a method for computing the vessel tree structure. While
thresholding works well for detecting relatively large vessels, detection of smaller vessels is complicated by noise,
partial voluming, and outliers (e.g. ring artifacts). More importantly, standard tubular filters exhibit signal loss at vessel
bifurcations as those do not look like tubes.
Earlier regularization methods [30, 31] address many
tree reconstruction challenges due to noise and outliers assuming accurately localized “anchor” points are available
and data is relatively small. In contrast, we focus on large

3

Robarts Research, Canada

3D data with 80% of near-capillary vessels of voxel-size or
less; thus, finding accurate centerline anchors is problematic due to signal loss at thinner parts and bifurcations. We
propose a new regularization prior based on knowledge of
the flow pattern divergence. It is critical for disambiguating
flow directions and gives important cues on the vessel tree
structure. Next subsections outline related regularization
methods for vessel reconstruction and motivate our work.
It may be also interesting to apply deep learning to vessel tree detection, but neural network training is problematic
since vessel tree ground truth is practically impossible in
real 3D data. Practical weakly-supervised training may require regularized loss functions [29] appropriate for vessel
tree detection. While our regularization methodology may
help to design such losses, we leave this for future work.

1.1. Vessel representation: centerline or segment
Two common approaches to representing vessels in reconstruction methods are volumetric binary mask and centerline. Volumetric mask is typical for techniques directly
computing vessel segmentation, i.e. binary labeling of pixels/voxels. In contrast, centerline is a 1D abstraction of
the vessel. But, if combined with information about vessel
radii, it is easy to obtain a volumetric mask or segmentation from the vessel’s centerline, e.g. using MAT [27]. Vice
versa, centerline could be estimated from the vessel’s binary
mask using skeletonization algorithms.
In the context of regularization methods for vessel reconstruction, centerline representation offers significant advantages since powerful higher-order regularizers are easier
to apply to 1D structures. For example, centerline’s curvature can be regularized [18], while conceptually comparable regularization for vessel segmentation requires optimization of Gaussian or minimum curvature of the vessel’s
surface with no known practical algorithms. In general, curvature remains a challenging regularization criteria for surfaces [25, 28, 14, 24, 21]. Alternatively, some vessel segmentation methods use simpler first-order regularizers producing minimal surfaces. While tractable, such regularizers
impose a wrong prior for surfaces of thin structures due to
their bias to compact blob shapes (a.k.a. shrinking bias).
110216

