Visual Tracking via Adaptive Spatially-Regularized Correlation Filters
Kenan Dai1 , Dong Wang1∗, Huchuan Lu1,2 , Chong Sun1,3 , Jianhua Li1
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Tencent Youtu Lab
dkn2014@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, waynecool@mail.dlut.edu.cn, jianhual@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel adaptive spatiallyregularized correlation filters (ASRCF) model to simultaneously optimize the filter coefficients and the spatial regularization weight. First, this adaptive spatial regularization scheme could learn an effective spatial weight for a
specific object and its appearance variations, and therefore
result in more reliable filter coefficients during the tracking process. Second, our ASRCF model can be effectively optimized based on the alternating direction method of
multipliers, where each subproblem has the closed-from solution. Third, our tracker applies two kinds of CF models
to estimate the location and scale respectively. The location CF model exploits ensembles of shallow and deep features to determine the optimal position accurately. The scale CF model works on multi-scale shallow features to estimate the optimal scale efficiently. Extensive experiments
on five recent benchmarks show that our tracker performs favorably against many state-of-the-art algorithms, with
real-time performance of 28fps.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking [36, 25, 24] is a fundamental computer
vision problem and has many realistic applications including video surveillance, behavior analysis, to name a few.
Although many efforts have been done, it is still a tough
task to design a robust and efﬁcient tracker due to the difﬁculties from both foreground and background variations.
Recently, tracking algorithms based on correlation ﬁlters
(CF) have achieved top-ranked performance and drawn increasing attentions. Usually, the CF-based trackers [18, 12,
11, 15, 8] exploit large numbers of cyclically shifted samples for learning, and convert the correlation operations in
the spatial domain to the element-wise multiplications in the
frequency domain, thereby reducing the computation complexity and improving the tracking speed signiﬁcantly.
∗ Corresponding Author: Dr. Wang

(a) SRDCF [11]

(b) ASRCF

Figure 1. The visualization of different spatial regularizations for
the (a) SRDCF [11] and (b) ASRCF methods. For SRDCF, the
spatial regularization has a negative Gaussian shape, which is almost equal for different objects and ﬁxed during the tracking process. By contrast, our ASRCF method attempts to learn an adaptive spatial regularization, which is ﬂexible for different objects in
different time. As shown in (b), the ASRCF model has learned an
effective spatial regularization that provides a higher penalty on
the noise part and a lower penalty on the reliable part.

However, there exist two major imperfections of the earlier CF-based methods. First, the circulant shifted sampling
process always suffers from periodic repetitions on boundary positions and makes the CF model be trained with a portion of unreal samples. This dilemma has been alleviated to
some extent with additional pre-deﬁned spatial constraints
on ﬁlter coefﬁcients [11, 15]. But these constraints are usually ﬁxed for different objects and not changed during the
tracking process, which cannot fully exploit the diversity
information of different objects in different time. Second,
the object localization and scale estimation are usually conducted on the same feature space, which requires extracting multi-scale feature maps during the tracking process.
This strategy signiﬁcantly increases the computational load
and decreases the tracking speeds when the tracker exploits
some powerful and complicated features (such as features
extracted from deep networks). That is why the top-ranked
CF trackers often runs very slow (e.g., DeepSRDCF [10],
C-COT [13], DRT [32] and RPCF [33]).
In this work, we develop a robust and efﬁcient CF-based
tracker with two major efforts: adaptive spatial regularization and efﬁcient scale estimation. The contributions of this

4670

