Associatively Segmenting Instances and Semantics in Point Clouds
Xinlong Wang1 Shu Liu2 Xiaoyong Shen2 Chunhua Shen1 Jiaya Jia2,3
1
2
3
University of Adelaide, Australia
Youtu Lab, Tencent
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
e-mail: wangxinlon@gmail.com

Abstract
A 3D point cloud describes the real scene precisely and
intuitively. To date how to segment diversified elements
in such an informative 3D scene is rarely discussed. In
this paper, we first introduce a simple and flexible framework to segment instances and semantics in point clouds
simultaneously. Then, we propose two approaches which
make the two tasks take advantage of each other, leading to a win-win situation. Specifically, we make instance
segmentation benefit from semantic segmentation through
learning semantic-aware point-level instance embedding.
Meanwhile, semantic features of the points belonging to
the same instance are fused together to make more accurate per-point semantic predictions. Our method largely
outperforms the state-of-the-art method in 3D instance segmentation along with a significant improvement in 3D semantic segmentation. Code has been made available at:
https://github.com/WXinlong/ASIS.

1. Introduction
Both instance segmentation and semantic segmentation
aim to detect specific informative region represented by
sets of smallest units in the scenes. For example, a point
cloud can be parsed into groups of points, where each
group corresponds to a class of stuff or an individual instance. The two tasks are related and both have wide applications in real scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving and
augmented reality. Though great progress has been made in
recent years [10, 6, 21, 34, 16] for each single task, no prior
method tackles these two tasks associatively.
In fact, instance segmentation and semantic segmentation conflict with each other in some respects. The former one distinguishes different instances of the same class
clearly, while the latter one wants them to have the same label. However, the two tasks could cooperate with each other
through seeking common grounds. Semantic segmentation
distinguishes points of different classes, which is also one
of the purposes of instance segmentation, as points of different classes must belong to different instances. Furthermore,

Ins. Decoder
ASIS

Encoder
Sem. Decoder

Figure 1: Instance segmentation and semantic segmentation results using ASIS. Our method takes raw point clouds as inputs and
outputs instance labels and semantic labels for each point.

instance segmentation assigns the same label to points belonging to the same instance, which is also consistent with
semantic segmentation, as points of the same instance must
belong to the same category. This observation makes one
wonder how the two tasks could be associated together to
lead to a win-win solution?
There may be two straightforward approaches. The first
one is that, given the semantic labels, we could run instance
segmentation independently on every semantic class to better distinguish individual instances. Thus, different class
instances are separated simply but naively.
However, the instance segmentation would greatly depend on performance of semantic segmentation as incorrect semantic predictions would inevitably result in incorrect instance predictions. Otherwise, given the instance labels, one could classify each instance and assign the predicted class label to each point of this instance. Thus, the
problem is transformed to an easier instance recognition
problem. However, inaccurate instance predictions would
deeply confuse the downstream object classifiers. Both
these two approaches are in step-wise paradigm, which can
be sub-optimal and inefficient. In this work, we integrate
the two tasks altogether into an end-to-end parallel training framework, which shares the same benefits in a soft and
learnable fashion.
We first introduce a simple baseline to segment instances
14096

