Iterative Projection and Matching: Finding Structure-preserving
Representatives and Its Application to Computer Vision
Alireza Zaeemzadeh∗, Mohsen Joneidi∗ , Nazanin Rahnavard, and Mubarak Shah
University of Central Florida
{zaeemzadeh, joneidi, nazanin}@eecs.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The goal of data selection is to capture the most structural information from a set of data. This paper presents
a fast and accurate data selection method, in which the selected samples are optimized to span the subspace of all
data. We propose a new selection algorithm, referred to as
iterative projection and matching (IPM), with linear complexity w.r.t. the number of data, and without any parameter to be tuned. In our algorithm, at each iteration,
the maximum information from the structure of the data is
captured by one selected sample, and the captured information is neglected in the next iterations by projection on
the null-space of previously selected samples. The computational efficiency and the selection accuracy of our proposed algorithm outperform those of the conventional methods. Furthermore, the superiority of the proposed algorithm
is shown on active learning for video action recognition
dataset on UCF-101; learning using representatives on ImageNet; training a generative adversarial network (GAN)
to generate multi-view images from a single-view input on
CMU Multi-PIE dataset; and video summarization on UTE
Egocentric dataset.

1. Introduction
Thanks to recent advances in computing, deep learning
based systems, which employ very large numbers of inputs,
have been developed in the last decade. However, processing/labeling/communication of a large number of input data
has remained challenging. Therefore, novel machine learning methods that make the best use of a significantly less
amount of data are of great interest. For example, active
learning (AL) [26] aims at addressing this problem by training a model using a small number of labeled data, testing on
the trained model, and then querying the labels of some selected data, which then are used for training a new model.
In this context, preserving the underlying structure of data
by a succinct format is an essential concern.
∗ indicates shared first authorship.

Data selection task is not trivial and possibly implies
ad
possibilidressing an NP-hard problem (i.e., there are M
K
ties of choosing K distinct sample out of M available ones).
This means that an optimal solution cannot be efficiently
computed when the number of available data becomes excessively large. A convex relaxation of the original NP-hard
problem has been suggested in terms of the D-optimal and
A-optimal solutions [1, 23]. In addition to convex relaxation, a sub-modular cost function as the criterion of selection, allows us to employ much faster greedy optimization
methods for selection [36]. The stochastic implementation
of D-optimal solution is referred to volume sampling (VS),
which is a fast and well-studied method. VS selects each
subset of data, which are organized in the rows of a matrix, with probability proportional to the determinant (volume) of the reduced matrix. Moreover, QR decomposition
with column pivoting (QRCP) and convex hull-based selection methods have been suggested for optimal data selection
[10, 9]. All the mentioned methods aim to select the most
diverse subset of data in an optimal sense. However, these
methods do not guarantee that the un-selected samples are
well-covered by the selected ones. Further, outliers are selected with a high probability using such algorithms due to
their diversity, unless preprocessed by outlier detection algorithms [35]. Authors in [22] address this problem via a
two-phase algorithm. There are some other efforts for outlier rejection in the selection procedure [34, 42]. However,
the outlier and inlier data are not well-defined and these
methods are not consistent with general data.
There is another more effective approach for subset selection, which chooses data such that the selected samples
are able to approximate the rest of data accurately. This selection problem is formulated using a convex optimization
problem and referred as sparse modeling representative selection (SMRS) algorithm [12]. The same goal is pursued
by dissimilarity-based sparse subset selection (DS3), which
is based on simultaneous sparse recovery for finding data
representatives [11]. Representative approaches, such as
SMRS and DS3, provide more suitable subset rather than
selecting some diverse samples. However, their computa15414

