Learning to Learn How to Learn:
Self-Adaptive Visual Navigation using Meta-Learning
Mitchell Wortsman1 , Kiana Ehsani2 , Mohammad Rastegari1 , Ali Farhadi1,2 , Roozbeh Mottaghi1
1
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, 2 University of Washington

Abstract
Learning is an inherently continuous phenomenon.
When humans learn a new task there is no explicit distinction between training and inference. As we learn a task,
we keep learning about it while performing the task. What
we learn and how we learn it varies during different stages
of learning. Learning how to learn and adapt is a key
property that enables us to generalize effortlessly to new
settings. This is in contrast with conventional settings in
machine learning where a trained model is frozen during
inference. In this paper we study the problem of learning to learn at both training and test time in the context
of visual navigation. A fundamental challenge in navigation is generalization to unseen scenes. In this paper we
propose a self-adaptive visual navigation method (SAVN)
which learns to adapt to new environments without any explicit supervision. Our solution is a meta-reinforcement
learning approach where an agent learns a self-supervised
interaction loss that encourages effective navigation. Our
experiments, performed in the AI2-THOR framework, show
major improvements in both success rate and SPL for visual
navigation in novel scenes. Our code and data are available
at: https://github.com/allenai/savn.

1. Introduction
Learning is an inherently continuous phenomenon. We
learn further about tasks that we have already learned and
can learn to adapt to new environments by interacting in
these environments. There is no hard boundary between the
training and the testing phases while we are learning and
performing tasks: we learn as we perform. This stands in
stark contrast with many modern deep learning techniques,
where the network is frozen during inference.
What we learn and how we learn it varies during different stages of learning. To learn a new task we often rely
on explicit external supervision. After learning a task, we
further learn as we adapt to new settings. This adaptation
does not necessarily need explicit supervision; we often do
this via interaction with the environment.

Figure 1. Traditional navigation approaches freeze the model during inference (top row); this may result in difficulties generalizing to unseen environments. In this paper, we propose a metareinforcement learning approach for navigation, where the agent
learns to adapt in a self-supervised manner (bottom row). In this
example, the agent learns to adapt itself when it collides with an
object once and acts correctly afterwards. In contrast, a standard
solution (top row) makes multiple mistakes of the same kind when
performing the task.

In this paper, we study the problem of learning to learn
and adapt at both training and test time in the context of
visual navigation; one of the most crucial skills for any visually intelligent agent. The goal of visual navigation is to
move towards certain objects or regions of an environment.
A key challenge in navigation is generalizing to a scene that
has not been observed during training, as the structure of
the scene and appearance of objects are unfamiliar. In this
paper we propose a self-adaptive visual navigation (SAVN)
model which learns to adapt during inference without any
explicit supervision using an interaction loss (Figure 1).
Formally, our solution is a meta-reinforcement learning approach to visual navigation, where an agent learns
to adapt through a self-supervised interaction loss. Our
approach is inspired by gradient based meta-learning algorithms that learn quickly using a small amount of data
[13]. In our approach, however, we learn quickly using a

6750

