Blind Image Deblurring with Local Maximum Gradient Prior
Liang Chen
Faming Fang∗
Tingting Wang
Guixu Zhang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, and
Department of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Blind image deblurring aims to recover sharp image
from a blurred one while the blur kernel is unknown. To
solve this ill-posed problem, plenty of image priors have
been explored and used in this area. In this paper, we
present a blind deblurring method based on Local Maximum Gradient (LM G) prior. Our work is inspired by the
simple and intuitive observation that the maximum value of
a local patch gradient will diminish after blurring process,
which is proved to be true both mathematically and empirically. This inherent property of the blurring process allows
us to establish a new energy function. By introducing a linear operator to compute the Local Maximum Gradient, together with an effective optimization scheme, our method
can handle various specific scenarios. Extensive experimental results illustrate that our method is able to achieve
favorable performance against state-of-the-art algorithms
on both synthetic and real-world images.

1. Introduction
Single image blind deblurring has drawn considerable
attention in recent years. Photography equipments, from
surveillance camera to personal hand-held smart phone, are
often suffered from blurring when capturing images. The
blurring process is characterized by the relative rotation or
translation between cameras and objects within camera lens
exposure time.
If the blur kernel is space-invariant, we consider it as
uniform blur. The blurring process is modelled as a convolution operation, i.e.,
B = I ⊗ K + ǫ,

(1)

where B, I, K and ǫ represent blurry input, latent image,
∗ Corresponding Author. Email address: fmfang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn. This
work was sponsored by the Key Project of the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61731009 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61871185, and ”Chenguang Program” supported by Shanghai Education Development Foundation and
Shanghai Municipal Education Commission under Grant 17CG25.

blur kernel and the inevitable noise, respectively, and ⊗ denotes the convolution symbol. Latent image I and blur kernel K are what we intend to acquire out of this equation.
This is a highly ill-posed problem, because different pairs
of I and K can bring about the same B.
Recent works, either optimization-based [4, 23, 2, 27,
20] or learning-based [24, 22, 17, 30, 25], have brought
significant improvements in blind deconvolution. We give
a detailed introduction to the highly related optimizationbased methods in this section.
Fergus et al. [4] introduce heavy-tailed distribution of
natural images gradient histogram and sparse characteristic
of blur kernel. Shan et al. [23] exploit a new representation by concatenating two piece-wise continuous functions
to fit the heavy-tailed distribution of logarithmic gradient,
and incorporate it with a local prior for blind deblurring.
To accelerate the iteration process, Cho and Lee [2] adopt
a multi-scale framework, and utilize image gradient for the
deblurring process rather than pixel values. Xu et al. [26]
find that strong edges could not improve kernel estimation
when object scale is relatively smaller than the kernel, and
they introduce a two-phase method to refine the kernel estimation step. Moreover, Levin et al. [14] derive an effective method to optimize the popular maximum a posteriori (M AP ) framework. Krishnan et al. [10] utilize an
L1 /L2 regularization which inhenrently favors clear image
over blurred ones. Hu et al. [7] adopt conditional random
field framework to learn good regions for deblurring. Xu
et al. [27] develop an unnatural L0 sparse expression and
greatly reduce the running time. Instead of utilizing the
salient edges for kernel estimation directly, Gong et al. [5]
use a gradient activation method to automatically select a
subset of gradients of the latent image for the task. These
methods perform well on natural blurry images. However,
when it comes to special occasions, such as human face
[18], low-light [6] and text [19] blurred images, some of
them will encounter setbacks.
A number of image priors have also been utilized to solve
this ill-posed problem [16, 11, 21, 20, 28, 15]. To name a
few, natural image patches across different scales are previously used by Michaeli and Ironi [16], as the patches recur11742

