Towards Scene Understanding:
Unsupervised Monocular Depth Estimation with Semantic-aware Representation
Po-Yi Chen1,3∗

Alexander H. Liu1,3∗
Yen-Cheng Liu2
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3
2
National Taiwan University
Georgia Institute of Technology
3
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
1

pychen0@ntu.edu.tw, r07922013@ntu.edu.tw, ycliu@gatech.edu, ycwang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is a challenging task in
scene understanding, with the goal to acquire the geometric properties of 3D space from 2D images. Due to the lack
of RGB-depth image pairs, unsupervised learning methods
aim at deriving depth information with alternative supervision such as stereo pairs. However, most existing works fail
to model the geometric structure of objects, which generally results from considering pixel-level objective functions
during training. In this paper, we propose SceneNet to overcome this limitation with the aid of semantic understanding
from segmentation. Moreover, our proposed model is able
to perform region-aware depth estimation by enforcing semantics consistency between stereo pairs. In our experiments, we qualitatively and quantitatively verify the effectiveness and robustness of our model, which produces favorable results against the state-of-the-art approaches do.

1. Introduction
With the development of robotics and autonomous driving, scene understanding has become a crucial yet challenging problem. One goal of scene understanding is to recognize and analyze 3D geometric information from a 2D scene
image. Toward this end, several methods [5, 14, 12] attempt
to estimate depth information from a monocular image by
learning a supervised regression model with a great amount
of 2D-3D image pairs or multiple observations from different viewpoints. However, as most supervised learning
methods, collecting ground truth data is costly and timeconsuming. Thus, recent works attempted to learn unsupervised depth estimation models based on either stereo image
pairs [8] or video sequences [27].
Most unsupervised depth estimation methods derive
∗ Indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1: Integrating depth estimation and semantic segmentation towards scene understanding. With image representation jointly learned from the above objectives preserving geometric/semantic information, unsupervised depth estimation can be realized.

depth information by reconstructing the geometric structure
of a scene, while in addition to the geometric cue, we human
estimate depth information according to semantic information of a scene. For example, we know that pixels labeled as
“sky” must accompany with large values of depth. Furthermore, the depth values of the pixels within a segmentation
mask (i.e., an object) should be close and relative, and significant changes of depth between adjacent pixels implicitly
indicate the boundary of an object. Based on these properties, several works [13, 20, 4, 18] have explored to mutually
positive transfer between semantic segmentation and depth
estimation, while the requirement of pairwise depth and semantic labels limits the applicability of these models.
In this paper, we first point out the current state-of-thearts like [8] predict the disparity maps for stereo views only
based on one monocular image. This results in unawareness of structural information from the other view in the inference stage and further affects the performance of disparity prediction. With the proposed SceneNet, the mismatching problem can be significantly alleviated by our training
12624

