SR-LSTM: State Refinement for LSTM
towards Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Pu Zhang 1 , Wanli Ouyang 2 , Pengfei Zhang 1 , Jianru Xue 1 ∗, Nanning Zheng 1
1
2

Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xian Jiaotong University, China
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
zhangpu2016,zpengfei@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
jrxue,nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
In crowd scenarios, reliable trajectory prediction of
pedestrians requires insightful understanding of their social
behaviors. These behaviors have been well investigated by
plenty of studies, while it is hard to be fully expressed by
hand-craft rules. Recent studies based on LSTM networks
have shown great ability to learn social behaviors. However, many of these methods rely on previous neighboring
hidden states but ignore the important current intention of
the neighbors. In order to address this issue, we propose a
data-driven state refinement module for LSTM network (SRLSTM), which activates the utilization of the current intention of neighbors, and jointly and iteratively refines the current states of all participants in the crowd through a message passing mechanism. To effectively extract the social effect of neighbors, we further introduce a social-aware information selection mechanism consisting of an element-wise
motion gate and a pedestrian-wise attention to select useful message from neighboring pedestrians. Experimental
results on two public datasets, i.e. ETH and UCY, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed SR-LSTM and we
achieve state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is strongly required by
various applications, e.g., autonomous driving and robot
navigation. The trajectory of pedestrian can be inﬂuenced
by multiple factors such as scene topologies, pedestrian beliefs, and the most complex one, human-human interactions. The intricate and subtle interactions are often taken place
among the pedestrians. For example, strangers avoid collisions, but fellows walk in group. Broken groups can re∗ Corresponding author.

t-1 t

t

(a)

t-1

t-1 t

t-1

(b)

Figure 1. When predicting for the lady at time t, considering the
trajectory of the man on the right up to time t (a), or the one up
to time t − 1 (b), can cause great deviation in predicting results
(dashed lines).

group to keep the unity [10, 30]. When individuals meet
groups, singles are statistically walking faster and are more
likely to adjust their routes [7, 11]. Stationary groups act as
obstacles [50, 51].
Although various social behaviors have been investigated, it is challenging to take a comprehensive consideration
of them. Some recent data-driven methods [1, 12, 13, 35, 38,
39, 41, 46] try to leverage from Long-Short Term Memory
networks (LSTM) [16], to learn social behaviors from large
scale data. In this paper, we point out two factors which are
important but neglected in different levels:
1). Current states of neighbors are important for timely
interaction inference.
Many of the recent RNN-based approaches make use of
the previous hidden states of neighbors [1, 12, 13, 35, 38,
39]. However, the previous states fail to reveal the newest
status of neighbors especially when they have just change
their intentions in short time period. This effect of lagging
depends on the size of the time step. Within a common time
step in recent works [1, 12, 35], e.g., 0.4s, human can take
one stride, in which the intentions of them could change
unexpectedly. Fig. 1 shows an example. The man on the
right in Fig. 1(a) changes his intention to turn left at time
t. Based on this observation, the predictions of the lady can
be straight on or turning slightly. But if the algorithm only

12085

