Fast Online Object Tracking and Segmentation: A Unifying Approach
Qiang Wang∗
CASIA

Li Zhang∗
University of Oxford

Luca Bertinetto∗
Five AI

qiang.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

lz@robots.ox.ac.uk

luca.bertinetto@five.ai

Weiming Hu
CASIA

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford

wmhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we illustrate how to perform both visual object
tracking and semi-supervised video object segmentation,
in real-time, with a single simple approach. Our method,
dubbed SiamMask, improves the offline training procedure
of popular fully-convolutional Siamese approaches for object tracking by augmenting their loss with a binary segmentation task. Once trained, SiamMask solely relies on a
single bounding box initialisation and operates online, producing class-agnostic object segmentation masks and rotated bounding boxes at 55 frames per second. Despite its
simplicity, versatility and fast speed, our strategy allows us
to establish a new state-of-the-art among real-time trackers on VOT-2018, while at the same time demonstrating
competitive performance and the best speed for the semisupervised video object segmentation task on DAVIS-2016
and DAVIS-2017. The project website is http://www.
robots.ox.ac.uk/˜qwang/SiamMask.

1. Introduction
Tracking is a fundamental task in any video application requiring some degree of reasoning about objects of
interest, as it allows to establish object correspondences between frames [38]. It finds use in a wide range of scenarios
such as automatic surveillance, vehicle navigation, video labelling, human-computer interaction and activity recognition. Given the location of an arbitrary target of interest in
the first frame of a video, the aim of visual object tracking
is to estimate its position in all the subsequent frames with
the best possible accuracy [69, 65, 55].
For many applications, it is important that tracking can
be performed online, while the video is streaming. In other
words, the tracker should not make use of future frames to
∗ Equal contribution.

Init

Estimates

Figure 1. Our method aims at the intersection between the tasks
of visual tracking and video object segmentation to achieve high
practical convenience. Like conventional object trackers, it relies
on a simple bounding box initialisation (blue) and operates online.
Differently from state-of-the-art trackers such as ECO [14] (red),
SiamMask (green) is able to produce binary segmentation masks,
which can more accurately describe the target object.

reason about the current position of the object [30]. This
is the scenario portrayed by visual object tracking benchmarks, which represent the target object with a simple axisaligned [62, 34, 42, 59, 43] or rotated [30] bounding box.
Such a simple annotation helps to keep the cost of data labelling low; what is more, it allows a user to perform a quick
and simple initialisation of the target.
Similar to object tracking, the task of semi-supervised
video object segmentation (VOS) requires estimating the
position of an arbitrary target specified in the first frame
of a video. However, in this case the object representation consists of a binary segmentation mask which expresses whether or not a pixel belongs to the target [46].
Such a detailed representation is more desirable for applications that require pixel-level information, like video editing [44] and rotoscoping [41]. Understandably, producing pixel-level estimates requires more computational re-

1328

