Embedding Complementary Deep Networks for Image Classification
Qiuyu Chen1∗ , Wei Zhang2∗, Jun Yu3 , Jianping Fan1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
{qchen12,jfan}@uncc.edu,

weizh@fudan.edu.cn,

Abstract
In this paper, a deep embedding algorithm is developed
to achieve higher accuracy rates on large-scale image classification. By adapting the importance of the object classes
to their error rates, our deep embedding algorithm can train
multiple complementary deep networks sequentially, where
each of them focuses on achieving higher accuracy rates for
different subsets of object classes in an easy-to-hard way.
By integrating such complementary deep networks to generate an ensemble network, our deep embedding algorithm
can improve the accuracy rates for the hard object classes
(which initially have higher error rates) at certain degrees
while effectively preserving high accuracy rates for the easy
object classes. Our deep embedding algorithm has achieved
higher overall accuracy rates on large-scale image classification.

1. Introduction
With the availability of massive training images and
the rapid growth of computational powers of GPUs, we
are now able to develop scalable learning algorithms to
support large-scale image classification, and deep learning [17, 13, 5, 30, 31, 22, 10, 12] has demonstrated its outstanding performance because it can learn more discriminative representations in an end-to-end fashion. On the
other hand, boosting has demonstrated its strong capability
by embedding multiple complementary weak classifiers to
construct an ensemble one [26, 8, 34]. By assigning larger
weights (importance) to hard samples (which are misclassified by the previous weak classifier), boosting can learn a
complementary weak classifier at the current training round
by paying more attention on such hard samples. Thus it is
very attractive to invest whether boosting [26, 8, 34] can
be integrated with deep learning to achieve higher accuracy
∗ The first two authors have equal contributions on this work.

yujun@hdu.edu.cn

rates on large-scale image classification.
By using deep networks to replace the weak classifiers in
traditional boosting frameworks, boosting of deep networks
has recently received enough attention and some interesting
researches have been done [23, 28, 29, 36, 2, 18, 24, 6, 32].
All these existing deep boosting algorithms simply use the
weighted errors (proposed by Adaboost [26, 8, 34]) to replace the softmax errors (used in deep learning), and the
underlying deep networks treat the errors from the hard object classes and the easy ones to be equally important. It
is worth noting that object classes may have significant differences on their learning complexities (i.e., some object
classes could be harder to be recognized than others), thus
the errors from the hard object classes and the easy ones
may have significantly different effects on optimizing their
joint objective function. Therefore, learning a joint deep
network for the hard object classes and the easy ones may
not be an optimal solution for large-scale visual recognition because such joint deep network may not have strong
discrimination ability on the hard object classes which may
result in low accuracy rates.
To achieve higher accuracy rates on large-scale image
classification, three types of solutions can be invested to
diversify the deep networks being combined and generate
more discriminative ensemble one: (a) weightingthe training samples according to their error rates and most existing
deep boosting algorithms [23, 28, 29, 36, 2, 18, 24, 6, 32]
belong to this direction; (b) learning multiple deep networks
by using different model parameters or using various sample subsets and some deep embedding algorithms [15, 25,
33, 9, 27, 14, 20, 4, 21, 1] belong to this direction; (c) training multiple complementary deep networks, e.g., such complementary deep networks are trained sequentially by focusing on achieving higher accuracy rates for different subsets
of object classes in an easy-to-hard way, so that they can
enhance each other. According to the best of our knowledge, the third direction (i.e., training and embedding complementary deep networks) has not been explored so far.

9238

