ContextDesc: Local Descriptor Augmentation with Cross-Modality Context
Zixin Luo1
Yao Yao1,∗

Tianwei Shen1
Shiwei Li1

Lei Zhou1, *
Tian Fang3,†

Jiahui Zhang2
Long Quan1

1

2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Tsinghua University
Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure)
{zluoag,tshenaa,lzhouai,yyaoag,slibc,quan}@cse.ust.hk

jiahui-z15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

fangtian@altizure.com

Abstract

Ref.
NN

Most existing studies on learning local features focus
on the patch-based descriptions of individual keypoints,
whereas neglecting the spatial relations established from
their keypoint locations. In this paper, we go beyond the local detail representation by introducing context awareness
to augment off-the-shelf local feature descriptors. Specifically, we propose a unified learning framework that leverages and aggregates the cross-modality contextual information, including (i) visual context from high-level image
representation, and (ii) geometric context from 2D keypoint
distribution. Moreover, we propose an effective N-pair
loss that eschews the empirical hyper-parameter search
and improves the convergence. The proposed augmentation scheme is lightweight compared with the raw local feature description, meanwhile improves remarkably on several large-scale benchmarks with diversified scenes, which
demonstrates both strong practicality and generalization
ability in geometric matching applications. [code release]

1. Introduction
Designing powerful local feature descriptor is a fundamental problem in applications such as panorama stitching [21], wide-baseline matching [24, 54, 55], image retrieval [27] and structure-from-motion (SfM) [57, 39, 52,
56]. Despite the recent notable achievements, the performance of state-of-the-art learned descriptors is observed to
be somewhat saturated on standard benchmarks. As shown
in Fig. 1a, due to repetitive patterns, the matching algorithm
often finds false matches as nearest neighbors that are visually indistinguishable from groundtruth, unless validated
by geometry. Essentially, such visual ambiguity may not be
easily resolved given only local information. In this spirit,
* Interns at Shenzhen Zhuke Innovation Technology (Altizure).
† Corresponding author.

GT
Ref.
NN
GT

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Saturated results on standard benchmark [2]
by a recent method [23]. The search of nearest neighbors (NN) returns false matches though visually similar to
groundtruth (GT), indicating the limitation of relying on
only local visual information. (b) 2D keypoints distribute
structurally, on which we human beings are capable of establishing coarse matches even without color information.
we seek to enhance the local feature description with extra
prior knowledge, which we refer to as introducing context
awareness to augment local feature descriptors.
As a common practice, a multi-scale-like architecture
can help to capture visual context of different levels, which
is referred to as multi-scale domain aggregation by DSPSIFT [8] and adopted by recent learned descriptors [50,
19, 43]. Beside of the challenge on selecting proper domain sizes, a naı̈ve multi-scale implementation may cost
excessive computation such as doubled inference time and
doubled feature dimensionality [50, 19, 43]. Seeking for
more reasonable accuracy-efficiency trade-offs, we instead
resort to well-studied high-level image representation, e.g.,
the regional representation used by image retrieval stud-

2527

