T OUCHDOWN: Natural Language Navigation and Spatial Reasoning
in Visual Street Environments
Howard Chen∗
ASAPP Inc.
New York, NY

Alane Suhr Dipendra Misra Noah Snavely
Yoav Artzi
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech, Cornell University
New York, NY

hchen@asapp.com

{suhr, dkm, snavely, yoav}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of jointly reasoning about language and vision through a navigation and spatial reasoning task. We introduce the T OUCHDOWN task and dataset,
where an agent must first follow navigation instructions in
a real-life visual urban environment, and then identify a location described in natural language to find a hidden object at the goal position. The data contains 9,326 examples
of English instructions and spatial descriptions paired with
demonstrations. Empirical analysis shows the data presents
an open challenge to existing methods, and qualitative linguistic analysis shows that the data displays richer use of
spatial reasoning compared to related resources. The environment and data are available at https://touchdown.ai.

1. Introduction
Consider the visual challenges of following natural language instructions in a busy urban environment. Figure 1
illustrates this problem. The agent must identify objects
and their properties to resolve mentions to traffic light and
American flags, identify patterns in how objects are arranged to find the flow of traffic, and reason about how
the relative position of objects changes as it moves to go
past objects. Reasoning about vision and language has
been studied extensively with various tasks, including visual question answering [3, 34], visual navigation [2, 25],
interactive question answering [9, 12], and referring expression resolution [16, 22, 23]. However, existing work has
largely focused on relatively simple visual input, including
object-focused photographs [20, 28] or simulated environments [4, 9, 19, 25, 33]. While this has enabled significant
progress in visual understanding, the use of real-world visual input not only increases the challenge of the vision task,
it also drastically changes the kind of language it elicits and
requires fundamentally different reasoning.

Turn and go with the flow of traffic. At the first traffic light turn left. Go
past the next two traffic light, As you come to the third traffic light you
will see a white building on your left with many American flags on it.
Touchdown is sitting in the stars of the first flag.

Figure 1. An illustration of the task. The agent follows the instructions to reach the goal, starting by re-orientating itself (top
image) and continuing by moving through the streets (two middle
images). At the goal (bottom), the agent uses the spatial description (underlined) to locate Touchdown the bear. Touchdown only
appears if the guess is correct (see bottom right detail).

In this paper, we study the problem of reasoning about
vision and natural language using an interactive visual navigation environment based on Google Street View.1 We design the task of first following instructions to reach a goal
1 https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/streetview/intro

⇤ Work done at Cornell University.

112538

