Attentive Single-Tasking of Multiple Tasks
Kevis-Kokitsi Maninis*
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich

Ilija Radosavovic
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Input Image

Abstract

1. Introduction
Real-world AI problems involve a multitude of visual
tasks that call for multi-tasking, universal vision systems.
For instance autonomous driving requires detecting pedestrians, estimating velocities and reading traffic signs, while
identity recognition, pose, face and hand tracking are required for human-computer interaction.
A thread of works have introduced multi-task networks
[54, 13, 22, 28] handling an increasingly large number of
tasks. Still, it is common practice to train devoted networks
for individual tasks when single-task performance is critical. This is supported by negative results from recent works
that have aimed at addressing multiple problems with a single network [22, 28] - these have shown that there is a limit
on performance imposed by the capacity of the network,
manifested as a drop in performance when loading a single network with more tasks. Stronger backbones can uniformly improve multi-task performance, but still the pertask performance can be lower than the single-task performance with the same backbone.
* Work done while at Facebook AI Research.

Semantic
Segmentation

Human
Parts

Surface
Normals

Saliency
Estimation

Layer 17

Layer 15

Layer 1

Edge
Detection

Last layer

In this work we address task interference in universal
networks by considering that a network is trained on multiple tasks, but performs one task at a time, an approach
we refer to as “single-tasking multiple tasks”. The network
thus modifies its behaviour through task-dependent feature
adaptation, or task attention. This gives the network the
ability to accentuate the features that are adapted to a task,
while shunning irrelevant ones. We further reduce task interference by forcing the task gradients to be statistically indistinguishable through adversarial training, ensuring that
the common backbone architecture serving all tasks is not
dominated by any of the task-specific gradients.
Results in three multi-task dense labelling problems
consistently show: (i) a large reduction in the number
of parameters while preserving, or even improving performance and (ii) a smooth trade-off between computation and multi-task accuracy. We provide our system’s
code and pre-trained models at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/astmt.

Iasonas Kokkinos∗
Ariel AI, UCL

Figure 1. Learned representations across tasks and layers: We
visualize how features change spatially in different depths of our
multi-task network. For each layer (row) we compute a common
PCA basis across tasks (column) and show the first three principal
components as RGB values at each spatial location. We observe
that the features are more similar in early layers and get more
adapted to specific tasks as depth increases, leading to disentangled, task-specific representations in the later layers. We see for
instance that the normal task features co-vary with surface properties, while the part features remain constant in each human part.

This problem, known as task interference, can be understood as facing a the dilemma of invariance versus sensitivity: the most crucial information for one task can be a nuisance parameter for another, which leads to potentially conflicting objectives when training multi-task networks. An
example of such a task pair is pose estimation and object detection: when detecting or counting people the detailed pose
information is a nuisance parameter that should be eliminated at some point from the representation of a network
aiming at pose invariance [22]. At the same time, when
watching a dance performance, one needs the detailed pose
of the dancers, while ignoring the large majority of spectators. More generally this is observed when combining a task
11851

