Neural Rejuvenation: Improving Deep Network Training by
Enhancing Computational Resource Utilization
Siyuan Qiao1∗ Zhe Lin2 Jianming Zhang2 Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Adobe Research
{siyuan.qiao, alan.yuille}@jhu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of improving computational resource utilization of neural networks. Deep neural networks are usually over-parameterized for their tasks
in order to achieve good performances, thus are likely to
have underutilized computational resources. This observation motivates a lot of research topics, e.g. network pruning,
architecture search, etc. As models with higher computational costs (e.g. more parameters or more computations)
usually have better performances, we study the problem of
improving the resource utilization of neural networks so that
their potentials can be further realized. To this end, we
propose a novel optimization method named Neural Rejuvenation. As its name suggests, our method detects dead
neurons and computes resource utilization in real time, rejuvenates dead neurons by resource reallocation and reinitialization, and trains them with new training schemes. By
simply replacing standard optimizers with Neural Rejuvenation, we are able to improve the performances of neural
networks by a very large margin while using similar training efforts and maintaining their original resource usages.
The code is available here: https://github.com/joe-siyuanqiao/NeuralRejuvenation-CVPR19

1. Introduction
Deep networks achieve state-of-the-art performances in
many visual tasks [9, 23, 42, 47]. On large-scale tasks such
as ImageNet [53] classification, a common observation is
that the models with more parameters, or more FLOPs, tend
to achieve better results. For example, DenseNet [28] plots
the validation error rates as functions of the number of parameters and FLOPs, and shows consistent accuracy improvements as the model size increases. This is consistent
with our intuition that large-scale tasks require models with
sufficient capacity to fit the data well. As a result, it is usually beneficial to train a larger model if the additional com∗ Work done while an intern at Adobe.

{zlin,jianmzha}@adobe.com

putational resources are properly utilized. However, previous work on network pruning [40, 64] already shows that
many neural networks trained by SGD have unsatisfactory
resource utilization. For instance, the number of parameters
of a VGG [54] network trained on CIFAR [33] can be compressed by a factor of 10 without affecting its accuracy [40].
Such low utilization results in a waste of training and testing time, and restricts the models from achieving their full
potentials. To address this problem, we investigate novel
neural network training and optimization techniques to enhance resource utilization and improve accuracy.
Formally, this paper studies the following optimization
problem. We are given a loss function L(f (x; A, θA ), y)
defined on data (x, y) from a dataset D, and a computational
resource constraint C. Here, f (x; A, θA ) is a neural network
with architecture A and parameterized by θA . Let c(A)
denote the cost of using architecture A in f , e.g., c(A) can
be the number of parameters in A or its FLOPs. Our task
is to find A and its parameter θA that minimize the average
loss L on dataset D under the resource constraint C, i.e.,
N


1 X
L f (xi ; A, θA ), yi
A,θA N
i=1

A, θA = arg min

(1)

s.t. c(A) ≤ C
The architecture A is usually designed by researchers
and fixed during minimizing Eq. 1, and thus the solution
A, θA will always meet the resource constraint. When A
is fixed, θA found by standard gradient-based optimizers
may have neurons (i.e. channels) that have little effects on
the average loss, removing which will save resources while
maintaining good performance. In other words, θA may
not fully utilize all the resources available in A. Let U (θA )
denote the computational cost based on θA ’s actual utilization of the computational resource of A, which can be measured by removing dead neurons which have little effect on
the output. Clearly, U (θA ) ≤ c(A). As previous work
suggests [40], the utilization ratio r(θA ) = U (θA )/c(A)
trained by standard SGD can be as low as 11.5%.
The low utilization motivates the research on network

61

