Structural Relational Reasoning of Point Clouds
Yueqi Duan1,2,3 , Yu Zheng1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗ , Jie Zhou1,2,3 , Qi Tian4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, China
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
duanyq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; yu-zheng15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn;
jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn; tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
The symmetry for the corners of a box, the continuity for
the surfaces of a monitor, the linkage between the torso
and other body parts — it suggests that 3D objects may
have common and underlying inner relations between local
structures, and it is a fundamental ability for intelligent
species to reason for them. In this paper, we propose
an effective plug-and-play module called the structural
relation network (SRN) to reason about the structural
dependencies of local regions in 3D point clouds. Existing
network architectures on point sets such as PointNet++
capture local structures individually, without considering
their inner interactions. Instead, our SRN simultaneously
exploits local information by modeling their geometrical
and locational relations, which play critical roles for our
humans to understand 3D objects. The proposed SRN
module is simple, interpretable, and does not require
any additional supervision signals, which can be easily
equipped with the existing networks. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets indicate promising boosts on the
tasks of 3D point cloud classification and segmentation by
capturing structural relations with the SRN module.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapid development on 3D
point cloud data due to the popularity of varying scanning
devices. Typically, point cloud data is represented by sparse and unordered 3D points. Compared with 2D images which usually have regularly arranged pixels, it is
more challenging to analyze 3D point clouds with the irregular structures [39]. Early works mainly focus on extracting hand-crafted 3D features, which aim to exploit statistical properties of point sets and are especially designed
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Examples of highly related local structures in common
3D objects. In the figure, red ellipses represent repetitive symmetric local regions, orange ellipses are continuous surfaces (on which
the local structures share the same plane), and green ellipses show
the junctions of connected parts. We observe that most real-world
3D objects contain highly related local structures and it is a fundamental ability for our humans to reason about them.

to present robustness to transformations [26]. In general,
these methods can be divided into two categories: intrinsic
features [3, 5, 33] and extrinsic features [30, 31, 22, 7, 15],
where representative hand-crafed 3D features include spin
image [15], fast point feature histograms (FPFH) [30] and
heat kernel signature (HKS) [33].
With the great success of deep learning methods on 2D
image processing and understanding, pioneer works have
been proposed to design network architectures for 3D point
cloud data [26, 28, 25, 17, 43]. The initial PointNet directly
learns global features from the input point clouds by pointwise spatial encoding and aggregation, which obtains encouraging performance [26]. While PointNet does not capture local information of point clouds, the extension work
PointNet++ demonstrates the importance of local structure
exploitation [28]. In order to capture local structures, PointNet++ designs sampling and grouping layers to obtain local sub-clouds, and individually encodes the local regions
1949

