Learning Joint Gait Representation via Quintuplet Loss Minimization
Kaihao Zhang1∗ Wenhan Luo2 Lin Ma2
1
Australian National University

Wei Liu2 Hongdong Li1
2
Tencent AI Lab

{kaihao.zhang, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au
{whluo.china, forest.linma}@gmail.com

wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gait recognition is the task of identifying people at a distance using videos of their walking patterns [47]. This is an
active research topic in the field of computer vision, due
to its importance in real-world applications such as video
surveillance, forensic identification, and evidence collection
[6, 22]. As a behavioral biometric, gait exhibits unique advantages over other biometrics like fingerprint, iris and face
[46], because gait based methods can identify subjects from
low-resolution video sequences [33] without subject’s cooperation.
In real-world scenarios, variations such as clothing [35],
walking speed [30, 43], carrying condition [42], and camera
viewpoints [24] result in remarkable changes in gait appearance, which may further degrade the performance of gait
∗ This work was primarily done while Kaihao Zhang was a research
intern with Tencent AI Lab.

X1
Same

Cross-entropy
ID(=)

CrossGait
X2

UniqueGait
JUCNet

CrossGait

ID(≠)

Push
or
Pull

Quintuplet
Loss

W

…

Gait recognition is an important biometric technique relevant to video surveillance, where the task is to identify people at a distance by their walking patterns captured in the
video. Most of the current approaches for gait recognition
either use a pair of gait images to form a cross-gait representation or rely on a single gait image for unique-gait
representation. These two types of representations empirically complement one another. In this paper, we propose
a new Joint Unique-gait and Cross-gait Network (JUCNet)
representation, to combine the advantages of both schemes,
leading to significantly improved performance. A second
contribution of this work is a tailored quintuplet loss function, which simultaneously boosts inter-class differences by
pushing different subjects further apart and contracts intraclass variations by pulling same subjects closer. Extensive
tests demonstrate that our method achieves the best performance tested on multiple standard benchmarks, compared
with other state-of-the-art methods.

UniqueGait

Cross-entropy

K2
Z1

Different

Representation

ID(=)

ID(≠)

Input

Figure 1. An illustration of our feature learning process. The JUCNet structure synchronously learns unique-gait and cross-gait representations, and the Quintuplet loss is proposed to increase the
inter-class differences and meanwhile reduce the intra-class variations.

recognition. Previous methods [18, 20, 48] have been proposed to alleviate these issues. Most of them focus on crossgait representation, which is the concatenation of a pair of
gait images and labeled to “Same” or “Different” like the
input of Fig. 1. While being effective in capturing the relationship between a pair of gaits (gallery and probe [23]),
these methods ignore the label (e.g., “X1”, “X2”, “Z1”,
and “K2” in Fig. 1) of each single gait image. The potential of unique-gait/single-gait representation is ignored,
which makes these methods confused in discriminating different subjects with similar clothing, illumination, and carrying conditions. For example, X1 and Y1 in Fig. 2 (a) may
be predicted to be an identical subject as they are close in
the feature space. Nowadays, some deep learning methods
(e.g., [37]) tackle this problem based on unique-gait representation solely. They extract unique-gait features enclosed
in a single image and then match them to predict the relationship. While these methods ignore the cross-gait representation.
To this end, we develop a deep network called JUCNet
to jointly learn the unique-gait and cross-gait representations. Different from existing gait recognition methods,
there are three output branches in our network, of which two
branches learn unique-gait representation and one branch

4700

