All about Structure: Adapting Structural Information across Domains for
Boosting Semantic Segmentation
Wei-Lun Chang* Hui-Po Wang* Wen-Hsiao Peng Wei-Chen Chiu
National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
{luckchang.ee06g, a88575847.cs06g, wpeng, walon}@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of unsupervised
domain adaptation for the task of semantic segmentation,
where we attempt to transfer the knowledge learned upon
synthetic datasets with ground-truth labels to real-world
images without any annotation. With the hypothesis that
the structural content of images is the most informative and
decisive factor to semantic segmentation and can be readily shared across domains, we propose a Domain Invariant
Structure Extraction (DISE) framework to disentangle images into domain-invariant structure and domain-specific
texture representations, which can further realize imagetranslation across domains and enable label transfer to improve segmentation performance. Extensive experiments
verify the effectiveness of our proposed DISE model and
demonstrate its superiority over several state-of-the-art approaches.

Source Domain

Target Domain

Domain-Invariant
Feature

(a) Conventional domain adaptation
Source Domain

Target Domain

Source-Specific Texture

Domain-Invariant
Structure

Target-Specific Texture

(b) The proposed method
Figure 1. Comparison of the conventional domain adaptation for
semantic segmentation and our proposed method. Instead of making the entire feature representation domain invariant, we align
only the distributions of the structure component across domains.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is to predict pixel-level semantic
labels for an image. It is considered one of the most challenging tasks in computer vision. Due to the renaissance
of deep learning in recent years, we witness a great leap
brought to this task. Since the inception of Fully Convolutional Network (FCN), which is built upon pre-trained classification models (e.g. VGG [21] and ResNet [7]) and deconvolutional layers, numerous techniques have been proposed to advance semantic segmentation, such as enlarging
receptive fields [2, 27] and better preserving contextual information [28], to name a few. However, these approaches
rely largely on supervised learning, thereby calling for expensive pixel-level annotations.
To circumvent this issue, one solution is to train segmentation models on synthetic data. The computer graphics technology nowadays is able to synthesize high-quality,
photo-realistic images for a virtual scene. It is thus possi*Both authors contribute equally

ble to build up a dataset for supervised semantic segmentation (e.g. GTA5 [17] and SYNTHIA [18]) based on these
synthetic images. During the rendering process, their pixellevel semantic labels are readily available. Nevertheless,
segmentation models trained on synthetic datasets often
have difficulty achieving satisfactory performance in realworld scenes due to a phenomenon known as domain shift
– i.e. synthetic and real-world images can still exhibit considerable difference in their low-level texture appearance.
Domain adaptation is thus proposed to transfer the
knowledge learned from a source domain (e.g. synthetic
images) to another target domain (e.g. real images). One
common approach is to learn a domain-invariant feature
space across domains by matching their feature distributions, where different matching criteria have been explored,
e.g. minimizing the second order statistics [23] and domain
adversarial training [6, 8, 25] . There is also a recent research work [24] which introduces distribution alignment
11900

