Toward Realistic Image Compositing with Adversarial Learning
Bor-Chun Chen*
University of Maryland
College Park

Andrew Kae
Verizon Media Group
andrewkae@verizonmedia.com

sirius@umd.edu

Abstract
Compositing a realistic image is a challenging task and
usually requires considerable human supervision using professional image editing software. In this work we propose a
generative adversarial network (GAN) architecture for automatic image compositing. The proposed model consists
of four sub-networks: a transformation network that improves the geometric and color consistency of the composite image, a refinement network that polishes the boundary
of the composite image, and a pair of discriminator network
and a segmentation network for adversarial learning. Experimental results on both synthesized images and real images show that our model, Geometrically and Color Consistent GANs (GCC-GANs), can automatically generate realistic composite images compared to several state-of-the-art
methods, and does not require any manual effort.

1. Introduction
Image compositing aims to create a realistic-looking image by taking the foreground object of one image and combining it with the background from another image (see Figure 1). In order to make the composite image look realistic,
many factors need to be considered, such as scene geometry,
object appearance, and semantic layout. It is a challenging
task and usually requires a human expert carefully adjusting details including geometry and color using professional
image editing software such as PhotoShop [1] to create a
single composition.
Many previous works [4, 27, 18, 14, 32, 19, 35, 30] try
to alleviate this manual burden by creating algorithms that
can automatically adjust the appearance of the foreground
image and make it fit into the background naturally. While
this may work in some cases, many of these approaches still
require human supervision to help with tasks such as determining the appropriate location and size of the foreground
object or capturing the lighting conditions of the scene.
* Work done during internship at Verizon Media Group.

Figure 1. The goal of image composition is to create a realistic
image by combining a foreground object with a background image. The x-axis corresponds to increasing color consistency in
the composite image, while the y-axis corresponds to increasing
geometric consistency. However, the composite image only looks
realistic when both geometry and color consistency are considered
(i.e. image in the red box). (Best viewed in color)

Recently generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
been shown to have the ability to generate realistic looking
images [7, 11, 3, 33, 31, 36, 5, 28] by learning to deceive an
adversarially trained discriminator network. However, image composition is a different task from image generation
because the composite image must maintain details from
the input images and apply only slight changes to improve
the realism of the composition. Recent work [21] modified
the GAN framework by restricting the range of the generator to a geometric manifold using a spatial transformer net18415

