On the Structural Sensitivity of Deep Convolutional Networks
to the Directions of Fourier Basis Functions
Yusuke Tsuzuku1,2 , Issei Sato1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN
tsuzuku@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, sato@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Data-agnostic quasi-imperceptible perturbations on inputs are known to degrade recognition accuracy of deep
convolutional networks severely. This phenomenon is considered to be a potential security issue. Moreover, some results on statistical generalization guarantees indicate that
the phenomenon can be a key to improve the networks’
generalization. However, the characteristics of the shared
directions of such harmful perturbations remain unknown.
Our primal finding is that convolutional networks are sensitive to the directions of Fourier basis functions. We derived the property by specializing a hypothesis of the cause
of the sensitivity, known as the linearity of neural networks,
to convolutional networks and empirically validated it. As
a by-product of the analysis, we propose an algorithm to
create shift-invariant universal adversarial perturbations
available in black-box settings.

1. Introduction
Malicious perturbations on inputs can easily change predictions of deep learning models [36]. These perturbations are called adversarial perturbations or adversarial examples. They have been intensively studied concerning
deep convolutional networks for object recognition tasks
[4, 7, 19, 24, 36, 39]. They are attracting attention because they are potential security issues. One of the intriguing aspects of adversarial perturbations is their universality.
Szegedy et al. [36] observed transferability of the perturbations between classifiers. Papernot et al. [28, 29] exploited
the transferability to attack black-box models. Some adversarial perturbations transfer not only between classifiers
but also between inputs. Goodfellow et al. [7] first discovered the universality, and Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [22]
studied this phenomenon in more detail. They found that
a single perturbation can change models’ predictions for
a significant portion of data points. Such input-agnostic
perturbations are called universal adversarial perturbations

Figure 1. Examples of images perturbed by single Fourier attack.
Added perturbation is the same as in Figure 3. The size of perturbations is 10/255 in ℓ∞ -distance for the first row and 20/255 for the
second. In Sec. 5.7, we show that the single 10/255 and 20/255
perturbations could change predictions for around 40% and 70%
of inputs for various architectures, respectively.

(UAPs). The perturbations also generalize between different networks to some extent.
We are primarily concerned with UAPs because of
their relation to statistical generalization guarantees of
deep learning models. For example, studies using PACBayes [27], compression [1], and minimum description
length [10] are all concerned with how perturbation propagates networks.1 In these analyses, how each perturbation
changes accuracy on training data and true data distribution
matters. In other words, we have an interest in perturbations transferable between inputs. These are nothing else
but UAPs. We try to shed lights on the tendency of UAPs
1 In these studies, we consider perturbations on weights, not inputs.
However, perturbations on weights become noises on inputs of the network’s subnetworks and investigating UAPs is still useful.

51

