HetConv: Heterogeneous Kernel-Based Convolutions for Deep CNNs
Pravendra Singh
Vinay Kumar Verma
Piyush Rai
Vinay P. Namboodiri
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
{psingh, vkverma, piyush, vinaypn}@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
We present a novel deep learning architecture in which
the convolution operation leverages heterogeneous kernels.
The proposed HetConv (Heterogeneous Kernel-Based Convolution) reduces the computation (FLOPs) and the number of parameters as compared to standard convolution operation while still maintaining representational efficiency.
To show the effectiveness of our proposed convolution,
we present extensive experimental results on the standard
convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures such as
VGG [31] and ResNet [8]. We find that after replacing
the standard convolutional filters in these architectures with
our proposed HetConv filters, we achieve 3X to 8X FLOPs
based improvement in speed while still maintaining (and
sometimes improving) the accuracy. We also compare our
proposed convolutions with group/depth wise convolutions
and show that it achieves more FLOPs reduction with significantly higher accuracy.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks [8, 19, 31] have shown
remarkable performance in domains like Vision and NLP.
The general trend to improve performance further has made
models more complex and deeper. Increasing the accuracy
by increasing model complexity with a deeper network is
not for free; it comes with the cost of a tremendous increase in computation (FLOPs). Therefore, various types of
convolution operations/convolutional filters have been proposed to reduce FLOPs to the model more efficient.
Existing convolutional filters can be roughly divided
into three categories: 1- Depthwise Convolutional Filter
to perform depthwise convolution (DWC) [39], 2- Pointwise Convolutional Filter to perform pointwise convolution
(PWC) [37] and 3- Groupwise Convolutional Filter to perform groupwise convolution (GWC) [19]. Most of the recent architectures [12, 36, 2, 15, 38, 43] use a combination
of these convolutional filters to make the model efficient.
Using these convolutions (e.g., DWC, PWC, and GWC),
many of the popular models [15, 12, 2] have explored new

architectures to reduce FLOPs. However, designing a new
architecture requires a lot of work to find out the best combination of filters that result in minimal FLOPs.
Another popular approach to increase the efficiency of a
model is to use model compression [28, 1, 24, 11, 21, 10,
42]. Model compression can be broadly categorized into
three categories: connection pruning [6], filter pruning [24,
11, 21, 10, 33, 32, 34] and quantization [6, 28].
In filter pruning, the idea is to prune a filter that has a
minimal contribution in the model, and after removing this
filter/connection, the model is usually fine-tuned to maintain its performance. While pruning the model, we require a
pre-trained model (possibly requiring a computationally expensive training as a preprocessing step), and then later we
discard the filter that has a minimal contribution. Hence it
is a very costly and tricky process. Therefore, using an efficient convolutional filter or convolution operation to design
an efficient architecture is a more popular approach than
pruning. This does not require expensive training and then
pruning since training is done from scratch efficiently.
Using efficient convolutional filters, there are two different objectives. One kind of work focuses on designing architectures that have minimal FLOPs while compromising
on accuracy. These works focus on developing the model
for the IoT/low-end device [12, 43]. These models suffer
from the low accuracy hence they have to search the best
possible model to create a balance between accuracy and
FLOPs. So there is a tradeoff between FLOPs and model
accuracy.
Another set of work focuses on increasing accuracy
while keeping the model FLOPs the same as the original
architecture. The recent architectures, such as Inception
[36], RexNetXt [41] and Xception [2] are examples of this
kind of work. Their objective is to design a more complex
model using efficient convolutional filters while keeping the
FLOPs the same as the base model. It is usually expected
that a more complex model would learn better features, resulting in better accuracies. However, these methods are
not focused on designing a new architecture, but primarily
on using existing efficient filters in standard base architectures. Therefore these works keep the number of layers and

4835

