Understanding and Visualizing Deep Visual Saliency Models
Sen He1 , Hamed R. Tavakoli2 , Ali Borji3 , Yang Mi1 , and Nicolas Pugeault1
1

University of Exeter, 2 Aalto University, 3 MarkableAI

Abstract
Recently, data-driven deep saliency models have
achieved high performance and have outperformed classical saliency models, as demonstrated by results on datasets
such as the MIT300 and SALICON. Yet, there remains a
large gap between the performance of these models and
the inter-human baseline. Some outstanding questions include what have these models learned, how and where they
fail, and how they can be improved. This article attempts
to answer these questions by analyzing the representations
learned by individual neurons located at the intermediate
layers of deep saliency models. To this end, we follow the
steps of existing deep saliency models, that is borrowing a
pre-trained model of object recognition to encode the visual features and learning a decoder to infer the saliency.
We consider two cases when the encoder is used as a fixed
feature extractor and when it is fine-tuned, and compare
the inner representations of the network. To study how the
learned representations depend on the task, we fine-tune the
same network using the same image set but for two different tasks: saliency prediction versus scene classification.
Our analyses reveal that: 1) some visual salient regions
(e.g. head, text, symbol, vehicle) are already encoded within
various layers of the network pre-trained for object recognition, 2) using modern datasets, we find that fine-tuning
pre-trained models for saliency prediction makes them favor some categories (e.g. head) over some others (e.g. text),
3) although deep models of saliency outperform classical
models on natural images, the converse is true for synthetic
stimuli (e.g. pop-out search arrays), an evidence of significant difference between human and data-driven saliency
models, and 4) we confirm that, after-fine tuning, the change
in inner-representations is mostly due to the task and not the
domain shift in the data.

1. Introduction
The human visual system routinely handles vast amounts
of information at about 108 to 109 bits per second [2, 3, 4,

Table 1: Five state-of-the-art deep saliency models and their
NSS scores [6] over the MIT300 saliency benchmark [5].
Fine
Model
Backbone
tuning
NSS
Deep gaze II [19]
VGG-19 [23]
×
2.34
√
SAM [8]
ResNet-50 [11]/VGG-16
2.34/2.30
√
Deepfix [18]
VGG-16 [23]
2.26
√
SALICON [14]
VGG-16
2.12
√
PDP [16]
VGG-16
2.05
Human IO
3.29

15]. An essential mechanism that allows the human visual
system to process this amount of information in real time
is its ability to selectively focus attention on salient parts
of a scene. Which parts of a scene and what individual patterns particularly attract the viewer’s eyes (e.g. salient areas)
have been the subject of psychological research for decades,
and designing computational models for predicting salient
areas is a longstanding problem in computer vision. In recent years, we have observed a surge in the development of
data-driven models of saliency based on deep neural networks. Such deep models have demonstrated significant
performance improvements in comparison to classical models, which are based on hand-crafted features or psychological assumptions, outperforming them on most benchmarks. However, while there still remains a relatively large
gap between deep models and the human visual system (see
Table 1), the performance of deep models appears to have
reached a ceiling. This raises the question of what is learned
by deep models that drives their superior performance over
classical models, and what are the remaining and missing
ingredients to attain human-like performance. Internal representations of deep object recognition models have been
visualized and analyzed extensively in recent years. Such
efforts, however, are missing for saliency models and it is
unclear how saliency models do what they do.
In this work, we shed light on what is learned by deep
saliency models by analyzing their internal representations.
Our contribution are as follows:
i10206

