ESIR: End-to-end Scene Text Recognition via Iterative Image Rectification
Fangneng Zhan
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

Shijian Lu
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798

fnzhan@ntu.edu.sg

shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Automated recognition of texts in scenes has been a research challenge for years, largely due to the arbitrary variation of text appearances in perspective distortion, text line
curvature, text styles and different types of imaging artifacts. The recent deep networks are capable of learning
robust representations with respect to imaging artifacts and
text style changes, but still face various problems while
dealing with scene texts with perspective and curvature distortions. This paper presents an end-to-end trainable scene
text recognition system (ESIR) that iteratively removes perspective distortion and text line curvature as driven by better scene text recognition performance. An innovative rectification network is developed which employs a novel linefitting transformation to estimate the pose of text lines in
scenes. In addition, an iterative rectification pipeline is
developed where scene text distortions are corrected iteratively towards a fronto-parallel view. The ESIR is also robust to parameter initialization and the training needs only
scene text images and word-level annotations as required by
most scene text recognition systems. Extensive experiments
over a number of public datasets show that the proposed
ESIR is capable of rectifying scene text distortions accurately, achieving superior recognition performance for both
normal scene text images and those suffering from perspective and curvature distortions.

1. Introduction
Texts in scenes contain high level semantic information that is very useful in many practical applications such
as indoor and outdoor navigation, content-based image retrieval, etc. Accurate and robust recognition of scene
texts by machines has been a research challenge for years,
largely due to a huge amount of variations in text appearance, the complicated image background, imaging artifacts, etc. The advance of deep learning research and its
successes in many computer vision tasks have pushed the
boundary of scene text recognition greatly in recent years

Figure 1. The proposed system consists of an Iterative Rectification Network that corrects scene text distortions iteratively and
a Recognition Network that recognizes the finally rectified scene
texts (the images within the Iterative Rectification Network illustrate the iterative scene text rectification process). It is end-to-end
trainable as driven by better scene text recognition performance,
where the dotted lines show the back propagation of gradients.

[29, 16, 35, 36, 40, 2, 23, 24, 25, 48, 45, 49, 50]. On the
other hand, the deep learning based approach is still facing various problems while dealing with a large amount of
scene texts that suffer from arbitrary perspective distortions
and text line curvature.
We design an end-to-end trainable scene text recognition
network via iterative rectification (ESIR). The ESIR employs an innovative rectification network that corrects perspective and curvature distortions of scene texts iteratively
as illustrated in Fig. 1. The finally rectified scene text image
is fed to a recognition network for recognition. The training of the iterative rectification network is driven by better
scene text recognition as back-propagated from the recognition network, requiring no other annotations beyond the
scene texts as used in most scene text recognition systems.
The proposed ESIR addresses two typical constraints in
the scene text recognition problem. The first is robust distortion rectification for optimal scene text recognition. To
address this challenge, we design a novel line-fitting transformation that is powerful and capable of modeling and
correcting various scene text distortions reliably. The linefitting transformation models the middle line of scene texts
by using a polynomial which is able to estimate the pose
of either straight or curved text lines flexibly as illustrated
in Fig. 2. In addition, it employs line segments which are
12059

