Structured Binary Neural Networks for Accurate Image Classification and
Semantic Segmentation
Bohan Zhuang1
Chunhua Shen1∗ Mingkui Tan2
Lingqiao Liu1
Ian Reid1
1
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, The University of Adelaide
2
South China University of Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to train convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) with both binarized weights and activations, leading to quantized models specifically for mobile
devices with limited power capacity and computation resources. Previous works on quantizing CNNs seek to approximate the floating-point information using a set of discrete values, which we call value approximation, but typically assume the same architecture as the full-precision
networks. However, we take a novel “structure approximation” view for quantization—it is very likely that a different architecture may be better for best performance. In
particular, we propose a “network decomposition” strategy, termed Group-Net, in which we divide the network into
groups. In this way, each full-precision group can be effectively reconstructed by aggregating a set of homogeneous
binary branches. In addition, we learn effective connections
among groups to improve the representational capability.
Moreover, the proposed Group-Net shows strong generalization to other tasks. For instance, we extend Group-Net
for highly accurate semantic segmentation by embedding
rich context into the binary structure. Experiments on both
classification and semantic segmentation tasks demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed methods over various popular architectures. In particular, we outperform the
previous best binary neural networks in terms of accuracy
and major computation savings.

1. Introduction
Designing deeper and wider convolutional neural networks
has led to significant breakthroughs in many machine learning tasks, such as image classification [17,26], object detection [40, 41] and object segmentation [7, 34]. However, accurate deep models often require billions of FLOPs, which
makes it infeasible for deep models to run many real-time
applications on resource constrained mobile platforms. To
∗ C. Shen is the corresponding author.

solve this problem, many existing works focus on network
pruning [18, 28, 54], low-bit quantization [24, 53] and/or efficient architecture design [8, 21]. Among them, the quantization approaches represent weights and activations with
low bitwidth fixed-point integers, and thus the dot product
can be computed by several XNOR-popcount bitwise operations. The XNOR of two bits requires only a single logic
gate instead of using hundreds units for floating point multiplication [10,14]. Binarization [22,39] is an extreme quantization approach where both the weights and activations are
represented by a single bit, either +1 or −1. In this paper,
we aim to design highly accurate binary neural networks
(BNNs) from both the quantization and efficient architecture design perspectives.
Existing quantization methods can be mainly divided
into two categories. The first category methods seek to design more effective optimization algorithms to find better
local minima for quantized weights. These works either introduce knowledge distillation [35,38,53] or use loss-aware
objectives [19, 20]. The second category approaches focus on improving the quantization function [4, 48, 51]. To
maintain good performance, it is essential to learn suitable
mappings between discrete values and their floating-point
counterparts . However, designing quantization function is
highly non-trivial especially for BNNs, since the quantization functions are often non-differentiable and gradients can
only be roughly approximated.
The above two categories of methods belong to value
approximation, which seeks to quantize weights and/or activations by preserving most of the representational ability
of the original network. However, the value approximation
approaches have a natural limitation that it is merely a local approximation. Moreover, these methods often lacks of
adaptive ability to general tasks. Given a pretrained model
on a specific task, the quantization error will inevitably occur and the final performance may be affected.
In this paper, we seek to explore a third category called
structure approximation . The main objective is to redesign
a binary architecture that can directly match the capability
of a floating-point model. In particular, we propose a Struc-

413

