Facial Emotion Distribution Learning
by Exploiting Low-Rank Label Correlations Locally
Xiuyi Jia1,2 , Xiang Zheng1 , Weiwei Li3 , Changqing Zhang4 , Zechao Li1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
College of Astronautics, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China

Abstract
Emotion recognition from facial expressions is an interesting and challenging problem and has attracted much attention in recent years. Substantial previous research has
only been able to address the ambiguity of “what describes
the expression”, which assumes that each facial expression
is associated with one or more predefined affective labels
while ignoring the fact that multiple emotions always have
different intensities in a single picture. Therefore, to depict facial expressions more accurately, this paper adopts
a label distribution learning approach for emotion recognition that can address the ambiguity of “how to describe the
expression” and proposes an emotion distribution learning
method that exploits label correlations locally. Moreover,
a local low-rank structure is employed to capture the local
label correlations implicitly. Experiments on benchmark facial expression datasets demonstrate that our method can
better address the emotion distribution recognition problem
than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
As one of the most natural, powerful and immediate
means for human beings to express their emotions and intentions, facial expression recognition techniques have already been adopted in numerous multimedia systems. Due
to its wide range of application, such as human-computer
interaction [21] and data-driven animation [19], automatic
∗ Corresponding author: Zechao Li (zechao.li@njust.edu.cn). This
work is jointly supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No. 61773208), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province (Grant No. BK20170809) and the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation (Grant No. 2018M632304).

facial expression recognition has attracted significant attention in recent years. Recent facial expression recognition
methods usually focus on extracting useful features and
applying efficient classifiers such as neural-network-based
methods [14], support vector machine (SVM) [13] and hidden Markov models (HMM) [27].
Although promising recognition results have been
achieved, there still exist a common issue in previous facial expression recognition methods: the assumption that
each facial image is associated with only one of the predefined affective labels tends to be an over-simplification. In
real-world applications, a facial expression always contains
blended emotions. For example, when one receives a letter from a friend whom he has not seen for a long time, he
would be happy and surprised simultaneously. According
to Plutchik’s wheel of emotion theory [22], only a few emotions are basic emotions, and each facial expression usually
expresses a mixture of basic emotions with different intensities. Therefore, to depict facial expressions more accurately,
multi-label learning is utilized for facial expression recognition, and each picture is associated with multiple predefined
emotions. For example, the GLMM (Group Lasso Regularized Maximum Margin) method was proposed to solve
the facial expression recognition problem in the multi-label
scenario [32]. However, there remain some cases that are
not suitable to be solved by multi-label learning. Specially,
in some cases, we need to know not only which emotions
are associated with a facial expression but also the extent to
which each emotion describes the expression. To solve such
problems, label distribution learning (LDL) [6] is utilized to
address facial expression recognition problems.
To the best of our knowledge, only one study [36] has
been conducted on facial expression recognition by using
LDL. Specifically, in this work, LDL was applied for facial

9841

