Dynamic Fusion with Intra- and Inter-modality Attention
Flow for Visual Question Answering
Peng Gao1 , Zhengkai Jiang3 , Haoxuan You4 ,
Pan Lu4 , Steven Hoi 2 , Xiaogang Wang 1 , Hongsheng Li 1
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Singapore Management University 3 NLPR, CASIA 4 Tsinghua University
{1155102382@link, xgwang@ee, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Learning effective fusion of multi-modality features is
at the heart of visual question answering. We propose a
novel method of dynamically fusing multi-modal features
with intra- and inter-modality information flow, which alternatively pass dynamic information between and across
the visual and language modalities. It can robustly capture the high-level interactions between language and vision domains, thus significantly improves the performance
of visual question answering. We also show that the proposed dynamic intra-modality attention flow conditioned
on the other modality can dynamically modulate the intramodality attention of the target modality, which is vital
for multimodality feature fusion. Experimental evaluations
on the VQA 2.0 dataset show that the proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art VQA performance. Extensive ablation studies are carried out for the comprehensive analysis of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering [2] aims at automatically answering a natural language question related to the contents
of a given image. It has extensive applications in practice,
such as assisting blind people [12] and education of young
children, and therefore become a hot research topic recently.
The performance of Visual Question Answering (VQA) has
been substantially improved in recent years thanks to three
lines of works. Firstly, better visual and language feature
representations are at the core for boosting VQA performance. The feature learning capability from VGG [35],
ResNet [13], FishNet [36] to the recent bottom-up & topdown features [1] increases the VQA performance significantly. Secondly, different variants of attention mechanisms [40] can adaptively select important features which
can help deep learning achieve better recognition accuracy.

Thirdly, better multi-modality fusion approaches, such Bilinear Fusion [9], MCB [7] and MUTAN [4], have been
proposed for better capturing the high-level interactions between language and visual features.
Despite being studied extensively, most existing VQA
approaches focus on learning inter-modality relations between visual and language features. Bilinear feature fusion
approaches [9] focus on capturing the higher order relations
between language and visual modalities by feature outer
product. Co-attention [39, 28, 24] or bilinear attentionbased approaches [19] learn the inter-modality relations
between word-region pairs to identify key pairs for question answering. On the other hand, there exist computer
vision and natural language processing algorithms focusing on learning intra-modality relations. Hu et al. [14] proposed to explore intra-modality object-to-object relations to
boost object detection accuracy. Yao et al. [42, 26] modeled intra-modality object-to-object relations for improving image captioning performance. In the recently proposed BERT algorithm [6] for natural language processing, intra-modality word relations are modelled by selfattention mechanism to learn state-of-the-art word embedding. However, the inter- and intra-modality relations were
never jointly investigated in a unified framework for solving the VQA problem. We argue that, for the VQA problem,
the intra-modality relations within each modality is complementary to the inter-modality relations, which were mostly
ignored by existing VQA methods. For instance, for the image modality, each image region should obtain information
not only from its associate words/phrases in the question
but also from related image regions to infer the answer of
the question. For the question modality, better understanding of question can be acquired by inferring other words.
Such cases motivate us to propose a unified framework for
modelling both inter- and intra-modality information flow.
To overcome the limitations, we propose a novel Dynamic Fusion with Intra- and Inter-modality Attention Flow
4321
6639

