Compact Feature Learning for Multi-domain Image Classification
Yajing Liu1 , Xinmei Tian1(B) , Ya Li2 , Zhiwei Xiong1 , Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
iFLYTEK Research, Hefei, China
lyj123@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn,
yali8@iflytek.com, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn, fengwu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The goal of multi-domain learning is to improve the performance over multiple domains by making full use of all
training data from them. However, variations of feature distributions across different domains result in a non-trivial
solution of multi-domain learning. The state-of-the-art
work regarding multi-domain classification aims to extract
domain-invariant features and domain-specific features independently. However, they view the distributions of features from different classes as a general distribution and try
to match these distributions across domains, which lead to
the mixture of features from different classes across domains
and degrade the performance of classification. Additionally, existing works only force the shared features among
domains to be orthogonal to the features in the domainspecific network. However, redundant features between the
domain-specific networks still remain, which may shrink the
discriminative ability of domain-specific features. Therefore, we propose an end-to-end network to obtain the more
optimal features, which we call compact features. We propose to extract the domain-invariant features by matching
the joint distributions of different domains, which have distinct boundaries between different classes. Moreover, we
add an orthogonal constraint between the private features
across domains to ensure the discriminative ability of the
domain-specific space. The proposed method is validated
on three landmark datasets, and the results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Image classification is one of the fundemental branches
of computer vision tasks and has achieved impressive success with the advances of deep learning [11, 13]. However, due to the various exteral factors, such as viewpoint
changes and background noise, in the real world, a classifier
trained on one domain is likely to perform poorly on another
domain. What’s more, labeling enough samples in each

Figure 1. The two curves in (a) represent two classifiers in two
domains. Features in each domain can be well-separated by its
own classifier. However, when features from different domains
are put together, the features from different classes across domains
are mixed up. Therefore, we apply a shared classifier to match the
conditional distributions P (Y |Fs (X)) across domains. As shown
in (b), features from different classes are well separated.

domain is time consuming. To address these drawbacks,
multi-domain learning aims to make full use of the training
data to simulataneously improve the general classification
performance over all domains [15]. Previous works regarding multi-domain learning trains classifiers in a collabrative
way based on multi-task learning [23]. These approaches
decompose the classifier in each domain into a shared part
and a domain-specific part. The sharing knowledge used in
the network significantly improves the classification performance over all domains. Unfortunately, these networks do
not consider the matching of distributions across domains.
Consequently, the shared knowledge cannot realize its full
potential to improve the general classification performance
in related domains.
Recent works [4, 17, 3] use a network with the adversarial loss to overcome the aforementioned drawbacks. Let
X, Fs (X) and Y denote the images, shared features after
transformation and category labels, respectively. Adversarial training is applied to match the marginal distributions of
shared features Fs (X). Under the assumption that the correlations P (Y |Fs (X)) between the marginal distributions
17193

