Learning Cross-Modal Embeddings with Adversarial Networks
for Cooking Recipes and Food Images
Wang Hao†,∗ Doyen Sahoo†,∗
†

Chenghao Liu†

Ee-peng Lim†

Steven C. H. Hoi†,‡

Singapore Management University ‡ Salesforce Research Asia
{hwang, doyens, chliu, eplim, chhoi}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Food computing is playing an increasingly important
role in human daily life, and has found tremendous applications in guiding human behavior towards smart food consumption and healthy lifestyle. An important task under the
food-computing umbrella is retrieval, which is particularly
helpful for health related applications, where we are interested in retrieving important information about food (e.g.,
ingredients, nutrition, etc.). In this paper, we investigate an
open research task of cross-modal retrieval between cooking
recipes and food images, and propose a novel framework
Adversarial Cross-Modal Embedding (ACME) to resolve the
cross-modal retrieval task in food domains. Specifically, the
goal is to learn a common embedding feature space between
the two modalities, in which our approach consists of several
novel ideas: (i) learning by using a new triplet loss scheme
together with an effective sampling strategy, (ii) imposing
modality alignment using an adversarial learning strategy,
and (iii) imposing cross-modal translation consistency such
that the embedding of one modality is able to recover some
important information of corresponding instances in the
other modality. ACME achieves the state-of-the-art performance on the benchmark Recipe1M dataset, validating the
efficacy of the proposed technique.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of social networks, Internet
of Things (IoT), and smart-phones equipped with cameras,
there has been an increasing trend towards sharing food images, recipes, cooking videos and food diaries. For example,
the social media platform “All Recipes" 1 allows chefs to
share their created recipes and relevant food images. Their
followers or fans follow the cooking instructions, upload
∗ denotes equal contribution

1 https://www.allrecipes.com

Modality
Alignment

𝐸𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑚𝑔

Triplet Loss
Retrieval
Learning

predicted ingredients

Instructions: Combine

𝐸𝑛𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑐 sugar and cornstarch in

a large saucepan; stir in
rhubarb…

recipes

images

sugar
garlic cloves
salt
eggs
buttermilk
baking powder

Ingredients: sugar,
cornstarch, buttermilk,
baking powder, eggs,
lemon juice

Cross-modal
Translation
Consistency

generated images

Figure 1: Example of illustrating the idea of Adversarial CrossModel Embedding (ACME), where the embeddings of cooking
recipes and food images are aligned. These embeddings are useful
for several health applications from the perspective of understanding characteristics about food, nutrition and calorie intake.

their pictures for reproducing the same dishes and share their
experiences for peer comments. As a result, the community
has access to rich, heterogeneous sources of information on
food. In recent years, food-computing [32] has become a
popular research topic due to its far-reaching impact on human life, health and well being. Analyzing food data could
support a lot of human-centric applications in medicine, biology, gastronomy, and agronomy [32]. One of the important
tasks under the food-computing umbrella is Food Retrieval,
i.e., we are interested in retrieving relevant information about
a specific food. For example, given a food image, we are
interested in knowing its recipe, nutrition content, or calorie information. In this paper, we investigate the problem
of cross-modal retrieval between cooking recipes and food
images, where our goal is to find an effective latent space to
map recipes to their corresponding food images.
The idea of cross-modal retrieval in the food domain is
to align matching pairs in a common space, so that given

11572

