Learning to Sample
Oren Dovrat∗
Tel-Aviv University

Itai Lang∗
Tel-Aviv University

Shai Avidan
Tel-Aviv University

orendovrat@mail.tau.ac.il

itailang@mail.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Processing large point clouds is a challenging task.
Therefore, the data is often sampled to a size that can be
processed more easily. The question is how to sample the
data? A popular sampling technique is Farthest Point Sampling (FPS). However, FPS is agnostic to a downstream application (classification, retrieval, etc.). The underlying assumption seems to be that minimizing the farthest point distance, as done by FPS, is a good proxy to other objective
functions.
We show that it is better to learn how to sample. To do
that, we propose a deep network to simplify 3D point clouds.
The network, termed S-NET, takes a point cloud and produces a smaller point cloud that is optimized for a particular task. The simplified point cloud is not guaranteed to be a
subset of the original point cloud. Therefore, we match it to
a subset of the original points in a post-processing step. We
contrast our approach with FPS by experimenting on two
standard data sets and show significantly better results for
a variety of applications. Our code is publicly available1

1. Introduction
Capturing 3D data is getting easier in recent years and
there is a growing number of 3D shape repositories available online. This data can be represented in a variety of
ways, including point clouds, multi-view images and voxel
grids. A point cloud contains information only about the
surface of a 3D object, while a grid based representation
also holds data about free space, making the former much
more efficient. However, processing a point cloud can be
challenging, since it may contain a lot of data points. Reducing the number of points can be beneficial in many aspects, such as reduction of power consumption, computational cost and communication load, to name a few.
One naive approach to reduce the data load is to randomly sample a subset of points. Another approach, which
1 https://github.com/orendv/learning_to_sample
∗ Equal contribution

Training
Sampling
loss
S-NET

Task
network

Task
loss

Fixed

Joint objective

Inference
Matching

S-NET

v

Task
network

Evaluation
metric

Fixed
Proposed sampling
Input points

Generated points

Sampledv points

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed learned sampling approach. In the training phase, S-NET generates points that are
passed to a task network, which was pre-trained and is held fixed.
The minimization objective contains the task’s loss and a sampling
loss. The latter serves as a regularizer and encourages proximity
between the input and generated points. At inference time, we
match the points generated by S-NET with the input point cloud
and get a subset of it. Only these points are then fed to the task
network for performance evaluation.

is commonly used in the literature, is Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) [27, 28, 21]. This sampling method takes into
account the structure of the point cloud and selects a group
of points that are farthest apart from each other [6, 24].
These sampling methods, as well as other approaches in the
literature [3, 18], operate according to a non-learned predetermined rule.
In the last few years, deep learning techniques have been
applied with great success to point cloud data. Among
various applications one can find point cloud classification [27, 28, 21, 42, 30, 36], part segmentation [27, 28, 21,
30, 36, 20], semantic segmentation [27, 21, 36, 34, 32, 12]
and retrieval [35, 17]. Other techniques perform point cloud
auto-encoding [1, 38, 8], generation [1, 33, 19], completion [1, 2, 41] and up-sampling [40, 39, 43]. Yet a learned
point clouds sampling approach, subject to a subsequent
task objective, has not been proposed before.
We propose a simplification network, termed S-NET,
that is based on the architecture of PointNet [27]. S-NET

2760

