Segmentation-driven 6D Object Pose Estimation
Yinlin Hu,

Joachim Hugonot,

Pascal Fua,

Mathieu Salzmann

CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{yinlin.hu, joachim.hugonot, pascal.fua, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
The most recent trend in estimating the 6D pose of rigid
objects has been to train deep networks to either directly
regress the pose from the image or to predict the 2D locations of 3D keypoints, from which the pose can be obtained
using a PnP algorithm. In both cases, the object is treated
as a global entity, and a single pose estimate is computed.
As a consequence, the resulting techniques can be vulnerable to large occlusions.
In this paper, we introduce a segmentation-driven 6D
pose estimation framework where each visible part of the
objects contributes a local pose prediction in the form of
2D keypoint locations. We then use a predicted measure of
confidence to combine these pose candidates into a robust
set of 3D-to-2D correspondences, from which a reliable
pose estimate can be obtained. We outperform the state-ofthe-art on the challenging Occluded-LINEMOD and YCBVideo datasets, which is evidence that our approach deals
well with multiple poorly-textured objects occluding each
other. Furthermore, it relies on a simple enough architecture to achieve real-time performance.

1. Introduction
Image-based 6D object pose estimation is crucial in
many real-world applications, such as augmented reality or
robot manipulation. Traditionally, it has been handled by
establishing correspondences between the object’s known
3D model and 2D pixel locations, followed by using the
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm to compute the 6 pose
parameters [19, 38, 43]. While very robust when the object
is well textured, this approach can fail when it is featureless
or when the scene is cluttered with multiple objects occluding each other.
Recent work has therefore focused on overcoming these
difficulties, typically using deep networks to either regress
directly from image to 6D pose [17, 45] or to detect keypoints associated to the object [35, 39], which can then be
used to perform PnP. In both cases, however, the object is

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Global pose estimation vs our segmentation-driven
approach. (a) The drill’s bounding box overlaps another occluding it. (b) As a result, the globally-estimated pose [45] is wrong.
(c) In our approach, only image patches labeled as corresponding
to the drill contribute to the pose estimate. (d) It is now correct.

still treated as a global entity, which makes the algorithm
vulnerable to large occlusions. Fig. 1 depicts a such a case:
The bounding box of an occluded drill overlaps other objects that provide irrelevant information to the pose estimator and thereby degrade its performance. Because this
happens often, many of these recent methods require an additional post-processing step to refine the pose [23].
In this paper, we show that more robust pose estimates
can be obtained by combining multiple local predictions instead of a single global one. To this end, we introduce a
segmentation-driven 6D pose estimation network in which
each visible object patch contributes a pose estimate for the
object it belongs to in the form of the predicted 2D projections of predefined 3D keypoints. Using confidence values
also predicted by our network, we then combine the most
reliable 2D projections for each 3D keypoint, which yields
a robust set of 3D-to-2D correspondences. We then use a
RANSAC-based PnP strategy to infer a single reliable pose
per object.
Reasoning in terms of local patches not only makes our

3385

