Barrage of Random Transforms for Adversarially Robust Defense
Edward Raff1,2,4
1

Jared Sylvester1,2,4

Laboratory for Physical Sciences

2

Steven Forsyth3

Booz Allen Hamilton

Abstract
Defenses against adversarial examples, when using
the ImageNet dataset, are historically easy to defeat.
The common understanding is that a combination of
simple image transformations and other various defenses are insufficient to provide the necessary protection when the obfuscated gradient is taken into account.
In this paper, we explore the idea of stochastically combining a large number of individually weak defenses into
a single barrage of randomized transformations to build
a strong defense against adversarial attacks. We show
that, even after accounting for obfuscated gradients, the
Barrage of Random Transforms (BaRT) is a resilient
defense against even the most difficult attacks, such as
PGD. BaRT achieves up to a 24⇥ improvement in accuracy compared to previous work, and has even extended
effectiveness out to a previously untested maximum adversarial perturbation of ✏ = 32.

1. Introduction
Adversarial machine learning has been a research
area for over a decade [1], but it has recently received
increased focus and attention from the larger community. This is largely due to the success of modern deep
learning techniques within the realm of computer vision
tasks and the surprising ease with which such systems
are fooled into giving incorrect decisions [2]. In particular, there are concerns about the safety of self-driving
cars, as they could be fooled into misreading stop signs
as speed limits, and other possible nefarious actions [3].
Consider an adversary A whom, given some vice = A(x) such that
tim model f (·), wants to alter x
f (x) 6= f (A(x)). Many works have attempted to find
a transform t(·) that can be applied to an image x to
yield a new image x̂ = t(x) such that f (x) = f (t(A(x))).
If it were possible to find such a defensive transform t(·)
it would allow us a simple and convenient way to circumvent the adversarial problem. This is particularly
alluring for computer vision, since there exists a rich

3

Mark McLean1
nvidia

4

u.m.b.c.

literature of computer vision transformations to pull
from. Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner [4] has shown that
the many attempts to find such a defensive transformation t(·) that defeats adversarial attacks have all failed,
due to a problem they term obfuscated gradients. More
broadly, every defense we are aware of that has undergone thorough evaluation has failed to produce any level
of protection for ImageNet[5], as exemplified in the RobustML catalog where all ImageNet results are reduced
to  0.1% accuracy.1 In contrast, we present a new,
state-of-the-art defense for ImageNet that pays some
cost to accuracy when not under attack, but achieves
a Top-5 accuracy of up to 57.1% when under attack.
These attacks are carried out by the strongest adversary we could construct, which is significantly stronger
than those used in similar work in key respects.
In our work, we instead look not for a single transformation t(·), but propose to build a collection of many
different transforms t1,...,n from which we will randomly
select a subset to apply to each image at both training
and testing time. The individual transforms will be
randomly parameterized as will the particular subset
chosen and the order in which they are applied. By
creating a barrage of random transformations, we show
that such an ensemble defense can provide tangible benefits against attack, even after taking into account all of
the methods by which obfuscated gradients can mislead
us into using a broken defense [4].
Overall we provide the following contributions:
• A new, state-of-the-art defense on ImageNet, that
fully accounts for the obfuscated gradients issue.
• Results that show ensembling weak defenses can
create a strong defense, provided they are combined
in a randomized fashion and the population of
defenses is large. Prior work had conjectured that
this was not the case [6].
BaRT is inspired by and builds upon a number of
prior works that have used singular transformations
to try to defend against attacks. We will review work
related to our approach in section 2 and detail both the
1 https://www.robust-ml.org/

6528

