Learning Active Contour Models for Medical Image Segmentation
Xu Chen1 , Bryan M. Williams1 , Srinivasa R. Vallabhaneni1,2 , Gabriela Czanner1,3 , Rachel Williams1 ,
and Yalin Zheng1
1

Department of Eye and Vision Science, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of
Liverpool, L7 8TX, UK
2
Liverpool Vascular & Endovascular Service, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, L7 8XP, UK
3
Department of Applied Mathematics, Liverpool John Moores University, L3 3AF, UK
{xuchen, bryan, fempop, g.czanner, rlw, yzheng}@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Image segmentation is an important step in medical image processing and has been widely studied and developed
for refinement of clinical analysis and applications. New
models based on deep learning have improved results but
are restricted to pixel-wise tting of the segmentation map.
Our aim was to tackle this limitation by developing a new
model based on deep learning which takes into account the
area inside as well as outside the region of interest as well
as the size of boundaries during learning. Specically, we
propose a new loss function which incorporates area and
size information and integrates this into a dense deep learning model. We evaluated our approach on a dataset of more
than 2,000 cardiac MRI scans. Our results show that the
proposed loss function outperforms other mainstream loss
function Cross-entropy on two common segmentation networks. Our loss function is robust while using different hyperparameter λ.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental and challenging
problem in computer vision, with the aim of partitioning
an image in a meaningful way so that objects can be
localized, distinguished and/or measured. In medical imaging, this is vital for further clinical analysis, diagnostics,
treatment planning and measuring disease progression.
High precision is typically required in bio-medical image
segmentation [6, 24]. Recently, segmentation techniques
based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been developed for various medical imaging modalities,
such as MRI, CT and X-ray, showing promising results and
overcoming the limitations of conventional segmentation

Figure 1: Our proposed loss function

methods [17]. During the training process of a CNN
model, its parameters are optimized through gradient
descent approaches based on the errors measured by a loss
function, which compares the prediction and ground truth
images. Loss functions are critical for model optimization.
In terms of classification problems, the L2 norm is also
known as mean squared error (MSE) and cross-entropy
(CE) are commonly used as loss functions [8, 33]. CE
and the Dice coefficient (DC) have typically been used for
segmentation problems [24, 12].
Despite the recent progress of using CNNs for biomedical image segmentation, the commonly used loss
functions generally evaluate pixel-wise similarity. For
instance, CE and DC focus on extracted features from
specific regions [28]. While this can result in good classification and segmentation performance, low resultant
loss function values may not necessarily correspond to
a meaningful segmentation. For example, a noisy result
can add many contours in the background representing
incorrect segmentation, and object boundaries can be fuzzy
4321
11632

