Dissimilarity Coefficient based Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Aditya Arun
CVIT, KCIS
IIIT Hyderabad

C.V. Jawahar
CVIT, KCIS
IIIT Hyderabad

Abstract
We consider the problem of weakly supervised object detection, where the training samples are annotated using
only image-level labels that indicate the presence or absence of an object category. In order to model the uncertainty in the location of the objects, we employ a dissimilarity coefficient based probabilistic learning objective. The
learning objective minimizes the difference between an annotation agnostic prediction distribution and an annotation
aware conditional distribution. The main computational
challenge is the complex nature of the conditional distribution, which consists of terms over hundreds or thousands
of variables. The complexity of the conditional distribution
rules out the possibility of explicitly modeling it. Instead,
we exploit the fact that deep learning frameworks rely on
stochastic optimization. This allows us to use a state of the
art discrete generative model that can provide annotation
consistent samples from the conditional distribution. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 data
sets demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Object detection requires us to localize all the instances
of an object category of interest in a given image. In recent years, significant advances in speed and accuracy have
been achieved by detection frameworks based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [7, 13, 14, 16, 24, 26, 27].
Most of the existing methods require a strongly supervised
data set, where each image is labeled with the groundtruth bounding boxes of all the object instances. Given the
high cost of obtaining such detailed annotations, researchers
have recently started exploring the weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) problem [3, 9, 18, 21, 22, 23, 33,
34, 39, 40, 41, 42]. The goal of WSOD is to learn an accurate detector using training samples that are annotated with
image-level labels (which indicate the presence of an object
category).
Given the wide availability of image-level labels,
WSOD offers a cost-effective and highly scalable learning
paradigm. However, this comes at the cost of introducing

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford,
The Alan Turing Institute

uncertainty in the location of the object instances during
training. For example, consider the task of detecting a car.
Given a training image annotated to indicate the presence of
a car, we are still faced with the challenge of identifying the
bounding box for the car.
In order to effectively model uncertainty in weakly supervised learning, Kumar et al. [20] proposed a probabilistic framework that models two distributions: (i) a conditional distribution, which represents the probability of an
output conditioned on the given annotation during training;
and (ii) a prediction distribution which represents the probability of an output at test time. The parameters of the two
distributions are estimated jointly by minimizing the dissimilarity coefficient [25], which measures the distance between any two distributions using a task specific loss function.
The aforementioned dissimilarity coefficient based
framework has provided promising results in domains
where the conditional distribution is simple to model (that
is, consists of terms that depend on a few variables at a
time) [1, 20]. However, WSOD presents a more challenging
scenario due to the complexity of the underlying conditional
distribution. Specifically, given the hundreds or even thousands of bounding box proposals for an image, the annotation constraint imposes a term over all of these bounding
box proposals such that at least one of them corresponds
to the given image-level label. This leads to a challenging
scenario where the distribution is not factorizable over the
bounding box proposals. While previous works have approximated this uncertainty as a fully factorized distribution
for computational efficiency, we argue that such a choice
leads to poor accuracy.
To overcome the difficulty of a complex conditional distribution, we make the key observation that deep learning
relies on stochastic optimization. Therefore, we do not
need to explicitly model this complex distribution but simply estimate the distribution using samples. This observation opens the door to the use of state-of-the-art deep generative models such as the Discrete D ISCO Net [4, 5].
We test the efficacy of our approach on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 data sets. To generate

9432

