DeepSDF: Learning Continuous Signed Distance Functions
for Shape Representation
Jeong Joon Park1,3
1

Peter Florence 2,3

University of Washington

2

Julian Straub3

Richard Newcombe3

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

3

Steven Lovegrove3

Facebook Reality Labs

Figure 1: DeepSDF represents signed distance functions (SDFs) of shapes via latent code-conditioned feed-forward decoder networks.
Above images are raycast renderings of DeepSDF interpolating between two shapes in the learned shape latent space. Best viewed digitally.

Abstract
Computer graphics, 3D computer vision and robotics
communities have produced multiple approaches to representing 3D geometry for rendering and reconstruction.
These provide trade-offs across fidelity, efficiency and compression capabilities. In this work, we introduce DeepSDF,
a learned continuous Signed Distance Function (SDF) representation of a class of shapes that enables high quality shape representation, interpolation and completion from
partial and noisy 3D input data. DeepSDF, like its classical counterpart, represents a shape’s surface by a continuous volumetric field: the magnitude of a point in the
field represents the distance to the surface boundary and the
sign indicates whether the region is inside (-) or outside (+)
of the shape, hence our representation implicitly encodes a
shape’s boundary as the zero-level-set of the learned function while explicitly representing the classification of space
as being part of the shapes’ interior or not. While classical
SDF’s both in analytical or discretized voxel form typically
represent the surface of a single shape, DeepSDF can represent an entire class of shapes. Furthermore, we show stateof-the-art performance for learned 3D shape representation
and completion while reducing the model size by an order
of magnitude compared with previous work.
Work performed while Park and Florence were interns at Facebook.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks which are a mainstay of
image-based approaches grow quickly in space and time
complexity when directly generalized to the 3rd spatial dimension, and more classical and compact surface representations such as triangle or quad meshes pose problems
in training since we may need to deal with an unknown
number of vertices and arbitrary topology. These challenges have limited the quality, flexibility and fidelity of
deep learning approaches when attempting to either input
3D data for processing or produce 3D inferences for object
segmentation and reconstruction.
In this work, we present a novel representation and approach for generative 3D modeling that is efficient, expressive, and fully continuous. Our approach uses the concept
of a SDF, but unlike common surface reconstruction techniques which discretize this SDF into a regular grid for evaluation and measurement denoising [14], we instead learn a
generative model to produce such a continuous field.
The proposed continuous representation may be intuitively understood as a learned shape-conditioned classifier
for which the decision boundary is the surface of the shape
itself, as shown in Fig. 2. Our approach shares the generative aspect of other works seeking to map a latent space to
a distribution of complex shapes in 3D [52], but critically
differs in the central representation. While the notion of an
1165

