Unsupervised Learning of Consensus Maximization for 3D Vision Problems

Thomas Probst, Danda Pani Paudel, Ajad Chhatkuli, Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Consensus maximization is a key strategy in 3D vision
for robust geometric model estimation from measurements
with outliers. Generic methods for consensus maximization, such as Random Sampling and Consensus (RANSAC),
have played a tremendous role in the success of 3D vision,
in spite of the ubiquity of outliers. However, replicating
the same generic behaviour in a deeply learned architecture, using supervised approaches, has proven to be difficult. In that context, unsupervised methods have a huge potential to adapt to any unseen data distribution, and therefore are highly desirable. In this paper, we propose for the
first time an unsupervised learning framework for consensus maximization, in the context of solving 3D vision problems. For that purpose, we establish a relationship between inlier measurements, represented by an ideal of inlier set, and the subspace of polynomials representing the
space of target transformations. Using this relationship, we
derive a constraint that must be satisfied by the sought inlier set. This constraint can be tested without knowing the
transformation parameters, therefore allows us to efficiently
define the geometric model fitting cost. This model fitting
cost is used as a supervisory signal for learning consensus maximization, where the learning process seeks for the
largest measurement set that minimizes the proposed model
fitting cost. Using our method, we solve a diverse set of
3D vision problems, including 3D-3D matching, non-rigid
3D shape matching with piece-wise rigidity and image-toimage matching. Despite being unsupervised, our method
outperforms RANSAC in all three tasks for several datasets.

1. Introduction
In 3D vision, problems such as Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) [26, 16, 12] and image registration [17, 30] are geometrically solved from noisy measurements with outliers.
In that context, consensus maximization among inlier measurements, is very often a crucial step. Typically, the maximum consensus is searched using the Random Sampling

and Consensus (RANSAC) algorithm [13] or its derivatives [35, 44, 37]. During this process, almost all geometric models are represented by a system of polynomials whose common root specifies the desired transformation parameters. Polynomial-based geometric model representations, when used with RANSAC, offer accurate transformation parameters, therefore are used for a diverse set
of problems [12, 17, 30, 20]. Globally optimal methods [10, 33, 42, 2, 15, 3, 23, 49], which overcome limitations of RANSAC, further bolster the importance of maximizing consensus. However, most methods that seek consensus maximization solely depend upon the geometric
models. They do not exploit knowledge about the scene
or their measurement distributions.
Learning for consensus maximization is an alternative
approach which has the potential of providing a higher inlier/outlier classification accuracy, by leveraging the distribution of the given data. Additionally, the supervisory
signal for consensus maximization may help to learn other
related tasks, within the framework of multi-task learning. Owing to the success of deep learning, recent methods
have tackled the consensus maximization problem for image matching using the Fundamental matrix [36], the Essential matrix [48] and for the absolute pose [7]. These methods use supervision through ground-truth labels to train a
neural network for classifying correspondences as inliers or
outliers. Other methods, [36, 48] respectively use Fundamental or Essential matrix models, which require supervision by their associated matrices to train the network parameters. Unfortunately, such networks, trained in a supervised
manner, are not on par with RANSAC in terms of their generality to unseen data distribution. Moreover, ground-truth
geometric models are sometimes difficult to obtain, or even
non-existent [16]. In this scenario, unsupervised methods
have a huge potential, as they can adapt to any unseen data
distribution, and therefore are highly desirable.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised framework to
learn consensus maximization in the context of geometric
3D vision problems. We model the geometric transformations using polynomials, as commonly done in the litera1929

