Pattern-Affinitive Propagation across
Depth, Surface Normal and Semantic Segmentation
Zhenyu Zhang1†
Yan Yan1†
1

Zhen Cui1†∗
Nicu Sebe2‡

Chunyan Xu1†
Jian Yang1†∗

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

zhangjesse, zhen.cui, cyx, yyan, csjyang@njust.edu.cn
2

Multimedia and Human Understanding Group, University of Trento
niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract

60%

Rate of Matched Similar Pairs
rate% in NYUDv2

rate% in SUNRGBD

40%

In this paper, we propose a novel Pattern-Affinitive Propagation (PAP) framework to jointly predict depth, surface
normal and semantic segmentation. The motivation behind
it comes from the statistic observation that pattern-affinitive
pairs recur much frequently across different tasks as well as
within a task. Thus, we can conduct two types of propagations, cross-task propagation and task-specific propagation,
to adaptively diffuse those similar patterns. The former integrates cross-task affinity patterns to adapt to each task
therein through the calculation on non-local relationships.
Next the latter performs an iterative diffusion in the feature
space so that the cross-task affinity patterns can be widelyspread within the task. Accordingly, the learning of each
task can be regularized and boosted by the complementary
task-level affinities. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness and the superiority of our method on the joint
three tasks. Meanwhile, we achieve the state-of-the-art or
competitive results on the three related datasets, NYUD-v2,
SUN-RGBD and KITTI.

1. Introduction
The predictions of depth, surface normal and semantic
segmentation are important and challenging for scene un∗ Corresponding authors
† Zhenyu Zhang, Zhen Cui, Chunyan Xu, Yan Yan and Jian Yang are
with PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for HighDimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab
of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Zhenyu Zhang is also a visiting student in University of Trento.
‡ Nicu Sebe is the head of Dept. of Information Engineering and Computer Science Leader of Multimedia and Human Understanding Group
(MHUG) University of Trento.

Image

Depth

20%
Segmentation & Normal & Depth Segmentation &
Depth
Normal
60%

Rate of Matched Dissimilar Pairs
rate% in NYUDv2
rate% in SUNRGBD

Segmentation

Surface Normal

50%

Similar Pairs
Dissimilar Pairs
(a)

40%
Segmentation &
Depth

Normal & Depth Segmentation &
Normal

(b)

Figure 1. Statistics of matched affinity (or dissimilar) pairs across
depth, surface normal and segmentation maps. (a) Visual exhibition. The point pairs colored white are the matched affinity
pixels across three tasks at the same positions, while the pairs
of black points correspond to dissimilar pixels across three maps. For the similarity metrics, REL/RMSE/Label consistency are
taken respectively for the three maps. (b) Statistical results. We
compute the success ratio of pairs matching across different maps
on NYUD-v2 and SUN-RGBD datasets, and observe that the success ratios of pairs matching cross tasks are rather high.

derstanding. Also, they have many potential industrial applications such as autonomous driving system [4], simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [52] and socially interactive robotics [12]. Currently, most methods [10, 11, 13, 14, 40, 43] focused on one of the three
tasks, and they also achieved the state-of-the-art performance through the technique of deep learning.
In contrast to the single-task methods, recently, several
joint-task learning methods [58, 62, 46, 32] on these tasks
have shown a promising direction to improve the predictions by utilizing task-correlative information to boost for each
other. In a broad sense, the problem of joint-task learning
has been widely studied in the past few decades [3]. But
more recently most approaches took the technique line of
deep learning for possible different tasks [41, 16, 18, 25,
26]. However, most methods aimed to perform feature fu14106

