Pointing Novel Objects in Image Captioning∗
Yehao Li †§ , Ting Yao ‡ , Yingwei Pan ‡ , Hongyang Chao †§ , and Tao Mei ‡
†

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
‡

§

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education

{yehaoli.sysu, tingyao.ustc, panyw.ustc}@gmail.com, isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn, tmei@live.com

Abstract
Image captioning has received significant attention with
remarkable improvements in recent advances. Nevertheless, images in the wild encapsulate rich knowledge and
cannot be sufficiently described with models built on imagecaption pairs containing only in-domain objects. In this
paper, we propose to address the problem by augmenting
standard deep captioning architectures with object learners. Specifically, we present Long Short-Term Memory with
Pointing (LSTM-P) — a new architecture that facilitates vocabulary expansion and produces novel objects via pointing
mechanism. Technically, object learners are initially pretrained on available object recognition data. Pointing in
LSTM-P then balances the probability between generating
a word through LSTM and copying a word from the recognized objects at each time step in decoder stage. Furthermore, our captioning encourages global coverage of objects in the sentence. Extensive experiments are conducted on both held-out COCO image captioning and ImageNet
datasets for describing novel objects, and superior results
are reported when comparing to state-of-the-art approaches. More remarkably, we obtain an average of 60.9% in F1
score on held-out COCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Automatic caption generation is the task of producing
a natural-language utterance (usually a sentence) that describes the visual content of an image. Practical applications of automatic caption generation include leveraging
descriptions for image indexing or retrieval, and helping
those with visual impairments by transforming visual signals into information that can be communicated via textto-speech technology. Recently, state-of-the-art image captioning methods tend to be monolithic deep models essentially of “encoder-decoder” style [13, 28, 36]. In general,
∗ This work was performed at JD AI Research.

a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is employed to encode an image into a feature vector, and a caption is then
decoded from this vector using a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Network, which is one typical Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Such models have indeed demonstrated
promising results on image captioning task. However, one
of the most critical limitations is that the existing models are
often built on a number of image-caption pairs, which contain only a shallow view of in-domain objects. That hinders
the generalization of these models in real-world scenarios to
describe novel scenes or objects in out-of-domain images.
The difficulty of novel objects prediction in captioning
mainly originates from two aspects: 1) how to facilitate
word vocabulary expansion? 2) how to learn a hybrid network that can nicely integrate the recognized objects (words) into the output captions? We propose to mitigate the
first problem through leveraging the knowledge from visual
recognition datasets, which are freely available and easier
to be scalable for developing object learners. Next, pointing mechanism is devised to balance the word generation
from decoder and the word taken directly from the learnt
objects. In other words, such mechanism controls when to
directly put the learnt objects at proper places in the output sentence, i.e., when to point. Moreover, despite having
high quantitative scores, qualitative analysis shows that automatically generated captions by deep captioning models
are often limited to describing very generic information of
objects, or rely on prior information and correlations from
training examples, and resulting frequently in undesired effects such as object hallucination [14]. As a result, we further take the coverage of objects into account to cover more
objects in the sentence and thus improve the captions.
By consolidating the idea of pointing mechanism and the
coverage of objects into image captioning, we present a new
Long Short-Term Memory with Pointing (LSTM-P) architecture for novel object captioning. Given an image, a CNN
is utilized to extract visual features, which are fed into LSTM at the initial time step as a trigger of sentence generation.
The output of LSTM is probability distribution over all the

12497

