Graphonomy: Universal Human Parsing via Graph Transfer Learning
Ke Gong1,2† , Yiming Gao1† , Xiaodan Liang1∗ ,
Xiaohui Shen3 , Meng Wang4 , Liang Lin1,2
1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

DarkMatter AI Research

3

4

ByteDance AI Lab

Hefei University of Technology

kegong936@gmail.com, gaoym9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com,
shenxiaohui@gmail.com, wangmeng@hfut.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Head

Prior highly-tuned human parsing models tend to fit towards each dataset in a specific domain or with discrepant
label granularity, and can hardly be adapted to other human parsing tasks without extensive re-training. In this
paper, we aim to learn a single universal human parsing
model that can tackle all kinds of human parsing needs
by unifying label annotations from different domains or at
various levels of granularity. This poses many fundamental learning challenges, e.g. discovering underlying semantic structures among different label granularity, performing
proper transfer learning across different image domains,
and identifying and utilizing label redundancies across related tasks.
To address these challenges, we propose a new universal human parsing agent, named “Graphonomy”, which incorporates hierarchical graph transfer learning upon the
conventional parsing network to encode the underlying label semantic structures and propagate relevant semantic
information. In particular, Graphonomy first learns and
propagates compact high-level graph representation among
the labels within one dataset via Intra-Graph Reasoning,
and then transfers semantic information across multiple
datasets via Inter-Graph Transfer. Various graph transfer dependencies (e.g., similarity, linguistic knowledge) between different datasets are analyzed and encoded to enhance graph transfer capability. By distilling universal semantic graph representation to each specific task, Graphonomy is able to predict all levels of parsing labels in one system without piling up the complexity. Experimental results
show Graphonomy effectively achieves the state-of-the-art
results on three human parsing benchmarks as well as advantageous universal human parsing performance.

1. Introduction
Human visual systems are capable of accomplishing
holistic human understanding at a single glance on a per† Equal contribution. *Corresponding Author.

Lower
-legs

Lower
-Arms
Upper
-legs

Torso

Upper
-arms

Intra-Graph
connection

Head

Torso

Inter-Graph
connection
Hat
Face
Hair
Upperclothes

Leftarm

Rightshoe

Pants

Upper
clothes

Face

Hat

Coat Helmet
Shirt

Pants
Leftshoe

Rightarm

cap

Sweater

Rightleg

Hair

Tshirt

…
Head
wear

Leftleg

…

…
Poloshirt

Sweater
Singlet
Jacket

…

Figure 1. With huge different granularity and quantity of semantic
labels, human parsing is isolated into multiple level tasks that hinder the model generation capability and data annotation utilization.
For example, the head region on a dataset is further annotated into
several fine-grained concepts on another dataset, such as hat, hair
and face. However, different semantic parts still have some intrinsic and hierarchical relations (e.g., Head includes the face. Face is
next to hair), which can be encoding as intra-graph and inter-graph
connections for better information propagation. To alleviate the
label discrepancy issue and take advantage of their semantic correlations, we introduce a universal human parsing agent, named as
“Graphonomy”, which models the global semantic coherency in
multiple domains via graph transfer learning to achieve multiple
levels of human parsing tasks.

son image, e.g., separating the person from the background,
understanding the pose, and recognizing the clothes the person wears. Nevertheless, recent research efforts on human
understanding have been devoted to developing numerous
highly-specific and distinct models for each individual application, e.g. foreground human segmentation task [8, 15],
coarse clothes segmentation task [25, 28] and fine-grained
human part/clothes parsing task [14, 39]. Despite the common underlying human structure and shared intrinsic se17450

