A Style-Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks
Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

tkarras@nvidia.com

slaine@nvidia.com

taila@nvidia.com

Abstract
We propose an alternative generator architecture for generative adversarial networks, borrowing from style transfer
literature. The new architecture leads to an automatically
learned, unsupervised separation of high-level attributes
(e.g., pose and identity when trained on human faces) and
stochastic variation in the generated images (e.g., freckles,
hair), and it enables intuitive, scale-specific control of the
synthesis. The new generator improves the state-of-the-art
in terms of traditional distribution quality metrics, leads to
demonstrably better interpolation properties, and also better disentangles the latent factors of variation. To quantify
interpolation quality and disentanglement, we propose two
new, automated methods that are applicable to any generator architecture. Finally, we introduce a new, highly varied
and high-quality dataset of human faces.

1. Introduction
The resolution and quality of images produced by generative methods — especially generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [21] — have seen rapid improvement recently [28,
41, 4]. Yet the generators continue to operate as black boxes,
and despite recent efforts [2], the understanding of various
aspects of the image synthesis process, e.g., the origin of
stochastic features, is still lacking. The properties of the latent space are also poorly understood, and the commonly
demonstrated latent space interpolations [12, 48, 34] provide
no quantitative way to compare different generators against
each other.
Motivated by style transfer literature [26], we re-design
the generator architecture in a way that exposes novel ways
to control the image synthesis process. Our generator starts
from a learned constant input and adjusts the “style” of
the image at each convolution layer based on the latent
code, therefore directly controlling the strength of image
features at different scales. Combined with noise injected
directly into the network, this architectural change leads to
automatic, unsupervised separation of high-level attributes

(e.g., pose, identity) from stochastic variation (e.g., freckles,
hair) in the generated images, and enables intuitive scalespecific mixing and interpolation operations. We do not
modify the discriminator or the loss function in any way, and
our work is thus orthogonal to the ongoing discussion about
GAN loss functions, regularization, and hyper-parameters
[23, 41, 4, 37, 40, 33].
Our generator embeds the input latent code into an intermediate latent space, which has a profound effect on how
the factors of variation are represented in the network. The
input latent space must follow the probability density of the
training data, and we argue that this leads to some degree
of unavoidable entanglement. Our intermediate latent space
is free from that restriction and is therefore allowed to be
disentangled. As previous methods for estimating the degree of latent space disentanglement are not directly applicable in our case, we propose two new automated metrics — perceptual path length and linear separability — for
quantifying these aspects of the generator. Using these metrics, we show that compared to a traditional generator architecture, our generator admits a more linear, less entangled
representation of different factors of variation.
Finally, we present a new dataset of human faces (FlickrFaces-HQ, FFHQ) that offers much higher quality and
covers considerably wider variation than existing highresolution datasets (Appendix A). We have made this dataset
publicly available, along with our source code and pretrained networks.1 The accompanying video can be found
under the same link.

2. Style-based generator
Traditionally the latent code is provided to the generator through an input layer, i.e., the first layer of a feedforward network (Figure 1a). We depart from this design
by omitting the input layer altogether and starting from a
learned constant instead (Figure 1b, right). Given a latent code z in the input latent space Z, a non-linear mapping network f : Z → W first produces w ∈ W (Figure 1b, left). For simplicity, we set the dimensionality of
1 https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan

4401

