Inverse Discriminative Networks for Handwritten Signature Verification

Ping Wei, Huan Li, Ping Hu∗
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, lh875056558@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, helenhu@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Handwritten signature verification is an important technique for many financial, commercial, and forensic applications. In this paper, we propose an inverse discriminative
network (IDN) for writer-independent handwritten signature verification, which aims to determine whether a test
signature is genuine or forged compared to the reference
signature. The IDN model contains four weight-shared neural network streams, of which two receiving the original signature images are the discriminative streams and the other
two addressing the gray-inverted images form the inverse
streams. Multiple paths of attention modules connect the
discriminative streams and the inverse streams to propagate messages. With the inverse streams and the multi-path
attention modules, the IDN model intensifies the effective
information of signature verification. Since there was no
proper Chinese signature dataset in the community, we collected a large-scale Chinese signature dataset with approximately 29,000 images of 749 individuals’ signatures. We
test our method on the Chinese signature dataset and other three signature datasets of different languages: CEDAR,
BHSig-B, and BHSig-H. Experiments prove the strength
and potential of our method.

1. Introduction
When a myriad of significant financial, commercial, and
forensic documents are signed worldwide everyday, verifying the authenticity of the signatures is a critical issue to be
concerned. Considering the huge amounts and wide applications of handwritten signatures, developing an automatic,
accurate, and efficient signature verification technique is becoming particularly important and necessary.
This paper addresses the problem of writer-independent
handwritten signature verification, which aims to determine
whether a test signature is genuine or forged compared with
∗ Ping Hu is the corresponding author.

reference

signature
verification

genuine
or
forged

test
Figure 1. Illustration of handwritten signature verification.

the reference signature of any writer, as shown in Fig. 1.
While the past decades have witnessed remarkable progress
in signature verification [2, 12, 18, 35, 34], several existing challenges make it still an open problem. First, there
was no proper Chinese signature dataset, which impedes
the research and application of Chinese signature verification. Second, in a signature image the information of the
signature is very sparse, because the signature strokes are
often extremely thin and a large area of the image is the
background. Third, most individual’s signature styles are
somewhat arbitrary, which makes the same individual’s signatures on different occasions appear notably different. On
the other hand, some skillfully forged signatures appear extremely similar to the genuine ones.
In this paper, we propose a novel inverse discriminative
network (IDN) model for writer-independent handwritten
signature verification. This network contains four weightshared streams, of which two streams are the discriminative
streams and the other two are the inverse streams. The two
discriminative streams respectively receive a reference signature image and a test signature image as inputs, and extract the signature features via four cascaded convolutional modules. The two inverse streams receive the inversegray reference and test signature images, respectively. The
discriminative streams and the inverse streams are connected by multiple paths of attention modules which propagate messages at different scales to intensify the effective
stroke information. The features from different discrimi4321
5764

