Deep High-Resolution Representation Learning for Human Pose Estimation
Ke Sun1,2∗† Bin Xiao2∗ Dong Liu1 Jingdong Wang2‡
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
sunk@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongleiu@ustc.edu.cn, {Bin.Xiao,jingdw}@microsoft.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
2D human pose estimation has been a fundamental yet
challenging problem in computer vision. The goal is to localize human anatomical keypoints (e.g., elbow, wrist, etc.)
or parts. It has many applications, including human action
recognition, human-computer interaction, animation, etc.
This paper is interested in single-person pose estimation,
which is the basis of other related problems, such as multiperson pose estimation [6, 26, 32, 38, 46, 55, 40, 45, 17, 69],
∗ Equal contribution.
† This work is done when Ke Sun was an intern at Microsoft Research,
Beijing, P.R. China
‡ Corresponding author

1×

scale

In this paper, we are interested in the human pose estimation problem with a focus on learning reliable highresolution representations. Most existing methods recover
high-resolution representations from low-resolution representations produced by a high-to-low resolution network.
Instead, our proposed network maintains high-resolution
representations through the whole process.
We start from a high-resolution subnetwork as the first
stage, gradually add high-to-low resolution subnetworks
one by one to form more stages, and connect the mutliresolution subnetworks in parallel. We conduct repeated
multi-scale fusions such that each of the high-to-low resolution representations receives information from other parallel representations over and over, leading to rich highresolution representations. As a result, the predicted keypoint heatmap is potentially more accurate and spatially
more precise. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of our network through the superior pose estimation results
over two benchmark datasets: the COCO keypoint detection
dataset and the MPII Human Pose dataset. In addition, we
show the superiority of our network in pose tracking on the
PoseTrack dataset. The code and models have been publicly
available at https://github.com/leoxiaobin/
deep-high-resolution-net.pytorch.

depth

2×

feature
maps

conv.
unit

down
samp.

up
samp.

4×

Figure 1. Illustrating the architecture of the proposed HRNet. It
consists of parallel high-to-low resolution subnetworks with repeated information exchange across multi-resolution subnetworks
(multi-scale fusion). The horizontal and vertical directions correspond to the depth of the network and the scale of the feature
maps, respectively.

video pose estimation and tracking [48, 70], etc.
The recent developments show that deep convolutional
neural networks have achieved the state-of-the-art performance. Most existing methods pass the input through a
network, typically consisting of high-to-low resolution subnetworks that are connected in series, and then raise the
resolution. For instance, Hourglass [39] recovers the high
resolution through a symmetric low-to-high process. SimpleBaseline [70] adopts a few transposed convolution layers
for generating high-resolution representations. In addition,
dilated convolutions are also used to blow up the later layers of a high-to-low resolution network (e.g., VGGNet or
ResNet) [26, 74].
We present a novel architecture, namely HighResolution Net (HRNet), which is able to maintain highresolution representations through the whole process. We
start from a high-resolution subnetwork as the first stage,
gradually add high-to-low resolution subnetworks one by
one to form more stages, and connect the multi-resolution
subnetworks in parallel. We conduct repeated multi-scale
fusions by exchanging the information across the parallel multi-resolution subnetworks over and over through the
whole process. We estimate the keypoints over the highresolution representations output by our network. The resulting network is illustrated in Figure 1.

5693

