Part-regularized Near-duplicate Vehicle Re-identification
Bing He1
Jia Li1,3,4∗
Yifan Zhao1
Yonghong Tian2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of EE&CS, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beijing, China
1

{bing, jiali, zhaoyf}@buaa.edu.cn 2 yhtian@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Vehicle re-identification (Re-ID) has been attracting
more interests in computer vision owing to its great contributions in urban surveillance and intelligent transportation. With the development of deep learning approaches,
vehicle Re-ID still faces a near-duplicate challenge, which
is to distinguish different instances with nearly identical appearances. Previous methods simply rely on the global visual features to handle this problem. In this paper, we proposed a simple but efficient part-regularized discriminative
feature preserving method which enhances the perceptive
ability of subtle discrepancies. We further develop a novel framework to integrate part constrains with the global
Re-ID modules by introducing an detection branch. Our
framework is trained end-to-end with combined local and
global constrains. Specially, without the part-regularized
local constrains in inference step, our Re-ID network outperforms the state-of-the-art method by a large margin on
large benchmark datasets VehicleID and VeRi-776.

1. Introduction
Given a query image of a vehicle identity, vehicle reidentification task aims to retrieve all the images of this identity from a large image database which typically captured from a large camera network. With the proposals of
large dataset [14, 12, 27]and the development of deep learning algorithms [24, 36], recent models have gain remarkable
success in the past decade. The re-identification of vehicles has a great potential to contribute to the urban security
surveillance and intelligent transportation.
Considering the inconspicuous divergences among different instances, vehicle re-identification is still a very challenging task, especially with the large amount of dataset. To
address this Re-ID task, many deep learning models [27, 1]
∗ Jia Li is the corresponding author. URL: http://cvteam.net

Figure 1. Near-duplicate problem. (a) Images in each row all come
from different vehicle identities with similar appearance. Apparently it is difficult to distinguish them especially the first row since
all three vehicle identities come from a same vehicle model. Subtle discriminative vehicle parts are crucial for the near-duplicate
vehicle re-identification. (b) As shown in the right side of the image those similar vehicles are easy to distinguish using the local
part feature.

relied on global information have been proposed in the past
decades. One intuitive solution is to reduce the distances
of identical vehicle images and enlarge the distance of different ones with learning approaches. To better measure
the distance, previous works [12] mainly use deep metric
learning to directly embed the raw image into an Euclidean
space where the distance can be directly used as similarity
scores between two vehicles. Weinberger et al. [25] explore
the topic of metric learning to perform k-nearest neighbor
classification and propose the Large Margin Nearest Neighbor loss (LMNN). FaceNet [20] improved the LMNN loss
into a modified triplet loss which directly optimize the final
distance metric and can be applied in re-identification and
face recognition tasks. Although these works reach remarkable success in vehicle re-identification tasks, they usually
get confused when these vehicle have inconspicuous differences. e.g., see Fig. 1 (a).

3997

