Veritatem Dies Aperit - Temporally Consistent Depth Prediction Enabled by a
Multi-Task Geometric and Semantic Scene Understanding Approach

1

Amir Atapour-Abarghouei1 Toby P. Breckon1,2
Department of Computer Science – 2 Department of Engineering
Durham University, UK
{amir.atapour-abarghouei,toby.breckon}@durham.ac.uk

Abstract
Robust geometric and semantic scene understanding is
ever more important in many real-world applications such
as autonomous driving and robotic navigation. In this paper, we propose a multi-task learning-based approach capable of jointly performing geometric and semantic scene
understanding, namely depth prediction (monocular depth
estimation and depth completion) and semantic scene segmentation. Within a single temporally constrained recurrent network, our approach uniquely takes advantage of a
complex series of skip connections, adversarial training and
the temporal constraint of sequential frame recurrence to
produce consistent depth and semantic class labels simultaneously. Extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates
the efficacy of our approach compared to other contemporary state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
As scene understanding grows in popularity due to its
applicability in many areas of interest for industry and
academia, scene depth has become ever more important
as an integral part of this task. Whilst in many current autonomous driving solutions, imperfect stereo camera set-ups or expensive LiDAR sensors are used to capture
depth, research has recently focused on refining estimated
depth with corrupted or missing regions in post-processing,
rendering it more useful in any downstream applications
[6, 78, 84]. Moreover, monocular depth estimation has received significant attention within the research community
as a cheap and innovative alternative to other more expensive and performance-limited technologies [8, 24, 29, 87].
Pixel-level image understanding, namely semantic segmentation, also plays an important role in many visionbased systems. Significant success has been achieved using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) in this field
[10, 17, 53, 66, 70] and many others such as image classification [54], object detection [88] and alike in recent years.
Veritatem Dies Aperit: Time discovers the truth.

Figure 1: Exemplar results of the proposed approach.
RGB: input colour image; MDE: Monocular Depth Estimation; GSS: Generated Semantic Segmentation.
In this work, we propose a model capable of semantically
understanding a scene by jointly predicting depth and pixelwise semantic classes (Figure 1). The network performs
semantic segmentation (Section 3.3) along with monocular
depth estimation (i.e., predicting scene depth based on a single RGB image) or depth completion (i.e., completing missing regions of existing depth sensed through other imperfect
means, Section 3.2). Our approach performs these tasks
within a single model (Figure 2 (A)) capable of two separate scene understanding objectives requiring low-level feature extraction and high-level inference, which leads to improved and deeper representation learning within the model
[41]. This is empirically demonstrated via the notably improved results obtained for each individual task when performed simultaneously in this manner.
Within the current literature, many techniques focus on
individual frames to spatially accomplish their objectives,
ignoring temporal consistency in video sequences, one of
the most valuable sources of information widely available
within real-world applications. In this work, we propose
a feedback network that at each time step takes the output
generated at the previous time step as a recurrent input. Furthermore, using a pre-trained optical flow estimation model,
we ensure the temporal information is explicitly considered
by the overall model during training (Figure 2 (A)).
In recent years, skip connections have been proven to

3373

