Look More Than Once: An Accurate Detector for Text of Arbitrary Shapes
Chengquan Zhang1∗ Borong Liang2∗ Zuming Huang1∗ Mengyi En1
Junyu Han1 Errui Ding1 Xinghao Ding2†
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University2
{zhangchengquan,huangzuming,enmengyi,hanjunyu,dingerrui}@baidu.com
liangborong@stu.xmu.edu.cn dxh@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous scene text detection methods have progressed
substantially over the past years. However, limited by the
receptive field of CNNs and the simple representations like
rectangle bounding box or quadrangle adopted to describe
text, previous methods may fall short when dealing with
more challenging text instances, such as extremely long text
and arbitrarily shaped text. To address these two problems,
we present a novel text detector namely LOMO, which localizes the text progressively for multiple times (or in other
word, LOok More than Once). LOMO consists of a direct
regressor (DR), an iterative refinement module (IRM) and
a shape expression module (SEM). At first, text proposals
in the form of quadrangle are generated by DR branch.
Next, IRM progressively perceives the entire long text by
iterative refinement based on the extracted feature blocks
of preliminary proposals. Finally, a SEM is introduced to
reconstruct more precise representation of irregular text by
considering the geometry properties of text instance, including text region, text center line and border offsets. The
state-of-the-art results on several public benchmarks including ICDAR2017-RCTW, SCUT-CTW1500, Total-Text,
ICDAR2015 and ICDAR17-MLT confirm the striking robustness and effectiveness of LOMO.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has drawn much attention in both
academic communities and industries due to its ubiquitous
real-world applications such as scene understanding, product search, and autonomous driving. Localizing text regions
is the premise of any text reading system, and its quality will
greatly affect the performance of text recognition. Recently
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Borong Liang is an intern
at Baidu Inc.
† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Two challenges of text detection: (a) The limitation of
receptive field size of CNN; (b) Comparison of different representations for text instances.

general object detection algorithms have achieved good performance along with the renaissance of CNNs. However,
the specific properties of scene text, for instance, significant
variations in color, scale, orientation, aspect ratio and shape,
make it obviously different from general objects. Most of
existing text detection methods [14, 15, 24, 42, 8] achieve
good performance in a controlled environment where text
instances have regular shapes and aspect ratios, e.g., the
cases in ICDAR 2015 [12]. Nevertheless, due to the limited receptive field size of CNNs and the text representation
forms, these methods fail to detect more complex scene text,
especially the extremely long text and arbitrarily shaped
text in datasets such as ICDAR2017-RCTW [31], SCUTCTW1500 [39], Total-Text [2] and ICDAR2017-MLT [26].
When detecting extremely long text, previous text detection methods like EAST [42] and Deep Regression [8] fail
to provide a complete bounding box proposal as the blue
box shown in Fig. 1 (a), since that the size of whole text instance is far beyond the receptive field size of text detectors.
CNNs fail to encode sufficient information to capture the
long distant dependency. In Fig. 1 (a), the regions in grids
mainly represent the receptive field of the central point with
corresponding color. The blue quadrangle in Fig. 1 (a) represents the predicted box of mainstream one-shot text detectors [42, 8]. The mainstream methods force the detectors to
localize text of different length with only once perception,
110552

