Feature Transfer Learning for Face Recognition with Under-Represented Data
Xi Yin†∗, Xiang Yu‡ , Kihyuk Sohn‡ , Xiaoming Liu† and Manmohan Chandraker§‡
†
Michigan State University
‡
NEC Laboratories America
§
University of California, San Diego

800

Despite the large volume of face recognition datasets,
there is a signiﬁcant portion of subjects, of which the samples are insufﬁcient and thus under-represented. Ignoring
such signiﬁcant portion results in insufﬁcient training data.
Training with under-represented data leads to biased classiﬁers in conventionally-trained deep networks. In this paper,
we propose a center-based feature transfer framework to
augment the feature space of under-represented subjects
from the regular subjects that have sufﬁciently diverse samples. A Gaussian prior of the variance is assumed across
all subjects and the variance from regular ones are transferred to the under-represented ones. This encourages the
under-represented distribution to be closer to the regular
distribution. Further, an alternating training regimen is proposed to simultaneously achieve less biased classiﬁers and
a more discriminative feature representation. We conduct
ablative study to mimic the under-represented datasets by
varying the portion of under-represented classes on the MSCeleb-1M dataset. Advantageous results on LFW, IJB-A and
MS-Celeb-1M demonstrate the effectiveness of our feature
transfer and training strategy, compared to both general
baselines and state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, our feature transfer successfully presents smooth visual interpolation, which conducts disentanglement to preserve identity of
a class while augmenting its feature space with non-identity
variations such as pose and lighting.

600

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the ongoing success stories in
the deep learning era, yielding very high accuracy on several
benchmarks [12, 20, 21]. However, it remains undetermined
how deep learning classiﬁers for ﬁne-grained recognition
are trained to maximally exploit real-world data. While
it is known that recognition engines are data-hungry and
∗ Main part of the work is done when Xi was an intern at NEC Laboratories America.

# images

Abstract

400
200
0

00

5000 ID
class

(a)

10000
10000

classifier weight norm

{yinxi1,liuxm}@cse.msu.edu, {xiangyu,ksohn,manu}@nec-labs.com

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

00

norm varies
1008

5000 ID
class

10449
10000

(b)

(c)
(d)
Figure 1. Illustration of the UR data problem and our proposed
solution. (a) The data distribution of CASIA-WebFace dataset [47].
(b) Classiﬁer weight norm varies across classes in proportion to
their volume. (c) Weight norm for regular class 1008 is larger than
UR class 10449, causing a bias in the decision boundary (dashed
line) towards ID 10449. (d) Data re-sampling solves the classiﬁer
bias to some extent. However, the variance of ID 1008 is much
larger than ID 10449. We augment the feature space of ID 1008
(dashed ellipsoid) and propose improved training strategies, which
corrects the classiﬁer bias and learns a better feature representation.

keep improving with more volume, mechanisms to derive
beneﬁts from the vast diverse data are relatively unexplored.
In particular, as discussed by [18], there is a non-negligible
part of data that is under-represented (UR), where only a few
samples are available for each class.
It is evident that classiﬁers that ignore this UR data
likely imbibe hidden biases. Consider CASIA-Webface [47]
dataset as an example (Figure 1 (a)). About 39% of the 10K
subjects have less than 20 images. A simple solution is to
discard the UR classes, which results in insufﬁcient training
data. Besides reduction in the volume of data, the inherently
uneven sampling leads to bias in the weight norm distribution across regular and UR classes (Figure 1 (b,c)). Sampling

5704

