DeFusionNET: Defocus Blur Detection via Recurrently Fusing and Refining
Multi-scale Deep Features
Chang Tang1 , Xinzhong Zhu2 , Xinwang Liu3 , Lizhe Wang1 , Albert Zomaya4
1
2

School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China

College of Mathematics, Physics and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China
3

School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
4

School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

{tangchang@cug.edu.cn,zxz@zjnu.edu.cn,xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn,Lizhe.Wang@gmail.com,albert.zomaya@sydney.edu.au}

Abstract
Defocus blur detection aims to detect out-of-focus regions from an image. Although attracting more and more
attention due to its widespread applications, defocus blur
detection still confronts several challenges such as the interference of background clutter, sensitivity to scales and
missing boundary details of defocus blur regions. To deal
with these issues, we propose a deep neural network which
recurrently fuses and refines multi-scale deep features (DeFusionNet) for defocus blur detection. We firstly utilize a
fully convolutional network to extract multi-scale deep features. The features from bottom layers are able to capture
rich low-level features for details preservation, while the
features from top layers can characterize the semantic information to locate blur regions. These features from different
layers are fused as shallow features and semantic features,
respectively. After that, the fused shallow features are propagated to top layers for refining the fine details of detected
defocus blur regions, and the fused semantic features are
propagated to bottom layers to assist in better locating the
defocus regions. The feature fusing and refining are carried
out in a recurrent manner. Also, we finally fuse the output
of each layer at the last recurrent step to obtain the final
defocus blur map by considering the sensitivity to scales
of the defocus degree. Experiments on two commonly used
defocus blur detection benchmark datasets are conducted
to demonstrate the superority of DeFusionNet when compared with other 10 competitors. Code and more results
can be found at: http://tangchang.net

1. Introduction
As a common phenomenon, defocus blur occurs when
the objects of a scene are not exactly at the camera’s focus
distance. Defocus blur detection, which aims to detect the

(a) Input

(b) LBP

(c) HiFST

(d) BTBNet

(e) DeFusionNet

(f) GT

Figure 1. Some challenging cases for defocus blur detection. (a)
Input image, defocus blur detection maps obtained by (b) LBP
[41], (c) HiFST [1], (d) BTBNet [48], (e) our DeFusionNet, and
(f) ground truth (GT).

out-of-focus regions from an image, has obtained much attention due to its wide potential applications such as image
quality assessment [38, 32], salient object detection [9, 34],
image deblurring [17, 25], defocus magnification [33, 2]
and image refocusing [44, 45], just list a few.
In the past decades, a variety of defocus blur detection methods have been proposed. Based on the used
image features, these methods can be roughly classified
into two categories, i.e., traditional hand-crafted features
based methods and deep learning based methods. As to
the former kind of methods, they often extract features
such as gradient and frequency which can model the edge
changes since defocus blur usually blunts object edges in an
image[15, 50, 29, 37, 46, 49, 25, 19, 35, 24, 21]. Although
great success has been achieved by using these tradition-

2700

