PA3D: Pose-Action 3D Machine for Video Recognition
An Yan∗ 1,3
Yali Wang∗ 1
Zhifeng Li 2
Yu Qiao† 1,4
1
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 University of California San Diego 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recent studies have witnessed the successes of using 3D
CNNs for video action recognition. However, most 3D models are built upon RGB and optical flow streams, which may
not fully exploit pose dynamics, i.e., an important cue of
modeling human actions. To fill this gap, we propose a
concise Pose-Action 3D Machine (PA3D), which can effectively encode multiple pose modalities within a unified 3D
framework, and consequently learn spatio-temporal pose
representations for action recognition. More specifically,
we introduce a novel temporal pose convolution to aggregate spatial poses over frames. Unlike the classical temporal convolution, our operation can explicitly learn the
pose motions that are discriminative to recognize human actions. Extensive experiments on three popular benchmarks
(i.e., JHMDB, HMDB, and Charades) show that, PA3D outperforms the recent pose-based approaches. Furthermore,
PA3D is highly complementary to the recent 3D CNNs, e.g.,
I3D. Multi-stream fusion achieves the state-of-the-art performance on all evaluated data sets.

1. Introduction
Video action recognition has been recently investigated,
due to its wide applications in video surveillance, humancomputer interaction, etc. The advances in this area are
mainly driven by deep learning [2, 24, 35]. In particular, 3D
CNNs have proven effective to learn spatio-temporal representations of videos [2, 29, 36]. However, most of existing
approaches are mainly built upon two input types, namely
RGB and optical flows. This ignores another discriminative
action cue, i.e, human pose dynamics.
Alternatively, several pose-based approaches have been
developed for action recognition [3, 4, 5, 18], based on
the remarkable successes in human pose estimation [1, 38].
One attractive direction is pose dynamics encoding [3, 4],
∗ An Yan and Yali Wang are the equally-contributed first authors
(ayan@ucsd.edu, yl.wang@siat.ac.cn).
† Yu Qiao is the corresponding author (yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn).

which aggregates human poses of different frames as spatiotemporal representations for action recognition. However,
these approaches mainly depend on two-stream features of
the predefined human-pose patches [3] and/or learn pose
dynamics with the predefined encoding scheme. In this
case, pose representation and action recognition are isolated
without adaptive interactions, which may limit the power to
understand complex actions in the wild videos. More importantly, the current research of pose-based action recognition lacks a unified framework, i.e., a general semantic
stream which is complementary to two-stream 3D CNNs.
To address these difficulties, we propose a novel PoseAction 3D (PA3D) machine, which provides a seamless
workflow to encode spatio-temporal pose representations
for video action recognition. Specifically, PA3D consists
of three semantic modules, i.e., spatial pose CNN, temporal
pose convolution, and action CNN. First, spatial pose CNN
can robustly extract different modalities of pose heatmaps
(i.e., joints, part affinity fields, and convolutional features)
from wild videos. Second, temporal pose convolution can
adaptively aggregate spatial pose heatmaps over frames,
which generates a spatio-temporal pose representation for
each pose modality. Finally, action CNN takes the learned
pose representation as input to recognize human actions.
Overall, we make three contributions in this paper.
First, PA3D is a concise 3D CNN framework, which
can achieve the learning efficiency by factorizing semantic
task (pose/action), convolution operation (spatial/temporal),
pose modality (joints/part affinity fields/convolutional features) within a multi-level fashion. In this case, PA3D can
flexibly encode various pose dynamics as a discriminative
cue to classify complex actions. Second, we propose a
novel temporal pose convolution operation, which mainly
consists of temporal association and semantic convolution
to encode pose motions. Different from the traditional temporal convolution in 3D CNNs, our temporal pose convolution can learn a spatio-temporal semantic representation to
explicitly describe pose motions. Moreover, our temporal
dilation design allows this convolution to capture complex
actions with multi-scale pose dynamics. Hence, it is more

7922

