Look Back and Predict Forward in Image Captioning
Yu Qin1,2 , Jiajun Du1 , Yonghua Zhang2 , Hongtao Lu1∗
1
Key Lab of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction and Cognitive Engineering,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
AI-Lab Visual Search Team, Bytedance
{qinyu123,dujiajun,htlu}@sjtu.edu.cn, {mpeg21}@hotmail.com

Abstract
Most existing attention-based methods on image captioning focus on the current word and visual information
in one time step and generate the next word, without considering the visual and linguistic coherence. We propose
Look Back (LB) method to embed visual information from
the past and Predict Forward (PF) approach to look into
future. LB method introduces attention value from the previous time step into the current attention generation to suit
visual coherence of human. PF model predicts the next two
words in one time step and jointly employs their probabilities for inference. Then the two approaches are combined
together as LBPF to further integrate visual information
from the past and linguistic information in the future to improve image captioning performance. All the three methods
are applied on a classic base decoder, and show remarkable
improvements on MSCOCO dataset with small increments
on parameter counts. Our LBPF model achieves BLEU-4
/ CIDEr / SPICE scores of 37.4 / 116.4 / 21.2 with crossentropy loss and 38.3 / 127.6 / 22.0 with CIDEr optimization. Our three proposed methods can be easily applied
on most attention-based encoder-decoder models for image
captioning.

1. Introduction
Image caption generation is to generate a sentence to describe an image in natural language from its visual contents
and has attracted increasing attention in computer vision
field. This task combines image understanding and natural
language processing methods to predict an informative and
fluent caption. The generated texts can do great help for
people with visual impairment and image searching problems. Caption generation is a challenging task. First, the
image needs to be well understood and the primary infor∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed Look Back and Predict Forward (LBPF) method. The same color of LSTM2 and Att indicates
they share the same parameters. Et denotes the word embedding
of yt . The Att layer takes both hidden state h and previous attention result attt−1 as input to predict the current attention value,
′
which shows the look-back part. The network predicts yt+1
and
′
yt+2 at the same timestep, and shares the Att and LSTM2 parameters, which shows the predict-forward part.

mation should be extracted as features for text generation.
Second, a language model should be employed to identify
concrete information from the extracted features and generate descriptive texts. In the past few years, many neural
encoder-decoder models [27, 25, 28] have been proposed to
solve this problem, where encoder extracts semantic embeddings from the image based on Convolutional Neural
Network (CNNs) and decoder predicts the texts using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs).
Attention mechanism is first introduced into this task

8367

