Mutual Learning of Complementary Networks via Residual Correction for
Improving Semi-Supervised Classification

1

Si Wu12 Jichang Li1 Cheng Liu2 Zhiwen Yu1 Hau-San Wong2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cslijichang@mail.scut.edu.cn, cliu272-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
zhwyu@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep mutual learning jointly trains multiple essential networks having similar properties to improve semisupervised classification. However, the commonly used
consistency regularization between the outputs of the networks may not fully leverage the difference between them.
In this paper, we explore how to capture the complementary information to enhance mutual learning. For this purpose, we propose a complementary correction network (CCN), built on top of the essential networks, to learn the
mapping from the output of one essential network to the
ground truth label, conditioned on the features learnt by
another. To make the second essential network increasingly
complementary to the first one, this network is supervised
by the corrected predictions. As a result, minimizing the
prediction divergence between the two complementary networks can lead to significant performance gains in semisupervised learning. Our experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed approach clearly improves mutual learning between essential networks, and achieves state-of-theart results on multiple semi-supervised classification benchmarks. In particular, the test error rates are reduced from
previous 21.23% and 14.65% to 12.05% and 10.37% on
CIFAR-10 with 1000 and 2000 labels, respectively.

1. Introduction
One of the main limitations of applying deep convolutional networks [16] [36] [12] is the need for massive collection of labeled images. To bypass expensive manual
annotations, many studies have been performed on semisupervised learning [21] [5] [40] [2], such that the models can be trained on partially labeled data, since it is more
practical to expect that only a small fraction of samples
can receive human annotations. In order to use unlabeled
data to improve the generalization capability of classifiers,

Figure 1. An example to illustrate how the proposed CCN improves semi-supervised classification on CIFAR-10 with 1000 labels (classes 0-9 denote ‘plane’, ‘auto’, ‘bird’, ‘cat’, ‘deer’, ‘dog’,
‘frog’, ‘horse’, ‘ship’ and ‘truck’, respectively). CCN learns the
mapping from the raw output (input of the softmax layer) of one
network (Net 1) to the ground truth label, conditioned on the features learnt by another network (Net 2). According to the raw
output, the ‘ship’ image is misidentified as ‘truck’. CCN is able to
produce a compensatory residual to correct the misclassification.

semi-supervised methods rely on an important assumption
that it is more likely for neighboring data points to belong
to the same class, which means that the decision boundaries should be located in low-density regions. There are
many deep models that have been developed based on this
assumption, such as [35] [25] [34]. The prediction of a classifier should be consistent on the unlabeled data irrespective
of whether perturbations have been added. Previous methods including Temporal Ensembling [18], virtual adversarial training (VAT) [26] and adversarial dropout (VAdD) [29]
follow similar principles. On the other hand, mutual learning between separate networks is also effective for determining more reliable decision boundaries. Recent methods, such as dual learning [11], Mean-Teacher [38] and deep
mutual learning (DML) [42], have brought improvement in
semi-supervised classification. Most of them penalize inconsistent predictions of different networks on unlabeled
data. However, these methods only consider the difference
between them, while ignoring the complementarity.
We are concerned with the task of improving mutual
16500

