Retrieval-Augmented Convolutional Neural Networks
against Adversarial Examples
Jake Zhao (Junbo) ∗
New York University
j.zhao@nyu.edu

Kyunghyun Cho
New York University & Facebook AI Research
CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose a retrieval-augmented convolutional network (RaCNN) and propose to train it with local mixup,
a novel variant of the recently proposed mixup algorithm.
The proposed hybrid architecture combining a convolutional network and an off-the-shelf retrieval engine was designed to mitigate the adverse effect of off-manifold adversarial examples, while the proposed local mixup addresses
on-manifold ones by explicitly encouraging the classifier to
locally behave linearly on the data manifold. Our evaluation of the proposed approach against seven readilyavailable adversarial attacks on three datasets–CIFAR-10,
SVHN and ImageNet–demonstrate the improved robustness
compared to a vanilla convolutional network, and comparable performance with the state-of-the-art reactive defense
approaches.

1. Introduction
Since the initial investigation in [35], adversarial examples have drawn a large interest. Various methods for both
generating adversarial examples as well as protecting a classifier from them have been proposed. According to [9], adversarial examples can be categorized into those off the data
manifold, which is defined as a manifold on which training
examples lie, and those on the data manifold. Off-manifold
adversarial examples occur as the classifier does not have a
chance to observe any off-manifold examples during training, which is a natural consequence from the very definition of the data manifold. On-manifold adversarial examples however exist between training examples on the data
manifold. There are two causes behind this phenomenon;
(1) the sparsity of training examples and (2) the non-smooth
behavior of the classifier on the data manifold.
We propose to tackle both off- and on-manifold adversarial examples by incorporating an off-the-shelf retrieval
∗ Work done while the author worked at Facebook AI Research.

mechanism which indexes a large set of examples and training this combination of a deep neural network classifier and
the retrieval engine to behave linearly on the data manifold
using a novel variant of the recently proposed mixup algorithm [39], to which we refer as “local mixup.”
The retrieval mechanism efficiently selects a subset of
neighboring examples from a candidate set near the input.
These neighboring examples are used as a local approximation to the data manifold in the form of a feature-space
convex hull onto which the input is projected. The classifier then makes a decision based on this projected input.
This addresses off-manifold adversarial examples. Within
this feature-space convex hull, we encourage the classifier
to behave linearly by using local mixup to further address
on-manifold adversarial examples.
We evaluate the proposed approach, called a retrievalaugmented classifier, with a deep convolutional network [22] on object recognition. We extensively test the
retrieval-augmented convolutional network (RaCNN) on
datasets with varying scales; CIFAR-10 [20], SVHN [26]
as well as ImageNet [7], against seven readily-available adversarial attacks including both white-box (FGSM, iFGSM,
DeepFool, L-BFGS, CW and PGD) and black-box attacks
(Boundary). Our experiments reveal that the RaCNN is
more robust to these attacks than the vanilla convolutional
network, and also achieve comparable robustness with other
reactive state-of-the-art defense methods. To the best of our
knowledge, RaCNN by far achieves the best results among
the proactive defense methods.

2. Retrieval-Augmented CNN
In [9], it was recently demonstrated that adversarial examples exist both on and off the data manifold. This result
suggests that it is necessary to tackle both types of adversarial examples to improve the robustness of a deep neural network based classifier to adversarial examples. In this
section, we describe our approach toward building a more
robust classifier by combining an off-the-shelf retrieval en111563

