High Flux Passive Imaging with Single-Photon Sensors
Atul Ingle

Andreas Velten†

Mohit Gupta†

{ingle,velten,mgupta37}@wisc.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are an emerging technology with a unique capability of capturing individual photons with high timing precision. SPADs are being used in several active imaging systems (e.g., fluorescence lifetime microscopy and LiDAR), albeit mostly limited to low photon flux settings. We propose passive freerunning SPAD (PF-SPAD) imaging, an imaging modality
that uses SPADs for capturing 2D intensity images with unprecedented dynamic range under ambient lighting, without any active light source. Our key observation is that
the precise inter-photon timing measured by a SPAD can be
used for estimating scene brightness under ambient lighting
conditions, even for very bright scenes. We develop a theoretical model for PF-SPAD imaging, and derive a scene
brightness estimator based on the average time of darkness
between successive photons detected by a PF-SPAD pixel.
Our key insight is that due to the stochastic nature of photon
arrivals, this estimator does not suffer from a hard saturation limit. Coupled with high sensitivity at low flux, this
enables a PF-SPAD pixel to measure a wide range of scene
brightnesses, from very low to very high, thereby achieving
extreme dynamic range. We demonstrate an improvement
of over 2 orders of magnitude over conventional sensors by
imaging scenes spanning a dynamic range of 106 : 1.

1. Introduction
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) can count individual photons and capture their temporal arrival statistics with very high precision [7]. Due to this capability,
SPADs are widely used in low light scenarios [25, 3, 1],
LiDAR [20, 29] and non-line of sight imaging [6, 12, 26].
In these applications, SPADs are used in synchronization
with an active light source (e.g., a pulsed laser). In this
paper, we propose passive free-running SPAD (PF-SPAD)
imaging, where SPADs are used in a free-running mode,
with the goal of capturing 2D intensity images of scenes
† Equal contribution.
This research was supported in part by ONR grants N00014-15-1-2652 and
N00014-16-1-2995 and DARPA grant HR0011-16-C-0025.

under passive lighting, without an actively controlled light
source. Although SPADs have so far been limited to low
flux settings, using the timing statistics of photon arrivals,
PF-SPAD imaging can successfully capture much higher
flux levels than previously thought possible.
We build a detailed theoretical model and derive a scene
brightness estimator for PF-SPAD imaging that, unlike a
conventional sensor pixel, does not suffer from full well
capacity limits [11] and can measure high incident flux.
Therefore, a PF-SPAD remains sensitive to incident light
throughout the exposure time, even under very strong incident flux. This enables imaging scenes with large brightness variations, from extreme dark to very bright. Imagine
an autonomous car driving out of a dark tunnel on a bright
sunny day, or a robot inspecting critical machine parts made
of metal with strong specular reflections. These scenarios
require handling large illumination changes, that are often
beyond the capabilities of conventional sensors.
Intriguing Characteristics of PF-SPAD Imaging: Unlike
conventional sensor pixels that have a linear input-output response (except past saturation), a PF-SPAD pixel has a nonlinear response curve with an asymptotic saturation limit as
illustrated in Figure 1. After each photon detection event,
the SPAD enters a fixed dead time interval where it cannot
detect additional photons. The non-linear response is a consequence of the PF-SPAD adaptively missing a fraction of
the incident photons as the incident flux increases (see Figure 1 top-right). Theoretically, a PF-SPAD sensor does not
saturate even at extremely high brightness values. Instead,
it reaches a soft saturation limit beyond which it still stays
sensitive, albeit with a lower signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
This soft saturation point is reached considerably past the
saturation limits of conventional sensors, thus, enabling PFSPADs to reliably measure high flux values.
Various noise sources in PF-SPAD imaging also exhibit
counter-intuitive behavior. For example, while in conventional imaging, photon noise increases monotonically (as
square-root) with the incident flux, in PF-SPAD imaging,
the photon noise first increases with incident flux, and then
decreases after reaching a maximum value, until eventually,
it becomes even lower than the quantization noise. Quantization noise dominates at very high flux levels. In contrast,
for conventional sensors, quantization noise affects SNR

6760

