ShieldNets: Defending Against Adversarial Attacks Using
Probabilistic Adversarial Robustness
Rajkumar Theagarajan∗† , 2 Ming Chen∗ , 1 Bir Bhanu and 3 Jing Zhang‡
Center for Research in Intelligent Systems, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521
2
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720
3
KLA Corporation, Milpitas, CA 95035
1

1

rthea001@ucr.edu, mingchen.chem@lbl.gov, bhanu@cris.ucr.edu, jing.zhang@kla-tencor.com

Abstract
Defending adversarial attack is a critical step towards
reliable deployment of deep learning empowered solutions
for industrial applications. Probabilistic adversarial robustness (PAR), as a theoretical framework, is introduced
to neutralize adversarial attacks by concentrating sample
probability to adversarial-free zones. Distinct to most of
the existing defense mechanisms that require modifying the
architecture/training of the target classifier which is not feasible in the real-world scenario, e.g., when a model has
already been deployed, PAR is designed in the first place
to provide proactive protection to an existing fixed model.
ShieldNet is implemented as a demonstration of PAR in this
work by using PixelCNN. Experimental results show that
this approach is generalizable, robust against adversarial
transferability and resistant to a wide variety of attacks on
the Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated impressive performance
on many important practical problems such as image [11],
video [8], audio [9] and text classification [2]. Despite
their outstanding performance, it has been recently shown
that deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial manipulation of their input which is intended to cause a misclassification [12, 25, 3]. These adversarial manipulations
are carefully crafted perturbations that are so subtle that a
human observer does not even notice the modification at
all, but can cause deep learning models to mis-classify the
input. Fig. 1(a) shows examples of original images from
the CIFAR10 [10] and Fashion-MNIST [30] testing datasets
that were correctly classified by a VGG [23] Convolutional
∗ Both authors contributed equally.
† This work was done in part as an internship at KLA Corporation.
‡ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Examples of original images from the CIFAR10 and
fashion-MNIST testing datasets correctly classified by VGG, (b)
generated perturbation for the corresponding images, (c) corresponding adversarial examples mis-classified by VGG.

Neural Network (CNN), (b) shows the adversarial perturbations crafted using attacks discussed in this literature and
(c) shows the adversarially perturbed images being misclassified using the same CNN.
16988

