Skeleton-Based Action Recognition with Directed Graph Neural Networks
Lei Shi1,2
Yifan Zhang1,2 *
Jian Cheng1,2,3
Hanqing Lu1,2
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{lei.shi, yfzhang, jcheng, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The skeleton data have been widely used for the action
recognition tasks since they can robustly accommodate dynamic circumstances and complex backgrounds. In existing
methods, both the joint and bone information in skeleton
data have been proved to be of great help for action recognition tasks. However, how to incorporate these two types
of data to best take advantage of the relationship between
joints and bones remains a problem to be solved. In this
work, we represent the skeleton data as a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) based on the kinematic dependency between
the joints and bones in the natural human body. A novel directed graph neural network is designed specially to extract
the information of joints, bones and their relationships and
make prediction based on the extracted features. In addition, to better fit the action recognition task, the topological
structure of the graph is made adaptive based on the training process, which brings notable improvement. Moreover,
the motion information of the skeleton sequence is exploited
and combined with the spatial information to further enhance the performance in a two-stream framework. Our final model is tested on two large-scale datasets, NTU-RGBD
and Skeleton-Kinetics, and exceeds state-of-the-art performance on both of them.

1. Introduction
Action recognition, which plays an essential role in
video surveillance and human-computer interaction, has
been widely investigated but not yet fully addressed [27,
31, 36, 5, 32, 38]. Compared with conventional processes
that use RGB images or videos for recognition, skeletonbased action recognition has drawn increasingly more attention since it is robust against changes in body scales,
motion speeds, camera viewpoints and interference of backgrounds. The skeleton data represent the human body as a
* Corresponding Author

sequence of coordinates of the major body joints, which can
be easily captured by the depth sensors (e.g., Kinetics) or
the pose estimation algorithms [4, 10].
Conventional methods for skeleton-based action recognition focus mainly on designing handcrafted features to
represent the skeleton [30, 8]. With the development of
deep-learning-based methods, the data-driven methods have
become the mainstream [7, 25, 20, 28, 37, 18, 19, 14, 13,
21, 17, 16, 34, 29, 3]. The most widely used models in
deep-learning-based methods are recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and graph
convolutional networks (GCNs), where the coordinates of
joints are represented as vector sequences, pseudo-images
and graphs, respectively.
Recently, bone information, which represents the directions and lengths of bones, has been proved to be a good
modality for skeleton-based action recognition [26, 18].
This information is intuitive since humans naturally evaluate action according to the directions and positions of bones
in the human body rather than the positions of joints. Moreover, it has been proved that joint and bone information are
complementary to each other and combining them can lead
to further improvement of recognition performance. For
the natural human body, joints and bones are strongly coupled, and the position of each joint (bone) is actually determined by their connected bones (joints). For example,
the position of the elbow joint depends on the location of
the upper arm bone, which also determines the location of
the forearm bone at the same time. Existing graph-based
methods usually represent the skeleton as an undirected
graph and model the bones and joints with two separate
networks, which cannot fully exploit these dependencies
between joints and bones. To solve this problem, we represent the skeleton as a directed acyclic graph with joints
as vertexes and bones as edges, where the dependencies between the joints and bones can be easily modeled by the
directed edges of the graph. Furthermore, a novel directed
graph neural network (DGNN) is designed to model the
constructed directed graph, which can propagate the infor-

7912

