CANet: Class-Agnostic Segmentation Networks with Iterative Refinement and
Attentive Few-Shot Learning
Chi Zhang1 ,

Guosheng Lin1∗, Fayao Liu2 , Rui Yao3 , Chunhua Shen2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
3
China University of Mining and Technology, China
E-mail: chi007@e.ntu.edu.sg , gslin@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Recent progress in semantic segmentation is driven by
deep Convolutional Neural Networks and large-scale labeled image datasets. However, data labeling for pixelwise segmentation is tedious and costly. Moreover, a trained
model can only make predictions within a set of pre-defined
classes. In this paper, we present CANet, a class-agnostic
segmentation network that performs few-shot segmentation
on new classes with only a few annotated images available. Our network consists of a two-branch dense comparison module which performs multi-level feature comparison between the support image and the query image, and
an iterative optimization module which iteratively refines
the predicted results. Furthermore, we introduce an attention mechanism to effectively fuse information from multiple support examples under the setting of k-shot learning.
Experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 show that our method
achieves a mean Intersection-over-Union score of 55.4%
for 1-shot segmentation and 57.1% for 5-shot segmentation,
outperforming state-of-the-art methods by a large margin of
14.6% and 13.2%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks have made significant breakthroughs in many visual understanding tasks
including image classification [13, 9, 30], object detection [27, 8, 26], and semantic segmentation [16, 2, 20]. One
crucial reason is the availability of large-scale datasets such
as ImageNet [4] that enable the training of deep models.
However, data labeling is expensive, particularly for dense
prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation and instance
segmentation. In contrast to machine learning algorithms,
humans are able to segment a new concept from the image easily when only seeing a few examples. The gap be∗ Guosheng Lin is the corresponding author.

Support set

Query set

IOM

IOM

Iter 0

Iter 1

…
…

IOM

Iter 𝒏

Figure 1 – Overview of our proposed network for 1-shot segmentation.
Our framework consists of a dense comparison module (DCM) and an
iterative optimization module (IOM). Given only one annotated training
image, our network is able to segment test images with new classes and
iteratively optimize the results.

tween humans and machine learning algorithms motivates
the study of few-shot learning that aims to learn a model
which can be generalized well to new classes with scarce
labeled training data.
In this paper, we undertake the task of few-shot semantic segmentation that only uses a few annotated training
images to perform segmentation on new classes. Previous work [29, 24, 5] on this task follows the design of
two-branch structure which includes a support branch and
a query branch. The support branch aims to extract information from the support set to guide segmentation in the
query branch. We also adopt the two-branch design in our
framework to solve the few-shot segmentation problem.
Our network includes a two-branch dense comparison
module, in which a shared feature extractor extracts representations from the query set and the support set for comparison. The design of the dense comparison module takes
inspiration from metric learning [37, 31] on image classification tasks where a distance function evaluates the similarity between images. However, different from image classification where each image has a label, image segmentation needs to make predictions on data with structured representation. It is difficult to directly apply metric learning
to dense prediction problems. To solve this, one straight-

5217

