Recursive Visual Attention in Visual Dialog
Yulei Niu1,2 Hanwang Zhang2 Manli Zhang1 Jianhong Zhang1 Zhiwu Lu1∗ Ji-Rong Wen1
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
{niu, manlizhang, jianhong, luzhiwu, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Visual dialog is a challenging vision-language task,
which requires the agent to answer multi-round questions
about an image. It typically needs to address two major
problems: (1) How to answer visually-grounded questions,
which is the core challenge in visual question answering
(VQA); (2) How to infer the co-reference between questions
and the dialog history. An example of visual co-reference
is: pronouns (e.g., “they”) in the question (e.g., “Are
they on or off?”) are linked with nouns (e.g., “lamps”)
appearing in the dialog history (e.g., “How many lamps
are there?”) and the object grounded in the image. In this
work, to resolve the visual co-reference for visual dialog,
we propose a novel attention mechanism called Recursive
Visual Attention (RvA). Speciﬁcally, our dialog agent
browses the dialog history until the agent has sufﬁcient
conﬁdence in the visual co-reference resolution, and reﬁnes
the visual attention recursively. The quantitative and
qualitative experimental results on the large-scale VisDial
v0.9 and v1.0 datasets demonstrate that the proposed RvA
not only outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, but also
achieves reasonable recursion and interpretable attention
maps without additional annotations. The code is available
at https://github.com/yuleiniu/rva.

1. Introduction
Vision and language understanding has become
an attractive and challenging interdisciplinary ﬁeld
in computer vision and natural language processing.
Thanks to the rapid development of deep neural networks
and the high quality of large-scale real-world datasets,
researchers have achieved inspiring progress in a range
of vision-language tasks, including visual relation
detection [21, 19, 39], image captioning [36, 8, 38, 3],
referring expression grounding [24, 25, 40], and visual
question answering (VQA) [6, 33, 11, 32]. However,
∗ Corresponding author.

Z‫ۥـ‬2ǯǶƽƪǬƪǜǖǐͷ‫ـ‬ƟƪƦ‫ۮ‬
‫|ۥـ‬ƪǯۭ
Z‫ۥف‬vƽƑǶǯǀͼƪǀǯǀǶ‫ۮ‬
‫ۥف‬Zǹƪƪǖ‫ۦ‬ǕƑͷƟƪۭ
Z‫ۥق‬/ǜͱǕƑǖͷǐƑǕǩǯƑǬƪǶƽƪǬƪ‫ۮ‬
‫ۭفۥق‬
Z‫ۥك‬vƽƑǶǜǐǜǬƑǬƪǶƽƪͷ‫ۮ‬
‫(ۥك‬Ǭƪƪǖۭ
Z‫ۥل‬ǬƪǶƽƪͷǜǖǜǬǜƶƶ‫ۮ‬

‫ـ‬ǀǯǜǖۭ
GHFRGH
MRLQWHPEHGGLQJ

ǬƪǶƽƪͷǜǖǜǬǜƶƶ‫ۮ‬

vƽƑǶƠǜǐǜǬƑǬƪǶƽƪͷ‫ۮ‬

/ǜͱǕƑǖͷǐƑǕǩǯƑǬƪ
ǶƽƪǬƪ‫ۮ‬

Figure 1. Illustration of the intuition of Recursive Visual Attention
in visual dialog. When our dialog agent meets an ambiguous
question (e.g., “Are they on or off?”), it will recursively review
the dialog history (see the ﬁrst column) and reﬁne the visual
attention (see the third column), until it can resolve the visual
co-reference (e.g., How many lamps are there?). The attention
maps tagged with green check mark represent reasonable recursive
visual attention, while those tagged with red cross mark in the
dashed box represent false question-guided visual attention.

comprehension and reasoning in vision and natural
language are still far from being resolved, especially
when the AI agent interacts with human in a continuous
communication, such as vision-and-language navigation [4]
and visual dialog [9].
Visual dialog is one of the prototype tasks introduced in
recent years [9, 10]. It can be viewed as the generalization
of VQA, which requires the agent to answer the question
about an image [6] or video [33] after comprehending and
reasoning out of visual and textual contents. Different from
one-round VQA, visual dialog is a multi-round conversation
about an image. Therefore, one of the key challenges in
visual dialog is visual co-reference resolution, since 98%
of dialogs and 38% of questions in the large-scale VisDial
dataset have at least one pronoun (e.g., “it”, “they”, “this”,
“he”, “she”) [9]. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1,
16679

