Deep Geometric Prior for Surface Reconstruction
Francis Williams1 , Teseo Schneider1 , Claudio Silva 1 , Denis Zorin1 , Joan Bruna1 , and Daniele Panozzo1
1

New York University

francis.williams@nyu.edu, teseo.schneider@nyu.edu, csilva@nyu.edu, dzorin@cs.nyu.edu,
bruna@cims.nyu.edu, panozzo@nyu.edu

Abstract

retains critical surface features and approximates the sampled surface well, is a pervasive and challenging problem.

The reconstruction of a discrete surface from a point
cloud is a fundamental geometry processing problem that
has been studied for decades, with many methods developed. We propose the use of a deep neural network as a
geometric prior for surface reconstruction. Specifically, we
overfit a neural network representing a local chart parameterization to part of an input point cloud using the Wasserstein distance as a measure of approximation. By jointly
fitting many such networks to overlapping parts of the point
cloud, while enforcing a consistency condition, we compute
a manifold atlas. By sampling this atlas, we can produce a
dense reconstruction of the surface approximating the input
cloud. The entire procedure does not require any training
data or explicit regularization, yet, we show that it is able
to perform remarkably well: not introducing typical overfitting artifacts, and approximating sharp features closely at
the same time. We experimentally show that this geometric prior produces good results for both man-made objects
containing sharp features and smoother organic objects, as
well as noisy inputs. We compare our method with a number
of well-known reconstruction methods on a standard surface reconstruction benchmark.

Different approaches have been proposed, mostly
grouped into several categories: (1) using the points to define a volumetric scalar function whose 0 level-set corresponds to the desired surface, (2) attempt to ”connect the
dots” in a globally consistent way to create a mesh, (3) fit a
set of primitive shapes so that the boundary of their union
is close to the point cloud, and (4) fit a set of patches to the
point cloud approximating the surface.

1. Introduction
3D geometry is commonly acquired in the form of collections of (possibly incomplete) range images (laser scanning, structured light, etc) or measurements of more complex structure (LIDAR). Unordered set of points (point
clouds) is a commonly used representation of combined
registered results of scanning objects or scenes. Point
clouds can be obtained in other ways, e.g., by sampling an
implicit surface using ray casting. Computing a continuous representation of a surface from the discrete point cloud
(e.g., a polygonal mesh, an implicit surface, or a set of parameteric patches) in way that is robust to noise, and yet

We propose a novel method, based, on the one hand, on
constructing a manifold atlas commonly used in differential geometry to define a surface, and, on the other hand, on
observed remarkable properties of deep image priors [37],
using an overfitted neural network for interpolation. We
define a set of 2D parametrizations, each one mapping a
square in parametric space to a region of a surface, ensuring consistency between neighbouring patches. This problem is inherently ambiguous: there are many possible valid
parametrizations, and only a small subset will correspond to
a faithful representation of the underlying surface. We compute each parametrization by overfiting a network to a part
of the point cloud, while enforcing consistency conditions
between different patches. We observe that the result is a
reconstruction which is superior quantitatively and qualitatively to commonly used surface reconstruction methods.
We use the Wasserstein distance as a training loss, which
is naturally robust to outliers, and has the added advantage
of providing us explicit correspondences between the parametric domain coordinates and the fitted points, allowing us
to explicitly measure, and thus minimize, the disagreement
between neighbouring patches covering a surface.
We use a standard shape reconstruction benchmark to
compare our method with 12 competing methods, showing
that, despite the conceptual simplicity of our algorithm, our
reconstructions are superior in terms of quantitative and visual quality.
110130

