Fast User-Guided Video Object Segmentation
by Interaction-and-Propagation Networks

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation is a task of separating a foreground object from a video sequence. It is an essential task
in video editing with a wide range of applications from the
consumer-level video editing to the professional TV and
movie post-production. This problem is often solved by
either a fully-automatic approach (i.e. unsupervised foreground object segmentation [35]) or a semi-supervised approach (i.e. ground-truth object masks are given on few
frames [5, 28]). However, both solutions have limitations
in reflecting a user’s intention or refining incorrect estimations.
Interactive video segmentation can potentially resolve
this issue by allowing user intervention given in a userfriendly form such as scribbles [37, 31, 2]. However, existing interactive methods require a lot of user interactions
to obtain results with acceptable quality for video editing
applications. In this paper, we aim to develop an interactive

Round 1

3

…

Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University

First interaction

50

40

…

𝑖

: User interaction at 𝑖 "# frame

50

…

…
…

…

…

…

…
Second interaction

…

We present a deep learning method for the interactive
video object segmentation. Our method is built upon two
core operations, interaction and propagation, and each operation is conducted by Convolutional Neural Networks.
The two networks are connected both internally and externally so that the networks are trained jointly and interact with each other to solve the complex video object segmentation problem. We propose a new multi-round training scheme for the interactive video object segmentation so
that the networks can learn how to understand the user’s
intention and update incorrect estimations during the training. At the testing time, our method produces high-quality
results and also runs fast enough to work with users interactively. We evaluated the proposed method quantitatively
on the interactive track benchmark at the DAVIS Challenge
2018. We outperformed other competing methods by a significant margin in both the speed and the accuracy. We also
demonstrate that our method works well with real user interactions.

Frame index

Round 2

Abstract

Ning Xu
Adobe Research

…

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

…

Seoung Wug Oh
Yonsei University

: Temporal propagation through frames

Figure 1: We propose a method that can estimate object
masks in a video by interacting with a user. The mask of a
target object is generated using user annotations (e.g. scribbles at frame 3), and the computed mask is propagated to
compute the masks for the entire video. The user can repeatedly provide additional feedback (e.g. scribbles on false
positive and false negative at frame 50) to refine the segmentation masks. Our method generates high-quality object
masks with minimal user interactions and time budget.

video object segmentation technique that can estimate accurate object masks in a video sequence with minimal user
interactions.
Interactive video cutout methods usually follow the procedure of the rotoscoping [4, 20], where a user sequentially
processes a video frame-by-frame. In this scenario, the user
verifies and updates the object mask with multiple interactions at every frame. This rotoscoping-style interaction requires a lot of effort and is more suitable for professional
uses that require high-quality results.
Recently, Caelles et al. [6] introduced another workflow
for the video object cutout that can minimize the user’s effort. In this scenario, which we call as the round-based interaction, the user provides annotations on a selected frame
and an algorithm computes the segmentation maps for all
video frames in a batch process. To refine the results, the
process of user annotation and segmentation map computations are repeatedd until the user is satisfied with the results.
This round-based interaction is useful for consumer-level
applications and rapid prototyping for professional usage,

5247

