Reliable and Efficient Image Cropping: A Grid Anchor based Approach
Hui Zeng1
1

Lida Li1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Zisheng Cao2
2

DJI Co.,Ltd

3

Lei Zhang1,3∗

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

{cshzeng, cslli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, zisheng.cao@dji.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Image cropping aims to improve the composition as well
as aesthetic quality of an image by removing extraneous
content from it. Existing image cropping databases provide only one or several human-annotated bounding boxes
as the groundtruth, which cannot reflect the non-uniqueness
and flexibility of image cropping in practice. The employed
evaluation metrics such as intersection-over-union cannot
reliably reflect the real performance of cropping models, either. This work revisits the problem of image cropping, and
presents a grid anchor based formulation by considering
the special properties and requirements (e.g., local redundancy, content preservation, aspect ratio) of image cropping. Our formulation reduces the searching space of candidate crops from millions to less than one hundred. Consequently, a grid anchor based cropping benchmark is constructed, where all crops of each image are annotated and
more reliable evaluation metrics are defined. We also design an effective and lightweight network module, which simultaneously considers the region of interest and region of
discard for more accurate image cropping. Our model can
stably output visually pleasing crops for images of different
scenes and run at a speed of 125 FPS.

1. Introduction
Cropping is an important and widely used operation to
improve the aesthetic quality of captured images. It aims to remove the extraneous contents of an image, change
its aspect ratio and consequently improve its composition
[37]. Since cropping is a high-frequency need in photography but a tedious job when a large number of images are
to be cropped, automatic image cropping has been attracting
much interest in both academia and industry in past decades
[4, 8, 20, 39, 13, 12, 1, 3, 5, 34, 2, 22].
Early researches on image cropping mostly focused on
cropping the major subject or important region of an image for small displays [4, 9] or generating image thumbnails
∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported by HK RGC General
Research Fund (PolyU 152135/16E).

Figure 1. The property of non-uniqueness of image cropping. Giv√
en a source image, many good crops (labeled with “ ”) can be obtained under different aspect ratios (e.g., 1:1, 4:3, 16:9). Even under the same aspect ratio, there are still multiple acceptable crops.
Regarding the three crops with 16:9 aspect ratio, by taking the
middle one as the groundtruth, the bottom one (a bad crop, labeled
with “×”) will have obviously larger IoU (intersection-over-union)
than the top one but with worse aesthetic quality. This shows that
IoU is not a reliable metric to evaluate cropping quality.

[33, 27]. Attention scores or saliency values were the principal concerns of these methods [30, 32]. With little consideration of the overall image composition, the attentionbased methods may lead to visually unpleasing outputs [39].
Moreover, user study was employed as the major criteria to
subjectively evaluate cropping performance, making it very
difficult to objectively compare different methods.
Recently, several benchmark databases have been released for image cropping [39, 13, 5]. On these databases, one or several bounding boxes were annotated by experienced human subjects as “groundtruth” crops for each
image. Two objective metrics, namely intersection-overunion (IoU) and boundary displacement error (BDE) [14],
were defined to evaluate the performance of image cropping models on these databases. These public benchmarks
enable many researchers to develop and test their cropping
models, significantly facilitating the research on automatic
image cropping [39, 11, 34, 5, 6, 10, 15, 22, 36].
Though many efforts have been made, there exists several intractable challenges caused by the special properties of
image cropping. As illustrated in Fig. 1, image cropping
is naturally a subjective and flexible task without unique
15949

