Deep Surface Normal Estimation with Hierarchical RGB-D Fusion
Jin Zeng1

Yanfeng Tong1,2∗ Yunmu Huang1∗ Qiong Yan1 Wenxiu Sun1
Jing Chen2 Yongtian Wang2
2
1
SenseTime Research
Beijing Institute of Technology

1

{zengjin, tongyanfeng, huangyunmu, yanqiong, sunwenxiu}@sensetime.com
2

{chen74jing29, wyt}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
The growing availability of commodity RGB-D cameras
has boosted the applications in the field of scene understanding. However, as a fundamental scene understanding task, surface normal estimation from RGB-D data lacks
thorough investigation. In this paper, a hierarchical fusion network with adaptive feature re-weighting is proposed
for surface normal estimation from a single RGB-D image.
Specifically, the features from color image and depth are
successively integrated at multiple scales to ensure global
surface smoothness while preserving visually salient details. Meanwhile, the depth features are re-weighted with
a confidence map estimated from depth before merging into
the color branch to avoid artifacts caused by input depth
corruption. Additionally, a hybrid multi-scale loss function
is designed to learn accurate normal estimation given noisy
ground-truth dataset. Extensive experimental results validate the effectiveness of the fusion strategy and the loss
design, outperforming state-of-the-art normal estimation
schemes.

1. Introduction
Per-pixel surface normal estimation has been extensively studied in the recent years. Previous works on normal estimation mostly assume single RGB image input
[8, 26, 1, 33], providing satisfying results in most cases
despite loss of shape features and erroneous results at the
highlight or dark areas, as shown in Fig. 1(c).
RGB-D cameras are now commercially available, leading to a great performance enhancement in the applications of scene understanding, e.g., semantic segmentation
[27, 5, 23], object detection [11, 20], 3D reconstruction
[15, 18, 12], etc. With the depth given by sensors, normal can be easily calculated via a least square optimization [21, 9] as used in the widely used NYUv2 dataset [22],
∗ indicates equal contribution.

(a) RGB Image

(b) Sensor Depth

(c) Using RGB

(d) Using Depth

(e) Early Fusion

(f) Hierarchical Fusion

Figure 1. Example in Matterport3D dataset. (a) RGB input; (b)
depth input; normal estimation with (c) single RGB [33], (d) depth
inpainting [9], (e) RGB-D early fusion [32], (f) proposed hierarchical RGB-D fusion.

but the quality of the normal suffers from the corruption in
depth, e.g., sensor noise along object edges or missing pixels due to glossy, black, transparent, and distant surfaces
[24], as shown in Fig. 1(d).
This motivates us to combine the advantages of color
and depth inputs while compensating for the deficiency of
each other in the task of normal estimation. Specifically,
the RGB information is utilized to fill the missing pixels in
depth; meanwhile the depth clue is merged into RGB results to enhance sharp edges and correct erroneous estimation, resulting in a complete normal map with fine details.
However, research on combining RGB and depth for normal estimation has not been extensively studied. To the best
of our knowledge, the only work considering RGB-D input
for normal estimation adopts early fusion, i.e., using depth
as an additional channel to the RGB input, leading to little
performance improvement compared with the methods using the RGB input only [32]. The lack of proper network
design for combining the geometric information in depth
and color image is an impediment to fully take advantage

6153

