MHP-VOS: Multiple Hypotheses Propagation for Video Object Segmentation
Shuangjie Xu1‡*
Daizong Liu1*
Linchao Bao2†
Wei Liu2
Pan Zhou1†
1
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Tencent AI Lab
{shuangjiexu, dzliu, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn

linchaobao@gmail.com

wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of semi-supervised video object
segmentation (VOS), where the masks of objects of interests are given in the ﬁrst frame of an input video. To deal
with challenging cases where objects are occluded or missing, previous work relies on greedy data association strategies that make decisions for each frame individually. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach to defer the decision
making for a target object in each frame, until a global
view can be established with the entire video being taken
into consideration. Our approach is in the same spirit as
Multiple Hypotheses Tracking (MHT) methods, making several critical adaptations for the VOS problem. We employ
the bounding box (bbox) hypothesis for tracking tree formation, and the multiple hypotheses are spawned by propagating the preceding bbox into the detected bbox proposals
within a gated region starting from the initial object mask
in the ﬁrst frame. The gated region is determined by a gating scheme which takes into account a more comprehensive
motion model rather than the simple Kalman ﬁltering model
in traditional MHT. To further design more customized algorithms tailored for VOS, we develop a novel mask propagation score instead of the appearance similarity score that
could be brittle due to large deformations. The mask propagation score, together with the motion score, determines
the afﬁnity between the hypotheses during tree pruning.
Finally, a novel mask merging strategy is employed to handle mask conﬂicts between objects. Extensive experiments
on challenging datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method, especially in the case of object missing.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is
the task to automatically segment the objects of interests
in a video given the annotations in the ﬁrst frame, which
is a fundamental task with wide applications in video editing, video summarization, action recognition, etc. Although
tremendous progress has been made with semantic segmen‡ Part of the work was done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
∗ Equal contributions.

† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Challenging examples handled by previous approaches.
In the ﬁrst example, the front object instance is segmented as two
different objects and the farther instance is missing in the result.
In the second example, the occluded instance and the re-appearing
instance are missing. In the last example, the smaller object near
the larger object is incorrectly segmented to be the larger one.

tation CNNs [24, 7, 8, 28] recently, VOS is still challenging in objects missing and association problems due to occlusions, large deformations, complex object interactions,
rapid motions, etc., as shown in Fig. 1.
To tackle these challenges, many recent works [22, 35,
25] resort to object proposal schemes [13, 34] to restore
missing objects or re-establish objects associations. In these
works, proposals of target objects are either generated individually in each frame [22, 35] by semantic detectors, or
further merged with a few neighboring frames [25]. However, these approaches rely on a greedy selection of the best
object proposal at each time step, for a given object, which
becomes a complication with utter dependence on a reliable Re-ID network [25] that can provide accurate similarity scores. In this paper, we instead deal with this problem
by employing a multiple hypotheses propagation approach,
which builds up a tracking tree for different hypotheses in
time steps, enabling us to defer the selection of the best object proposal for each target till a whole proposal tree along
temporal domain is established. This delayed decision making provides us a global view to determine data associations
in each frame by considering objects information over the
entire video, provably more reliable than greedy methods.
The idea of tracking using multiple hypotheses is not
new. In the seminal work by Cox and Hingorani [11], Multiple Hypotheses Tracking (MHT) was ﬁrst introduced to

314

