Memory In Memory: A Predictive Neural Network for Learning Higher-Order
Non-Stationarity from Spatiotemporal Dynamics
Yunbo Wang∗, Jianjin Zhang∗ , Hongyu Zhu, Mingsheng Long (B), Jianmin Wang, and Philip S. Yu
KLiss, MOE; BNRist; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
{wangyb15,zhang-jj16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Natural spatiotemporal processes exhibit complex nonstationarity in both space and time, where neighboring pixels
exhibit local dependencies, and their joint distributions are
∗ Equal contribution, in alphabetical order

t=20

Distributions

Frames

t=10

Mean

40

30
20
10

0
50
40
30

Std

Natural spatiotemporal processes can be highly nonstationary in many ways, e.g. the low-level non-stationarity
such as spatial correlations or temporal dependencies of
local pixel values; and the high-level variations such as the
accumulation, deformation or dissipation of radar echoes
in precipitation forecasting. From Cramér’s Decomposition
[4], any non-stationary process can be decomposed into
deterministic, time-variant polynomials, plus a zero-mean
stochastic term. By applying differencing operations appropriately, we may turn time-variant polynomials into a constant, making the deterministic component predictable.
However, most previous recurrent neural networks for
spatiotemporal prediction do not use the differential signals
effectively, and their relatively simple state transition functions prevent them from learning too complicated variations
in spacetime. We propose the Memory In Memory (MIM)
networks and corresponding recurrent blocks for this purpose. The MIM blocks exploit the differential signals between
adjacent recurrent states to model the non-stationary and approximately stationary properties in spatiotemporal dynamics with two cascaded, self-renewed memory modules. By
stacking multiple MIM blocks, we could potentially handle
higher-order non-stationarity. The MIM networks achieve
the state-of-the-art results on four spatiotemporal prediction
tasks across both synthetic and real-world datasets. We believe that the general idea of this work can be potentially
applied to other time-series forecasting tasks.

t=1

20
10
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Figure 1: An example of 20 consecutive radar maps to illustrate the
complicated non-stationarity in precipitation forecasting. First row:
radar maps, in which the whiter pixels show higher precipitation
probability. Second, third, last row: pixel values’ distributions,
means and standard deviations for corresponding local regions
that are identified by bounding boxes of different colors. Note
that different regions have different variation trends, making the
spatiotemporal prediction problem extremely challenging.

changing over time. Learning higher-order properties underlying the spatiotemporal non-stationarity is particularly
significant for many video prediction tasks. Examples include modeling highly complicated real-world systems such
as traffic flows [37, 35] and weather conditions [24, 32]. A
well-performed predictive model is expected to learn the
intrinsic variations in consecutive spatiotemporal context,

9154

