Learning Image and Video Compression through Spatial-Temporal Energy
Compaction
Zhengxue Cheng, Heming Sun, Masaru Takeuchi, Jiro Katto
Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
{zxcheng@asagi., hemingsun@aoni., masaru-t@aoni., katto@}waseda.jp

Abstract
Compression has been an important research topic for
many decades, to produce a significant impact on data
transmission and storage. Recent advances have shown a
great potential of learning image and video compression.
Inspired from related works, in this paper, we present an
image compression architecture using a convolutional autoencoder, and then generalize image compression to video
compression, by adding an interpolation loop into both
encoder and decoder sides. Our basic idea is to realize
spatial-temporal energy compaction in learning image and
video compression. Thereby, we propose to add a spatial energy compaction-based penalty into loss function, to
achieve higher image compression performance. Furthermore, based on temporal energy distribution, we propose
to select the number of frames in one interpolation loop,
adapting to the motion characteristics of video contents.
Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed image
compression outperforms the latest image compression standard with MS-SSIM quality metric, and provides higher
performance compared with state-of-the-art learning compression methods at high bit rates, which benefits from our
spatial energy compaction approach. Meanwhile, our proposed video compression approach with temporal energy
compaction can significantly outperform MPEG-4 and is
competitive with commonly used H.264. Both our image
and video compression can produce more visually pleasant
results than traditional standards.

1. Introduction
Data compression has been a significant research topic in
the field of signal processing for several decades. In terms
of image compression codecs, existing image compression
standards, such as JPEG [1], JPEG2000 [2], and BPG,
which uses the intra-coded HEVC [3], rely on the handcrafted encoder-decoder pipeline. These image formats are
widely used in various image applications. Conventional

(a) Reconstructed images kodim21 from kodak dataset.

(b) Reconstructed frame akiyo cif from VTL dataset.

Figure 1: Visualized results of our approach and commonly
used image/video compression standards. With the same
bit bugets, our approach produces more visually pleasant
results than conventional standards.

video coding algorithms, including H.261, MPEG-4 Part 2,
commonly used standard H.264/AVC [4], most recent standard HEVC/H.265 [3], have also achieved impressive performance through efforts spanning several decades. However, along with the proliferation of high-resolution images and videos, as well as the development of novel image/video formats, existing standards are not expected to be
the optimal compression solution for all types of contents.
Recently, deep learning has been successfully applied to
compression tasks. There are several potential advantages
for learning compression to enhance the performance of
image and video compression. First, the encoder-decoder
pipeline in conventional compression standards resembles
an autoencoder to learn high-level representation. Although

10071

