A Neurobiological Evaluation Metric for Neural Network Model Search
Nathaniel Blanchard
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Notre Dame

Jeffery Kinnison
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Notre Dame

nblancha@nd.edu

jkinniso@nd.edu

Brandon RichardWebster
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Notre Dame

Pouya Bashivan
McGovern Institute for Brain Research and
Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT

brichar1@nd.edu

bashivan@mit.edu

Walter J. Scheirer
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Notre Dame
walter.scheirer@nd.edu

Abstract

Neuroscience theory posits that the brain’s visual system coarsely identifies broad object categories via neural
activation patterns, with similar objects producing similar
neural responses. Artificial neural networks also have internal activation behavior in response to stimuli. We hypothesize that networks exhibiting brain-like activation behavior
will demonstrate brain-like characteristics, e.g., stronger
generalization capabilities. In this paper we introduce a
human-model similarity (HMS) metric, which quantifies the
similarity of human fMRI and network activation behavior.
To calculate HMS, representational dissimilarity matrices
(RDMs) are created as abstractions of activation behavior, measured by the correlations of activations to stimulus
pairs. HMS is then the correlation between the fMRI RDM
and the neural network RDM across all stimulus pairs. We
test the metric on unsupervised predictive coding networks,
which specifically model visual perception, and assess the
metric for statistical significance over a large range of hyperparameters. Our experiments show that networks with
increased human-model similarity are correlated with better performance on two computer vision tasks: next frame
prediction and object matching accuracy. Further, HMS
identifies networks with high performance on both tasks. An
unexpected secondary finding is that the metric can be employed during training as an early-stopping mechanism.

Figure 1. A primary goal of biologically-inspired deep learning
work is achieving generalization capabilities that more closely resemble those of biological brains. Along these lines, we propose
that model search frameworks for neural network training can be
guided by a human-model similarity metric. The metric correlates
internal activation behavior of the human brain and neural networks over shared stimuli. In this work, we examine the specific
case of fMRI recordings [23] and predictive coding networks [29].
Internal behavior is measured by the dissimilarity in activations
between two stimuli. Human-model similarity is the comparison
of internal behavior of a brain and a model on a stimulus set, where
higher similarity implies better model generalization.

15404

