Language-driven Temporal Activity Localization: A Semantic Matching
Reinforcement Learning Model
Weining Wang 1,3
Yan Huang1,3
Liang Wang1,2,3,4
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS-AIR)
1

weining.wang@cripac.ia.ac.cn {yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Current studies on action detection in untrimmed videos
are mostly designed for action classes, where an action is
described at word level such as jumping, tumbling, swing,
etc. This paper focuses on a rarely investigated problem
of localizing an activity via a sentence query which would
be more challenging and practical. Considering that current methods are generally time-consuming due to the dense
frame-processing manner, we propose a recurrent neural
network based reinforcement learning model which selectively observes a sequence of frames and associates the
given sentence with video content in a matching-based manner. However, directly matching sentences with video content performs poorly due to the large visual-semantic discrepancy. Thus, we extend the method to a semantic matching reinforcement learning (SM-RL) model by extracting semantic concepts of videos and then fusing them with global
context features. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets, TACoS, Charades-STA and DiDeMo, show that
our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance with a
high detection speed, demonstrating both effectiveness and
efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of video surveillance systems, a
large amount of video data are generated. Understanding
the content of video data is becoming increasingly important. Action recognition is one of the hottest topics in this
area, which ﬁrst obtains a representation of the given video,
and then trains a classiﬁer to categorize it into one of speciﬁed actions. However, action recognition usually assumes
that videos are manually precut and each action ubiqui-

tously exists in the given video. Such assumption does not
always hold in real-world scenarios, because most videos in
real applications are untrimmed and contain various background segments without any action, especially in video
surveillance. To address this problem, temporal action detection has emerged, which aims to recognize and localize
actions in videos simultaneously.
There has been growing interest in temporal action detection, and different approaches have been proposed [19,
27, 6, 9, 28, 25, 14, 2]. Although signiﬁcant progress has
been made, there is a major limitation of temporal action
detection. In particular, these studies just focus on a limited
set of actions described at word level. They can not properly
handle activities in practice, because activities in real world
are more complex and diverse which consist of many semantic concepts, such as actors, actions, objects, etc. Take
the sentence “the person cuts oranges on a cutting board” in
Figure 1 for an example, besides the action “cuts”, the activity contains an actor “person”, and two objects, namely
“oranges” and “cutting board”. It is inappropriate to describe this activity by a single word or simply categorize it
into an action class.
In this paper, we are interested in a more challenging and
practical problem, namely language-driven temporal activity localization. There are few studies that investigate this
problem [11, 8, 15], which all utilize a traditional crossmodal retrieval framework to match video clips and sentence queries with an alignment loss or a ranking loss. However, they utilize sliding windows to generate dense proposals and every frame needs to be processed, which is prohibitively time-consuming. Besides, they use average pooling to generate video features at clip level, thus temporal
information might not be fully exploited.
Motivated by the work using reinforcement learning to

334

