Action Recognition from Single Timestamp Supervision in Untrimmed Videos
Davide Moltisanti
Visual Information Lab
University of Bristol

Sanja Fidler
University of Toronto
NVIDIA Vector Institute

Dima Damen
Visual Information Lab
University of Bristol

davide.moltisanti@bristol.ac.uk

fidler@cs.toronto.edu

dima.damen@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Recognising actions in videos relies on labelled supervision during training, typically the start and end times of
each action instance. This supervision is not only subjective, but also expensive to acquire. Weak video-level supervision has been successfully exploited for recognition in
untrimmed videos, however it is challenged when the number of different actions in training videos increases. We
propose a method that is supervised by single timestamps
located around each action instance, in untrimmed videos.
We replace expensive action bounds with sampling distributions initialised from these timestamps. We then use the
classifier’s response to iteratively update the sampling distributions. We demonstrate that these distributions converge
to the location and extent of discriminative action segments.
We evaluate our method on three datasets for finegrained recognition, with increasing number of different actions per video, and show that single timestamps offer a reasonable compromise between recognition performance and
labelling effort, performing comparably to full temporal supervision. Our update method improves top-1 test accuracy
by up to 5.4%. across the evaluated datasets.

1. Introduction
Typical approaches for action recognition in videos rely
on full temporal supervision, i.e. on the availability of the
action start and end times for training. When the action
boundaries are available, all (or most of) the frames enclosed by the temporal bounds can be considered relevant
to the action, and thus state-of-the-art methods randomly or
uniformly select frames to represent the action and train a
classifier [30, 12, 33, 6, 34, 16]. Collecting these boundaries is not only notoriously burdensome and expensive, but
also potentially ambiguous and often arbitrary [21, 29, 7].
With an increasing need for bigger video datasets, it
is important to scale up the annotation process to foster
more rapid advance in video understanding. In this work,
we attempt to alleviate such annotation burden, using sin-

gle roughly aligned timestamp annotations in untrimmed
videos - i.e. videos labelled with only one timestamp per
action, located close to the action of interest. Such labelling
is quicker to collect, and importantly is easier to communicate to annotators who do not have to decide when the
action starts or ends, but only label one timestamp within or
close to the action. Single timestamps can alternatively be
collected from audio narrations and video subtitles [8, 1].
To utilise this weak supervision, we propose a sampling
distribution, initialised from the single timestamps, to select
relevant frames to train an action recognition classifier. Due
to the potential coarse location of the timestamps, and to
actions having different lengths, the initial sampling distributions may not be well aligned with the actions, as showed
in Figure 1 (top). We thus propose a method to update the
parameters of the sampling distributions during training, using the classifier’s response, in order to sample more relevant frames and reinforce the classifier (Figure 1, bottom).
Our attempt is inspired by similar approaches for single point annotations in image based semantic segmentation [2], where results achieved using such point supervision have slightly lower accuracy than those obtained with
fully annotated masks, but outperform results obtained with
image-level annotations. Correspondingly, we show that
single timestamp supervision for action recognition outperforms video-level supervision.
We test our method on three datasets [15, 9, 8], of
which [8] is annotated with single timestamps from live audio commentary. We show that our update method converges to the location and temporal extent of actions in
the three datasets, and boosts initial accuracy on the three
datasets. We additionally demonstrate the advantages of
curriculum learning during this update process, and the robustness of our approach to the initial parameters of the
sampling distributions. When single timestamps are consistently within the action boundaries, our approach is comparable to strongly supervised models on all datasets.

9915

