Distilled Person Re-identification: Towards a More Scalable System
Ancong Wu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,3∗ , Xiaowei Guo5 , and Jian-Huang Lai2,4
1

School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security, China
5
YouTu Lab, Tencent
wuancong@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org, scorpioguo@tencent.com, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID), for matching pedestrians across non-overlapping camera views, has made great
progress in supervised learning with abundant labelled data. However, the scalability problem is the bottleneck for
applications in large-scale systems. We consider the scalability problem of Re-ID from three aspects: (1) low labelling
cost by reducing label amount, (2) low extension cost by
reusing existing knowledge and (3) low testing computation
cost by using lightweight models. The requirements render scalable Re-ID a challenging problem. To solve these
problems in a unified system, we propose a Multi-teacher
Adaptive Similarity Distillation Framework, which requires
only a few labelled identities of target domain to transfer
knowledge from multiple teacher models to a user-specified
lightweight student model without accessing source domain
data. We propose the Log-Euclidean Similarity Distillation
Loss for Re-ID and further integrate the Adaptive Knowledge Aggregator to select effective teacher models to transfer target-adaptive knowledge. Extensive evaluations show
that our method can extend with high scalability and the
performance is comparable to the state-of-the-art unsupervised and semi-supervised Re-ID methods.

1. Introduction
With the development of surveillance systems, person
re-identification (Re-ID) has drawn much attention in recent years. Most researches focus on supervised learning
[25, 67, 31, 28, 1, 47] and have made great progress. However, system extension is still a significant obstacle for applying Re-ID in large-scale surveillance systems because
of the scalability problem, which is still under-explored.
Some previous works attempt to improve scalability from
different aspects, such as unsupervised and transfer learning [42, 24, 62, 52, 51, 11] for reducing label amount and
∗ Corresponding author

Unlabelled data and little
labelled data of new scene

Massive labelled data of other scenes (unavailable)
Scene 1 Data

Scene 2 Data

Scene M Data
…

Student Model ‫ܪ‬ௌ
(user-specified and
lightweight)
New scene model learning

Scene 1
Teacher
Model ‫்ܪ‬ଵ

Scene 2
Teacher
Model ‫்ܪ‬ଶ

Scene M
Teacher
Model ‫்ܪ‬ெ

Teacher model pool (available)

Knowledge distillation

Figure 1. A scalable adaptation Re-ID system. We propose to store
the knowledge in teacher models trained in existing scenes. When
extending to a new scene, we can flexibly transfer the knowledge
from teacher models to a user-specified lightweight student model
by using unlabelled data and little labelled data of the new scene,
without using source domain data which may not be accessible.

fast retrieval [56, 73] for large-scale applications. To build
a more scalable Re-ID system, it is expected that these scalability problems can be addressed in a unified system.
We consider the requirements and challenges of the scalability problem of Re-ID mainly from three aspects:
(1) Low labelling cost. Existing supervised Re-ID methods
require abundant labelled identities, which is unrealistic for
a large-scale system. A scalable Re-ID system should be
able to learn from unlabelled data and limited labelled data,
which provide very limited information for learning.
(2) Low extension cost. When extending to a new scene,
most existing Re-ID methods apply transfer learning, which
requires auxiliary source domain data for pretraining or
joint training. In some cases, source domain data of other
scenes may not be accessible because of privacy problem or
transfer problem. Even if source domain data is available,
joint training increases computation costs. Moreover, pretrained models may not be applicable due to different userspecified requirements of model architecture and capacity.
Thus, a scalable Re-ID system should be able to extend to a
new scene flexibly with low cost. Knowledge transfer without accessing source domain data is a challenge.
(3) Low testing computation cost. Existing state-of-the-art

1187

