Adaptive Pyramid Context Network for Semantic Segmentation
Junjun He 1,2
Zhongying Deng 1
Lei Zhou 1
Yali Wang 1
Yu Qiao∗ 1,3
1
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recent studies witnessed that context features can significantly improve the performance of deep semantic segmentation networks. Current context based segmentation methods differ with each other in how to construct context features and perform differently in practice. This paper firstly
introduces three desirable properties of context features in
segmentation task. Specially, we find that Global-guided
Local Affinity (GLA) can play a vital role in constructing effective context features, while this property has been largely
ignored in previous works. Based on this analysis, this paper proposes Adaptive Pyramid Context Network (APCNet)
for semantic segmentation. APCNet adaptively constructs
multi-scale contextual representations with multiple welldesigned Adaptive Context Modules (ACMs). Specifically,
each ACM leverages a global image representation as a
guidance to estimate the local affinity coefficients for each
sub-region, and then calculates a context vector with these
affinities. We empirically evaluate our APCNet on three semantic segmentation and scene parsing datasets, including
PASCAL VOC 2012, Pascal-Context, and ADE20K dataset.
Experimental results show that APCNet achieves state-ofthe-art performance on all three benchmarks, and obtains
a new record 84.2% on PASCAL VOC 2012 test set without
MS COCO pre-trained and any post-processing.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, aiming at assigning a category
label for each pixel, is a fundamental yet important problem in computer vision, with wide applications in scene understanding, medical imaging, robot vision etc [27] [28].
The challenge of semantic segmentation comes from the
inner content, shape, and scale variations of the same object/stuff, as well as the easily confused and fine boundaries among different objects/stuff. Current state-of-the-art
∗ Yu Qiao is the corresponding author. The author emails are hejunjun@sjtu.edu.cn, {zy.deng1, lei.zhou, yl.wang, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn.

semantic segmentation methods heavily exploit deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), e.g. Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [22], U-Net [28], to extract dense semantic representations from input images and predict pixellevel labels. When trained properly, deep CNNs can capture
rich scene information with multilayer convolutional operations and nonlinear pooling/activation functions. Due to the
convolutional nature of CNN, however, local convolutional
features usually have limited receptive fields. Moreover,
even with a large receptive field, these features mainly describe the core region and largely ignore the context around
boundary [23]. On the other hand, local regions from different category may share near features, e.g. wood table and
chair may exhibit similar local textures. The precise semantic segmentation always requires context information from
different scales and large regions to release the ambiguity
caused by local regions.
To address this problem, a number of recent works
[4, 40, 20, 10, 13] aggregate context vector to local convolutional feature to boost the segmentation performance.
These methods differ with each other in the way to construct context vector, and perform differently on different
datasets. So there is a natural question, what are the optimal
contexts for semantic segmentation. This paper tries to address this question by investigating the desirable properties
that the optimal context vector should exhibit. In principle,
the optimal context vector should describe segmentationrelevant image contents which are complementary to the local features, meanwhile, this vector should be compact with
irrelevant information as less as possible. Specifically, we
summarize three key properties as follows.
Property 1-Multi-scale. For semantic segmentation,
holistic objects/stuff regions yield important cues to determine the sematic labels of local pixels. Since objects usually have different sizes and positions, it is necessary to construct multi-scale representations to capture image contents
from different scales. As shown in the first row of Figure 1,
method without multi-scale contexts can only capture objects in single scale and lose details in other scales.
Property 2-Adaptive. Not all areas in input image con-

7519

