Constrained Generative Adversarial Networks for Interactive Image Generation
Eric Heim
Air Force Research Laboratory
Information Directorate
Rome, NY USA
eheim602@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Learning a generative model from data is a task that has
gotten recent attention due to a number of breakthroughs
in complex data domains [15, 30, 13]. Some of the most
striking successes have been in creating novel imagery using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6]. While
GANs show promise in having machines effectively “draw”
realistic pictures, the mechanisms for allowing humans to
guide the image generation process have been largely limited
to conditioning on class labels [21] (e.g. “Draw a zero.”)
or domain-specific attributes [35] (e.g. “Draw a coat with
stripes.”). Such feedback, though powerful, limits the user
to expressing feedback through a pre-defined set of labels.
If the user is unable to accurately express the characteristics

th
an
M
or
el
ik
e

Constraint

+

User

Interaction with user

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have received
a great deal of attention due in part to recent success in generating original, high-quality samples from visual domains.
However, most current methods only allow for users to guide
this image generation process through limited interactions.
In this work we develop a novel GAN framework that allows
humans to be “in-the-loop” of the image generation process.
Our technique iteratively accepts relative constraints of the
form “Generate an image more like image A than image B”.
After each constraint is given, the user is presented with new
outputs from the GAN, informing the next round of feedback.
This feedback is used to constrain the output of the GAN
with respect to an underlying semantic space that can be
designed to model a variety of different notions of similarity
(e.g. classes, attributes, object relationships, color, etc.). In
our experiments, we show that our GAN framework is able to
generate images that are of comparable quality to equivalent
unsupervised GANs while satisfying a large number of the
constraints provided by users, effectively changing a GAN
into one that allows users interactive control over image
generation without sacrificing image quality.

Map to Semantic Space

Abstract

Constraint
Set

Generator

Image

Figure 1: Interaction with the CONGAN generator: A user
provides a relative constraint in the form of two images meaning “Generate an image more like image A than image B.”
The constraint is combined to previously given constraints
to form a set, which is input to the generator to produce an
image. This image is shown to the user to drive further iterations of feedback. The goal for the generator is to “satisfy”
the constraints with respect to a mapping to an underlying
semantic space. The generator satisfies a constraint (A, B)
by producing an image that is mapped to a coordinate closer
to where A is mapped than to where B is mapped.

that they desire using this label set, then they cannot guide
the model to produce acceptable images.
In this work, we seek a more natural and powerful way for
humans to interact with a generative model. To this end, we
propose a novel GAN technique we call CONstrained GAN
(CONGAN). Our model is designed to accept human feedback iteratively, effectively putting users “in-the-loop” of the
generation process. Figure 1 illustrates how a user interacts
with the CONGAN generator. The generator accepts relative
constraints of the form “More like image A than image B.”

10753

