3D Shape Reconstruction from Images in the Frequency Domain
Weichao Shen, Yunde Jia, and Yuwei Wu∗
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081
{shenweichao,jiayunde,wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing the high-resolution volumetric 3D shape
from images is challenging due to the cubic growth of computational cost. In this paper, we propose a Fourier-based
method that reconstructs a 3D shape from images in a 2D
space by predicting slices in the frequency domain. According to the Fourier slice projection theorem, we introduce
a thickness map to bridge the domain gap between images
in the spatial domain and slices in the frequency domain.
The thickness map is the 2D spatial projection of the 3D
shape, which is easily predicted from the input image by a
general convolutional neural network. Each slice in the frequency domain is the Fourier transform of the corresponding thickness map. All slices constitute a 3D descriptor and
the 3D shape is the inverse Fourier transform of the descriptor. Using slices in the frequency domain, our method
can transfer the 3D shape reconstruction from the 3D space
into the 2D space, which significantly reduces the computational cost. The experiment results on the ShapeNet dataset
demonstrate that our method achieves competitive reconstruction accuracy and computational efficiency compared
with the state-of-the-art reconstruction methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have made good progress in 3D
shape reconstruction owing to their powerful ability to extract priors from big data [18, 15, 21, 9, 6, 27, 12]. However,
high-resolution 3D shape reconstruction is still challenging
due to the cubic growth of computational cost. The high
computational requirements may be reduced by using efficient data structures, such as prob [11] and Octree [22] in
the spatial domain, but these methods often require more
complicated training procedures and customized network
architectures [19]. In this paper, we analyze the 3D shape
in the frequency domain and propose a simple method to
reconstruct the 3D shape in the 2D space with a general 2D
∗ corresponding author

convolutional neural network.
3D reconstruction in the frequency domain has been
proven to be effective in medical and cryo-microscopy image processing [26, 25]. Much work [25, 24] shows that a
3D shape can be reconstructed from a series of 2D slices
in the frequency domain. Considering that the surface of a
3D shape is always sparse, we assume that a volumetric 3D
shape is reconstructed well with a compact set of the slices.
Given the Fourier transform of a 3D shape at 32 × 32 × 32
resolution, we select 2D slices along the coordinate axis direction, i.e., from the low-frequency to the high-frequency.
Figure 1 shows the inverse Fourier transform results. We
found that the reconstruction error is reduced below 10%
with only three slices selected along each axis direction.
This observation motivates us to design a 3D shape reconstruction method in the 2D space by predicting slices in the
frequency domain.
Different from the 3D shape reconstruction from medical images, in which each slice is calculated directly from a
CT or MR image, we aim to train a model to predict slices
from ordinary RGB or gray image. Due to the information
gap between the spatial domain (images) and the frequency
domain (slices), it is difficult to learn a projection function
from an ordinary image to a slice using deep neural networks directly. To deal with this problem, we introduce an
intermediate representation, thickness map. Our idea comes
from the Fourier slice theorem (or Fourier projection-slice
theorem), a famous theorem in medical image processing
[1]. This theorem presents that a slice going through the
origin of a 3D shape in the frequency space at an angle θ is
equal to the Fourier transform of the 2D projection, which
is the Radon transform of the 3D shape at the same angle θ.
For the 2D slice without going through the origin, we extend
the Fourier slice theorem and show that they are the Fourier
transform of a weighted 2D projection, which is the Radon
transform of the 3D shape after a sine-weighted preprocessing. Both the 2D projection and weighted 2D projection
reflect the thickness of a 3D shape or weight 3D shape, so
we name it the thickness map. A diagrammatic sketch can
be found in Figure 2. The Radon transform projects a 3D

4471

