Decorrelated Adversarial Learning for Age-Invariant Face Recognition
Hao Wang, Dihong Gong, Zhifeng Li, Wei Liu
Tencent AI Lab
hawelwang@tencent.com, gongdihong@gmail.com, michaelzfli@tencent.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
There has been an increasing research interest in ageinvariant face recognition. However, matching faces with
big age gaps remains a challenging problem, primarily due
to the significant discrepancy of face appearance caused
by aging. To reduce such discrepancy, in this paper we
present a novel algorithm to remove age-related components from features mixed with both identity and age information. Specifically, we factorize a mixed face feature into
two uncorrelated components: identity-dependent component and age-dependent component, where the identitydependent component contains information that is useful
for face recognition. To implement this idea, we propose
the Decorrelated Adversarial Learning (DAL) algorithm,
where a Canonical Mapping Module (CMM) is introduced
to find maximum correlation of the paired features generated by the backbone network, while the backbone network
and the factorization module are trained to generate features reducing the correlation. Thus, the proposed model
learns the decomposed features of age and identity whose
correlation is significantly reduced. Simultaneously, the
identity-dependent feature and the age-dependent feature
are supervised by ID and age preserving signals respectively to ensure they contain the correct information. Extensive experiments have been conducted on the popular
public-domain face aging datasets (FG-NET, MORPH Album 2, and CACD-VS) to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
With the impressive advancement driven by deep learning [22, 36, 17, 47], current face recognition methods[37,
39, 38, 46, 42, 40, 28, 10] have achieved excellent performance. Many of these models are even more accurate than
humans in various scenarios. However, identifying faces
across a wide range of ages remains under-exploring.
Recently, modern advances [41, 46, 28, 42, 40, 10] introduce the margin-based metrics and normalization mechanism to train the models in order to improve the face recog-

Intra-identity
distance

Inter-identity
distance

Figure 1. We show a typical example for AIFR, where the intraidentity distance is greater than the inter-identity distance due to
the large age variations. As a result, many current face recognition
systems fail to identify faces across big age gaps.

nition performance. However, most of these methods usually lack the discriminating power for face identification in
the scenario of Age Invariant Face Recognition (AIFR). The
crucial challenge for AIFR is subject to the significant discrepancy resulting from the aging process. Figure 1 shows
an example that face images have great variations within the
same identity across different ages, while those of different
identities share similar age-related information. As a result,
those faces with big age gaps serve as hard examples that the
current face recognition systems cannot identify correctly.
In particular, the intra-identity distance is increasing larger
if there are more faces of the child and the elderly.
In the meanwhile, increasing research attentions have
been attracted to the age-invariant face recognition (AIFR).
Recent research studies on AIFR mainly focus on the design of either generative models or discriminative models.
The generative methods [12, 23, 32] propose to synthesize
face images of different ages to assist the face recognition.
Very recently, several studies [53, 2, 11] aim at improving
the quality of generated aging faces by utilizing the powerful GAN-based models. However, accurately modeling the
aging process is difficult and complicated. The unstable ar-

3527

