Convolutional Recurrent Network for Road Boundary Extraction
Justin Liang1∗ Namdar Homayounfar1,2∗
Wei-Chiu Ma1,3 Shenlong Wang1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto 3 MIT
{justin.liang,namdar,weichiu,slwang,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
Creating high definition maps that contain precise information of static elements of the scene is of utmost importance for enabling self driving cars to drive safely. In
this paper, we tackle the problem of drivable road boundary extraction from LiDAR and camera imagery. Towards
this goal, we design a structured model where a fully convolutional network obtains deep features encoding the location and direction of road boundaries and then, a convolutional recurrent network outputs a polyline representation
for each one of them. Importantly, our method is fully automatic and does not require a user in the loop. We showcase
the effectiveness of our method on a large North American
city where we obtain perfect topology of road boundaries
99.3% of the time at a high precision and recall.

1. Introduction
High definition maps (HD maps) contain useful information about the semantics of the static part of the scene. They
are employed by most self-driving cars as an additional sensor in order to help localization, [9, 30], perception [27, 12]
and motion planning. Drawing the maps, is however, a laborious process where annotators look at overhead views of
the cities and draw one by one all the elements of the scene.
This is an expensive and time consuming process preventing mapping from being done at scale.
Crowd-source efforts such as OpenStreetMaps provide
scale, but are not very reliable or precise enough for the
safe navigation of the self driving cars. Although they cover
most of the globe and provide valuable data such as the road
network topology, speed limits, traffic signals, building contours, etc, they suffer from low resolution and are not perfectly aligned with respect to the actual physical clues in
the world. This is due to the nature of the map topology
creation process which is obtained from GPS trajectories
or satellite imagery that could have errors in meters as it is
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Overview: Our Convolutional Reccurrent Network takes
as input overhead camera and LiDAR imagery (left) and outputs a
structured polyline for each road boundary (right) that is utilized
in creating HD maps for autonomous driving.

typically very low resolution.
Many efforts have been devoted to automate the map creation process to achieve scale. Most early approaches treat
the problem as semantic segmentation, either from aerial
images [40, 41, 34, 33] or from first person views, where the
goal is to capture free space [22, 15, 54, 2, 23]. However,
these techniques do not provide a structured representation
that is required in order to be consumed by most self driving
software stacks.
Automatically estimating the road topology from aerial
imagery has been tackled in [35, 52, 10]. In these works,
a graph of the road network with nodes being intersections
and edges corresponding to the streets connecting them is
extracted. Although very useful for routing purposes, these
graphs still lack the fine detail and accuracy needed for a
safe localization and motion planning of an autonomous car.
In contrast, in this paper we tackle the problem of estimating drivable regions from both LiDAR and camera
data, which provide a very high definition information of
the surroundings. Towards this goal, we employ convolutional neural networks to predict a set of visual cues that are
employed by a convolutional recurrent network to output a
variable number of boundary regions of variable size. Im-

9512

