Large-Scale Long-Tailed Recognition in an Open World
Ziwei Liu1,2∗ Zhongqi Miao2∗ Xiaohang Zhan1 Jiayun Wang2 Boqing Gong2† Stella X. Yu2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
UC Berkeley / ICSI
{zwliu,zx017}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {zhongqi.miao,peterwg,stellayu}@berkeley.edu, bgong@outlook.com

Abstract
Real world data often have a long-tailed and open-ended
distribution. A practical recognition system must classify
among majority and minority classes, generalize from a few
known instances, and acknowledge novelty upon a never
seen instance. We define Open Long-Tailed Recognition
(OLTR) as learning from such naturally distributed data
and optimizing the classification accuracy over a balanced
test set which include head, tail, and open classes.
OLTR must handle imbalanced classification, few-shot
learning, and open-set recognition in one integrated algorithm, whereas existing classification approaches focus
only on one aspect and deliver poorly over the entire class
spectrum. The key challenges are how to share visual
knowledge between head and tail classes and how to reduce
confusion between tail and open classes.
We develop an integrated OLTR algorithm that maps
an image to a feature space such that visual concepts can
easily relate to each other based on a learned metric that respects the closed-world classification while acknowledging
the novelty of the open world. Our so-called dynamic metaembedding combines a direct image feature and an associated memory feature, with the feature norm indicating the
familiarity to known classes. On three large-scale OLTR
datasets we curate from object-centric ImageNet, scenecentric Places, and face-centric MS1M data, our method
consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art. Our code,
datasets, and models enable future OLTR research and are
publicly available at https://liuziwei7.github.
io/projects/LongTail.html.

1. Introduction
Our visual world is inherently long-tailed and openended: The frequency distribution of visual categories in
our daily life is long-tailed [38], with a few common classes
and many more rare classes, and we constantly encounter
new visual concepts as we navigate in an open world.
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done in part at Tencent AI Lab.

Open Long-tailed Recognition
Imbalanced Classification

Open World
Few-shot Learning

Head Classes

Tail Classes

Open Classes

Figure 1: Our task of open long-tailed recognition must
learn from long-tail distributed training data in an open
world and deal with imbalanced classification, few-shot
learning, and open-set recognition over the entire spectrum.
While the natural data distribution contains head, tail,
and open classes (Fig. 1), existing classification approaches
focus mostly on the head [7, 28], the tail [51, 25], often in a
closed setting [55, 31]. Traditional deep learning models are
good at capturing the big data of head classes [24, 18]; more
recently, few-shot learning methods have been developed
for the small data of tail classes [48, 16].
We formally study Open Long-Tailed Recognition
(OLTR) arising in natural data settings. A practical
system shall be able to classify among a few common
and many rare categories, to generalize the concept of a
single category from only a few known instances, and to
acknowledge novelty upon an instance of a never seen
category. We define OLTR as learning from long-tail and
open-end distributed data and evaluating the classification
accuracy over a balanced test set which include head, tail,
and open classes in a continuous spectrum (Fig. 1).
OLTR must handle not only imbalanced classification
and few-shot learning in the closed world, but also open-set
recognition with one integrated algorithm (Tab. 1). Existing
classification approaches tend to focus on one aspect and
deliver poorly over the entire class spectrum.
The key challenges for OLTR are tail recognition robustness and open-set sensitivity: As the number of training
instances drops from thousands in the head class to the few

2537

