Text2Scene: Generating Compositional Scenes from Textual Descriptions
Fuwen Tan1 Song Feng2 Vicente Ordonez1
1
University of Virginia, 2 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center.
fuwen.tan@virginia.edu, sfeng@us.ibm.com, vicente@virginia.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Text2Scene, a model that generates various forms of compositional scene representations
from natural language descriptions. Unlike recent works,
our method does NOT use Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). Text2Scene instead learns to sequentially generate
objects and their attributes (location, size, appearance, etc)
at every time step by attending to different parts of the input text and the current status of the generated scene. We
show that under minor modifications, the proposed framework can handle the generation of different forms of scene
representations, including cartoon-like scenes, object layouts corresponding to real images, and synthetic images.
Our method is not only competitive when compared with
state-of-the-art GAN-based methods using automatic metrics and superior based on human judgments but also has
the advantage of producing interpretable results.

1. Introduction
Generating images from textual descriptions has recently
become an active research topic [26, 37, 38, 13, 33, 11].
This interest has been partially fueled by the adoption of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] which have
demonstrated impressive results on a number of image synthesis tasks. Synthesizing images from text requires a level
of language and visual understanding which could lead to
applications in image retrieval through natural language
queries, representation learning for text, and automated
computer graphics and image editing applications.
In this work, we introduce Text2Scene, a model to interpret visually descriptive language in order to generate
compositional scene representations. We specifically focus on generating a scene representation consisting of a
list of objects, along with their attributes (e.g. location,
size, aspect ratio, pose, appearance). We adapt and train
models to generate three types of scenes as shown in Figure 1, (1) Cartoon-like scenes as depicted in the Abstract
Scenes dataset [41], (2) Object layouts corresponding to image scenes from the COCO dataset [19], and (3) Synthetic

Figure 1. Sample inputs (left) and outputs of our Text2Scene
model (middle), along with ground truth reference scenes (right)
for the generation of abstract scenes (top), object layouts (middle),
and synthetic image composites (bottom).

scenes corresponding to images in the COCO dataset [19].
We propose a unified framework to handle these three seemingly different tasks with unique challenges. Our method,
unlike recent approaches, does not rely on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8]. Instead, we produce an interpretable model that iteratively generates a scene by predicting and adding new objects at each time step. Our
method is superior to the best result reported in Abstract
Scenes [41], and provides near state-of-the-art performance
on COCO [19] under automatic evaluation metrics, and
state-of-the-art results when evaluated by humans.
Generating rich textual representations for scene generation is a challenging task. For instance, input textual
descriptions could hint only indirectly at the presence of
attributes – e.g. in the first example in Fig. 1 the input
text “Mike is surprised” should change the facial attribute
on the generated object “Mike”. Textual descriptions often
have complex information about relative spatial configura-

6710

