Learning Transformation Synchronization
Xiangru Huang
UT Austin

Zhenxiao Liang
UT Austin

Xiaowei Zhou
Zhejiang University∗

Yao Xie
Georgia Tech

Qixing Huang†
UT Austin

Leonidas Guibas
Facebook AI Research, Stanford University

Abstract
Reconstructing the 3D model of a physical object typically requires us to align the depth scans obtained from
different camera poses into the same coordinate system. Solutions to this global alignment problem usually proceed in
two steps. The first step estimates relative transformations
between pairs of scans using an off-the-shelf technique. Due
to limited information presented between pairs of scans, the
resulting relative transformations are generally noisy. The
second step then jointly optimizes the relative transformations among all input depth scans. A natural constraint used
in this step is the cycle-consistency constraint, which allows
us to prune incorrect relative transformations by detecting
inconsistent cycles. The performance of such approaches,
however, heavily relies on the quality of the input relative
transformations. Instead of merely using the relative transformations as the input to perform transformation synchronization, we propose to use a neural network to learn the
weights associated with each relative transformation. Our
approach alternates between transformation synchronization using weighted relative transformations and predicting
new weights of the input relative transformations using a
neural network. We demonstrate the usefulness of this approach across a wide range of datasets.

1. Introduction
Transformation synchronization, i.e., estimating consistent rigid transformations across a collection of images or
depth scans, is a fundamental problem in various computer vision applications, including multi-view structure
from motion [11, 37, 48, 45], geometry reconstruction from
depth scans [27, 15], image editing via solving jigsaw puzzles [14], simultaneous localization and mapping [10], and
reassembling fractured surfaces [22], to name just a few. A
common approach to transformation synchronization proceeds in two phases. The first phase establishes the rela∗ Xiaowei Zhou is affiliated with the StateKey Lab of CAD&CG and
the ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Reconstruction results from 30 RGBD images of an indoor environment using different transformation synchronization
methods. (a) Our approach. (b) Rotation Averaging [12]. (c) Geometric Registration[15]. (d) Ground Truth.

tive rigid transformations between pairs of objects in isolation. Due to incomplete information presented in isolated pairs, the estimated relative transformations are usually quite noisy. The second phase improves the relative
transformations by jointly optimizing them across all input objects. This is usually made possible by utilizing
the so-called cycle-consistency constraint, which states that
the composite transformation along every cycle should be
the identity transformation, or equivalently, the data matrix
that stores pair-wise transformations in blocks is low-rank
(c.f. [23]). This cycle-consistency constraint allows us to
jointly improve relative transformations by either detecting
inconsistent cycles [14, 36] or performing low-rank matrix
recovery [23, 47, 39, 7, 9].
However, the success of existing transformation synchronization [47, 11, 3, 26] and more general map synchronization [23, 39, 38, 13, 42, 26] techniques heavily depends on the compatibility between the loss function and
the noise pattern of the input data. For example, approaches
based on robust norms (e.g., L1 [23, 13]) can tolerate either a constant fraction of adversarial noise (c.f.[23, 26])
18082

