Shape2Motion: Joint Analysis of Motion Parts and Attributes from 3D Shapes
Xiaogang Wang1 Bin Zhou1 Yahao Shi1 Xiaowu Chen1 Qinping Zhao1 Kai Xu2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
For the task of mobility analysis of 3D shapes, we propose joint analysis for simultaneous motion part segmentation and motion attribute estimation, taking a single 3D
model as input. The problem is significantly different from
those tackled in the existing works which assume the availability of either a pre-existing shape segmentation or multiple 3D models in different motion states. To that end, we develop Shape2Motion which takes a single 3D point cloud as
input, and jointly computes a mobility-oriented segmentation and the associated motion attributes. Shape2Motion is
comprised of two deep neural networks designed for mobility proposal generation and mobility optimization, respectively. The key contribution of these networks is the novel
motion-driven features and losses used in both motion part
segmentation and motion attribute estimation. This is based
on the observation that the movement of a functional part
preserves the shape structure. We evaluate Shape2Motion
with a newly proposed benchmark for mobility analysis of
3D shapes. Results demonstrate that our method achieves
the state-of-the-art performance both in terms of motion
part segmentation and motion attribute estimation.

1. Introduction
The analysis of part mobilities is a key step towards function analysis of 3D shapes [7], finding numerous potential
applications in robot-environment interaction [17, 18]. In
this work, we approach this problem from a data-driven perspective: Given a 3D shape as static observation, learn to
simultaneously segment the shape into motion parts and estimate associated motion attributes (type and parameters).
In most existing approaches, mobility analysis is conducted on the pre-segmented parts of a 3D model [6]. However, the pre-existing segmentation of a 3D model does not
necessarily conform to its mobilities. For example, in many
car models, the door is not a separate component (Figure 1(a)). This greatly limits the utility of those methods
* Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Three examples of simultaneous motion part segmentation and motion attribute inference. In each example,
the left is the input point cloud; the middle demonstrates
the analyzed result (segmented motion parts are shaded in
distinct colors and their associated motions depicted with
arrows); the right shows the motion parts are moved according to the analyzed motions.
on existing shape repositories where mobility-oriented segmentation is often unavailable. Another type of method extracts mobility through comparing multiple different motion
states of a single object, e.g., a scissor with different opening angles [32]. Such requirement is, unfortunately, hard
to meet for most testing shapes. Moreover, not all mobility
can be easily spot by motion state comparison. For instance,
it would be very hard to capture a rotating sphere without
very accurate slippage analysis [4]. Last but not least, existing methods can only output a single mobility for each
motion part, while in reality one part may possess multiple
motions (e.g., the seat of a swivel chair in Figure 1(c)).
We propose Shape2Motion, a method that consumes a
single 3D shape in point cloud as input, and jointly computes a mobility-oriented segmentation and estimates the
corresponding motion attributes. Shape2Motion adopts a
propose-and-optimize strategy, in a similar spirit to the
proposal-based object detection from images [21]. It consists of two carefully designed deep neural networks, i.e., a
mobility proposal network (MPN) followed by a mobility
optimization network (MON). MPN generates a collection
of mobility proposals and selects a few high-quality ones.
18876

