Deep Blind Video Decaptioning by Temporal Aggregation and Recurrence
Dahun Kim∗
KAIST

Sanghyun Woo∗
KAIST

Joon-Young Lee
Adobe Research

In So Kweon
KAIST

Abstract
Blind video decaptioning is a problem of automatically
removing text overlays and inpainting the occluded parts in
videos without any input masks. While recent deep learning based inpainting methods deal with a single image and
mostly assume that the positions of the corrupted pixels are
known, we aim at automatic text removal in video sequences
without mask information. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective framework for fast blind video decaptioning. We construct an encoder-decoder model, where the encoder takes multiple source frames that can provide visible
pixels revealed from the scene dynamics. These hints are
aggregated and fed into the decoder. We apply a residual
connection from the input frame to the decoder output to
enforce our network to focus on the corrupted regions only.
Our proposed model was ranked in the first place in the
ECCV Chalearn 2018 LAP Inpainting Competition Track2:
Video decaptioning. In addition, we further improve this
strong model by applying a recurrent feedback. The recurrent feedback not only enforces temporal coherence but
also provides strong clues on where the corrupted pixels
are. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our full model produces accurate and temporally
consistent video results in real time (50+ fps).

1. Introduction
Dealing with missing or corrupted data is a crucial
step before consuming visual contents. In many applications in image/video processing, such incompleteness degrades the visual perception for both human and machines.
To overcome this limitation, recent approaches have focused on solving denoising [30], restoration [20], superresolution [6], and inpainting [22]. In this paper, we focus on video decaptioning, one of the video inpainting tasks
where the solution can be directly applicable to real-world
video restoration scenarios.
In the context of media and video data from various languages, there are frequently text captions or encrusted commercials. These text overlays reduce visual attention and
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Overview of our blind video decaptioning network.
(BVDNet) We propose a hybrid encoder-decoder model, where
the aggregation encoder stream takes multiple input frames and the
decoder reconstructs the middle frame. The temporal-pooling skip
connections carry low-level information. By a residual learning
algorithm, our model directly learns to recover the corrupted pixels
in the input. The output is then fed into a feedback connection for
a recurrent learning to the next time step.

occlude parts of frames. Removing the text overlays and
inpainting the occluded parts require the understanding of
the spatio-temporal context in videos. However, processing
a video sequence requires high memory footprint and time
complexity due to the additional time dimension.
A straightforward way to perform video decaptioning is
to recover a video frame-by-frame. However, it loses a great
advantage coming from the video dynamics. In many subtitled videos, the occluded parts in a frame are often revealed
in its neighboring frames if the object moves out of the text
overlay or the subtitles disappear (e.g. Fig. 4-a). Also, since
dealing with a single frame does not consider any temporal
consistency, the consecutive frames in the recovered video
are not likely to be connected naturally. The video captions which disappear or change very suddenly and independently to the visual semantics make it more challenging to maintain the temporal stability. Post-processing with
off-the-shelf techniques like blind video temporal consistency [17] is also not applicable, since they require reference video sequences with dense optical flows which are
14263

