Single Image Depth Estimation Trained via Depth from Defocus Cues
Shir Gur
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel Aviv University

shir.gur@cs.tau.ac.il

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Estimating depth from a single RGB images is a fundamental task in computer vision, which is most directly
solved using supervised deep learning. In the field of unsupervised learning of depth from a single RGB image, depth
is not given explicitly. Existing work in the field receives
either a stereo pair, a monocular video, or multiple views,
and, using losses that are based on structure-from-motion,
trains a depth estimation network. In this work, we rely,
instead of different views, on depth from focus cues. Learning is based on a novel Point Spread Function convolutional
layer, which applies location specific kernels that arise from
the Circle-Of-Confusion in each image location. We evaluate our method on data derived from five common datasets
for depth estimation and lightfield images, and present results that are on par with supervised methods on KITTI
and Make3D datasets and outperform unsupervised learning approaches. Since the phenomenon of depth from defocus is not dataset specific, we hypothesize that learning
based on it would overfit less to the specific content in each
dataset. Our experiments show that this is indeed the case,
and an estimator learned on one dataset using our method
provides better results on other datasets, than the directly
supervised methods.

1. Introduction
In classical computer vision, many depth cues were
used in order to recover depth from a given set of images. These shape from X methods include structure-frommotion, which is based on multi-view geometry, shape from
structured light, in which the known light source plays the
role of an additional view, shape from shadow, and most relevant to our work, shape from defocus. In machine learning
based computer vision, the interest has mostly shifted into
depth from a single image, treating the problem as a multivariant image-to-depth regression problem, with an additional emphasis on using deep learning.
Learning depth from a single image consists of two
forms. There are supervised methods, in which the target in-

formation (the depth) is explicitly given, and unsupervised
methods, in which the depth information is given implicitly. The most common approach in unsupervised learning is to provide the learning algorithm with stereo pairs
or other forms of multiple views [37, 41]. In these methods, the training set consists of multiple scenes, where for
each scene, we are given a set of views. The output of the
method, similar to the supervised case, is a function that
given a single image, estimates depth at every point.
In this work, we rely, instead of multiple view geometry, on shape from defocus. The input to our method,
during training, is an all-in-focus image and one or more
focused images of the same scene from the same viewing point. The algorithm then learns a regression function,
which, given an all-in-focus image, estimates depth by reconstructing the given focused images. In classical computer vision, research in this area led to a variety of applications [44, 35, 32], such as estimating depth from mobile
phone images [33]. A deep learning based approach was
presented by Anwar et al. [1] who employ synthetic focus
images in supervised depth learning, and an aperture supervision depth learning by Srinivasan et al. [31], who employ
lightfield images in the same way we use defocus images.
Our method relies on a novel Point Spread Function
(PSF) layer, which preforms a local operation over an image, with a location dependent kernel which is computed
“on-the-fly”, according to the estimated parameters of the
PSF at each location. More specifically, the layer receives
three inputs: an all-in-focus image, estimated depth-map
and camera parameters, and outputs an image at one specific focus. This image is then compared to the training
images to compute a loss. Both the forward and backward
operations of the layer are efficiently computed using a dedicated CUDA kernel. This layer is then used as part of a
novel architecture, combining the successful ASPP architecture [5, 9]. To improve the ASPP block, we add dense
connections [16], followed by self-attention [42].
We evaluate our method on all relevant benchmarks we
were able to obtain. These include the flower lightfield
dataset and the multifocus indoor and outdoor scene dataset,
for which we compare the ability to generate unseen focus

7683

