Less is More: Learning Highlight Detection from Video Duration
Bo Xiong1 , Yannis Kalantidis2 , Deepti Ghadiyaram2 , Kristen Grauman3∗
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Facebook AI, 3 Facebook AI Research
bxiong@cs.utexas.edu,{yannisk, deeptigp, grauman}@fb.com

Abstract
Highlight detection has the potential to significantly ease
video browsing, but existing methods often suffer from expensive supervision requirements, where human viewers
must manually identify highlights in training videos. We
propose a scalable unsupervised solution that exploits video
duration as an implicit supervision signal. Our key insight is
that video segments from shorter user-generated videos are
more likely to be highlights than those from longer videos,
since users tend to be more selective about the content when
capturing shorter videos. Leveraging this insight, we introduce a novel ranking framework that prefers segments from
shorter videos, while properly accounting for the inherent
noise in the (unlabeled) training data. We use it to train a
highlight detector with 10M hashtagged Instagram videos.
In experiments on two challenging public video highlight
detection benchmarks, our method substantially improves
the state-of-the-art for unsupervised highlight detection.

1. Introduction
“I didn’t have time to write a short letter, so I wrote a
long one instead.” – Mark Twain
With the increasing prevalence of portable computing
devices (like smartphones, wearables) and promotion from
social media platforms, it is seamless for Internet users to
record and share massive amounts of video. According to
Cisco [1], by 2021 video traffic will be 82% of all consumer Internet traffic, and every second a million minutes
of video content will cross the network. Yet, indexing, organizing, and even browsing such massive video data is still
very challenging.
As an attempt to mitigate the overload, video highlight
detection has attracted increasing attention in the research
community. The goal in highlight detection is to retrieve a
moment—in the form of a short video clip—that captures
a user’s primary attention or interest within an unedited
∗ On leave from UT Austin (grauman@cs.utexas.edu).

Short clips of surfing

A long video of surfing

Figure 1: Video frames from three shorter user-generated
video clips (top row) and one longer user-generated video
(second row). Although all recordings capture the same
event (surfing), video segments from shorter user-generated
videos are more likely to be highlights than those from
longer videos, since users tend to be more selective about
their content. The height of the red curve indicates highlight score over time. We leverage this natural phenomenon
as a free latent supervision signal in large-scale Web video.
video. A well-selected highlight can accelerate browsing
many videos (since a user quickly previews the most important content), enhance social video sharing (since friends
become encouraged to watch further), and facilitate video
recommendation (since systems can relate unedited videos
in a more focused way). Highlight detectors are typically
domain-specific [33, 40, 39, 28, 26, 20], meaning they are
tailored to a category of video or keywords/tags like skiing,
surfing, etc. This accounts for the fact that the definition of
what constitutes a highlight often depends on the domain,
e.g., a barking dog might be of interest in a dog show video,
but not in a surfing video.
Existing methods largely follow one of two strategies.
The first strategy poses highlight detection as a supervised
learning task [9, 33, 40]. Given unedited videos together
with manual annotations for their highlights, a ranker is
trained to score highlight segments higher than those else11258

