How to make a pizza:
Learning a compositional layer-based GAN model
Dim P. Papadopoulos1 Youssef Tamaazousti1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2

Ferda Ofli2 Ingmar Weber2 Antonio Torralba1
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU

{dimpapa,ytamaaz,torralba}@mit.edu, {fofli,iweber}@hbku.edu.qa

Abstract
A food recipe is an ordered set of instructions for preparing a particular dish. From a visual perspective, every instruction step can be seen as a way to change the visual
appearance of the dish by adding extra objects (e.g., adding
an ingredient) or changing the appearance of the existing
ones (e.g., cooking the dish). In this paper, we aim to teach
a machine how to make a pizza by building a generative
model that mirrors this step-by-step procedure. To do so, we
learn composable module operations which are able to either add or remove a particular ingredient. Each operator
is designed as a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN).
Given only weak image-level supervision, the operators are
trained to generate a visual layer that needs to be added to
or removed from the existing image. The proposed model
is able to decompose an image into an ordered sequence of
layers by applying sequentially in the right order the corresponding removing modules. Experimental results on synthetic and real pizza images demonstrate that our proposed
model is able to: (1) segment pizza toppings in a weaklysupervised fashion, (2) remove them by revealing what is
occluded underneath them (i.e., inpainting), and (3) infer
the ordering of the toppings without any depth ordering supervision. Code, data, and models are available online1 .

1. Introduction
Food is an integral part of life that has profound implications for aspects ranging from health to culture. In order to
teach a machine to “understand” food and its preparation, a
natural approach is to teach it the conversion of raw ingredients to a complete dish, following the step-by-step instructions of a recipe. Though progress has been made on the
understanding of the recipe-to-image mapping using multimodal embeddings [6, 39], remaining challenges include (i)
the reconstruction of the correct steps in the recipe, and (ii)
dealing with partial occlusion of ingredients for food that
1 http://pizzagan.csail.mit.edu

pizzaPepperoniOlives():
add(pepperoni);
add(olives);
cook(pizza);

add

add

cook

remove

remove

uncook

Figure 1. How to make a pizza: We propose PizzaGAN, a compositional layer-based generative model that aims to mirror the stepby-step procedure of making a pizza.

consists of different layers.
The archetypal example for this is pizza (Fig. 1 (left)).
The recipe for making a pizza typically requires sequentially adding several ingredients in a specific order on top
of a pizza dough. This ordering of the adding operations
defines the overlap relationships between the ingredients.
In other words, creating this pizza image requires sequentially rendering different ingredient layers on top of a pizza
dough image. Following the reverse procedure of sequentially removing the ingredients in the reverse order corresponds to decomposing a given image into its layer representation (Fig. 1 (right)). Removing an ingredient requires
not only detecting all the ingredient instances but also resolving any occlusions with the ingredients underneath by
generating the appearance of their invisible parts. Going beyond food, the concept of “layers” is widespread in digital
image editing, where images are composed by combining
different layers with different alpha masks.
In this paper, we propose PizzaGAN, a compositional
layer-based generative model that mirrors this step-by-step
procedure of making a pizza. Given a set of training images with only image-level labels (e.g., “pepperoni pizza”),
18002

