TACNet: Transition-Aware Context Network for
Spatio-Temporal Action Detection
Lin Song1∗ Shiwei Zhang2∗ Gang Yu3 Hongbin Sun1†
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong Univeristy.
2
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology.
3
Megvii Inc. (Face++).
{stevengrove@stu, hsun@mail}.xjtu.edu.cn, swzhang@hust.edu.cn, yugang@megvii.com
1

Negative Samples

Target Samples

Negative Samples

Time T
Transitional state
Groundtruth
Figure 1: Diagram of transitional state. There are some ambiguous states around but not belong to the target actions, and it
is hard to distinguish them. We define the states as “transitional state” (red boxes). If we can effectively distinguish these
states, we can improve the ability of temporal extent detection.

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art approaches for spatio-temporal
action detection have achieved impressive results but remain unsatisfactory for temporal extent detection. The main
reason comes from that, there are some ambiguous states
similar to the real actions which may be treated as target
actions even by a well-trained network. In this paper, we
define these ambiguous samples as “transitional states”,
and propose a Transition-Aware Context Network (TACNet)
to distinguish transitional states. The proposed TACNet includes two main components, i.e., temporal context detector
and transition-aware classifier. The temporal context detector can extract long-term context information with constant time complexity by constructing a recurrent network.
The transition-aware classifier can further distinguish transitional states by classifying action and transitional states
simultaneously. Therefore, the proposed TACNet can substantially improve the performance of spatio-temporal action detection. We extensively evaluate the proposed TACNet on UCF101-24 and J-HMDB datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that TACNet obtains competitive performance on JHMDB and significantly outperforms
∗ indicates equal contribution.
† indicates corresponding author.

the state-of-the-art methods on the untrimmed UCF101-24
in terms of both frame-mAP and video-mAP.

1. Introduction
Action detection focuses both on classifying the actions present in a video and on localizing them in space
and time. It has been receiving more and more attention
from researchers because of its various applications. Action detection has already served as a critical technology
in anomaly detection, human-machine interaction, video
monitoring, etc. Currently, most of action detection approaches [8, 15, 19, 23] separate the spatio-temporal detection into two stages, i.e., spatial detection and temporal
detection. These approaches adopt the detectors based on
deep neural networks [4, 12] to spatially detect action in
the frame level. Then, they construct temporal detection
by linking frame-level detections and applying some objective functions, such as maximum subarray method [15], to
create spatio-temporal action tubes. Because these methods
treat video frames as a set of independent images, they can
not exploit the temporal continuity of videos. Thus, their
detection results are actually unsatisfactory.
To address this issue, ACT [10] employs a stacked strategy to exploit the short-term temporal continuity for clip-

11987

