Self-Supervised Convolutional Subspace Clustering Network
Junjian Zhang† , Chun-Guang Li† , Chong You‡ , Xianbiao Qi♯ ,
Honggang Zhang† , Jun Guo† , and Zhouchen Lin§
†
SICE, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
‡
EECS, University of California, Berkeley ♯ Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
§
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University

Abstract
Subspace clustering methods based on data selfexpression have become very popular for learning from
data that lie in a union of low-dimensional linear subspaces. However, the applicability of subspace clustering
has been limited because practical visual data in raw form do not necessarily lie in such linear subspaces. On the
other hand, while Convolutional Neural Network (ConvNet)
has been demonstrated to be a powerful tool for extracting discriminative features from visual data, training such
a ConvNet usually requires a large amount of labeled data,
which are unavailable in subspace clustering applications. To achieve simultaneous feature learning and subspace
clustering, we propose an end-to-end trainable framework,
called Self-Supervised Convolutional Subspace Clustering
Network (S2 ConvSCN), that combines a ConvNet module
(for feature learning), a self-expression module (for subspace clustering) and a spectral clustering module (for selfsupervision) into a joint optimization framework. Particularly, we introduce a dual self-supervision that exploits the
output of spectral clustering to supervise the training of the
feature learning module (via a classification loss) and the
self-expression module (via a spectral clustering loss). Our
experiments on four benchmark datasets show the effectiveness of the dual self-supervision and demonstrate superior
performance of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications such as image and video
processing, we need to deal with a large amount of highdimensional data. Such data can often be well approximated by a union of multiple low-dimensional subspaces,
where each subspace corresponds to a class or a category.
For example, the frontal facial images of a subject taken under varying lighting conditions approximately span a linear
subspace of dimension up to nine [11]; the trajectories of

feature points related to a rigidly moving object in a video
sequence span an affine subspace of dimension up to three
[41]; the set of handwritten digit images of a single digit also approximately span a low-dimensional subspace [8]. In
such cases, it is important to segment the data into multiple groups where each group contains data points from the
same subspace. This problem is known as subspace clustering [42, 45], which we formally define as follows.
Problem (Subspace Clustering). Let X ∈ IRD×N be
a real-valued matrix whose columns
∪n are drawn from a union of n subspaces of IRD , i=1 {Si }, of dimensions
di ≪ min{D, N }, for i = 1, . . . , n. The goal of subspace
clustering is to segment the columns of X into their corresponding subspaces.
In the past decade, subspace clustering has become an
important topic in unsupervised learning and many subspace clustering algorithms have been developed [2, 23, 4,
27, 22, 26, 5, 17, 37, 53, 51, 18]. These methods have been
successfully applied to various applications such as motion
segmentation [44, 40], face image clustering [3], genes expression microarray clustering [28, 20] and so on.
Despite the great success in the recent development of
subspace clustering, its applicability to real applications is
very limited because practical data do not necessarily conform with the linear subspace model. In face image clustering, for example, practical face images are often not aligned
and often contain variations in pose and expression of the
subject. Subspace clustering cannot handle such cases as
images corresponding to the same face no longer lie in linear subspaces. While there are recently developed techniques for joint image alignment and subspace clustering
[21], such a parameterized model is incapable of handling a
broader range of data variations such as deformation, translation and so on. It is also possible to use manually designed invariance features such as SIFT [25], HOG [1] and
PRICoLBP [38] of the images before performing subspace
clustering, e.g., in [36, 35]. However, there has been neither
theoretical nor practical evidence to show that such features
follow the linear subspace model.
15473

