Unsupervised 3D Pose Estimation with Geometric Self-Supervision
Ching-Hang Chen1
Rohith MV1
1

Ambrish Tyagi1
Amit Agrawal1
Dylan Drover1
Stefan Stojanov1,2
James M. Rehg1,2

Amazon Lab126, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology

{chinghc, ambrisht, aaagrawa, droverd, kurohith}@amazon.com {sstojanov, rehg}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present an unsupervised learning approach to recover 3D human pose from 2D skeletal joints extracted from
a single image. Our method does not require any multiview image data, 3D skeletons, correspondences between
2D-3D points, or use previously learned 3D priors during
training. A lifting network accepts 2D landmarks as inputs
and generates a corresponding 3D skeleton estimate. During training, the recovered 3D skeleton is reprojected on
random camera viewpoints to generate new ‘synthetic’ 2D
poses. By lifting the synthetic 2D poses back to 3D and
re-projecting them in the original camera view, we can define self-consistency loss both in 3D and in 2D. The training
can thus be self supervised by exploiting the geometric selfconsistency of the lift-reproject-lift process. We show that
self-consistency alone is not sufficient to generate realistic
skeletons, however adding a 2D pose discriminator enables
the lifter to output valid 3D poses. Additionally, to learn
from 2D poses ‘in the wild’, we train an unsupervised 2D
domain adapter network to allow for an expansion of 2D
data. This improves results and demonstrates the usefulness of 2D pose data for unsupervised 3D lifting. Results on
Human3.6M dataset for 3D human pose estimation demonstrate that our approach improves upon the previous unsupervised methods by 30% and outperforms many weakly
supervised approaches that explicitly use 3D data.

1. Introduction
Estimation of 3D human pose from images and videos
is a classical ill-posed inverse problem in computer vision
with numerous applications [12, 17, 28, 31] in human tracking, action understanding, human-robot interaction, augmented reality, video gaming, etc. Current deep learningbased systems attempt to learn a mapping from RGB images
or 2D keypoints to 3D skeleton joints via some form of supervision requiring datasets with known 3D pose. However,
obtaining 3D motion capture data is time-consuming, difficult, and expensive, and as a result, only a limited amount of
3D data is currently available. On the other hand, 2D image

and video data of humans is available in abundance. However, unsupervised learning of 3D joint locations from 2D
pose alone remains a holy grail in the field. In this paper, we
take a first step towards achieving this goal and present an
unsupervised learning algorithm to estimate 3D human pose
from 2D pose landmarks/keypoints. Our approach does not
use 3D inputs in any form and does not require 2D-3D correspondences or explicit 3D priors.
Due to perspective projection ambiguity, there exists an
infinite number of 3D skeletons corresponding to a given
2D pose. However, all of these solutions are not physically
plausible given the anthropomorphic constraints and joint
angle limits of a human body articulation. Typically, supervised learning with 2D pose and corresponding 3D skeletons is used to restrict the solution space. In addition, the
3D structure can also be regularized in a weakly-supervised
manner by using priors such as symmetry, ratio of length of
various skeleton elements, and kinematic constraints, which
are learned from 3D data. In contrast, this paper addresses
the fundamental problem of lifting 2D image coordinates
to 3D space without the use of any additional cues such as
video [43, 54], multi-view cameras [1, 16], or depth images [35, 40, 52].
We posit that the following properties of the 2D-3D pose
mapping render unsupervised lifting possible: 1) Closure:
If a 2D skeleton is lifted to 3D accurately, and then randomly rotated and reprojected, the resulting 2D skeleton
will lie within the distribution of valid 2D poses. Conversely, a lifted 3D skeleton whose random re-projection
falls outside this distribution is likely to be inaccurate. 2)
Invariance: 2D projections of the same 3D skeleton from
different viewpoints, when lifted, should produce the same
3D output. In other words, lifting should be invariant to
change in the viewpoint.
We employ the above properties in designing a deep neural network, referred to as the lifting network, which is illustrated in Figure 1. We introduce a novel geometrical
consistency loss term that allows the network to learn in
a self-supervised mode. This self-consistency loss relies on
the property of invariance: any 2D projection of the gen15714

