Decoupling Direction and Norm for Efficient Gradient-Based L2
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses
Jérôme Rony∗ 1

Luiz G. Hafemann∗ 1
Luiz S. Oliveira2
Ismail Ben Ayed1
1
1
Robert Sabourin
Eric Granger
1
Laboratoire d’imagerie, de vision et d’intelligence artificielle (LIVIA), ÉTS Montreal, Canada
2
Department of Informatics, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil
jerome.rony@gmail.com

luiz.gh@mailbox.org

lesoliveira@inf.ufpr.br

{ismail.benayed, robert.sabourin, eric.granger}@etsmtl.ca

Abstract
Research on adversarial examples in computer vision
tasks has shown that small, often imperceptible changes to
an image can induce misclassification, which has security
implications for a wide range of image processing systems.
Considering L2 norm distortions, the Carlini and Wagner
attack is presently the most effective white-box attack in the
literature. However, this method is slow since it performs
a line-search for one of the optimization terms, and often
requires thousands of iterations. In this paper, an efficient
approach is proposed to generate gradient-based attacks that
induce misclassifications with low L2 norm, by decoupling
the direction and the norm of the adversarial perturbation
that is added to the image. Experiments conducted on the
MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets indicate that our
attack achieves comparable results to the state-of-the-art (in
terms of L2 norm) with considerably fewer iterations (as
few as 100 iterations), which opens the possibility of using
these attacks for adversarial training. Models trained with
our attack achieve state-of-the-art robustness against whitebox gradient-based L2 attacks on the MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets, outperforming the Madry defense when the attacks
are limited to a maximum norm.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performances on a wide variety of computer vision applications,
such as image classification, object detection, tracking, and
activity recognition [8]. In spite of their success in addressing these challenging tasks, they are vulnerable to active
adversaries. Most notably, they are susceptible to adversarial examples1 , in which adding small perturbations to an
∗ Equal contribution.

1 This also affects other machine learning classifiers, but we restrict our
analysis to CNNs, that are most commonly used in computer vision tasks.

image, often imperceptible to a human observer, causes a
misclassification [2, 17].
Recent research on adversarial examples developed attacks that allow for evaluating the robustness of models, as
well as defenses against these attacks. Attacks have been
proposed to achieve different objectives, such as minimizing
the amount of noise that induces misclassification [5, 17], or
being fast enough to be incorporated into the training procedure [7, 18]. In particular, considering the case of obtaining
adversarial examples with lowest perturbation (measured by
its L2 norm), the state-of-the-art attack has been proposed by
Carlini and Wagner (C&W) [5]. While this attack generates
adversarial examples with low L2 noise, it also requires a
high number of iterations, which makes it impractical for
training a robust model to defend against such attacks. In
contrast, one-step attacks are fast to generate, but using them
for training does not increase model robustness on white-box
scenarios, with full knowledge of the model under attack
[18]. Developing an attack that finds adversarial examples
with low noise in few iterations would enable adversarial
training with such examples, which could potentially increase model robustness against white-box attacks.
Developing attacks that minimize the norm of the adversarial perturbations requires optimizing two objectives: 1)
obtaining a low L2 norm, while 2) inducing a misclassification. With the current state-of-the-art method (C&W [5]),
this is addressed by using a two-term loss function, with the
weight balancing the two competing objectives found via an
expensive line search, requiring a large number of iterations.
This makes the evaluation of a system’s robustness very slow
and it is unpractical for adversarial training.
In this paper, we propose an efficient gradient-based attack called Decoupled Direction and Norm2 (DDN) that
induces misclassification with a low L2 norm. This attack
optimizes the cross-entropy loss, and instead of penalizing
2 Code available at https://github.com/jeromerony/fast_
adversarial.

4322

