Deep Incremental Hashing Network for Efficient Image Retrieval
Dayan Wu1,2∗, Qi Dai3 , Jing Liu1,2 , Bo Li1†, Weiping Wang1
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{wudayan,liujing,libo,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn qid@microsoft.com

Abstract
Hashing has shown great potential in large-scale image
retrieval due to its storage and computation efficiency, especially the recent deep supervised hashing methods. To
achieve promising performance, deep supervised hashing
methods require a large amount of training data from different classes. However, when images of new categories
emerge, existing deep hashing methods have to retrain the
CNN model and generate hash codes for all the database
images again, which is impractical for large-scale retrieval
system. In this paper, we propose a novel deep hashing framework, called Deep Incremental Hashing Network
(DIHN), for learning hash codes in an incremental manner. DIHN learns the hash codes for the new coming images directly, while keeping the old ones unchanged. Simultaneously, a deep hash function for query set is learned by
preserving the similarities between training points. Extensive experiments on two widely used image retrieval benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed DIHN framework can
significantly decrease the training time while keeping the
state-of-the-art retrieval accuracy.

1. Introduction
Learning to hash has achieved great successes in various
computer vision tasks, e.g., image retrieval [5, 8, 27, 17, 30,
20, 21, 33], classification [24], and person re-identification
[35, 31]. It aims to encode documents, images, videos or
other sorts of multimedia data into short binary hash codes,
while preserving the similarity of the original data. With
the compact hash codes, the storage and computation costs
are significantly reduced. In this paper, we focus on the recent deep hashing methods which incorporate deep neural
networks into the learning of hash codes. Such approaches
[13, 16] have shown superior improvements over the con∗ This work was done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Framework of the traditional deep hashing methods for
model updates. When new semantic concepts emerge, traditional
methods have to retrain the models using both the previous training
images and the new coming images. The database images are required to be fed into the new models to generate hash codes again.

ventional hashing methods like Locality Sensitive Hashing
(LSH) [6], Spectral Hashing (SH) [28] and Iterative Quantization [7].
To date in the literature, the state-of-the-art deep hashing methods typically exploit the powerful convolutional
neural networks (CNN) to capture the underlying semantic
structures of images. By simultaneously learning the feature representations and hash functions, these methods take
full advantage of the pre-trained CNN and show satisfactory
performance. Numerous approaches have been proposed,
including both the single-label image hashing [13, 16] and
multi-label image hashing [29, 36] methods.
One practical challenge in modern image retrieval system is how to keep the model up to date. With the explosive growth of various web images, lots of the new semantic
concepts constantly emerge, while the up to date model is
not always timely available. In other words, we have to update the retrieval model once new concepts appear. Such
requirement is highly difficult for existing hashing methods, as illustrated in Figure 1. On the one hand, the learned
hash codes of the same images from the updated model
would change. One has to feed all the database images
into the model to generate the codes again, which is very
time-consuming, especially for large database. On the other
hand, retraining the model with both original and additional
data further increases the time cost of update.

9069

