You reap what you sow: Using Videos to Generate High Precision Object
Proposals for Weakly-supervised Object Detection
Krishna Kumar Singh and Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis

Abstract
We propose a novel way of using videos to obtain high
precision object proposals for weakly-supervised object detection. Existing weakly-supervised detection approaches
use off-the-shelf proposal methods like edge boxes or selective search to obtain candidate boxes. These methods provide high recall but at the expense of thousands of noisy proposals. Thus, the entire burden of finding the few relevant
object regions is left to the ensuing object mining step. To
mitigate this issue, we focus instead on improving the precision of the initial candidate object proposals. Since we cannot rely on localization annotations, we turn to video and
leverage motion cues to automatically estimate the extent of
objects to train a Weakly-supervised Region Proposal Network (W-RPN). We use the W-RPN to generate high precision object proposals, which are in turn used to re-rank high
recall proposals like edge boxes or selective search according to their spatial overlap. Our W-RPN proposals lead to
significant improvement in performance for state-of-the-art
weakly-supervised object detection approaches on PASCAL
VOC 2007 and 2012.

1. Introduction
Object detection has seen tremendous progress in recent
years [11, 23, 16, 22]. We now have detectors that can accurately detect objects in the presence of severe clutter, scale
changes, viewpoint/pose changes, occlusion, etc. However,
existing state-of-the-art algorithms require expensive and
error-prone bounding box annotations for training, which
severely limits the number of categories that they can be
trained to recognize.
To tackle this issue, researchers have proposed to use
only weak-supervision in which image-level object presence labels (like ‘dog’ or ‘no dog’) are provided rather than
bounding box annotations [33, 6, 32, 27, 17, 25, 1, 28, 34].
In this setting, object detection is often formulated as multiple instance learning and solved using non-convex optimization in which the predicted object localizations on
the training set and model learning are iteratively updated.

(a) Weakly-labeled image (b) Edge box proposals

(c) Our proposals

Figure 1. Given a weakly-labeled image (a), standard weaklysupervised object detection methods start by generating hundreds
to thousands of object proposals (b). The ensuing object localizer
must then perform the extremely difficult task of mining the one or
two relevant object regions out of all the noisy proposals. We instead generate a few high-precision proposals (c), using a weaklysupervised region proposal network (W-RPN) trained without any
bounding box annotations.

Most existing methods start off by using an off-the-shelf
object proposal method like selective search [31] or edge
boxes [37] to generate thousands of candidate object proposals (Fig. 1 (b)). They then perform the extremely difficult data mining task of localizing the few relevant object
regions among the thousands of noisy proposals in each image (i.e., akin to finding a needle in a haystack). Since there
is no supervisory signal other than the image class label,
this process often results in inaccurate initial object bounding box guesses which either correspond to only an object
part or include background. Ultimately, these errors lead to
inaccurate object detectors.
Rather than creating yet another approach that tries to
mine through the thousands of noisy candidate object proposals to find the few relevant regions, we instead propose to take a step back and improve the initialization step:
specifically, to generate a much smaller yet reliable initial
candidate object proposal set such that we can turn an extremely difficult data mining problem into a more manageable one (Fig. 1 (c)). In principle, this sounds straightforward: create a new object proposals method that produces higher precision compared to existing methods. However, the key challenge is to create such an algorithm in the
weakly-supervised setting without any bounding box annotations.
To address this challenge, we turn to weakly-labeled

9414

