Learning Linear Transformations for Fast Image and Video Style Transfer
Xueting Li∗1 , Sifei Liu∗2 , Jan Kautz2 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang1,3
1

University of California, Merced, 2 NVIDIA, 3 Google Cloud

Abstract
Given a random pair of images, a universal style transfer method extracts the feel from a reference image to synthesize an output based on the look of a content image.
Recent algorithms based on second-order statistics, however, are either computationally expensive or prone to generate artifacts due to the trade-off between image quality and run-time performance. In this work, we present
an approach for universal style transfer that learns the
transformation matrix in a data-driven fashion. Our algorithm is efficient yet flexible to transfer different levels
of styles with the same auto-encoder network. It also produces stable video style transfer results due to the preservation of the content affinity. In addition, we propose a
linear propagation module to enable a feed-forward network for photo-realistic style transfer. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach on three tasks: artistic
style, photo-realistic and video style transfer, with comparisons to state-of-the-art methods. The project website can be found at https://sites.google.com/
view/linear-style-transfer-cvpr19.

1. Introduction
A style transfer method takes a content image and a style
image as inputs to synthesize an image with the look from
the former and feel from the latter. In recent years, numerous style transfer methods have been developed. The
method by Gatys et al. [8] iteratively minimizes content and
style reconstruction losses between the target image and input images. To reduce the computational cost, a few approaches have since been developed based on feed-forward
networks [13, 30]. However, these approaches do not generalize to universal style images with one single network.
For universal style transfer, a number of methods explore the second order statistical transformation from reference image onto content image via a linear multiplication between content image features and a transformation
matrix [12, 18, 19]. The AdaIn method [12] matches the
⇤ equal contribution

(a) artistic

(b) photo-realistic

(c) video

Figure 1. Applications of the proposed algorithm. (a) Artistic style
transfer. (b) Photo-realistic style transfer. (c) Video style transfer
(click on the image to see animations using Adobe Reader). The
style thumbnails are shown in lower right corners.

means and variances of deep features between content and
style images. The WCT [18] algorithm further exploits the
feature covariance matrix instead of the variance, by embedding both whitening and coloring processes within a
pre-trained encoder-decoder module. However, these approaches directly compute these matrices from deep feature vectors. As such, these methods do not present general solutions to this problem. Furthermore, such matrixcomputation-based methods can be computationally expensive due to the high dimensionality of deep feature vectors.
In this work, we propose a learnable linear transformation matrix which is conditioned on an arbitrary pair of content and style images. We derive a linear transform and
draw connections to the reconstruction objective (squared
Frobenius norm of the difference between Gram matrices)
widely used in style transfer [8, 13, 30, 12]. We learn the
transformation matrix with two light-weighted CNNs, and
show that this approach is significantly faster than computing the transforms from features (e.g., [18, 19]). Specifically, the learning-based transformation matrix can be controlled by different levels of style losses and is computationally efficient. In addition, we present a linear propagation
module [22] that can correct distortions and artifacts in contours and textures, which are commonly observed in style
13809

