Multi-granularity Generator for Temporal Action Proposal
Yuan Liu♯∗
Lin Ma♮†
♮
Tencent AI Lab

Yifeng Zhang♯†
Wei Liu♮
Shih-Fu Chang§
♯
§
Southeast University
Columbia University

{lhy19930911,forest.linma}@gmail.com

yfz@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal action proposal generation is an important
task, aiming to localize the video segments containing human actions in an untrimmed video. In this paper, we propose a multi-granularity generator (MGG) to perform the
temporal action proposal from different granularity perspectives, relying on the video visual features equipped with
the position embedding information. First, we propose to
use a bilinear matching model to exploit the rich local information within the video sequence. Afterwards, two components, namely segment proposal producer (SPP) and frame
actionness producer (FAP), are combined to perform the
task of temporal action proposal at two distinct granularities. SPP considers the whole video in the form of feature
pyramid and generates segment proposals from one coarse
perspective, while FAP carries out a finer actionness evaluation for each video frame. Our proposed MGG can be
trained in an end-to-end fashion. By temporally adjusting the segment proposals with fine-grained frame actionness information, MGG achieves the superior performance
over state-of-the-art methods on the public THUMOS-14
and ActivityNet-1.3 datasets. Moreover, we employ existing
action classifiers to perform the classification of the proposals generated by MGG, leading to significant improvements
compared against the competing methods for the video detection task.

1. Introduction
Temporal action proposal [10, 14] aims at capturing
video temporal intervals that are likely to contain an action in an untrimmed video. This task plays an important
role in video analysis and can thus be applied in many
areas, such as action recognition [3, 19–21], summarization [45,47], grounding [6,7] and captioning [39,40]. Many
methods [13,43] have been proposed to handle this task, and
have shown that, akin to object proposals for object detec∗ This work was done while Yuan Liu was a Research Intern with Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

Video Input

{wl2223,sc250}@columbia.edu

End

Start

Segment Proposals
Score: 0.82
Score: 0.53
Score: 0.33

Time(s)

Frame Actionness
1

Search Space

starting
ending

Search Space

0.5
0

Refined Proposals

Score: 0.82

Figure 1: Our proposed MGG can generate segment proposals and frame actionness simultaneously, which helps discover information about possible actions at both the coarse
and fine levels. By temporally adjusting the boundaries of
the segment within the search space determined by the computed frame actionness, MGG can yield refined action proposals with both high recall and precision.

tion [30], temporal action proposal has a crucial impact on
the quality of action detection.
High-quality action proposal methods should capture
temporal action instances with both high recall and high
temporal overlapping with ground-truths, meanwhile producing proposals without many false alarms. One type of
existing methods focuses on generating segment proposals [14, 35], where the initial segments are regularly distributed or manually defined over the video sequence. A binary classier is thereafter trained to evaluate the confidence
scores of the segments. Such methods are able to generate proposals of various temporal spans. However, since
the segments are regularly distributed or manually defined,
the generated proposals naturally have imprecise boundary
information, even though boundary regressors are further
applied. Another thread of work, like [33, 43, 50], tackles
the action proposal task in the form of evaluating frame actionness. These methods densely evaluate the confidence
score for each frame and group consecutive frames together
as candidate proposals. The whole video sequence is analyzed at a finer level, in contrast with the segment proposal
based methods. As a result, the boundaries of the generated

3604

