Reversible GANs for Memory-efficient Image-to-Image Translation
Tycho F.A. van der Ouderaa
University of Amsterdam

Daniel E. Worrall
University of Amsterdam

tychovdo@gmail.com

d.e.worrall@uva.nl

Abstract
The Pix2pix [15] and CycleGAN [31] losses have vastly
improved the qualitative and quantitative visual quality of
results in image-to-image translation tasks. We extend this
framework by exploring approximately invertible architectures which are well suited to these losses. These architectures are approximately invertible by design and thus partially satisfy cycle-consistency before training even begins.
Furthermore, since invertible architectures have constant
memory complexity in depth, these models can be built arbitrarily deep. We are able to demonstrate superior quantitative output on the Cityscapes and Maps datasets at near
constant memory budget.

1. Introduction
Computer vision was once considered to span a great
many disparate problems, such as superresolution [11], colorization [7], denoising and inpainting [29], or style transfer
[12]. Some of these challenges border on computer graphics (e.g. style transfer), while others are more closely related
to numerical problems in the sciences (e.g. superresolution
of medical images [28]). With the new advances of modern
machine learning, many of these tasks have been unified
under the term of image-to-image translation [15].
Mathematically, given two image domains X and Y , the
task is to find or learn a mapping F : X → Y , based
on either paired examples {(xi , yi )} or unpaired examples
{xi } ∪ {yj }. Let’s take the example of image superresolution. Here X may represent the space of low-resolution
images, and Y would represent the corresponding space
of high-resolution images. We might equivalently seek to
learn a mapping G : Y → X. To learn both F and
G it would seem sufficient to use the standard supervised
learning techniques on offer, using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for F and G. For this, we require paired
training data and a loss function ℓ to measure performance.
In the absence of paired training data, we can instead exploit
the reciprocal relationship between F and G. Note how we
expect the compositions G ◦ F ≃ Id and F ◦ G ≃ Id,

where Id is the identity. This property is known as cycleconsistency [31]. The unpaired training objective is then to
minimize ℓ(G◦F (x), x) or ℓ(F ◦G(y), y) with respect to F
and G, across the whole training set. Notice how in both of
these expressions, we never require explicit pairs (xi , yi ).
Naturally, in superresolution exact equality to the identity is
impossible, because the upsampling task F is one-to-many,
and the downsampling task G is many-to-one.
The problem with the cycle-consistency technique is that
while we can insert whatever F and whatever G we deem
appropriate into the model, we avoid making use of the fact
that F and G are approximate inverses of one another. In
this paper, we consider constructing F and G as approximate inverses, by design. This is not a replacement to cycleconsistency, but an adjunct to it. A key benefit of this is that
we need not have a separate X → Y and Y → X mapping, but just a single X → Y model, which we can run in
reverse to approximate Y → X. Furthermore, note by explicitly weight-tying the X → Y and Y → X models, we
can see that training in the X → Y direction will also train
the reverse Y → X direction, which does not necessarily
occur with separate models. Lastly, there is also a computational benefit that invertible networks are very memoryefficient [13]; intermediate activations do not need to be
stored to perform backpropagation. As a result, invertible
networks can be built arbitrarily deep, while using a fixed
memory-budget—this is relevant because recent work has
suggested a trend of wider and deeper networks performing better in image generation tasks [4]. Furthermore, this
enables dense pixel-wise translation models to be shifted to
memory-intensive arenas, such as 3D (see Section 5.3 for
our experiements on dense MRI superresolution).
Our results indicate that by using invertible networks
as the central workhorse in a paired or unpaired image-toimage translation model such as Pix2pix [15] or CycleGAN
[31], we can not only reduce memory overhead, but also
increase fidelity of the output. We demonstrate this on the
Cityscapes and Maps datasets in 2D and on a diffusion tensor image MRI dataset for the 3D scenario (see Section 5).
14720

