Discovering Visual Patterns in Art Collections
with Spatially-consistent Feature Learning
Xi Shen1 , Alexei A. Efros2 , and Mathieu Aubry3
1,3

LIGM (UMR 8049), École des Ponts ParisTech
2
University of California, Berkeley
1,3
{xi.shen, mathieu.aubry}@enpc.fr, 2 efros@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Our goal in this paper is to discover near duplicate
patterns in large collections of artworks. This is harder
than standard instance mining due to differences in the
artistic media (oil, pastel, drawing, etc), and imperfections inherent in the copying process. Our key technical insight is to adapt a standard deep feature to this
task by fine-tuning it on the specific art collection using
self-supervised learning. More specifically, spatial consistency between neighbouring feature matches is used
as supervisory fine-tuning signal. The adapted feature
leads to more accurate style-invariant matching, and
can be used with a standard discovery approach, based
on geometric verification, to identify duplicate patterns
in the dataset. The approach is evaluated on several
different datasets and shows surprisingly good qualitative discovery results. For quantitative evaluation of
the method, we annotated 273 near duplicate details in
a dataset of 1587 artworks attributed to Jan Brueghel
and his workshop1 . Beyond artworks, we also demonstrate improvement on localization on the Oxford5K
photo dataset as well as on historical photograph localization on the Large Time Lags Location (LTLL)
dataset.

1. Introduction
Visiting a world-class art museum might leave one
with an impression that each painting is absolutely
unique and unlike any other. In reality, things are
more complicated. While working on a painting, an
artist would typically create a number of preliminary
sketches and studies to experiment with various as1 Code and data is available at http://imagine.enpc.fr/
shenx/ArtMiner
~

(a) common detail (dog) discovered in our new Brueghel
dataset of 1587 artworks

(b) relationship between painting and two studies discovered
from collection of 195 artworks by Dante Gabriel Rossetti
Figure 1: Examples of repeated visual patterns automatically discovered by our algorithm. Sources: (a) left:
Nymphs Sleeping After the Hunt, Spied on by Satyr (oil),
center: Diana’s Nymphs After the Hunt (oil), right: Seventeen Studies of Different Dogs (drawing); (b) The Bower
Meadow (left: chalk, center: oil, right: pastel)

pects of the composition. Many of these studies also
find their way into (usually more provincial) museums.
Some artists enjoy returning time and again to the
same subject matter (e.g. Claude Monet and his series
of 25 paintings of the same haystacks). Moreover, during the Renaissance, it was not uncommon for an artist
(or an apprentice in his workshop) to reuse the same
visual elements or motifs (an angel, a cart, a windmill,
etc) in multiple paintings, with little or no variation.
For example, Flemish painter Jan Brueghel is believed
19278

