Where’s Wally Now?
Deep Generative and Discriminative Embeddings for Novelty Detection
Philippe Burlina, Neil Joshi, and I-Jeng Wang
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
{philippe.burlina, neil.joshi,i-jeng.wang}@jhuapl.edu

Abstract
We develop a framework for novelty detection (ND)
methods relying on deep embeddings, either discriminative
or generative, and also propose a novel framework for assessing their performance. While much progress was made
recently in these approaches, it has been accompanied by
certain limitations: most methods were tested on relatively
simple problems (low resolution images / small number of
classes) or involved non-public data; comparative performance has often proven inconclusive because of lacking
statistical significance; and evaluation has generally been
done on non-canonical problem sets of differing complexity,
making apples-to-apples comparative performance evaluation difficult. This has led to a relative confusing state of affairs. We address these challenges via the following contributions: We make a proposal for a novel framework to measure the performance of novelty detection methods using a
trade-space demonstrating performance (measured by ROCAUC) as a function of problem complexity. We also make
several proposals to formally characterize problem complexity. We conduct experiments with problems of higher
complexity (higher image resolution / number of classes).
To this end we design several canonical datasets built from
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet (IN-125) which we make available
to perform future benchmarks for novelty detection as well
as other related tasks including semantic zero/adaptive shot
and unsupervised learning. Finally, we demonstrate, as one
of the methods in our ND framework, a generative novelty
detection method whose performance exceeds that of all recent best-in-class generative ND methods.

1. Motivation, prior work, and contributions
Motivation Novelty detection (ND) methods [7, 13–
15, 18, 31, 33, 36, 38] have applications in a wide array of
use cases including in semi/unsupervised learning, lifelong
learning and zero-shot learning [29]. Application examples
include: (1) robotic applications with lifelong and open set

learning abilities, where the ability to perform novelty detection allows a robot to trigger human-machine dialogue
to seek information on novel objects it encounters; (2) performing medical diagnostics for rare diseases (e.g., myopathies) – for which prior observations are sparse or unavailable – and using novelty detection to pre-screen patients and refer them to clinicians; and (3), zero-shot semantic learning leveraging novelty detection to improve
zero-shot classification performance by turning a generalized / uninformed zero-shot problem into an easier informed
problem (where it is known if the object comes or not
from a novel class) for which higher performance can be
achieved [29, 38].
Prior work Past work in ND goes far and wide, and
started with methods primarily grounded on classical machine learning (for recent surveys see [14, 31, 33], and more
domain specific surveys [2, 4, 25]), including approaches
such as [7,13,15]. For instance, [7] used image features and
Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) for ND applied to
hyperspectral imaging. [13] used convolutional sparse models to characterize novelty. Novel multiscale density estimators working for high dimensional data were developed and
applied to ND in dynamic data in [15]. By contrast, representation learning via deep learning (DL) has offered novel
ways to implement ND [18, 25, 36], with methods falling
into two main categories: generative and discriminative.
Recent ND via DL Novelty detection using discriminative deep learning approaches were developed first based
on deep embeddings computed by processing the image
through deep discriminative networks, including deep convolutional neural nets (DCNNs), deep belief networks
(DBNs), or recursive neural nets (RNNs). In [18] discriminative embeddings via DBNs and DCNNs were used along
with one class SVM (1CSVM) to detect novelty. Most
recently, generative approaches, principally via generative
adversarial networks (GANs) or variational autoencoders
(VAEs) have been embraced for representation learning for
novelty detection [1, 3, 8, 16, 20, 21, 24, 26, 28, 32, 36, 41].
Most approaches focus on GANs’ ability to offer varied
means for embedding (e.g., in latent space, using the en111507

