Exact Adversarial Attack to Image Captioning
via Structured Output Learning with Latent Variables
Yan Xu‡†∗, Baoyuan Wu†♯∗, Fumin Shen‡ , Yanbo Fan† , Yong Zhang† , Heng Tao Shen‡ , Wei Liu†♯
†

Tencent AI Lab, ‡ University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{xuyan5533,wubaoyuan1987,fumin.shen,fanyanbo0124,zhangyong201303}@gmail.com,
shenhengtao@hotmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the robustness of a CNN+RNN
based image captioning system being subjected to adversarial noises. We propose to fool an image captioning system
to generate some targeted partial captions for an image polluted by adversarial noises, even the targeted captions are
totally irrelevant to the image content. A partial caption indicates that the words at some locations in this caption are
observed, while words at other locations are not restricted.
It is the first work to study exact adversarial attacks of targeted partial captions. Due to the sequential dependencies
among words in a caption, we formulate the generation of adversarial noises for targeted partial captions as a structured
output learning problem with latent variables. Both the generalized expectation maximization algorithm and structural
SVMs with latent variables are then adopted to optimize the
problem. The proposed methods generate very successful attacks to three popular CNN+RNN based image captioning
models. Furthermore, the proposed attack methods are used
to understand the inner mechanism of image captioning systems, providing the guidance to further improve automatic
image captioning systems towards human captioning.

1. Introduction
It has been shown [29] that deep neural networks (DNNs)
[18] are vulnerable to adversarial images, which are visually similar to benign images. Most of these works focus
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [17] based tasks
(e.g., image classification [15, 33, 32, 31], object detection
[9], or object tracking [38, 19]), of which the loss functions
are factorized to independent (i.e., unstructured) outputs, so
that the gradient can be easily computed to generate adversarial noises. However, if the output is structured, it may be
∗ indicates equal contributions. ♯ indicates corresponding authors. This
work was done when Yan Xu was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.

Benign Image

(Original) A double decker bus is
driving down the street.

(Original) A group of sheep standing
on top of a lush green field.

(a)

Targeted Partial Captions

Targeted Complete Captions

(Targeted) A bird is
over a
of water.

(Targeted) A bird is flying over a
body of water.

(Result) A bird is sitting over a
truck of water. (5.0674)

(Result) A bird is flying over a body
of water. (4.2249)

(Targeted) A
fruit

a variety of
vegetables.

(Targeted) A market with a variety
of fruit and vegetables.

(Result) A group of a variety of
fruit and vegetables. (5.2710)

(Result) A market with a variety of
fruit and vegetables. (5.6272)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of adversarial attacks to the image captioning
model of Show-Attend-and-Tell [35], using the proposed attack
methods dubbed GEM (the top row) and latent SSVMs (the bottom
row), respectively. In each targeted partial caption (i.e., targeted),
the red ‘_’ indicates one latent word. In each predicted caption
(i.e., result), the value at the end denotes the norm of adversarial
noises kǫk2 . All targeted captions are successfully attacked, while
adversarial noises are invisible to human perception.

difficult to derive the gradient of the corresponding structured loss. One popular deep model with structured outputs
is the combination of CNNs and recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [26], where the visual features extracted by CNNs
are fed into RNNs to generate a sequential output. We call
this combination as a CNN+RNN architecture in this paper. One typical task utilizing the CNN+RNN architecture
is image captioning [30], which describes the image content
using a sentence. In this work, we present adversarial attacks
to image captioning, as an early attempt of the robustness of
DNNs with structured outputs.
Given a trained CNN+RNN image captioning model and
an benign image, we want to fool the model to produce a targeted partial caption, which may be totally irrelevant to the
image content, through adding adversarial noises to that im-

4135

