Attentive Relational Networks for Mapping Images to Scene Graphs
Mengshi Qi∗1,2 , Weijian Li∗3 , Zhengyuan Yang3 , Yunhong Wang†1,2 , and Jiebo Luo†3
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, USA
{qi mengshi, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn, {wli69,zyang39,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Scene graph generation refers to the task of automatically mapping an image into a semantic structural graph,
which requires correctly labeling each extracted object and
their interaction relationships. Despite the recent success in
object detection using deep learning techniques, inferring
complex contextual relationships and structured graph representations from visual data remains a challenging topic.
In this study, we propose a novel Attentive Relational Network that consists of two key modules with an object detection backbone to approach this problem. The first module is a semantic transformation module utilized to capture semantic embedded relation features, by translating
visual features and linguistic features into a common semantic space. The other module is a graph self-attention
module introduced to embed a joint graph representation
through assigning various importance weights to neighboring nodes. Finally, accurate scene graphs are produced
by the relation inference module to recognize all entities
and the corresponding relations. We evaluate our proposed
method on the widely-adopted Visual Genome Dataset, and
the results demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of
our model.

1. Introduction
Visual scene understanding [11, 15, 49] is a fundamental problem in computer vision. It aims at capturing the
structural information in an image including the object entities and pair-wise relationships. As is shown in Figure 1,
each entity and relation should be processed with a broader
context to correctly understand the image at the semantic
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the task of scene graph generation. Using our proposed Attentive Relational Network, an image can be
mapped to a scene graph, which captures individual entities (e.g.
boy, tree and grass) and their relationships (e.g. <boy-ridingskateboard> and <weeds-behind-boy>).

level. During recent years, deep neural network based object detection models such as Faster R-CNN [8, 31] and
YOLO [30] have achieved great improvements. However,
such conventional object detection approaches cannot capture and infer the relationships within an image.
Because of its ability to enrich semantic analysis and
clearly describe how objects interact with each other (e.g.
“a boy is riding a skateboard” in Figure 1), generating scene
graphs from images plays a significant role in multiple computer vision applications, such as image retrieval [11, 28],
image captioning [16, 19, 40], visual question answering [17, 33] and video analysis [27, 43]. The highly diverse
visual appearances and the large numbers of distinct visual
relations make scene graph generation a challenging task.
Previous scene graph generation methods [9, 18, 19, 22,
37, 38, 44] locate and infer the visual relationship as a triplet
in the form <subject-predicate-object>, and the predicate
is a word used to link a pair of objects, e.g. <boy-wearinghat> in Figure 1. There exist various kinds of relationships
between two objects, including spatial positions (e.g. un-

3957

