IP102: A Large-Scale Benchmark Dataset for Insect Pest Recognition
Xiaoping Wu1 , Chi Zhan1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Ming-Ming Cheng1 , Jufeng Yang1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
{xpwu95, chizhan nt}@163.com, LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk, {cmm, yangjufeng}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Insect pests are one of the main factors affecting agricultural product yield. Accurate recognition of insect pests
facilitates timely preventive measures to avoid economic
losses. However, the existing datasets for the visual classiﬁcation task mainly focus on common objects, e.g., flowers and dogs. This limits the application of powerful deep
learning technology on speciﬁc domains like the agricultural ﬁeld. In this paper, we collect a large-scale dataset
named IP102 for insect pest recognition. Speciﬁcally, it
contains more than 75, 000 images belonging to 102 categories, which exhibit a natural long-tailed distribution. In
addition, we annotate about 19, 000 images with bounding
boxes for object detection. The IP102 has a hierarchical
taxonomy and the insect pests which mainly affect one speciﬁc agricultural product are grouped into the same upperlevel category. Furthermore, we perform several baseline
experiments on the IP102 dataset, including handcrafted
and deep feature based classiﬁcation methods. Experimental results show that this dataset has the challenges of interand intra- class variance and data imbalance. We believe
our IP102 will facilitate future research on practical insect
pest control, ﬁne-grained visual classiﬁcation, and imbalanced learning ﬁelds. We make the dataset and pre-trained
models publicly available at https://github.com/
xpwu95/IP102.

1. Introduction
Insect pests are known to be a major cause of damage
to the commercially important agricultural crops [8]. Categorization of insect pests plays a crucial role in agricultural
pest forecasting, which is vital for food security and stable
agricultural economy [10]. Due to the vast number of pest
species and the subtle differences among species, insect pest
recognition heavily relies on the professional knowledge of
agricultural experts [1], meaning it is expensive and time∗ Corresponding author

5LFHOHDIFDWHUSLOODU

5LFHOHDIUROOHU

3DGG\VWHPPDJJRW

&LFDGHOOLGDH

;\ORWUHFKXV

$SRO\JXVOXFRUXP

7DUQLVKHGSODQWEXJ

'DFXVGRUVDOLV

/\FRUPDGHOLFDWXOD

3URGHQLDOLWXUD

&RUQERUHU

$PSHORSKDJD

Figure 1. Example images of the IP102 dataset. Each image belongs to a different species of insect pests.

consuming. With the development of machine learning and
computer vision techniques, automated insect pest recognition attracts increasing research attention.
Most of the previous works on insect pest recognition
can be described by a traditional machine learning classiﬁcation framework, which is composed of two modules: (1)
feature representation of the insect pest images: a series of
handcrafted features including GIST [30], SIFT [25], and
SURF [3] etc. are adopted to represent the whole image.
(2) machine learning classiﬁers including the support vector machine [4] and the k-nearest neighbor (KNN) classiﬁer.
These feature-based methods rely on the careful choice of
features. If incomplete or erroneous features are extracted
from insect pest images, the subsequent classiﬁer may fail
to distinguish similar pest species.
Recently, deep learning enables robust feature learning and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a variety of image classiﬁcation tasks. It is well known that
the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) [6] marks the beginning of the rapid development of deep learning, demonstrating that large-scale image
datasets play a key role in driving deep learning progress.

8787

