Spindle Net: Person Re-identification with Human Body Region Guided
Feature Decomposition and Fusion
Haiyu Zhao♭♯ , Maoqing Tian♭ , Shuyang Sun♭ , Jing Shao♭ , Junjie Yan♭ , Shuai Yi♭ ,
Xiaogang Wang♯ , Xiaoou Tang♯
♭
♯
SenseTime Group Limited
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{zhaohaiyu,tianmaoqing,sunshuyang,shaojing,yanjunjie,yishuai}@sensetime.com
{xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk,xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk}

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) is an important task in
video surveillance and has various applications. It is nontrivial due to complex background clutters, varying illumination conditions, and uncontrollable camera settings.
Moreover, the person body misalignment caused by detectors or pose variations is sometimes too severe for feature
matching across images. In this study, we propose a novel
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), called Spindle Net,
based on human body region guided multi-stage feature decomposition and tree-structured competitive feature fusion.
It is the first time human body structure information is considered in a CNN framework to facilitate feature learning.
The proposed Spindle Net brings unique advantages: 1) it
separately captures semantic features from different body
regions thus the macro- and micro-body features can be well
aligned across images, 2) the learned region features from
different semantic regions are merged with a competitive
scheme and discriminative features can be well preserved.
State of the art performance can be achieved on multiple
datasets by large margins. We further demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of the proposed Spindle Net on
our proposed dataset SenseReID without fine-tuning. 1

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at associating person images across cameras and temporal periods. Given one
query image of one specific person, a person ReID system is
expected to provide all the images of the same person from
a large gallery database.
It is of great security interest and can be used for various
surveillance applications. For example, when a child gets
lost in a busy street, the ReID system can automatically
1 H. Zhao and M. Tian share equal contribution. Source code and
dataset can be found from https://github.com/yokattame/SpindleNet.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Challenges of person ReID. (a-b) Body region alignment
across images. With human landmark information, the body regions shown in the blue boxes can be well aligned across images.
However, without such information, directly matching based on
location may results in ambiguities (the red boxes). (c) Detail information. With the local region features extracted from the blue
boxes, detailed information can be captured and the two persons
can be easily distinguished, even though their overall appearance
are quite similar. (d) Occlusion. The lower-body region of the
right image is occluded and the influence of the corresponding features should be weakened. All the examples are selected from the
Market-1501 dataset [33].

search all the surveillance videos captured from nearby
cameras and locate this child immediately. If an accident
can be captured by one surveillance camera, all the witnesses of this accident can also be successfully tracked and
located with a person ReID system, which can help the police find out more information of the accident and a lot of
manpower can be saved.
Although the person ReID problem has been studied for
years, it is still quite challenging. Firstly, human body regions cannot be well aligned across images. Two detection
bounding boxes of the same person are shown in Fig. 1
(a), and the right box is not accurate. The head-shoulder
region (blue box) of the left image is mis-aligned with the
background region (red box) of the right image. The CNN
11077

