Convolutional Random Walk Networks for Semantic Image Segmentation
Gedas Bertasius1 , Lorenzo Torresani2 , Stella X. Yu3 , Jianbo Shi1
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 Dartmouth College, 3 UC Berkeley ICSI
{gberta,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

lt@dartmouth.edu

stealla.yu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Most current semantic segmentation methods rely on
fully convolutional networks (FCNs). However, their use of
large receptive fields and many pooling layers cause low
spatial resolution inside the deep layers. This leads to
predictions with poor localization around the boundaries.
Prior work has attempted to address this issue by postprocessing predictions with CRFs or MRFs. But such models often fail to capture semantic relationships between objects, which causes spatially disjoint predictions. To overcome these problems, recent methods integrated CRFs or
MRFs into an FCN framework. The downside of these new
models is that they have much higher complexity than traditional FCNs, which renders training and testing more challenging.
In this work we introduce a simple, yet effective Convolutional Random Walk Network (RWN) that addresses the
issues of poor boundary localization and spatially fragmented predictions with very little increase in model complexity. Our proposed RWN jointly optimizes the objectives
of pixelwise affinity and semantic segmentation. It combines these two objectives via a novel random walk layer
that enforces consistent spatial grouping in the deep layers
of the network. Our RWN is implemented using standard
convolution and matrix multiplication. This allows an easy
integration into existing FCN frameworks and it enables
end-to-end training of the whole network via standard backpropagation. Our implementation of RWN requires just 131
additional parameters compared to the traditional FCNs,
and yet it consistently produces an improvement over the
FCNs on semantic segmentation and scene labeling.

1. Introduction
Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) were first introduced in [20] where they were shown to yield significant
improvements in semantic image segmentation. Adopting the FCN approach, many subsequent methods have
achieved even better performance [6, 27, 8, 12, 17, 6, 27, 8,
19, 23]. However, traditional FCN-based methods tend to
suffer from several limitations. Large receptive fields in the

Input

DeepLab [6]

DeepLab-CRF [6]

Figure 1: Examples illustrating shortcomings of prior semantic segmentation methods. Segments produced by
FCNs are poorly localized around object boundaries, while
Dense-CRF produce spatially-disjoint object segments.
convolutional layers and the presence of pooling layers lead
to low spatial resolution in the deepest FCN layers. As a result, their predicted segments tend to be blobby and lack fine
object boundary details. We report in Fig. 1 some examples
illustrating typical poor localization of objects in the outputs
of FCNs. Recently, Chen at al. [6] addressed this issue by
applying a Dense-CRF post-processing step [15] on top of
coarse FCN segmentations. However, such approaches often fail to accurately capture semantic relationships between
objects and lead to spatially fragmented segmentations (see
an example in the last column of Fig. 1).
To address these problems several recent methods integrated CRFs or MRFs directly into the FCN framework [27, 19, 17, 5]. However, these new models typically involve (1) a large number of parameters, (2) complex loss functions requiring specialized model training or
(3) recurrent layers, which make training and testing more
complicated. We summarize the most prominent of these
approaches and their model complexities in Table 1.
We note that we do not claim that using complex loss
functions always makes the model overly complex and too
difficult to use. If a complex loss is integrated into an FCN
framework such that the FCN can still be trained in a standard fashion, and produce better results than using standard losses, then such a model is beneficial. However, in
the context of prior segmentation methods [27, 19, 17, 5],
such complex losses often require: 1) modifying the network structure (casting CNN into an RNN) [27, 5], or 2)
using a complicated multi-stage learning scheme, where
different layers are optimized during a different training
stage [19, 17]. Due to such complex training procedures,
1858

