Hierarchical Multimodal Metric Learning for Multimodal Classification
Heng Zhang1 , Vishal M. Patel2 and Rama Chellappa1
1
Center for Automation Research, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University, NJ, 08854
hzhang98@umiacs.umd.edu, vishal.m.patel@rutgers.edu, rama@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Multimodal classification arises in many computer vision tasks such as object classification and image retrieval.
The idea is to utilize multiple sources (modalities) measuring the same instance to improve the overall performance
compared to using a single source (modality). The varying characteristics exhibited by multiple modalities make it
necessary to simultaneously learn the corresponding metrics. In this paper, we propose a multiple metrics learning algorithm for multimodal data. Metric of each modality
is a product of two matrices: one matrix is modality specific, the other is enforced to be shared by all the modalities.
The learned metrics can improve multimodal classification
accuracy and experimental results on four datasets show
that the proposed algorithm outperforms existing learning
algorithms based on multiple metrics as well as other approaches tested on these datasets. Specifically, we report
95.0% object instance recognition accuracy, 89.2% object
category recognition accuracy on the multi-view RGB-D
dataset and 52.3% scene category recognition accuracy on
SUN RGB-D dataset.

1. Introduction
Owing to recent developments in sensor technology, researchers and developers are able to collect multimodal data
consisting of depth information and RGB images to achieve
better performance for tasks such as object detection, classification and scene understanding [20, 7, 18, 30, 38, 32].
Massive image and video data available on the Internet are
associated with tags and metadata which are useful for image classification [16] and retrieval [45, 37]. Solutions to
these problems can be formulated using multimodal classification frameworks. Multimodal classification has also
been studied for other applications such as audio-visual
speech classification [27, 33], and multimodal biometrics
recognition [29, 44].
How to efficiently and effectively combine different
modalities is the key issue in multimodal classification.

Feature vectors corresponding to different modalities might
be very different even if they essentially represent the same
object. Some feature vectors are very discriminative while
others are not; some feature vectors are clean while others
are noisy; some feature vectors are dense while others are
sparse. Many factors like data acquisition, preprocessing
and feature extraction can make feature vectors’ behavior
quite different. Therefore, direct linear combination of feature vectors or simple linear combination of the result of
each modality can not guarantee good performance compared with using certain modality alone.
Metric learning algorithms can learn the Mahalanobis
distance from data pairs and side information indicating the
relationship between data pairs [40]. The learned distance
can be better than Euclidean distance for the original feature space. Extensive research on metric learning in unimodal setting is available in the literature. Typical examples include the one proposed in [40], Large Margin Nearest Neighbor (LMNN) algorithm [36] and Information Theoretical Metric Learning (ITML) algorithm [12].
Extending the uni-modal metric learning algorithm to
multi-modal metric learning can be a good solution for
multimodal classification problems if the learned metrics
are appropriate distance measures for corresponding feature spaces. Also, it is important to explore the relationship
among multiple metrics and the learning process should
take into account the underlying differences among multiple modalities by balancing the contribution of each modality. As will be analyzed in Section 2 and Section 3, existing
approaches for multimodal metric learning do not fully capture the relationships among the multiple learned metrics.
Motivated by previous works that consider shared representations in their formulations for multi-modal applications such as [27, 34, 41, 44], we propose a Hierarchical Multimodal Metric Learning (HM3L) algorithm which
fully explores the relationships among the different metrics of different modalities. In our formulation, metric
of each modality is constructed through the multiplication
of modality specific part representing appropriate subspace
and a common part (p.s.d matrix) shared by all the met13057

