Generating Descriptions with Grounded and Co-Referenced People
Anna Rohrbach1
Marcus Rohrbach2
Siyu Tang1,3
Seong Joon Oh1
Bernt Schiele1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
2
UC Berkeley, CA, United States 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Previous clip

Current clip

Abstract
Learning how to generate descriptions of images or
videos received major interest both in the Computer Vision
and Natural Language Processing communities. While a
few works have proposed to learn a grounding during the
generation process in an unsupervised way (via an attention
mechanism), it remains unclear how good the quality of the
grounding is and whether it benefits the description quality.
In this work we propose a movie description model which
learns to generate description and jointly ground (localize)
the mentioned characters as well as do visual co-reference
resolution between pairs of consecutive sentences/clips. We
also propose to use weak localization supervision through
character mentions provided in movie descriptions to learn
the character grounding. At training time, we first learn
how to localize characters by relating their visual appearance to mentions in the descriptions via a semi-supervised
approach. We then provide this (noisy) supervision into our
description model which greatly improves its performance.
Our proposed description model improves over prior work
w.r.t. generated description quality and additionally provides grounding and local co-reference resolution. We evaluate it on the MPII Movie Description dataset using automatic and human evaluation measures and using our newly
collected grounding and co-reference data for characters.

1. Introduction
When humans talk about what they see, they not only
use common objects and terms, but typically refer to reappearing entities, most commonly using names (“John”) and
referential words such as pronouns (“he”, “it”). To correctly generate descriptions with reappearing entities, one
needs to understand and link them across sentences and
visual appearances (images/frames). Current image/video
captioning datasets essentially ignore this aspect as they
ask to independently describe each image/clip with a single sentence. At the same time, e.g. visual storytelling [17]
and movie description [37] ultimately require solving this
problem. However, the first approaches on visual story-

Sophia talks to Emma while they fold clothes and watch Zoe.

This work: She walks over to Zoe

Someone talks to Someone while they fold clothes and
watch Someone.

Prior work: Someone walks over to Someone.

Figure 1: Bring in the color: our task is to generate grounded and
co-referenced descriptions for the current clip using pronouns and
new or reappearing character IDs, which are grounded, i.e. localized in the current clip (boxes and lines) and visually co-referenced
to the previous clip (dashed lines). The visual grounding allows for
co-reference to the previous clip/sentence which enables us using
the pronoun “she” to refer to the first ID (Sophia).

telling [17] so far have not taken it into account, and current movie description challenges and approaches [35, 48]
abstract from it by looking at a single clip at a time and
replacing all the character mentions with e.g. “Someone”.
In this work we address grounded co-reference resolution, with application to movie description. The most
prominent entities in movies are the people or characters.
In fact, there is a long line of work which aims to link
character mentions in movie or TV scripts with their visual
tracks [5, 8, 42, 46, 27, 3, 31]. However, all these works are
already given the description for all movies where they want
to predict the linking. In contrast we want to generate a description, while jointly linking it with the currently and previously depicted character’s visual presence. Specifically,
the task we address in this work is to generate descriptions
for movies and at the same time localize or ground the characters, recognize their gender and refer to them consistently,
i.e. co-reference them across sentences, as visualized in Figure 1. Importantly, rather than trying to obtain consistent ids
in the entire movie, we focus on robust local co-reference
resolution on two consecutive sentences/clips. We argue
that local co-reference resolution is an important problem
on itself. On the one hand there are many characters without proper names and/or with only a few occurrences, which
14979

