An Exact Penalty Method for Locally Convergent Maximum Consensus
Huu Le, Tat-Jun Chin and David Suter
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
{huu.le, tat-jun.chin, david.suter}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Maximum consensus estimation plays a critically important role in computer vision. Currently, the most prevalent approach draws from the class of non-deterministic
hypothesize-and-verify algorithms, which are cheap but do
not guarantee solution quality. On the other extreme, there
are global algorithms which are exhaustive search in nature and can be costly for practical-sized inputs. This paper
aims to fill the gap between the two extremes by proposing
a locally convergent maximum consensus algorithm. Our
method is based on a formulating the problem with linear
complementarity constraints, then defining a penalized version which is provably equivalent to the original problem.
Based on the penalty problem, we develop a Frank-Wolfe algorithm that can deterministically solve the maximum consensus problem. Compared to the randomized techniques,
our method is deterministic and locally convergent; relative
to the global algorithms, our method is much more practical
on realistic input sizes. Further, our approach is naturally
applicable to problems with geometric residuals1 .

1. Introduction
Robust model fitting lies at the core of computer vision,
due to the need of many fundamental tasks to deal with reallife data that are noisy and contaminated with outliers. To
conduct robust model fitting, a robust fitting criterion is optimized w.r.t. a set of input measurements. Arguably the
most popular robust criterion is maximum consensus, which
aims to find the model that is consistent with the largest
number of inliers, i.e., has the highest consensus.
Due to the critical importance of maximum consensus
estimation, considerable effort has been put into devising
algorithms for optimizing the criterion. A large amount of
work occurred within the framework of hypothesize-andverify methods, i.e., RANSAC [8] and its variants. Broadly
speaking, these methods operate by fitting the model onto
randomly sampled minimal subsets of the data, and return1 Code and demo are available in the supplementary material.

ing the candidate with the largest inlier set. Improvements
to the basic algorithm include guided sampling and speeding up the model verification step [4].
An important innovation is locally optimized RANSAC
(LO-RANSAC) [6, 15]. As the name suggests, the objective of the method is to locally optimize RANSAC estimates. This is achieved by embedding in RANSAC an inner
hypothesize-and-verify routine, which is triggered whenever the solution is updated in the outer loop. Different from
the main RANSAC algorithm, the inner subroutine generates hypotheses from larger-than-minimal subsets sampled
from the inlier set of the incumbent solution, in the hope of
driving it towards an improved result.
Though efficient, there are fundamental shortcomings in
the hypothesize-and-verify heuristic. Primarily, it does not
give analytical assurances of the quality of its solutions.
This weakness manifests in LO-RANSAC in that the algorithm does not strictly guarantee local convergence. The
randomized nature of the heuristic also means that different
runs may give unpredictably different results, which makes
it non-ideal for tasks that require high repeatability.
More recently, there is a growing number of globally optimal algorithms for consensus maximization [19, 26, 7, 16,
3]. The fundamental intractability of maximum consensus
estimation, however, means that the global optimum can
only be found by searching. Indeed, the previous techniques
respectively conduct branch-and-bound search [26, 16], tree
search [3], or exhaustive search [19, 7]. Thus, global algorithms are practical only on problems with a small number
of measurements and/or models of low dimensionality.
So far, what is sorely missing in the literature is an algorithm that lies in the middle ground between the above
two extremes. Specifically, a maximum consensus algorithm that is deterministic and locally convergent would add
significantly to the robust fitting toolbox of computer vision.
In this paper, we contribute such an algorithm. We
reformulate consensus maximization with linear complementary constraints, then define a penalized version of the
problem. We prove that, under easily achievable conditions, the penalty problem is equivalent to the original problem, in the sense that they have the same optima. We
11888

