Modeling Sub-Event Dynamics in First-Person Action Recognition

†

Hasan F. M. Zaki†∗ , Faisal Shafait‡ and Ajmal Mian†
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia
‡
National University of Sciences and Technology, Pakistan
∗
Department of Mechatronics Engineering, International Islamic University Malaysia

hasan.mohdzaki@research.uwa.edu.au, faisal.shafait@seeks.edu.pk, ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
First-person videos have unique characteristics such as
heavy egocentric motion, strong preceding events, salient
transitional activities and post-event impacts. Action recognition methods designed for third person videos may not
optimally represent actions captured by first-person videos.
We propose a method to represent the high level dynamics
of sub-events in first-person videos by dynamically pooling features of sub-intervals of time series using a temporal feature pooling function. The sub-event dynamics are
then temporally aligned to make a new series. To keep track
of how the sub-event dynamics evolve over time, we recursively employ the Fast Fourier Transform on a pyramidal
temporal structure. The Fourier coefficients of the segment
define the overall video representation. We perform experiments on two existing benchmark first-person video datasets
which have been captured in a controlled environment. Addressing this gap, we introduce a new dataset collected
from YouTube which has a larger number of classes and a
greater diversity of capture conditions thereby more closely
depicting real-world challenges in first-person video analysis. We compare our method to state-of-the-art first person and generic video recognition algorithms. Our method
consistently outperforms the nearest competitors by 10.3%,
3.3% and 11.7% respectively on the three datasets.

1. Introduction
Video based human action recognition has received considerable attention from the research community due to its
importance in real-world applications such as surveillance
and human-machine interaction. The key challenge of designing highly discriminative motion features that can capture high-level video dynamics still remains an open problem. While a number of research works have focused on
action recognition from a third-person’s perspective, efforts on understanding ﬁrst-person videos are much more
restricted despite that wearable cameras are increasingly
accessible. Moreover, many real applications can bene-

Frame 6

Frame 20

Frame 72

Frame 90

Frame 1

Frame 30

Frame 46

Frame 96

pre-event

transitional

action

post-event

Figure 1. Sample frames of play ball and punching actions from
our proposed YoutubeDog (top) and JPL-Interaction [32] (bottom)
datasets respectively. First-person videos are deﬁned by multiple salient sub-events such as pre-event (waiting/ standing), transitional (ball is being thrown/ approaching ), action is being performed (playing ball/ punching), post-event (ball is released/ observer is knocked down). We model the dynamics of these subevents before temporally encoding these dynamics as the entire
video representation.

ﬁt from the understanding of such videos including medical monitoring, life-logging and long-term robotics perception [13, 16, 20, 30, 32, 33, 48, 45, 49, 51].
In contrast to third-person videos, where the camera is
usually set up in a ﬁxed position, in ﬁrst-person videos the
camera is moving and the observer is actively involved in
the activities being recorded. The activities include inward
interactions (e.g. shaking hands or throwing something to
the observer), egocentric actions (e.g. jumping) and outward interactions (e.g. following a leader). This results
in unique visual characteristics of ﬁrst-person videos (see
Fig. 1 for examples) that are not normally found in thirdperson videos. The visual effects can occur due to heavy
egocentric motion (e.g. the person is running), strong preceding events (e.g. sudden approach before harming the
observer), salient transitional activities (e.g. transition between running and playing ball) and post-event impacts
(e.g. observer knocked down after being punched by an attacker). Moreover, most third-person videos [28, 43] consist of a subject performing an action repeatedly where the
17253

