A Gift from Knowledge Distillation:
Fast Optimization, Network Minimization and Transfer Learning
Junho Yim1
Donggyu Joo1
Jihoon Bae2
Junmo Kim1
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
{junho.yim, jdg105, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr
{baejh}@etri.re.kr

Abstract
We introduce a novel technique for knowledge transfer,
where knowledge from a pretrained deep neural network
(DNN) is distilled and transferred to another DNN. As the
DNN maps from the input space to the output space through
many layers sequentially, we define the distilled knowledge
to be transferred in terms of flow between layers, which is
calculated by computing the inner product between features
from two layers. When we compare the student DNN and the
original network with the same size as the student DNN but
trained without a teacher network, the proposed method of
transferring the distilled knowledge as the flow between two
layers exhibits three important phenomena: (1) the student
DNN that learns the distilled knowledge is optimized much
faster than the original model; (2) the student DNN outperforms the original DNN; and (3) the student DNN can learn
the distilled knowledge from a teacher DNN that is trained
at a different task, and the student DNN outperforms the
original DNN that is trained from scratch.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, various deep neural network
(DNN) models have provided state-of-the-art performance
in many tasks, ranging from computer vision [8, 23] to natural language processing [1, 19]. Recently, several studies on the knowledge transfer technique have been conducted [11, 20]. Hinton et al. [11] first proposed the concept of knowledge distillation (KD) in the teacher–student
framework by introducing the teacher’s softened output. Although the KD training achieved improved accuracy over
several datasets, this method has limitations such as difficulty with optimizing very deep networks. To improve
the performance of the KD training for deeper networks,
Romero et al. [20] devised a hint-based training approach
that uses the pretrained teacher’s hint layer and student’s

Figure 1. Concept diagram of the proposed transfer learning
method. The FSP matrix, which represents the distilled knowledge from the teacher DNN, is generated by the features from two
layers. By computing the inner product, which represents the direction, to generate the FSP matrix, the flow between two layers
can be represented by the FSP matrix.

guided layer. Thanks to the additional hint-based training, the trained deep student network showed better accuracy with fewer parameters compared to the original wide
teacher network.
The knowledge transfer performance is very sensitive to
how the distilled knowledge is defined. The distilled knowledge can be extracted by various features in the pretrained
DNN. Considering that a real teacher teaches a student the
flow for how to solve a problem, we defined high-level distilled knowledge as the flow for solving a problem. Because
a DNN uses many layers sequentially to map from the input
space to the output space, the flow of solving a problem can
be defined as the relationship between features from two
layers.
Gatys et al. [6] used the Gramian matrix to represent
the texture information of the input image. Because the
Gramian matrix is generated by computing the inner product of feature vectors, it can contain the directionality between features, which can be thought of as texture information. Similar to Gatys et al. [6], we represented the
14133

