BIND: Binary Integrated Net Descriptors for Texture-less Object Recognition
Jacob Chan1 , Jimmy Addison Lee2 and Qian Kemao1
1

School of Computer Engineering (SCE), Nanyang Technological University
Block N4 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
jchan015@ntu.edu.sg, MKMQian@ntu.edu.sg

2

Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
1 Fusionopolis Way, Connexis (South Tower), Singapore 138632
jalee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper presents BIND (Binary Integrated Net
Descriptor), a texture-less object detector that encodes
multi-layered binary-represented nets for high precision
edge-based description. Our proposed concept aligns layers
of object-sized patches (nets) onto highly fragmented
occlusion resistant line-segment midpoints (linelets) to
encode regional information into efficient binary strings.
These lightweight nets encourage discriminative object
description through their high-spatial resolution, enabling
highly precise encoding of the object’s edges and internal
texture-less information. BIND achieved various invariant
properties such as rotation, scale and edge-polarity through
its unique binary logical-operated encoding and matching
techniques, while performing remarkably well in occlusion
and clutter. Apart from yielding efficient computational
performance, BIND also attained remarkable recognition
rates surpassing recent state-of-the-art texture-less object
detectors such as BORDER, BOLD and LINE2D.

Fig. 1: BIND’s texture-less object recognition in high clutter
and semi-occlusion. (Top) keypoint matches, (bottom) binary net
matches where green boxes represent angular block matches,
yellow boxes indicate internal homogeneous block matches, and
gray boxes refers to the background/no-match blocks.

1. Introduction
Texture-less objects are a familiar sight in the real
world and yet, widely established recognition algorithms
such as SIFT (Scale Invariant Feature Transform) [1],
and SURF (Speeded Up Robust Features) [2] are largely
ineffective in such instances. This is due to their heavy
reliance on highly-textured, feature-rich informative local
regions, which are relatively scarce in homogeneous
occurrences. Therefore, this challenging problem has led
to various recent works such as [3–5], where object-sized
regional information is exploited to gather discriminative
content. Although producing decent results, extensive
use of such sizable spatial architecture often leads to
expensive computational run-times as well as memory load.
As modern contemporary technologies such as real-time
detection systems and mobile applications have limited
computational resources, there is a growing consensus for

today’s algorithms to be robust, fast and compact.
A proven way to produce quick and memory efficient
detectors without hardware acceleration is by means of
binary descriptors. Works such as BRIEF (Binary Robust
Independent Elementary Features) [6] and ORB (Orient
FAST and Rotated BRIEF) [7] utilize local patches for
simple binary intensity tests between pixels to form
their descriptors. This led to very efficient vector sizes
and matching speeds, as these strings can be quickly
compared using the Hamming distance. However, these
binary descriptors share the same predicament as the
aforementioned algorithms, as they similarly require rich
local information for their intensity tests.
Therefore, in pursuit of a texture-less detector that
caters to the needs of modern technologies, we propose
BIND (Binary Integrated Net Descriptor), a detector

2068

