Exploiting Symmetry and/or Manhattan Properties for
3D Object Structure Estimation from Single and Multiple Images
Yuan Gao
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
ethanygao@tencent.com

Alan L. Yuille
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
alan.yuille@jhu.edu

Abstract
Many man-made objects have intrinsic symmetries and
Manhattan structure. By assuming an orthographic projection model, this paper addresses the estimation of 3D structures and camera projection using symmetry and/or Manhattan structure cues, which occur when the input is singleor multiple-image from the same category, e.g., multiple different cars. Specifically, analysis on the single image case
implies that Manhattan alone is sufficient to recover the
camera projection, and then the 3D structure can be reconstructed uniquely exploiting symmetry. However, Manhattan structure can be difficult to observe from a single image
due to occlusion. To this end, we extend to the multipleimage case which can also exploit symmetry but does not
require Manhattan axes. We propose a novel rigid structure
from motion method, exploiting symmetry and using multiple images from the same category as input. Experimental
results on the Pascal3D+ dataset show that our method significantly outperforms baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Many objects, especially these made by humans, have intrinsic symmetry [43, 25] and Manhattan properties (meaning that 3 perpendicular axes are inferable on the object
[9, 10, 13]), such as cars, aeroplanes, see Fig 1. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the benefits of using
symmetry and/or Manhattan constraints to estimate the 3D
structures of objects from one or more images. As a key
task in computer vision, numerous studies have been conducted on estimating the 3D shapes of objects from multiple images [23, 47, 52, 48, 4, 17, 21, 11, 12, 1]. There
is also a long history of research on the use of symmetry
[16, 30, 49, 40, 25, 45, 32, 28] and a growing body of work
on Manhattan world [9, 10, 13]. There is, however, little
work that combines these cues.
This paper aims at estimating the 3D structure of an ob-

Figure 1. Left Panel: Illustration of symmetry and Manhattan
structure. The car has a bilateral symmetry with respect to the
plane in red. There are three Manhattan axes. The first is normal
to the symmetry plane of the car (e.g., from left wheels to right
wheels). The second is from the front to the back of the car (e.g.,
from back wheels to front wheels) while the third is in the vertical
direction. Right Panel: Illustration of the 3 Manhattan directions
on a real aeroplane image, shown by Red, Green, Blue lines. These
3 Manhattan directions can be obtained directly from the labeled
keypoints.

ject class, taking a single or multiple intra-class instances as
input, e.g., different cars from various viewpoints. Following [50, 29, 15], we use 2D positions of keypoints as input to
estimate the 3D structure and the camera projection, leaving the detection of the 2D keypoints to methods such as
[8]. In this paper, different combinations of the three cues,
i.e., symmetry, Manhattan and multiple images, are investigated and two algorithms/derivations are proposed (assuming orthographic projection), i.e., single image reconstruction using both symmetry and Manhattan constraints, and
multiple-image reconstruction using symmetry1 .
Specifically, we start with the single image reconstruction case, using the symmetry and Manhattan constraints,
see Fig. 1. Our derivation is inspiring that a single image is
sufficient for reconstruction when the symmetry and Manhattan axes can be inferred. Specifically, our analysis shows
that using Manhattan alone is sufficient to recover the camera projection (up to several axis-sign ambiguities) by a single input image, then the 3D structure can be reconstructed
uniquely by symmetry thereafter. We show these results on
1 We experimented with using Manhattan for the multiple-image case,
but found it gave negligible improvement. Please see the derivations of using Manhattan for the multiple-image case in the supplementary material.

7408

