Dynamic FAUST: Registering Human Bodies in Motion
Federica Bogo1,∗
Javier Romero2,∗
Gerard Pons-Moll3
Michael J. Black3
1
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK 2 Body Labs Inc., New York, NY
3
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
febogo@microsoft.com, javier.romero@bodylabs.com, {gpons, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1: Dynamic FAUST. We present a new 4D dataset containing more than one hundred dynamic performances of 10
subjects. We provide raw 3D scans (meshes) at 60 frames per second and dense ground-truth correspondences between them,
obtained with a novel technique that combines shape and appearance to obtain accurate temporal mesh registration.

Abstract
While the ready availability of 3D scan data has influenced research throughout computer vision, less attention
has focused on 4D data; that is 3D scans of moving nonrigid objects, captured over time. To be useful for vision
research, such 4D scans need to be registered, or aligned,
to a common topology. Consequently, extending mesh registration methods to 4D is important. Unfortunately, no
ground-truth datasets are available for quantitative evaluation and comparison of 4D registration methods. To address this we create a novel dataset of high-resolution 4D
scans of human subjects in motion, captured at 60 fps. We
propose a new mesh registration method that uses both 3D
geometry and texture information to register all scans in
a sequence to a common reference topology. The approach
exploits consistency in texture over both short and long time
intervals and deals with temporal offsets between shape and
∗ The work was performed at the MPI for Intelligent Systems.

texture capture. We show how using geometry alone results
in significant errors in alignment when the motions are fast
and non-rigid. We evaluate the accuracy of our registration
and provide a dataset of 40,000 raw and aligned meshes.
Dynamic FAUST extends the popular FAUST dataset to dynamic 4D data, and is available for research purposes at
http://dfaust.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
We inhabit a 4D world of 3D shapes in motion and the
number of range sensing devices that can capture this world
is growing rapidly. There is already extensive work on registering, or aligning, 3D scans of static scenes to create rich
3D mesh representations. The story is quite different, however, for dynamic scenes, containing articulated and nonrigid objects, where the problem is much harder and there
are many fewer methods. Moreover there exist no groundtruth datasets for evaluating algorithms for the registration

6233

