Designing illuminant spectral power distributions for surface classification
Henryk Blasinski, Joyce Farrell, Brian Wandell
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Stanford, CA
hblasins,joyce_farrell,wandell@stanford.edu

Abstract
There are many scientific, medical and industrial imaging applications where users have full control of the scene
illumination and color reproduction is not the primary objective. For example, it is possible to co-design sensors and
spectral illumination in order to classify and detect changes
in biological tissues, organic and inorganic materials, and
object surface properties. In this paper, we propose two
different approaches to illuminant spectrum selection for
surface classification. In the first approach, a supervised
framework, we formulate a biconvex optimization problem
where we alternate between optimizing support vector classifier weights and optimal illuminants. In the second approach, an unsupervised dimensionality reduction, we describe and apply a new sparse Principal Component Analysis (PCA) algorithm. We efficiently solve the non-convex
PCA problem using a convex relaxation and Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM). We compare the
classification accuracy of a monochrome imaging sensor
with optimized illuminants to the classification accuracy of
conventional RGB cameras with natural broadband illumination.

1. Introduction
The spectral power distribution of the illumination
source plays a fundamental role in how objects objects are
imaged and analyzed by a digital camera [34]. In consumer
digital photography, the spectral properties of scene illumination are unknown at capture and the main challenge in
color balancing (white balancing) is estimating the spectral
power of the illuminant [35].
There are many applications where color reproduction
is not the primary goal of imaging systems, for example
laparoscopic surgery, endoscopy, microscopy or industrial
quality control [4, 17]. In these cases the spectrum of light
is a design parameter that can be optimized for tasks such
as detecting object features or classifying surfaces [7]. Depending on the application it may be more advantageous to

Convenional
illuminant

Discriminative
illuminant

Figure 1: The spectral power distribution of the illuminant
has a big impact on the data captured by an imaging system.
It can be difficult for a machine learning algorithm to discriminate between a real and fake apple based on the data
from an RGB camera and broadband illumination (left).
In contrast a camera capturing the scene with customized
lights produces better data for discrimination (right) even
though the light optimal for feature discrimination or classification may not produce accurate color matching effects.

adjust the spectral power distribution of the illuminant to
enhance the visibility of features of interest, at the expense
of accurate color rendering. Specifically, scene data captured under natural, broadband light sources and with conventional RGB cameras can be less useful in classification
problems than the data acquired with monochrome cameras
and highly customized, narrowband illuminants (Fig. 1).
The customized set of illuminants will produce a more robust set of features that can be later leveraged by machine
learning algorithms to improve classification performance.
In this paper we describe and evaluate two novel algorithms to effectively and systematically search for spectral
power distributions of optimal lights that improve material
classification. The lights are optimized for a particular classification task, for example apple classification. We formulate the problem of illuminant spectral power distribution
selection in two different frameworks: supervised and unsupervised learning. Our methods are designed to explicitly

2164

