Low-Rank-Sparse Subspace Representation for Robust Regression
Yongqiang Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin, China

Daming Shi
Harbin Institute of Technology;Shenzhen University
Harbin, China;Shenzhen, China

seekever@foxmail.com

d.m.shi@hotmail.com

Junbin Gao
The University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Dansong Cheng
Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin, China

junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au

cdsinhit@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning robust regression model from high-dimensional
corrupted data is an essential and difficult problem in many
practical applications. The state-of-the-art methods have
studied low-rank regression models that are robust against
typical noises (like Gaussian noise and out-sample sparse
noise) or outliers, such that a regression model can be
learned from clean data lying on underlying subspaces.
However, few of the existing low-rank regression methods
can handle the outliers/noise lying on the sparsely corrupted disjoint subspaces. To address this issue, we propose a low-rank-sparse subspace representation for robust
regression, hereafter referred to as LRS-RR in this paper.
The main contribution include the following: (1) Unlike
most of the existing regression methods, we propose an approach with two phases of low-rank-sparse subspace recovery and regression optimization being carried out simultaneously;(2) we also apply the linearized alternating direction method with adaptive penalty to solved the formulated
LRS-RR problem and prove the convergence of the algorithm and analyze its complexity; (3) we demonstrate the
efficiency of our method for the high-dimensional corrupted
data on both synthetic data and two benchmark datasets
against several state-of-the-art robust methods.

1. Introduction
As one of the most important machine learning technique, multivariate linear regression attempts to model the
relationship between dependent variables and independent
variables by fitting a linear mapping to observed samples.
Generally, the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression is
represented as minT ||Y −TX||2F , where X denotes the independent variables, Y the dependent variables, and T the

mapping relationship between X and Y.
In many real-world applications, such linear regression
models suffer from two drawbacks: lack of robustness to
outliers/noises and the curse of dimensionality. A typical
solution to the former is to estimate noises under an assumed parametric distribution such as Gaussian, whereas
a solution to the latter is to select appropriate features by
using dimensionality reduction such as Principal Component Analysis(PCA). However, if there exist a small number
of gross outliers among the samples, the estimate of model
parameters would drift obviously. Moreover, the linear regression models often do not work well in processing highdimensional data. For regression tasks on high-dimensional
data like face images, we often cannot collect and label
enough samples.
As a matter of fact, outliers/noise are due to three
sources: the first, statistically salient data; the second, miscollected noised data; and the third, occluded multi-class
data. Almost all the existing regression methods tackle the
outlier/noise problem by getting rid of the first and second
types under an assumption of noise distribution, whereas by
”Gambling”. The third type of outlier can be dealt with by
using maximum likelihood. Obviously, only the first type of
outlier can arguably follow a parametric distribution. The
second and the third types should be treated as sparsely corrupted data. In the meantime, the third type is also caused
by linearly non-separable problem, which requires a systematic solution to handle multiple subspaces/multi-classes.
Recently the robust methods have been studied widely to
overcome the impact of outliers/noise, such as robust methods based on least sum of squares [32, 30] and methods
using the least median of squares[3, 32] in the field of statistics. Approaches via subset selection have been studied in
many computer vision applications, like Random Sample
Consensus(RANSAC) [35, 8]) which randomly picks sam4321
7445

