End-to-end Learning of Driving Models from Large-scale Video Datasets
Huazhe Xu∗ Yang Gao∗ Fisher Yu Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley
Moving Path

Abstract
Robust perception-action models should be learned from
training data with diverse visual appearances and realistic behaviors, yet current approaches to deep visuomotor
policy learning have been generally limited to in-situ models learned from a single vehicle or simulation environment.
We advocate learning a generic vehicle motion model from
large scale crowd-sourced video data, and develop an endto-end trainable architecture for learning to predict a distribution over future vehicle egomotion from instantaneous
monocular camera observations and previous vehicle state.
Our model incorporates a novel FCN-LSTM architecture,
which can be learned from large-scale crowd-sourced vehicle action data, and leverages available scene segmentation side tasks to improve performance under a privileged
learning paradigm. We provide a novel large-scale dataset
of crowd-sourced driving behavior suitable for training our
model, and report results predicting the driver action on
held out sequences across diverse conditions.

1. Introduction
Learning perception-based policies to support complex
autonomous behaviors, including driving, is an ongoing
challenge for computer vision and machine learning. While
recent advances that use rule-based methods have achieved
some success, we believe that learning-based approaches
will be ultimately needed to handle complex or rare scenarios, and scenarios that involve multi-agent interplay with
other human agents.
The recent success of deep learning methods for visual perception tasks has increased interest in their efficacy for learning action policies. Recent demonstration systems [1, 2, 12] have shown that simple tasks, such as a vehicle lane-following policy or obstacle avoidance, can be
solved by a neural net. This echoes the seminal work by
Dean Pomerleau with the CMU NavLab, whose ALVINN
network was among the earliest successful neural network
models [17].
1 * indicates equal contribution

Motion
N

LSTM
Previous Motion

Video

Seg Loss

Dilated FCN

Figure 1: Autonomous driving is formulated as a future
egomotion prediction problem. Given a large-scale driving
video dataset, an end-to-end FCN-LSTM network is trained
to predict multi-modal discrete and continuous driving behaviors. Using semantic segmentation as a side task further
improves the model.

These prior efforts generally formulate the problem as
learning a mapping from pixels to actuation. This endto-end optimization is appealing as it directly mimics the
demonstrated performance, but is limiting in that it can
only be performed on data collected with the specifically
calibrated actuation setup, or in corresponding simulations
(e.g., as was done in [17], and more recently in [23, 20, 3]).
The success of supervised robot learning-based methods
is governed by the availability of training data, and typical publicly available datasets only contain on the order of
dozens to hundreds of hours of collected experience.
We explore an alternative paradigm, which follows the
successful practice in most computer vision settings, of exploiting large scale online and/or crowdsourced datasets.
We advocate learning a driving model or policy from large
scale uncalibrated sources, and specifically optimize models based on crowdsourced dashcam video sources. We release with our paper a curated dataset from which suitable
models or policies can be learned.
To learn a model from this data, we propose a novel
deep learning architecture for learning-to-drive from uncalibrated large-scale video data. We formulate the problem as
learning a generic driving model/policy; our learned model
is generic in that it learns a predictive future motion path

2174

