Multiple Instance Detection Network with Online Instance Classifier Refinement
Peng Tang Xinggang Wang Xiang Bai Wenyu Liu∗
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{pengtang,xgwang,xbai,liuwy}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Of late, weakly supervised object detection is with great
importance in object recognition. Based on deep learning,
weakly supervised detectors have achieved many promising
results. However, compared with fully supervised detection,
it is more challenging to train deep network based detectors
in a weakly supervised manner. Here we formulate weakly
supervised detection as a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)
problem, where instance classifiers (object detectors) are
put into the network as hidden nodes. We propose a novel
online instance classifier refinement algorithm to integrate
MIL and the instance classifier refinement procedure into a
single deep network, and train the network end-to-end with
only image-level supervision, i.e., without object location
information. More precisely, instance labels inferred from
weak supervision are propagated to their spatially overlapped instances to refine instance classifier online. The
iterative instance classifier refinement procedure is implemented using multiple streams in deep network, where each
stream supervises its latter stream. Weakly supervised object detection experiments are carried out on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 benchmarks. We obtain
47% mAP on VOC 2007 that significantly outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
With the development of Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [17, 19], great improvements have been achieved on
object detection [12, 13, 23, 25, 26], due to the availability
of large scale datasets with accurate boundingbox-level annotations [8, 11, 22]. However, collecting such accurate annotations can be very labor-intensive and time-consuming,
whereas achieving only image-level annotations (i.e., image
tags) is much easier, as these annotations are often available at the Internet (e.g., image search queries [21]). In this
paper, we aim at the Weakly Supervised Object Detection
(WSOD) problem, i.e., only image tags are available during
∗ Corresponding author.

0.21

0.04
0.07
0.02

0.11

A

B
C

D

0.19
0.34
0.71

A

B
C

D

Figure 1. Detection results without/with classifier refinement
(left/right). Detection scores are plotted in the bottom of the sampled proposals A, B, C, and D. In the left, the top ranking proposal
A does not correctly localize the object. After instance classifier
refinement, in the right, the correct proposal D is detected and
more discriminative performance of instance classifier is shown.

training to indicate whether an object exists in an image.
Most of previous methods follow the Multiple Instance
Learning (MIL) pipeline for WSOD [3, 4, 7, 16, 28, 30, 31].
They treat images as bags and image regions generated
by object proposal methods [29, 35] as instances to train
instance classifiers (object detectors) under the MIL constraints [10]. Meanwhile, recent efforts tend to combine
MIL and CNN by either using CNN as an off-the-shelf feature extractor [3, 7, 28, 30, 31] or training an end-to-end
MIL network [4, 16]. Here we are also along the MIL line
for WSOD, and train an end-to-end network.
Though many promising results have been achieved in
WSOD, they are still far from comparable to fully supervised ones [12, 13, 26]. Weakly supervised object detection only requires supervision at image category level.
Bilen and Vedaldi [4] presents an end-to-end deep network
for WSOD, in which final image classification score is the
weighted sum of proposal scores, that is, each proposal contributes a percentage to the final image classification. The
deep network can correctly classify image even only “see”
a part of object, and as a result, the top ranking proposal
may fail to meet the standard object detection requirement
(IoU>0.5 between ground truths and predicted boxes). As
shown in Fig. 1 (left), the top-ranking proposal A is too
small. Meanwhile, proposals B, C, and D have similar detection scores. This shows that the WSOD network is not

2843

