Pyramid Scene Parsing Network
Hengshuang Zhao1 Jianping Shi2 Xiaojuan Qi1 Xiaogang Wang1 Jiaya Jia1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Group Limited
{hszhao, xjqi, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, shijianping@sensetime.com

Abstract
Scene parsing is challenging for unrestricted open vocabulary and diverse scenes. In this paper, we exploit the
capability of global context information by different-regionbased context aggregation through our pyramid pooling
module together with the proposed pyramid scene parsing
network (PSPNet). Our global prior representation is effective to produce good quality results on the scene parsing
task, while PSPNet provides a superior framework for pixellevel prediction. The proposed approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance on various datasets. It came first in ImageNet scene parsing challenge 2016, PASCAL VOC 2012
benchmark and Cityscapes benchmark. A single PSPNet
yields the new record of mIoU accuracy 85.4% on PASCAL
VOC 2012 and accuracy 80.2% on Cityscapes.
Figure 1. Illustration of complex scenes in ADE20K dataset.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing, based on semantic segmentation, is a fundamental topic in computer vision. The goal is to assign
each pixel in the image a category label. Scene parsing provides complete understanding of the scene. It predicts the
label, location, as well as shape for each element. This topic
is of broad interest for potential applications of automatic
driving, robot sensing, to name a few.
Difficulty of scene parsing is closely related to scene and
label variety. The pioneer scene parsing task [23] is to classify 33 scenes for 2,688 images on LMO dataset [22]. More
recent PASCAL VOC semantic segmentation and PASCAL
context datasets [8, 29] include more labels with similar
context, such as chair and sofa, horse and cow, etc. The
new ADE20K dataset [43] is the most challenging one with
a large and unrestricted open vocabulary and more scene
classes. A few representative images are shown in Fig. 1.
To develop an effective algorithm for these datasets needs
to conquer a few difficulties.
State-of-the-art scene parsing frameworks are mostly
based on the fully convolutional network (FCN) [26]. The
deep convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods
boost dynamic object understanding, and yet still face chal-

lenges considering diverse scenes and unrestricted vocabulary. One example is shown in the first row of Fig. 2, where
a boat is mistaken as a car. These errors are due to similar
appearance of objects. But when viewing the image regarding the context prior that the scene is described as boathouse
near a river, correct prediction should be yielded.
Towards accurate scene perception, the knowledge graph
relies on prior information of scene context. We found
that the major issue for current FCN based models is lack
of suitable strategy to utilize global scene category clues.
For typical complex scene understanding, previously to get
a global image-level feature, spatial pyramid pooling [18]
was widely employed where spatial statistics provide a good
descriptor for overall scene interpretation. Spatial pyramid
pooling network [12] further enhances the ability.
Different from these methods, to incorporate suitable
global features, we propose pyramid scene parsing network
(PSPNet). In addition to traditional dilated FCN [3, 40] for
pixel prediction, we extend the pixel-level feature to the
specially designed global pyramid pooling one. The local
and global clues together make the final prediction more
reliable. We also propose an optimization strategy with
12881

