ER3: A Unified Framework for Event Retrieval, Recognition and Recounting
Zhanning Gao1 , Gang Hua2 , Dongqing Zhang2 , Nebojsa Jojic2 , Le Wang1 ,
Jianru Xue1 , and Nanning Zheng1
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Microsoft Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
Analysis of event videos is a very challenging task. In
contrast with action recognition which is usually based on
video clips a few seconds long [4, 32], the event classification is performed on videos which often last for several
minutes or even hours. These videos often capture multiple
human actions and may contain a variety of different objects across various scenes. For example, a “birthday party”
event may take place at home or in a restaurant, with multiple objects coming into focus, e.g. a birthday cake, and may
include a variety of activities that span multiple frames, e.g.
singing the birthday song, or blowing out candles.

Event
retrieval
Unsupervised
Supervised

Feature
alignment

Reasoning
network

Event
recognition

Feature
extraction

ER3

Event
recounting

Dominique StraussKahn arrested

We develop a unified framework for complex event retrieval, recognition and recounting. The framework is based
on a compact video representation that exploits the temporal correlations in image features. Our feature alignment
procedure identifies and removes the feature redundancies
across frames and outputs an intermediate tensor representation we call video imprint. The video imprint is then fed
into a reasoning network, whose attention mechanism parallels that of memory networks used in language modeling.
The reasoning network simultaneously recognizes the event
category and locates the key pieces of evidence for event
recounting. In event retrieval tasks, we show that the compact video representation aggregated from the video imprint
achieves significantly better retrieval accuracy compared
with existing methods. We also set new state of the art
results in event recognition tasks with an additional benefit: The latent structure in our reasoning network highlights
the areas of the video imprint and can be directly used for
event recounting. As video imprint maps back to locations
in the video frames, the network allows not only the identification of key frames but also specific areas inside each
frame which are most influential to the decision process.

Feature
aggregation

Figure 1. Illustration of ER3 framework for event retrieval, recognition and recounting. The compact video representation from feature aggregation can be used for large-scale event retrieval. With
supervised training, ER3 can also recognize the event category of
the input video. Event recounting falls directly out of the latent
structure of the model in form of statistics displayed as heat maps
for each frame indicating key areas related to the event.

In last decade, analysis of complex events in videos has
attracted significant attention in the computer vision community [10, 11, 17, 24, 29, 35]. Previous research was
pursued in both unsupervised and supervised settings. Unsupervised models were typically used for event retrieval
[9, 29] where the goal is to retrieve all the related videos in
the database in some sense similar to the query video provided by a user. On the other hand, supervised learning has
been used in event recognition [3, 5] or detection [24, 47]
in similar ways as in action recognition [4, 32] and general video classification [18, 46, 49]. In this latter case, a
classifier is learned from annotated training videos to detect
and recognize the event categories of the test videos, e.g.,
the multimedia event detection task of the TRECVID [26].
In practical applications, it is often important to qualify the
event category prediction by providing an explanation for it.

2253

