Towards Accurate Multi-person Pose Estimation in the Wild
George Papandreou, Tyler Zhu, Nori Kanazawa, Alexander Toshev,
Jonathan Tompson, Chris Bregler, Kevin Murphy
Google, Inc.
[gpapan, tylerzhu, kanazawa, toshev, tompson, bregler, kpmurphy]@google.com

Abstract
We propose a method for multi-person detection and 2D pose estimation that achieves state-of-art results on the
challenging COCO keypoints task. It is a simple, yet powerful, top-down approach consisting of two stages.
In the first stage, we predict the location and scale of
boxes which are likely to contain people; for this we use
the Faster RCNN detector. In the second stage, we estimate
the keypoints of the person potentially contained in each
proposed bounding box. For each keypoint type we predict dense heatmaps and offsets using a fully convolutional
ResNet. To combine these outputs we introduce a novel aggregation procedure to obtain highly localized keypoint predictions. We also use a novel form of keypoint-based NonMaximum-Suppression (NMS), instead of the cruder boxlevel NMS, and a novel form of keypoint-based confidence
score estimation, instead of box-level scoring.
Trained on COCO data alone, our final system achieves
average precision of 0.649 on the COCO test-dev set and
the 0.643 test-standard sets, outperforming the winner of
the 2016 COCO keypoints challenge and other recent stateof-art. Further, by using additional in-house labeled data
we obtain an even higher average precision of 0.685 on the
test-dev set and 0.673 on the test-standard set, more than
5% absolute improvement compared to the previous best
performing method on the same dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual interpretation of people plays a central role in the
quest for comprehensive image understanding. We want to
localize people, understand the activities they are involved
in, understand how people move for the purpose of Virtual/Augmented Reality, and learn from them to teach autonomous systems. A major cornerstone in achieving these
goals is the problem of human pose estimation, defined as
2-D localization of human joints on the arms, legs, and keypoints on torso and the face.
Recently, there has been significant progress on this

problem, mostly by leveraging deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) trained on large labeled datasets [45, 27,
44, 10, 33, 2, 7, 6, 20, 25, 8]. However, most prior work
has focused on the simpler setting of predicting the pose of
a single person assuming the location and scale of the person is provided in the form of a ground truth bounding box
or torso keypoint position, as in the popular MPII [2] and
FLIC [40] datasets.
In this paper, we tackle the more challenging setting of
pose detection ‘in the wild’, in which we are not provided
with the ground truth location or scale of the person instances. This is harder because it combines the problem
of person detection with the problem of pose estimation. In
crowded scenes, where people are close to each other, it can
be quite difficult to solve the association problem of determining which body part belongs to which person.
The recently released COCO person keypoints detection
dataset and associated challenge [31] provide an excellent
vehicle to encourage research, establish metrics, and measure progress on this task. It extends the COCO dataset
[32] with additional annotations of 17 keypoints (12 body
joints and 5 face landmarks) for every medium and large
sized person in each image. A large number of persons in
the dataset are only partially visible. The degree of match
between ground truth and predicted poses in the COCO keypoints task is measured in terms of object keypoint similarity (OKS), which ranges from 0 (poor match) to 1 (perfect
match). The overall quality of the combined person detection and pose estimation system in the benchmark is measured in terms of an OKS-induced average precision (AP)
metric. In this paper, we describe a system that achieves
state-of-the-art results on this challenging task.
There are two broad approaches for tackling the multiperson pose estimation problem: bottom-up, in which keypoint proposals are grouped together into person instances,
and top-down, in which a pose estimator is applied to the
output of a bounding-box person detector. Recent work
[35, 25, 8, 24] has advocated the bottom-up approach; in
their experiments, their proposed bottom-up methods outperformed the top-down baselines they compared with.

4903

