Beyond instance-level image retrieval:
Leveraging captions to learn a global visual representation for semantic retrieval
Albert Gordo and Diane Larlus
Computer Vision group, Xerox Research Center Europe
firstname.name@xrce.xerox.com

Abstract
Querying with an example image is a simple and intuitive
interface to retrieve information from a visual database.
Most of the research in image retrieval has focused on the
task of instance-level image retrieval, where the goal is to
retrieve images that contain the same object instance as the
query image. In this work we move beyond instance-level
retrieval and consider the task of semantic image retrieval
in complex scenes, where the goal is to retrieve images that
share the same semantics as the query image. We show that,
despite its subjective nature, the task of semantically ranking visual scenes is consistently implemented across a pool
of human annotators. We also show that a similarity based
on human-annotated region-level captions is highly correlated with the human ranking and constitutes a good computable surrogate. Following this observation, we learn a
visual embedding of the images where the similarity in the
visual space is correlated with their semantic similarity surrogate. We further extend our model to learn a joint embedding of visual and textual cues that allows one to query the
database using a text modifier in addition to the query image, adapting the results to the modifier. Finally, our model
can ground the ranking decisions by showing regions that
contributed the most to the similarity between pairs of images, providing a visual explanation of the similarity.

1. Introduction
The task of image retrieval aims at, given a query image,
retrieving all images relevant to that query within a potentially very large database of images. This topic has been
heavily studied over the years. Initially tackled with bagof-features representations, large vocabularies, and inverted
files [61, 51], and then with feature encodings such as the
Fisher vector or the VLAD descriptors [55, 31], the retrieval
task has recently benefited from the success of deep learning representations such as convolutional neural networks
that were shown to be both effective and computationally

Figure 1. We tackle the semantic retrieval task. Leveraging the
multiple human captions that are available for images of a training set, we train a semantic-aware representation that improves
semantic visual search within a disjoint database of images that
do not contain textual annotations. As a by-product, our method
highlights regions that contributed the most to the decision.

efficient for this task [64, 58, 25]. Among previous retrieval
methods, many have focused on retrieving the exact same
instance as in the query image, such as a particular landmark [56, 57, 32] or a particular object [51]. Another group
of methods have concentrated on retrieving semanticallyrelated images, where “semantically related” is understood
as displaying the same object category [65, 8], or sharing
a set of tags [23, 22]. This requires to make the strong assumption that all categories or tags are known in advance,
which does not hold for complex scenes.
In this paper we are interested in applying the task of semantic retrieval to query images that display realistic and
complex scenes, where we cannot assume that all the object categories are known in advance, and where the inter16589

