G2 DeNet: Global Gaussian Distribution Embedding Network and Its
Application to Visual Recognition∗

1

Qilong Wang1 , Peihua Li1 , Lei Zhang2
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Hong Kong Polytechnic University

qlwang@mail.dlut.edu.cn, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, plugging trainable structural layers into deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as image representations has made promising progress. However, there has
been little work on inserting parametric probability distributions, which can effectively model feature statistics,
into deep CNNs in an end-to-end manner. This paper proposes a Global Gaussian Distribution embedding Network
(G2 DeNet) to take a step towards addressing this problem. The core of G2 DeNet is a novel trainable layer of a
global Gaussian as an image representation plugged into
deep CNNs for end-to-end learning. The challenge is that
the proposed layer involves Gaussian distributions whose
space is not a linear space, which makes its forward and
backward propagations be non-intuitive and non-trivial. To
tackle this issue, we employ a Gaussian embedding strategy which respects the structures of both Riemannian manifold and smooth group of Gaussians. Based on this strategy, we construct the proposed global Gaussian embedding
layer and decompose it into two sub-layers: the matrix partition sub-layer decoupling the mean vector and covariance
matrix entangled in the embedding matrix, and the squarerooted, symmetric positive definite matrix sub-layer. In this
way, we can derive the partial derivatives associated with
the proposed structural layer and thus allow backpropagation of gradients. Experimental results on large scale region
classification and fine-grained recognition tasks show that
G2 DeNet is superior to its counterparts, capable of achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Modeling activations of convolutional layers or fullyconnected layers of pre-trained deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) as image representations has been very
∗ P. Li, to whom correspondence should be addressed, was supported

by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61471082). L.
Zhang was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 61672446). We thank NVIDIA corporation for donating GPU.

successful in a variety of computer vision tasks, such as object recognition [25], image retrieval [9] and texture classification [6]. However, these methods handle feature learning,
image modeling and loss function (e.g., classifier) in separate stages. Recent researches have shown it is meaningful and helpful to plug modeling methods into deep CNN
architectures as structural layers in an end-to-end manner
[14, 24, 1, 37]. Compared with [9, 6], the end-to-end approaches can jointly leverage the power of learning features,
representing images and training classifiers [1, 29].
To represent images, the probability distributions are
widely used as they generally have capability to model
abundant statistics of features, producing fixed size representations regardless of varying feature sizes [28, 32, 33,
40]. Unfortunately, there has been little work attempting
to plug trainable probability distribution modeling layers
into deep CNNs. Oliva et al. [29] make an effort to propose a deep mean maps (DMMs) method, which can plug a
family of non-parametric distributions into deep CNNs. By
exploiting the mean of random Fourier features [31] to approximate the mean map embeddings of distributions [11],
the DMMs layer is decomposed into common operations of
convolution, pixel-wise cosine and average pooling so that
forward and backward propagations can be easily accomplished. It is reported that the DMMs layer improves the
existing CNNs on several real-world datasets. However, the
DMMs method does not consider special characteristics of
individual distributions, for example, exponential distributions have specific geometric structures.
Although the DMMs method has been studied, combining parametric probability distributions modeling into deep
CNNs still is an open problem. In this paper, we take a step
forward towards addressing this problem. Specifically, as
in [28, 33, 40], we use global Gaussians as image representations and propose a global Gaussian embedding layer
to combine them in deep CNN architectures. In contrast to
DMMs [29], we explicitly take advantage of the geometry
of Gaussians by considering their parameters (i.e., the mean
vectors and covariance matrices) rather than using approximated embeddings of distributions in DMMs. This renders

2730

