Exclusivity-Consistency Regularized Multi-view Subspace Clustering
Xiaobo Wang1,2 Xiaojie Guo2,3 Zhen Lei1,2∗ Changqing Zhang4 Stan Z. Li1,2
1
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University
{xiaobo.wang, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

xj.max.guo@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-view subspace clustering aims to partition a set of
multi-source data into their underlying groups. To boost the
performance of multi-view clustering, numerous subspace
learning algorithms have been developed in recent years,
but with rare exploitation of the representation complementarity between different views as well as the indicator consistency among the representations, let alone considering
them simultaneously. In this paper, we propose a novel
multi-view subspace clustering model that attempts to harness the complementary information between different representations by introducing a novel position-aware exclusivity term. Meanwhile, a consistency term is employed to
make these complementary representations to further have
a common indicator. We formulate the above concerns into a unified optimization framework. Experimental results
on several benchmark datasets are conducted to reveal the
effectiveness of our algorithm over other state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Clustering data points into different groups such that the
objects in the same group are highly similar to each other, is
one of the most fundamental topics in computer vision and
pattern recognition [1, 30, 17, 22, 23]. In the past decades, a
number of clustering approaches have been developed, such
as the iteration based methods [28, 13], the factorization
based methods [6, 14], and the spectral clustering based
approaches [24, 8, 20]. Among them, spectral clustering
based ones have become popular and dominant. For example, Standard Spectral Clustering (SPC) proposed in [24]
aims to perform clustering by learning the similarity matrix
based on the data locality. Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) [8] is to seek a sparse representation for each instance
∗ Corresponding Author

zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

over the whole data. Having the representation calculated, the spectral clustering algorithm (e.g., Normalized Cuts
[27]) is performed to obtain the clustering result. The LowRank Representation (LRR) approach proposed in [20] tries
to find a low-rank representation. Additionally, the method
proposed in [18], called Structured Sparse Subspace Clustering (S3C), achieves promising results by integrating the
sparse representation learning and the spectral clustering into one framework. However, these methods mainly focus on
advancing the clustering performance for single source features. For multi-view ones, they are difficult to find good
clusters due to the potential presence of view insufficiency
or the high-dimensionality of data. Typically, they cannot
be directly applied to multi-view cases. This paper devotes
to boost the clustering performance by recovering the subspace structure of the data set with multi-view features.
In practice, we often face data in multiple views. Different views characterize different and partly independent information about the data. For instance, images and videos
are described by different kinds of features, such as color, texture and edge. Web pages contain texts, hyperlinks
and possibly existing visual information. In general, these
multi-view representations can seamlessly capture the rich
information from multiple data cues as well as the complementary information among different cues, thus will be beneficial to clustering. To integrate different features, much
progress has been made in developing effective multi-view
clustering methods [7, 15, 5, 2, 4, 9, 31]. The work [7] utilizes a bipartite similarity matrix to connect two types of
features and adopts the standard spectral clustering to generate the final result. The co-regularized multi-view spectral
clustering introduced in [15] is to perform clustering on different views simultaneously with a co-regularization constraint. The method designed in [5] learns a common representation under the spectral clustering framework by combining Laplacians of different views. By considering the
complementary information between representations, the
1923

