Dynamic Attention-controlled Cascaded Shape Regression Exploiting Training
Data Augmentation and Fuzzy-set Sample Weighting

1

Zhen-Hua Feng1 Josef Kittler1 William Christmas1 Patrik Huber1 Xiao-Jun Wu2
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK
2
School of IoT Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China
{z.feng, j.kittler, w.christmas, p.huber}@surrey.ac.uk, wu xiaojun@jiangnan.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a new Cascaded Shape Regression (CSR)
architecture, namely Dynamic Attention-Controlled CSR
(DAC-CSR), for robust facial landmark detection on unconstrained faces. Our DAC-CSR divides facial landmark detection into three cascaded sub-tasks: face bounding box
refinement, general CSR and attention-controlled CSR. The
first two stages refine initial face bounding boxes and output intermediate facial landmarks. Then, an online dynamic model selection method is used to choose appropriate domain-specific CSRs for further landmark refinement.
The key innovation of our DAC-CSR is the fault-tolerant
mechanism, using fuzzy set sample weighting, for attentioncontrolled domain-specific model training. Moreover, we
advocate data augmentation with a simple but effective 2D
profile face generator, and context-aware feature extraction
for better facial feature representation. Experimental results obtained on challenging datasets demonstrate the merits of our DAC-CSR over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Facial Landmark Detection (FLD), also known as face
alignment, is a prerequisite for many automatic face analysis systems, e.g. face recognition [3, 33, 34], expression
analysis [13, 14] and 2D-3D inverse rendering [1, 20, 21,
23, 28, 48]. Facial landmarks provide accurate shape information with semantic meaning, enabling geometric image
normalisation and feature extraction for use in the remaining stages of a face processing pipeline. This is crucial for
high-fidelity face image analysis. As the technology of FLD
for constrained faces has already been well developed, the
current trend is to address FLD for unconstrained faces in
the presence of extreme variations in pose, expression, illumination and partial occlusion [2, 4, 24, 25, 30].
More recently, unconstrained FLD has seen huge
progress owing to the state-of-the-art Cascaded Shape Re-

Face Box
Refinement

General
CSR

Domain-specific
CSRs

Figure 1. The pipeline of our proposed DAC-CSR.

gression (CSR) architecture [6, 12, 15, 29, 46]. The key to
the success of CSR is to construct a strong regressor from a
set of weak regressors arranged in a cascade. This architecture greatly improves the performance of FLD in terms of
generalisation capacity and accuracy. However, in the light
of very recent studies [35, 39, 42, 46, 47], the capacity of
CSR appears to be saturating, especially for unconstrained
faces with extreme appearance variations. For example, the
FLD error of state-of-the-art CSR-based methods increases
from around 3% (error in percent of the inter-ocular distance) on the Labelled Face Parts in the Wild (LFPW) [2]
dataset to 6.5% on the more challenging Caltech Occluded
Faces in the Wild (COFW) [4] dataset. This degradation
has three main reasons: 1) The modelling capacity of the
existing CSR architecture is limited. 2) CSR is sensitive to
the positioning of face bounding boxes used for landmark
initialisation. 3) The volume of available training data is
insufficient. Can these limitations be overcome, especially
for unconstrained faces exhibiting extreme appearance variations? We offer an encouraging answer by presenting a
new Dynamic Attention-Controlled CSR (DAC-CSR) architecture with a dynamic domain selection mechanism and
a novel training strategy which benefits from training data
augmentation and fuzzy set training sample weighting.
Fig. 1 depicts a simplified overview of the proposed
DAC-CSR architecture. Its innovation is in linking three
types of regressor cascades performing in succession: 1)
face bounding box refinement for better landmark initialisation, 2) an initial landmark update using a general CSR, and

2481

