Variational Autoencoded Regression:
High Dimensional Regression of Visual Data on Complex Manifold

1

YoungJoon Yoo1 Sangdoo Yun2 Hyung Jin Chang3 Yiannis Demiris3 Jin Young Choi2
Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul National University, South Korea
2
ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng., Seoul National University, South Korea
3
Personal Robotics Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
1

yjyoo3312@gmail.com 2 {yunsd101, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr 3 {hj.chang, y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

(a) Image Sequence

Abstract
This paper proposes a new high dimensional regression
method by merging Gaussian process regression into a variational autoencoder framework. In contrast to other regression methods, the proposed method focuses on the case
where output responses are on a complex high dimensional
manifold, such as images. Our contributions are summarized as follows: (i) A new regression method estimating
high dimensional image responses, which is not handled by
existing regression algorithms, is proposed. (ii) The proposed regression method introduces a strategy to learn the
latent space as well as the encoder and decoder so that the
result of the regressed response in the latent space coincide
with the corresponding response in the data space. (iii) The
proposed regression is embedded into a generative model,
and the whole procedure is developed by the variational autoencoder framework. We demonstrate the robustness and
effectiveness of our method through a number of experiments on various visual data regression problems.

1. Introduction
Regression of paired input and output data with an unknown relationship is one of the most crucial challenges in
data analysis. In diverse research fields, such as trajectory
analysis, robotics, the stock market, etc. [15, 44, 44, 28, 22],
target phenomena are interpreted as a form of paired input /
output data. In these applications, a regression algorithm is
usually used to estimate the unknown response for a given
input by using the information obtained from the observed
data pairs. Many vision applications can also be expressed
as such input / output data pairs. For example, in Fig. 1 (a),
the sequence of the motion images can be described by input / output paired data, where the input can be defined as
the relative order and the output response is defined as the

:

:

→

?

?

: Ϭ
(b) Joint-Pose Data
:
:

→

ϭ

?

?

:

Figure 1. Examples of paired data in vision applications. (a) For
the image sequence, the domain can be defined by the space representing relative orders of image sequences. (b) For joint-pose data
pairs, the joint vector space can be a possible domain.

corresponding image. The motion capture data and their
corresponding images in Fig. 1 (b) are another example.
The input data are 3D joint positions, and their responses
will be the corresponding posture images. If we can model
the implicit function representing the given image data pairs
via regression, we can estimate unobserved images that correspond to the input data.
However, applying existing multiple output regression
algorithms [1, 3, 2, 39] to these kinds of visual data applications is not straightforward, because the visual data are
usually represented in high dimensional spaces. In general,
high dimensional visual data (such as image sequences) are
difficult to be analyzed with classical probabilistic methods
because of their limited modeling capacity [17, 18]. Thus,
regression of visual data to estimate visual responses requires a novel approach.
In handling high dimensional complex data, recent at13674

