BRISKS: Binary Features for Spherical Images on a Geodesic Grid
Hao Guan, and William A. P. Smith
Department of Computer Science, The University of York, UK
{hg607, william.smith}@york.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we develop an interest point detector and
binary feature descriptor for spherical images. We take as
inspiration a recent framework developed for planar images, BRISK (Binary Robust Invariant Scalable Keypoints),
and adapt the method to operate on spherical images. All of
our processing is intrinsic to the sphere and avoids the distortion inherent in storing and indexing spherical images in
a 2D representation. We discretise images on a spherical
geodesic grid formed by recursive subdivision of a triangular mesh. This leads to a multiscale pixel grid comprising mainly hexagonal pixels that lends itself naturally to a
spherical image pyramid representation. For interest point
detection, we use a variant of the Accelerated Segment Test
(AST) corner detector which operates on our geodesic grid.
We estimate a continuous scale and location for features
and descriptors are built by sampling onto a regular pattern in the tangent space. We evaluate repeatability, precision and recall on both synthetic spherical images with
known ground truth correspondences and real images.

1. Introduction
Spherical images arise in a number of contexts. In computer vision, they are captured by omnidirectional cameras
such as catadioptric or ﬁsheye imaging systems or by stitching multiple perspective images. Such panoramic images
have many applications where their full coverage of the
viewing sphere provides a richer source of image features
and increases the likelihood of matching features between
views. Spherical images have taken on a particular importance recently due to the rapid rise in popularity of “360
video”. There are now commercially available systems for
capturing such video1 and support for their interactive playback is available in the most popular online video repositories2 . Outside computer vision, any discretely sampled
spherical function may be processed as a spherical image.
1 https://vr.gopro.com/
2 https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/
6178631?hl=en-GB

The most obvious examples occur in Geographic Information Systems (GIS) which model the spatial variation of
properties of the surface of the Earth [21].
Image processing for spherical images is less well developed than for their planar counterpart. There are two complexities that arise in processing spherical images. The ﬁrst
is that the nature of the spherical surface must be taken into
account when performing geometric operations. For example, distance between image points depends on geodesic
(great circle) distance as opposed to Euclidean distance for
planar images. The second is that for discrete images, the
spherical surface must be segmented into discrete pixels
which can be efﬁciently indexed. A common means to address both of these issues is to parameterise a spherical image to the 2D plane via a chosen projection (e.g. equirectangular) and then treat the image as if it were planar. The
problem with this approach is that any projection introduces
distortion and boundaries. A more attractive alternative is to
discretise spherical images on the sphere and perform image
processing on the surface of the sphere.
One of the most fundamental operations in image processing is to identify points of interest and to build descriptors of local appearance around an interest point. This enables point-to-point matches to be established between images or a compact description of a scene or object to be constructed. The seminal work in this area is the Scale Invariant
Feature Transform (SIFT) of Lowe [12]. While SIFT features remain a benchmark for their distinctiveness and robustness to appearance variation, the computational cost of
extracting and matching them has led to them being largely
superseded by a class of lighter weight features based on
binary descriptors. In this paper, we take one such feature,
BRISK (Binary Robust Invariant Scalable Keypoints) [11],
as inspiration and extend them to operate on spherical images. The proposed BRISKS (BRISK on the Sphere) framework includes a novel discretisation of spherical images and
scale space, interest point detection, binary feature description and matching. We perform experimental evaluation on
both synthetic and real images and test robustness to rotation, camera motion, illumination changes and noise.
14516

