Seeing What Is Not There:
Learning Context to Determine Where Objects Are Missing
Jin Sun
David W. Jacobs
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
{jinsun,djacobs}@cs.umd.edu

Figure 1: When curb ramps (green rectangle) are missing from a segment of sidewalks in an intersection (orange rectangle),
people with mobility impairments are unable to cross the street. We propose an approach to determine where objects are
missing by learning a context model so that it can be combined with object detection results.

Abstract
Most of computer vision focuses on what is in an image. We propose to train a standalone object-centric context
representation to perform the opposite task: seeing what is
not there. Given an image, our context model can predict
where objects should exist, even when no object instances
are present. Combined with object detection results, we can
perform a novel vision task: finding where objects are missing in an image. Our model is based on a convolutional
neural network structure. With a specially designed training strategy, the model learns to ignore objects and focus
on context only. It is fully convolutional thus highly efficient. Experiments show the effectiveness of the proposed
approach in one important accessibility task: finding city
street regions where curb ramps are missing, which could
help millions of people with mobility disabilities.

1. Introduction
Most fundamental computer vision tasks, e.g., image
classification and object detection, focus on seeing what is
there: for example, is there a curb ramp in this image, if
yes, where is it? Using deep neural network models, computational approaches to such tasks are catching up to human performance in more and more benchmarks. However,
humans can easily outperform algorithms in the task of inferring objects that are ‘not there’: for example, is there a
curb ramp in this image, if no, where could it be?
We are interested in finding where objects are missing in
an image: an object of interest is not there, even though the
environment suggests it should be. From a computational
perspective, an object can be defined as missing in an image
region when: 1) an object detector finds nothing; 2) a predictor of the object’s typical environment, i.e. context, indicates high probability of its existence. Given an image, we
want to detect all such regions efficiently. We summarize

5716

