Deep Temporal Linear Encoding Networks
Ali Diba1,⋆ , Vivek Sharma2,⋆,∓ , Luc Van Gool1,3
1

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, 2 CV:HCI, KIT, 3 CVL, ETH Zürich

{ali.diba,luc.vangool}@esat.kuleuven.be, vivek.sharma@kit.edu

Abstract
The CNN-encoding of features from entire videos for
the representation of human actions has rarely been addressed. Instead, CNN work has focused on approaches
to fuse spatial and temporal networks, but these were typically limited to processing shorter sequences. We present
a new video representation, called temporal linear encoding (TLE) and embedded inside of CNNs as a new layer,
which captures the appearance and motion throughout entire videos. It encodes this aggregated information into a
robust video feature representation, via end-to-end learning. Advantages of TLEs are: (a) they encode the entire
video into a compact feature representation, learning the
semantics and a discriminative feature space; (b) they are
applicable to all kinds of networks like 2D and 3D CNNs for
video classification; and (c) they model feature interactions
in a more expressive way and without loss of information.
We conduct experiments on two challenging human action
datasets: HMDB51 and UCF101. The experiments show
that TLE outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on
both datasets.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition [6, 15, 25, 35] in videos has
attracted quite some attention, due to the potential applications in video surveillance, behavior analysis, video retrieval, and more. Even if considerable progress was made,
the performance of computer vision systems still falls behind that of people. On top of the challenges that make
object class recognition hard, there are issues like camera
motion and the continously changing viewpoints that come
with it. Whereas Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) have
caused several sub-fields of vision to leap forward, they still
lack the capacity to exploit long-range temporal information, probably the main reason why end-to-end networks
are still unable to outperform methods using hand-crafted
⋆ Ali Diba and Vivek Sharma contributed equally to this work and
listed in alphabetical order.
∓ This work was carried out while he was at ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven.

C
O
N
V

C
O
N
V

Tennis

Temporal Linear Encoding
(TLE) Layer

C
O
N
V

End-To-End Training

Figure 1: Temporal linear encoding for video classification.
Given several segments of an entire video, be it either a
number of frames or a number of clips, the model builds a
compact video representation from the spatial and temporal
cues they contain, through end-to-end learning. The ConvNets applied to different segments share the same weights.

features [35].
Neural networks for action recognition can be categorized into two types, namely one-stream ConvNets [15, 33]
(which use only one stream at a time: either spatial or temporal information), and two-stream ConvNets [25] (which
integrate both spatial and temporal information at the same
time).
As to the one-stream ConvNets, spatial networks perform action recognition from individual video frames. They
lack any form of motion modeling. On the other hand,
temporal networks typically get their motion information
from dense optical flow. This reliance on dense temporal
sampling leads to excessive computational costs for longer
videos. One way to avoid processing the abundance of input frames is by extracting a fixed number of shorter clips,
evenly distributed over the video [25, 33].
The two-stream ConvNets have shown to outperform
one-stream ConvNets. They exploit fusion techniques like
trajectory-constrained pooling [37], 3D pooling [8], and
12329

