Deep Variation-structured Reinforcement Learning for Visual Relationship and
Attribute Detection
Xiaodan Liang Lisa Lee Eric P. Xing
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{xiaodan1,lslee,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Computers still struggle to understand the interdependency of objects in the scene as a whole, e.g., relations between objects or their attributes. Existing methods often ignore global context cues capturing the interactions among
different object instances, and can only recognize a handful of types by exhaustively training individual detectors
for all possible relationships. To capture such global interdependency, we propose a deep Variation-structured Reinforcement Learning (VRL) framework to sequentially discover object relationships and attributes in the whole image. First, a directed semantic action graph is built using language priors to provide a rich and compact representation of semantic correlations between object categories, predicates, and attributes. Next, we use a variationstructured traversal over the action graph to construct a
small, adaptive action set for each step based on the current
state and historical actions. In particular, an ambiguityaware object mining scheme is used to resolve semantic
ambiguity among object categories that the object detector
fails to distinguish. We then make sequential predictions using a deep RL framework, incorporating global context cues
and semantic embeddings of previously extracted phrases
in the state vector. Our experiments on the Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) dataset and the large-scale Visual
Genome dataset validate the superiority of VRL, which can
achieve significantly better detection results on datasets involving thousands of relationship and attribute types. We
also demonstrate that VRL is able to predict unseen types
embedded in our action graph by learning correlations on
shared graph nodes.

1. Introduction
Although much progress has been made in image classification [7], detection [25, 16, 18] and segmentation [20,
15, 17], we are still far from reaching the goal of holistic scene understanding—that is, a model capable of rec-

man
standing.on
skateboard
yellow

helmet

green
object

woman

wearing

black

on
shirt

log
yellow

white
relationships

kneeling.on
surfboard
white

beach

has

wearing
on

wetsuit

blue

foot
on
log
yellow

attributes

Figure 1. In each example (left and right), we show the bounding boxes of objects in the image (top), and the relationships and
attributes recognized by our proposed VRL framework (bottom).
Only the top few results are illustrated for clarity.

ognizing the interactions and relationships between objects,
and describing their attributes. While objects are the core
building blocks of an image, it is often the relationships
and attributes that determine the holistic interpretation of
the scene. For example in Fig. 1, the left image can be understood as “a man standing on a yellow and green skateboard”, and the right image as “a woman wearing a blue wet
suit and kneeling on a surfboard”. Being able to extract and
exploit such visual information would benefit many realworld applications such as image search [24], question answering [1, 9, 14], and fine-grained recognition [34, 4, 32].
Visual relationships are a pair of localized objects connected via a predicate; for example, predicates can be actions (“kick”), comparative (“smaller than”), spatial (“near
to”), verbs (“wear”), or prepositions (“with”). Attributes
describe a localized object, e.g., with color (“yellow”) or
state (“standing”). Detecting relationships and attributes is
more challenging than traditional object detection [25] due
to the following reasons: (1) There are a massive number of
possible relationship and attribute types (e.g., 13,894 relationship types in Visual Genome [13]), resulting in a greater
skew of rare and infrequent types. (2) Each object can be
associated with many relationships and attributes, making it
inefficient to exhaustively search all possible relationships
for each pair of objects. (3) A global, holistic perspective of
1848

