CLEVR: A Diagnostic Dataset for
Compositional Language and Elementary Visual Reasoning
Justin Johnson1,2∗
Li Fei-Fei1
1

Bharath Hariharan2
C. Lawrence Zitnick2
2

Stanford University

Laurens van der Maaten2
Ross Girshick2

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
When building artificial intelligence systems that can
reason and answer questions about visual data, we need
diagnostic tests to analyze our progress and discover shortcomings. Existing benchmarks for visual question answering can help, but have strong biases that models can exploit
to correctly answer questions without reasoning. They also
conflate multiple sources of error, making it hard to pinpoint
model weaknesses. We present a diagnostic dataset that
tests a range of visual reasoning abilities. It contains minimal biases and has detailed annotations describing the kind
of reasoning each question requires. We use this dataset to
analyze a variety of modern visual reasoning systems, providing novel insights into their abilities and limitations.

1. Introduction
A long-standing goal of artificial intelligence research
is to develop systems that can reason and answer questions about visual information. Recently, several datasets
have been introduced to study this problem [4, 10, 21, 26,
32, 46, 49]. Each of these Visual Question Answering
(VQA) datasets contains challenging natural language questions about images. Correctly answering these questions
requires perceptual abilities such as recognizing objects,
attributes, and spatial relationships as well as higher-level
skills such as counting, performing logical inference, making comparisons, or leveraging commonsense world knowledge [31]. Numerous methods have attacked these problems [2, 3, 9, 24, 44], but many show only marginal improvements over strong baselines [4, 16, 48]. Unfortunately,
our ability to understand the limitations of these methods is
impeded by the inherent complexity of the VQA task. Are
methods hampered by failures in recognition, poor reasoning, lack of commonsense knowledge, or something else?
The difficulty of understanding a system’s competences
∗ Work done during an internship at FAIR.

Q: Are there an equal number of large things and metal spheres?
Q: What size is the cylinder that is left of the brown metal thing that
is left of the big sphere? Q: There is a sphere with the same size as the
metal cube; is it made of the same material as the small red sphere?
Q: How many objects are either small cylinders or metal things?

Figure 1. A sample image and questions from CLEVR. Questions
test aspects of visual reasoning such as attribute identification,
counting, comparison, multiple attention, and logical operations.

is exemplified by Clever Hans, a 1900s era horse who appeared to be able to answer arithmetic questions. Careful observation revealed that Hans was correctly “answering” questions by reacting to cues read off his human observers [30]. Statistical learning systems, like those used
for VQA, may develop similar “cheating” approaches to
superficially “solve” tasks without learning the underlying
reasoning processes [35, 36]. For instance, a statistical
learner may correctly answer the question “What covers the
ground?” not because it understands the scene but because
biased datasets often ask questions about the ground when
it is snow-covered [1, 47]. How can we determine whether
a system is capable of sophisticated reasoning and not just
exploiting biases of the world, similar to Clever Hans?
In this paper we propose a diagnostic dataset for studying the ability of VQA systems to perform visual reasoning.
We refer to this dataset as the Compositional Language and
Elementary Visual Reasoning diagnostics dataset (CLEVR;
pronounced as clever in homage to Hans). CLEVR contains
100k rendered images and about one million automaticallygenerated questions, of which 853k are unique. It has chal12901

