Richer Convolutional Features for Edge Detection
Yun Liu1

Ming-Ming Cheng1 Xiaowei Hu1 Kai Wang1
1
Nankai University 2 HUST

Xiang Bai2

https://mmcheng.net/rcfEdge/

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an accurate edge detector using richer convolutional features (RCF). Since objects in
natural images possess various scales and aspect ratios,
learning the rich hierarchical representations is very critical for edge detection. CNNs have been proved to be effective for this task. In addition, the convolutional features in
CNNs gradually become coarser with the increase of the receptive fields. According to these observations, we attempt
to adopt richer convolutional features in such a challenging vision task. The proposed network fully exploits multiscale and multilevel information of objects to perform the
image-to-image prediction by combining all the meaningful
convolutional features in a holistic manner. Using VGG16
network, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on several available datasets. When evaluating on the well-known
BSDS500 benchmark, we achieve ODS F-measure of 0.811
while retaining a fast speed (8 FPS). Besides, our fast version of RCF achieves ODS F-measure of 0.806 with 30 FPS.

1. Introduction
Edge detection, which aims to extract visually salient
edges and object boundaries from natural images, has remained as one of the main challenges in computer vision for
several decades. It is usually considered as a low-level technique, and varieties of high-level tasks have greatly benefited from the development of edge detection, such as object
detection [17, 55], object proposal [9, 54, 60–62] and image
segmentation [1, 3, 8, 56].
Typically, traditional methods first extract local cues of
brightness, colors, gradients and textures, or other manually designed features like Pb [40], gPb [2], and Sketch tokens [36], then sophisticated learning paradigms [14,57] are
used to classify edge and non-edge pixels. Although edge
detection approaches using low-level features have made
great improvement in these years [33], their limitations are
M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

(a) original image (b) ground truth

(e) conv3 3

(f) conv4 1

(c) conv3 1

(d) conv3 2

(g) conv4 2

(h) conv4 3

Figure 1: We build a simple network based on VGG16
[50] to produce side outputs of conv3 1, conv3 2, conv3 3,
conv4 1, conv4 2 and conv4 3. One can clearly see that
convolutional features become coarser gradually, and the
intermediate layers conv3 1, conv3 2, conv4 1, and conv4 2
contain lots of useful fine details that do not appear in other
layers.
also obvious. For example, edges and boundaries are often
defined to be semantically meaningful, however, it is difficult to use low-level cues to represent object-level information. Under these circumstances, gPb [2] and Structured
Edges [14] try to use complex strategies to capture global
features as much as possible.
In the past few years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have become popular in the computer vision community by substantially advancing the state-of-the-art of
various tasks, including image classification [31, 50, 52],
object detection [20, 21, 34, 43] and semantic segmentation [7, 38] etc. Since CNNs have a strong capability to
learn high-level representations of natural images automatically, there is a recent trend of using convolutional networks
to perform edge detection. Some well-known CNN-based
methods have pushed forward this field significantly, such

3000

