Commonly Uncommon:
Semantic Sparsity in Situation Recognition
Mark Yatskar1 , Vicente Ordonez2,3 , Luke Zettlemoyer1 , Ali Farhadi1,2
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2), Seattle, WA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
[my89, lsz, ali]@cs.washington.edu, vicente@cs.virginia.edu
1

Abstract
Semantic sparsity is a common challenge in structured
visual classification problems; when the output space is
complex, the vast majority of the possible predictions are
rarely, if ever, seen in the training set. This paper studies
semantic sparsity in situation recognition, the task of producing structured summaries of what is happening in images, including activities, objects and the roles objects play
within the activity. For this problem, we find empirically
that most substructures required for prediction are rare,
and current state-of-the-art model performance dramatically decreases if even one such rare substructure exists in
the target output.We avoid many such errors by (1) introducing a novel tensor composition function that learns to share
examples across substructures more effectively and (2) semantically augmenting our training data with automatically
gathered examples of rarely observed outputs using web
data. When integrated within a complete CRF-based structured prediction model, the tensor-based approach outperforms existing state of the art by a relative improvement of
2.11% and 4.40% on top-5 verb and noun-role accuracy, respectively. Adding 5 million images with our semantic augmentation techniques gives further relative improvements of
6.23% and 9.57% on top-5 verb and noun-role accuracy.

1. Introduction
Many visual classification problems, such as image captioning [29], visual question answering [2], referring expressions [23], and situation recognition [44] have structured, semantically interpretable output spaces. In contrast to classification tasks such as ImageNet [37], these
problems typically suffer from semantic sparsity; there is
a combinatorial number of possible outputs, no dataset can
cover them all, and performance of existing models degrades significantly when evaluated on rare or unseen in-

CARRYING
ROLE

VALUE

ROLE

VALUE

ROLE

AGENT

MAN

ITEM

BABY

AGENTPART
PLACE

VALUE

AGENT

WOMAN

AGENT

MAN

ITEM

BUCKET

ITEM

TABLE

CHEST

AGENTPART

HEAD

AGENTPART

BACK

OUTSIDE

PLACE

PATH

PLACE

STREET

Figure 1: Three situations involving carrying, with semantic roles agent, the carrier, item, the carried, agentpart, the
part of the agent carrying, and place, where the situation is happening. For carrying, there are many possible carry-able objects
(nouns that can fill the item role), which is an example of semantic sparsity. Such rarely occurring substructures are challenging and cause significant errors, affecting not only performance on
role-values but also verbs.

puts [3, 46, 9, 44]. In this paper, we consider situation
recognition, a prototypical structured classification problem
with significant semantic sparsity, and develop new models and semantic data augmentation techniques that significantly improve performance by better modeling the underlying semantic structure of the task.
Situation recognition [44] is the task of producing structured summaries of what is happening in images, including
activities, objects and the roles those objects play within the
activity. This problem can be challenging because many
activities, such as carrying, have very open ended semantic roles, such as item, the thing being carried (see
Figure 1); nearly any object can be carried and the training
data will never contain all possibilities. This is a prototypical instance of semantic sparsity: rare outputs constitute
17196

