A Practical Method for Fully Automatic Intrinsic Camera Calibration Using
Directionally Encoded Light
Mahdi Abbaspour Tehrani
University of California Irvine

Thabo Beeler
Disney Research

Anselm Grundhöfer
Disney Research

mabbaspo@ics.uci.edu

thabo@disneyresearch.com

anselm@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Calibrating the intrinsic properties of a camera is one of
the fundamental tasks required for a variety of computer vision and image processing tasks. The precise measurement
of focal length, location of the principal point as well as distortion parameters of the lens is crucial, for example, for 3D
reconstruction [27]. Although a variety of methods exist to
achieve this goal, they are often cumbersome to carry out,
require substantial manual interaction, expert knowledge,
and a significant operating volume. We propose a novel
calibration method based on the usage of directionally encoded light rays for estimating the intrinsic parameters. It
enables a fully automatic calibration with a small device
mounted close to the front lens element and still enables an
accuracy comparable to standard methods even when the
lens is focused up to infinity.
Our method overcomes the mentioned limitations since it
guarantees an accurate calibration without any human intervention while requiring only a limited amount of space.
Besides that, the approach also allows to estimate the distance of the focal plane as well as the size of the aperture.
We demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method by
evaluating several camera/lens configurations using prototypical devices.

1. Introduction
Accurate intrinsic camera calibration is one of the core
requirements for a multitude of computer vision tasks. Although reliable methods exist to do so, most of them require substantial human interaction and a carefully configured setup to successfully compute accurate calibration parameters. Especially the accuracy of the estimated lens distortion parameters may suffer if the user is not sufficiently
covering the complete area of the image sensor. This is particularly challenging for wide angle lenses where a large
volume needs to be covered, or for tele-lenses where the
calibration volume is at a distance.

Overcoming these issues is the primary goal of this work
and therefore we propose a simple, fully automatic calibration method that estimates the intrinsic parameters of a camera reliably without any human intervention. We present
a practical calibration device that only requires a minimal
working volume directly in front of the lens and the overall process can be carried out within few minutes with repeatingly reliable accuracy at the push of a button. Unlike
most existing calibration methods we employ directionally
encoded light which allows to calibrate additional intrinsic
parameters, such as focus distance or aperture size. The proposed algorithm is not exclusively aimed for being used by
scientists or engineers, but to simplify calibration for maintenance personnel, or amateurs who want to use a specific
software application requiring a calibrated camera. From
practical experience, achieving an acceptable camera calibration is a seriously difficult task for such non-experts.
In summary, our proposed method includes the following
novel contributions:
• A reliable and fully automatic intrinsic camera calibration algorithm.
• A prototypical hardware setup which requires only a
minimal working volume directly in front of the lens.
• An algorithm not requiring any system pre-calibration.
• The use of directionally encoded light to calibrate additional lens properties, such as focus distance and
aperture size.
• An evaluation of the system based on various different lenses and cameras including a comparison with
Zhang’s method [31].
The remainder of the paper will start with a short discussion of the related work (2), followed by a description of the
proposed setup (3) and calibration method (4). In section 5
we will introduce our hardware prototype used to evaluate
the system in section 6.

2. Background and Related Work
In the following we will give a short introduction about
the basic camera model and the calibration method we are
11106

