Minimum Delay Moving Object Detection
Dong Lao and Ganesh Sundaramoorthi
King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
{dong.lao, ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We present a general framework and method for detection of an object in a video based on apparent motion. The
object moves relative to background motion at some unknown time in the video, and the goal is to detect and segment the object as soon it moves in an online manner. Due
to unreliability of motion between frames, more than two
frames are needed to reliably detect the object. Our method
is designed to detect the object(s) with minimum delay, i.e.,
frames after the object moves, constraining the false alarms.
Experiments on a new extensive dataset for moving object
detection show that our method achieves less delay for all
false alarm constraints than existing state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Detection and segmentation of object(s) from video are
fundamental problems in computer vision. Motion cues
play a role in biological visual systems, and may be useful for object segmentation in both biological and computer
vision systems [16]. Thus, there have been many works
that segment a video by apparent motion, i.e., motion induced in the image, in an attempt to segment relevant objects (e.g., [34, 35, 27, 16]). With abuse of nomenclature,
we will refer to apparent motion as motion from now on. In
these methods, it is assumed that the video is obtained when
the objects of interest are already in motion relative to the
background. However, that may not be representative of the
problem solved by biological systems [5] or that is required
in certain computer vision applications such as robotics or
surveillance. In such cases, the object may be stationary or
out of view of the observer or otherwise have apparent motion indistinguishable from the background when the video
starts. Thus, detection of the object at the time it moves is
needed before segmentation 1 .
This paper addresses the problem of detection and seg1 We define detection as the problem of determining the existence of

an object and declaring the first frame when it is in motion. We define
segmentation as the problem of marking the pixels of the object. For us,
an object corresponds to a smooth surface in the scene.

mentation of an object by motion in a video. The object
moves, at some unknown time, differently than the “background”, induced from camera motion. Since we eventually aim for real-time closed loop operation (e.g., robotic
systems), an online algorithm is desired. We define an online system as a system that receives frames sequentially,
one at a time, and must make a decision, that is, declare a
detection or wait for more data, at each time instant. Observing more frames before declaring a detection may lead
to a more accurate detection and segmentation, since more
motion may be observed leading to a stronger motion cue.
However, this leads to greater delay, which may not be tolerable in closed-loop systems. Thus, our goal is to derive
an algorithm with minimum delay, defined as the number of
frames acquired after the object moves. Of course zero delay can be achieved by always declaring detection at frame
1, irrespective of the data. Thus, we require an algorithm
that operates under a constraint on false alarms, defined as
declarations of detection before the object moves or incorrect or inaccurate segmentation at the detection time.
Quickest Detection (QD) [21, 33, 23, 20] is a theory
for reliably detecting changes in an online fashion from a
stochastic process with minimum delay. The stochastic process arises from a certain probability distribution before an
unknown change time, and a different distribution after the
change time. QD theory derives online algorithms to detect
the change time with minimal delay subject to false alarm
constraints. Since our problem of moving object detection
resembles the Quickest Detection problem, we build on the
techniques in that literature.
In this paper, 1. We introduce a general framework and
the first online algorithm that guarantees reliable detection
of an object based on motion while minimizing the detection
delay. To achieve this, we derive statistical models of image
sequences, the objects within images, their motions, and occlusion phenomena. We achieve reliable detection by integrating motion over frames, and minimal delay by using the
statistical models to formulate the problem as a QD problem. 2. We derive a new motion segmentation approach by
integrating motion from multiple frames, as a sub-problem
for our detection scheme. 3. We provide approximate algo14250

