Temporal Convolutional Networks
for Action Segmentation and Detection
Colin Lea

Michael D. Flynn René Vidal Austin Reiter Gregory D. Hager
Johns Hopkins University
{clea1@, mflynn@, rvidal@cis., areiter@cs., hager@cs.}jhu.edu
Abstract

The ability to identify and temporally segment finegrained human actions throughout a video is crucial for
robotics, surveillance, education, and beyond. Typical approaches decouple this problem by first extracting local
spatiotemporal features from video frames and then feeding them into a temporal classifier that captures highlevel temporal patterns. We describe a class of temporal
models, which we call Temporal Convolutional Networks
(TCNs), that use a hierarchy of temporal convolutions to
perform fine-grained action segmentation or detection. Our
Encoder-Decoder TCN uses pooling and upsampling to efficiently capture long-range temporal patterns whereas our
Dilated TCN uses dilated convolutions. We show that TCNs
are capable of capturing action compositions, segment durations, and long-range dependencies, and are over a magnitude faster to train than competing LSTM-based Recurrent Neural Networks. We apply these models to three challenging fine-grained datasets and show large improvements
over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Action segmentation is crucial for applications ranging
from collaborative robotics to analysis of activities of daily
living. Given a video, the goal is to simultaneously segment
every action in time and classify each constituent segment.
In the literature, this task goes by either action segmentation or detection. We focus on modeling situated activities
– such as in a kitchen or surveillance setup – which are composed of dozens of actions over a period of many minutes.
These actions, such as cutting a tomato versus peeling a cucumber, are often only subtly different from one another.
Current approaches decouple this task into extracting
low-level spatiotemporal features and applying high-level
temporal classifiers. While there has been extensive work
on the former, recent temporal models have been limited
to sliding window action detectors [26, 28, 21], which are

Figure 1. Our Encoder-Decoder Temporal Convolutional Network
(ED-TCN) hierarchically models actions using temporal convolutions, pooling, and upsampling.

typically too short to capture long-range temporal patterns;
segmental models [25, 16, 24], which typically condition
the current action class on the previous segment, thus ignoring long-range latent dependencies; and recurrent models [28, 10], which empirically can have a limited span of
attention [28] and are hard to correctly train [22]. For many
of these models, such as RNNs with LSTM or GRUs [5],
the latent state at each time step, t, is only a function of the
data at t and the hidden state and memory at t − 1. This is
limiting when an action is defined by the changes in features
over the course of many frames.
In this paper, we discuss a class of time-series models,
which we call Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs),
that overcome the previous shortcomings by capturing longrange patterns using a hierarchy of temporal convolutional
filters. We present two types of TCNs: First, our EncoderDecoder TCN (ED-TCN) only uses a hierarchy of temporal
convolutions, pooling, and upsampling but can efficiently
capture long-range temporal patterns. The ED-TCN has a
1156

