Local Binary Convolutional Neural Networks
Felix Juefei-Xu
Carnegie Mellon University

Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Michigan State University

Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University

felixu@cmu.edu

vishnu@msu.edu

msavvid@ri.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose local binary convolution (LBC), an efficient
alternative to convolutional layers in standard convolutional
neural networks (CNN). The design principles of LBC are
motivated by local binary patterns (LBP). The LBC layer
comprises of a set of fixed sparse pre-defined binary convolutional filters that are not updated during the training process,
a non-linear activation function and a set of learnable linear weights. The linear weights combine the activated filter
responses to approximate the corresponding activated filter responses of a standard convolutional layer. The LBC
layer affords significant parameter savings, 9x to 169x in
the number of learnable parameters compared to a standard
convolutional layer. Furthermore, the sparse and binary nature of the weights also results in up to 9x to 169x savings in
model size compared to a standard convolutional layer. We
demonstrate both theoretically and experimentally that our
local binary convolution layer is a good approximation of a
standard convolutional layer. Empirically, CNNs with LBC
layers, called local binary convolutional neural networks
(LBCNN), achieves performance parity with regular CNNs
on a range of visual datasets (MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-10, and
ImageNet) while enjoying significant computational savings.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been overwhelmingly successful in a
broad range of applications, such as computer vision, speech
recognition / natural language processing, machine translation, bio-medical data analysis, and many more. Deep
convolutional neural networks (CNN), in particular, have
enjoyed huge success in tackling many computer vision
problems over the past few years, thanks to the tremendous
development of many effective architectures, AlexNet [21],
VGG [30], Inception [33] and ResNet [12, 13] to name a
few. However, training these networks end-to-end with fully
learnable convolutional kernels (as is standard practice) is (1)
computationally very expensive, (2) results in large model
size, both in terms of memory usage and disk space, and
(3) prone to over-fitting, under limited data, due to the large

number of parameters.
On the other hand, there is a growing need for deploying,
both for learning and inference, these systems on resource
constrained platforms like, autonomous cars, robots, smartphones, smart cameras, smart wearable devices, etc. To
address these drawbacks, several binary versions of CNNs
have been proposed [6, 5, 28] that approximate the dense
real-valued weights with binary weights. Binary weights
bear dramatic computational savings through efficient implementations of binary convolutions. Complete binarization of
CNNs, though, leads to performance loss in comparison to
real-valued network weights.
In this paper, we present an alternative approach to reducing the computational complexity of CNNs while performing
as well as standard CNNs. We introduce the local binary
convolution (LBC) layer that approximates the non-linearly
activated response of a standard convolutional layer. The
LBC layer comprises of fixed sparse binary filters (called
anchor weights), a non-linear activation function and a set of
learnable linear weights that computes weighted combinations of the activated convolutional response maps. Learning
reduces to optimizing the linear weights, as opposed to optimizing the convolutional filters. Parameter savings of at
least 9× to 169× can be realized during the learning stage
depending on the spatial dimensions of the convolutional
filters (3 × 3 to 13 × 13 sized filters respectively), as well
as computational and memory savings due to the sparse nature of the binary filters. CNNs with LBC layers, called
local binary convolutional neural networks (LBCNN)1 , have
much lower model complexity and are as such less prone to
over-fitting and are well suited for learning and inference of
CNNs in resource-constrained environments.
Our theoretical analysis shows that the LBC layer is a
good approximation for the non-linear activations of standard convolutional layers. We also demonstrate empirically
that CNNs with LBC layers performs comparably to regular CNNs on a range of visual datasets (MNIST, SVHN,
CIFAR-10, and ImageNet) while enjoying significant savings in terms of the number of parameters during training,
1 Implementation and future updates will be available at http://
xujuefei.com/lbcnn.

1 19

