Tracking by Natural Language Specification
Zhenyang Li, Ran Tao, Efstratios Gavves, Cees G. M. Snoek, Arnold W.M. Smeulders
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam

Abstract
This paper strives to track a target object in a video.
Rather than specifying the target in the first frame of a video
by a bounding box, we propose to track the object based on
a natural language specification of the target, which provides a more natural human-machine interaction as well as
a means to improve tracking results. We define three variants of tracking by language specification: one relying on
lingual target specification only, one relying on visual target
specification based on language, and one leveraging their
joint capacity. To show the potential of tracking by natural language specification we extend two popular tracking
datasets with lingual descriptions and report experiments.
Finally, we also sketch new tracking scenarios in surveillance and other live video streams that become feasible with
a lingual specification of the target.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to track an object in video,
a long-standing challenge in computer vision. The common approach is to specify a target by means of a bounding box around the object and to track this target as it
moves throughout the video [38, 33, 20]. The paradigm has
proven to be effective and considerable progress has been
achieved [17, 37, 34, 3, 11]. Yet, the fundamental assumption of having a bounding box target specification available
has never been challenged. In this paper, we propose a new
approach to object tracking in video, in addition to or in
contrast to target specification by means of a bounding box.
We are inspired by recent progress in object retrieval [15,
14, 26]. Both Hu et al. [15, 14] and Mao et al. [26] present
a recurrent neural network able to localize an object in an
image by means of a natural language query only, either returning a bounding box [15] or a free-form segment [14].
To cope with language ambiguity, Mao et al. introduce referring expressions that uniquely describe an object in an
image. However, unlike in still images, in videos objects
may change their appearance and position, also the background can vary dramatically from frame to frame. Even
if the video frames contain the same object category, that

Figure 1: Tracking by natural language specification allows for a novel type of human-machine interaction in object tracking. It enhances standard trackers by helping them
against drift. It also opens up opportunities for new applications like random start tracking, for example when the target
is lost, or simultaneous multiple-video tracking.

object might have a different appearance, be in different location or in a different background, thus rendering any description challenging. Unlike [15, 14, 26] we do not retrieve
but track the object of interest in video from a natural language specification.
First and foremost, the contribution of this paper is tracking by natural language specification, which allows for a
novel type of human-machine interaction in tracking, see
Figure 1. In several real-life applications, such as robotics
or autonomous driving, defining the target by a description
is more natural, e.g., “track the red car in the middle lane”.
As a second contribution, we define three variants of tracking by language specification, that are dominated by lingual
target specification, visual target specification, or leverages
their joint capacity. As third novelty we enrich standard

6495

