The Impact of Typicality for Informative Representative Selection
Jawadul H. Bappy, Sujoy Paul, Ertem Tuncel and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
Department of ECE, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA
{mbappy,supaul,ertem,amitrc}@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
In computer vision, selection of the most informative
samples from a huge pool of training data in order to learn
a good recognition model is an active research problem.
Furthermore, it is also useful to reduce the annotation cost,
as it is time consuming to annotate unlabeled samples. In
this paper, motivated by the theories in data compression,
we propose a novel sample selection strategy which exploits the concept of typicality from the domain of information theory. Typicality is a simple and powerful technique which can be applied to compress the training data to
learn a good classification model. In this work, typicality
is used to identify a subset of the most informative samples
for labeling, which is then used to update the model using
active learning. The proposed model can take advantage
of the inter-relationships between data samples. Our approach leads to a significant reduction of manual labeling
cost while achieving similar or better recognition performance compared to a model trained with entire training set.
This is demonstrated through rigorous experimentation on
five datasets.

1. Introduction
One of the challenges in visual recognition tasks is to
learn a good classification model from a set of labeled examples. Today we live in a time where we have instant access to huge amount of visual data from online sources such
as Google, Yahoo, Bing and Youtube. It becomes infeasible to label all the unlabeled samples as it is very costly
and time consuming. Moreover, it is not always true that
more labeled data can help a classifier to learn better; in
fact, it may as well confuse the classifier [25]. Also, the
adaptability of recognition models is unavoidable in order
to achieve good classification performance that is robust to
concept drift. As a result, selection of the most informative
samples [41] becomes critical and has drawn significant recent attention from the vision community in order to train
recognition models [40, 29]. Motivated by this, the goal of
this paper is to obtain a subset of few informative samples
from the huge corpus of available unlabeled data to learn a
good recognition model.

In order to identify the informative samples, most
active learning based query selection techniques choose
the samples about which the classifier is most uncertain
[40]. Recent advances in active learning exploit the interrelationships between samples in order to reduce the number of labeled samples to train the models [27, 32], with
applications in several recognition tasks such as activity
recognition [18], and scene and object classification [2].
The utilization of context in active learning is sometimes
referred as context-aware active learning. Most of the
context-aware recognition tasks involve graphical models
[36] to correlate between the samples. In order to measure
uncertainty on a graph [48], we require node entropy as well
as mutual information. It is shown in [48] that node entropy
is calculated from node potential, and mutual information
is computed from both node and edge potential. In recognition tasks, node potentials are usually designed from the
classification score of the samples. Thus, a sample might
not be selected if the classification score is high enough for
the wrong class. Furthermore, it becomes computationally
expensive or intractable to compute the mutual information
when the number of random variables increases, and hence
the above-mentioned methods need to make simplifying assumptions.
In this paper, we explore whether information theoretic
ideas that have been very successfully applied in data compression can be used to identify the most informative samples to build a recognition model. We leverage upon the
concept of typicality for this purpose. Typicality allows representation of any sequence using entropy as a measure of
information. The concept of typical set is developed based
on the intuitive notion that not all the messages are equally
important, i.e., some messages carry more information than
others. According to the theory, there is a set of messages
for which the total probability of any of its members occurring is close to one, which is referred as typical set of messages. By analogy, in computer vision perspective, we are
convinced that not all the samples are equally important to
learn a recognition model. Thus, we ask how can we exploit
this approach to select the most informative samples, which
will be manually labeled, and classifiers designed on this
subset can then be applied to the entire dataset. Although,
the term ‘typicality’ is mentioned in some computer vision
15878

