Dynamic Edge-Conditioned Filters in Convolutional Neural Networks on Graphs
Martin Simonovsky
Université Paris Est, École des Ponts ParisTech

Nikos Komodakis
Université Paris Est, École des Ponts ParisTech

martin.simonovsky@enpc.fr

nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract

ing rotational invariance of filters in regular convolutions
on images. Hence, in this work we propose a convolution
operation which can make use of this information channel
and show that it leads to an improved graph classification
performance.
This novel formulation also opens up a broader range of
applications; we concentrate here on point clouds specifically. Point clouds have been mostly ignored by deep learning so far, their voxelization being the only trend to the best
of our knowledge [25, 18]. To offer a competitive alternative with a different set of advantages and disadvantages,
we construct graphs in Euclidean space from point clouds
in this work and demonstrate state of the art performance
on Sydney dataset of LiDAR scans [9].
Our contributions are as follows:

A number of problems can be formulated as prediction
on graph-structured data. In this work, we generalize the
convolution operator from regular grids to arbitrary graphs
while avoiding the spectral domain, which allows us to handle graphs of varying size and connectivity. To move beyond
a simple diffusion, filter weights are conditioned on the specific edge labels in the neighborhood of a vertex. Together
with the proper choice of graph coarsening, we explore constructing deep neural networks for graph classification. In
particular, we demonstrate the generality of our formulation in point cloud classification, where we set the new state
of the art, and on a graph classification dataset, where we
outperform other deep learning approaches.

• We formulate a convolution-like operation on graph
signals performed in the spatial domain where filter
weights are conditioned on edge labels (discrete or
continuous) and dynamically generated for each specific input sample. Our networks work on graphs with
arbitrary varying structure throughout a dataset.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have gained
massive popularity in tasks where the underlying data representation has a grid structure, such as in speech processing
and natural language understanding (1D, temporal convolutions), in image classification and segmentation (2D, spatial
convolutions), or in video parsing (3D, volumetric convolutions) [21].
On the other hand, in many other tasks the data naturally lie on irregular or generally non-Euclidean domains,
which can be structured as graphs in many cases. These include problems in 3D modeling, computational chemistry
and biology, geospatial analysis, social networks, or natural
language semantics and knowledge bases, to name a few.
Assuming that the locality, stationarity, and composionality
principles of representation hold to at least some level in the
data, it is meaningful to consider a hierarchical CNN-like
architecture for processing it.
However, a generalization of CNNs from grids to general graphs is not straightforward and has recently become
a topic of increased interest. We identify that the current
formulations of graph convolution do not exploit edge labels, which results in an overly homogeneous view of local graph neighborhoods, with an effect similar to enforc-

• We are the first to apply graph convolutions to point
cloud classification. Our method outperforms volumetric approaches and attains the new state of the art
performance on Sydney dataset, with the benefit of
preserving sparsity and presumably fine details.
• We reach a competitive level of performance on graph
classification benchmark NCI1 [38], outperforming
other approaches based on deep learning there.

2. Related Work
The first formulation of a convolutional network analogy
for irregular domains modeled with graphs has been introduced by Bruna et al. [6], who looked into both the spatial
and the spectral domain of representation for performing localized filtering.

3693

