Generative Attribute Controller with
Conditional Filtered Generative Adversarial Networks
Takuhiro Kaneko
Kaoru Hiramatsu
Kunio Kashino
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{kaneko.takuhiro, hiramatsu.kaoru, kashino.kunio}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
We present a generative attribute controller (GAC), a
novel functionality for generating or editing an image while
intuitively controlling large variations of an attribute. This
controller is based on a novel generative model called the
conditional filtered generative adversarial network (CFGAN), which is an extension of the conventional conditional
GAN (CGAN) that incorporates a filtering architecture into
the generator input. Unlike the conventional CGAN, which
represents an attribute directly using an observable variable (e.g., the binary indicator of attribute presence) so its
controllability is restricted to attribute labeling (e.g., restricted to an ON or OFF control), the CFGAN has a filtering architecture that associates an attribute with a multidimensional latent variable, enabling latent variations of
the attribute to be represented. We also define the filtering
architecture and training scheme considering controllability, enabling the variations of the attribute to be intuitively
controlled using typical controllers (radio buttons and slide
bars). We evaluated our CFGAN on MNIST, CUB, and
CelebA datasets and show that it enables large variations
of an attribute to be not only represented but also intuitively
controlled while retaining identity. We also show that the
learned latent space has enough expressive power to conduct attribute transfer and attribute-based image retrieval.

1. Introduction
In computer vision and machine learning, generative image modeling has been actively investigated to explore the
“secret” behind images. In particular, an open issue has
been to learn a latent space that has low dimensionality but
is so expressive that we can extract realistic images from it.
However, recent studies on generative image modeling with
deep neural networks [12, 22, 40] have given us a clue to
a solution. These studies presented promising results, indicating that their methods enable the learning of a latent

What types of glasses fit my face?

How can I modify the facial expression?

Figure 1. Practical examples of generative attribute controller. Our
goal is to develop functionality for generating or editing image
while intuitively controlling variations of attribute.

space from which we can randomly generate images with
high visual fidelity. However, it is not easy to extract a desired image from this space because the variables are highly
entangled in the space, and the individual dimensions do not
correspond to specific semantic features.
To solve this problem, we aim to learn a latent space that
is not only expressive but also so controllable that a user can
intuitively find and obtain a desired image. In particular, we
focused on the controllability of attributes and developing a
generative attribute controller (GAC) with which a user can
generate or edit an image while intuitively controlling the
variations of an attribute. Figure 1 shows practical examples
of a GAC.
To develop a “good” GAC, we need to obtain a latent
space that is (1) disentangled, (2) expressive, and (3) controllable. First, attributes and identity need to be disentangled in the latent space to change the attributes independently from the identity. For example, when modifying the
facial expression in a portrait, a user wants to do so without compromising the person’s identity. Second, the la-

6089

