Deep Sketch Hashing: Fast Free-hand Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Li Liu1 , Fumin Shen2 , Yuming Shen1 , Xianglong Liu3 , and Ling Shao1
1

2

School of Computing Science, University of East Anglia, UK
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China

{li.liu, yuming.shen, ling.shao}@uea.ac.uk, fumin.shen@gmail.com, xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Free-hand sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is a specific cross-view retrieval task, in which queries are abstract
and ambiguous sketches while the retrieval database is
formed with natural images. Work in this area mainly
focuses on extracting representative and shared features for
sketches and natural images. However, these can neither
cope well with the geometric distortion between sketches
and images nor be feasible for large-scale SBIR due to
the heavy continuous-valued distance computation. In this
paper, we speed up SBIR by introducing a novel binary
coding method, named Deep Sketch Hashing (DSH), where
a semi-heterogeneous deep architecture is proposed and
incorporated into an end-to-end binary coding framework.
Specifically, three convolutional neural networks are utilized to encode free-hand sketches, natural images and,
especially, the auxiliary sketch-tokens which are adopted as
bridges to mitigate the sketch-image geometric distortion.
The learned DSH codes can effectively capture the crossview similarities as well as the intrinsic semantic correlations between different categories. To the best of our knowledge, DSH is the first hashing work specifically designed for
category-level SBIR with an end-to-end deep architecture.
The proposed DSH is comprehensively evaluated on two
large-scale datasets of TU-Berlin Extension and Sketchy,
and the experiments consistently show DSH’s superior SBIR accuracies over several state-of-the-art methods, while
achieving significantly reduced retrieval time and memory
footprint.

1. Introduction
Content-based image retrieval (CBIR) or text-based retrieval (TBR) has played a major role in practical computer
vision applications. In some scenarios, however, if example
queries are not available or it is difficult to describe them

Results

Image Retrieval Gallery

Sketch Query

SBIR

output

……
Figure 1. An illustration of the SBIR concept in this paper. Given
a free-hand query, we aim to retrieve relevant natural images in the
same category as the query from the gallery.

with keywords, what should we do? To address such
a problem, sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) [13, 19,
49, 73, 45, 50, 3, 12, 27, 21, 61, 6, 7, 20, 66, 46, 52]
has been recently developed and is becoming popular in
information retrieval area (as shown in Fig. 1). Compared
to traditional retrieval approaches, using a sketch query can
more efficiently and precisely express the shape, pose and
fine-grained details of the search target, which is intuitive
to humans and far more convenient than describing it with
a “hundred” words in text.
However, SBIR is challenging since humans draw freehand sketches without any reference but only focus on the
salient object structures. As such, the shapes and scales in
sketches are usually distorted compared to natural images.
To deal with this problem, some studies have attempted
to bridge the domain gap between sketches and natural
images for SBIR. These methods can be roughly divided
into two groups: hand-crafted methods and cross-domain
deep learning-based methods.
Hand-crafted SBIR first generates approximate sketches
by extracting edge or contour maps from the natural images. After that, hand-crafted features (e.g., SIFT [40],
HOG [8], gradient field HOG [18, 19], histogram of edge
local orientations (HELO) [51, 49] and Learned KeyShapes
12862

