Surveillance Video Parsing with Single Frame Supervision

1

Si Liu1 , Changhu Wang2 , Ruihe Qian1 , Han Yu1 , Renda Bao1 , Yao Sun1∗
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences,Beijing 100093,China
2
Toutiao AI Lab
{liusi, qianruihe, yuhan, sunyao}@iie.ac.cn, wangchanghu@toutiao.com
Abstract
Training
a
phase˖

Surveillance video parsing, which segments the video
frames into several labels, e.g., face, pants, left-leg, has
wide applications [41, 8]. However, pixel-wisely annotating all frames is tedious and inefﬁcient. In this paper, we
develop a Single frame Video Parsing (SVP) method which
requires only one labeled frame per video in training stage.
To parse one particular frame, the video segment preceding
the frame is jointly considered. SVP (i) roughly parses the
frames within the video segment, (ii) estimates the optical
flow between frames and (iii) fuses the rough parsing results warped by optical flow to produce the reﬁned parsing
result. The three components of SVP, namely frame parsing, optical flow estimation and temporal fusion are integrated in an end-to-end manner. Experimental results on
two surveillance video datasets show the superiority of SVP
over state-of-the-arts. The collected video parsing datasets
can be downloaded via http://liusi-group.com/
projects/SVP for the further studies.

1. Introduction
In recent years, human parsing [16] is receiving increasing owning to its wide applications, such as person reidentiﬁcation [41] and person attribute prediction [19, 38].
Most existing human parsing methods [15, 16, 37] target at
segmenting the human-centric images in the fashion blogs.
Different from fashion images, parsing surveillance videos
is much more challenging due to the lack of labeled data.
It is very tedious and time-consuming to annotate all the
frames of a video, for a surveillance video usually contains
tens of thousands of frames per second.
In this paper, we target at an important, practically applicable yet rarely studied problem: how to leverage the
very limited labels to obtain a robust surveillance video
parsor? More speciﬁcally, we mainly consider an extreme
∗ corresponding author

…

…

h
LongͲrange
Testing
phase˖ (tͲl)

h

h

h

…

…

я

Sh t
ortͲrange
(tͲs)
t

h

Labels

h Unlabeledframe
я Labeledframe
LongͲrange(tͲl)
ShortͲrange(tͲs)
Testframe(t)

Slidingwindow

…

t

Singleframe
SupervisedVideo
Parser(SVP)

Figure 1. During training, only a single frame per video (red check
mark) is labeled, while others (blue x mark) are unlabeled. A SVP
network is learned from the extremely sparsely labeled videos.
During testing, a parsing window is slided along the video. The
parsing result of testing frame It (orange box) is determined by
itself, the long-range frame It−l (green box) and the short-range
frame frame It−s (blue box). For better viewing of all ﬁgures in
this paper, please see original zoomed-in color pdf ﬁle.

situation, i.e., only one frame in each training video is annotated. Note that labeling is unnecessary in testing phase.
As shown in Figure 1, the labeled frame per training video
(red bounding box) is fed into the proposed Single frame
supervised Video Parsing (SVP) network. Insufﬁcient labeled data always lead to over-ﬁtting, especially in the deep
learning based method. The rich temporal context among
video frames can partially solve this problem. By building the dense correspondences, i.e., optical ﬂow, among
video frames, the single labeled frame can be viewed as the
seed to indirectly expand (propagate) to the whole video.
Most state-of-the-art optical ﬂow estimation methods, such
as EpicFlow [29] etc, suffer from relatively slow speed. Because the video parsing task requires extensive online optical ﬂow computation, a real-time, accurate optical ﬂow
estimation is essential. Thus, it is a challenging but essential problem to build an end-to-end, efﬁcient video parsing
framework by only utilizing the limited (e.g, only one) labeled images and large amount of unlabeled images with
online estimated dense correspondences among them.
To tackle these challenges, we propose the SVP network.
As shown in Figure 1, to parse a test frame It , a parsing
1413

