Webly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Bin Jin
IC, EPFL

Maria V. Ortiz Segovia
Océ Print Logic Technologies

Sabine Süsstrunk
IC, EPFL

bin.jin@epfl.ch

Maria.Ortiz@oce.com

sabine.susstrunk@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a weakly supervised semantic segmentation
algorithm that uses image tags for supervision. We apply the tags in queries to collect three sets of web images,
which encode the clean foregrounds, the common backgrounds, and realistic scenes of the classes. We introduce
a novel three-stage training pipeline to progressively learn
semantic segmentation models. We first train and refine a
class-specific shallow neural network to obtain segmentation masks for each class. The shallow neural networks of
all classes are then assembled into one deep convolutional
neural network for end-to-end training and testing. Experiments show that our method notably outperforms previous
state-of-the-art weakly supervised semantic segmentation
approaches on the PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark. We further apply the class-specific shallow neural
networks to object segmentation and obtain excellent results.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which refers to accurately assigning semantic labels to the corresponding pixels in an
image, is a challenging task actively studied in computer
vision. Recent breakthroughs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] in semantic
segmentation are mainly due to the fully supervised algorithms that apply Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
on datasets that contain images and their pixel-wise annotations, e.g., PASCAL VOC [7] and Microsoft COCO [8].
These algorithms report excellent performance on the limited amount of classes covered by these datasets. The PASCAL VOC segmentation set contains 20 object classes with
500 images per class, the Microsoft COCO 91 object classes
with 3.5K images per class, respectively. Extending fully
supervised algorithms to more object classes, however, requires collecting massive amount of pixel-wise annotations,
which is both time-consuming and expensive. As reported
in [9], the average annotation time was 239.7 seconds per
image in the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset. Thus, other annotations that are less precise but faster to collect, such as

Figure 1: To supervise semantic segmentation, we extract
three sets of web images: images with white background
{Wk }, images that contain common background scenes
C, and realistic images {Rk }. {Wk } and C sets are
used for initial training of the segmentation models. Later,
these models are iteratively refined on the realistic image set
{Rk }. Finally {Rk } is adopted again to train an end-to-end
semantic segmentation network.
points, scribbles, or bounding boxes, have also been employed to supervise semantic segmentation [9, 10, 11, 12].
Our proposed semantic segmentation algorithm only
uses image tags as supervision. Image tags represent which
object class(es) are present in the image. They are usually much easier and faster to obtain than the other human annotations described above, and have thus been used
in many weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. However, as opposed to the segmentation masks obtained by the pixel-wise
annotations, image tags do not indicate the location of the
object(s) in the image, therefore making semantic segmen-

3626

