Kernel Square-Loss Exemplar Machines
for Image Retrieval
Rafael S. Rezende1

Joaquin Zepeda2,3

Jean Ponce1,4
2

Francis Bach1

1

Inria Paris†

4

École Normale Supérieure/PSL Research University

Technicolor

Abstract
Zepeda and Pérez [41] have recently demonstrated the
promise of the exemplar SVM (ESVM) as a feature encoder
for image retrieval. This paper extends this approach in
several directions: We first show that replacing the hinge
loss by the square loss in the ESVM cost function significantly reduces encoding time with negligible effect on accuracy. We call this model square-loss exemplar machine,
or SLEM. We then introduce a kernelized SLEM which can
be implemented efficiently through low-rank matrix decomposition, and displays improved performance. Both SLEM
variants exploit the fact that the negative examples are fixed,
so most of the SLEM computational complexity is relegated
to an offline process independent of the positive examples.
Our experiments establish the performance and computational advantages of our approach using a large array of
base features and standard image retrieval datasets.

1. Introduction
The exemplar support vector machine (ESVM), originally proposed by Malisiewicz et al. [24], leverages the
availability of large, unannotated pools of images within
the context of supervised learning. It uses a large generic
pool of images as a set of negative examples, while using a
single image (the exemplar) as a positive example. Given
these training sets, an SVM classifier is learned that can
generalize well, despite the drastically limited size of the
set of positive examples. This classifier has successfully
been used in classification, object detection and label transfer [25]. Zepeda and Pérez [41] have proposed to treat instead the weights of the resulting classifier as a new feature
vector for image retrieval. An ESVM feature is computed
for each database and query image, by treating it as the only
positive sample while keeping a fixed pool of generic neg† WILLOW and SIERRA project team, Département d’Informatique
de l’École Normale Suprérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548

3

Patrick Pérez2

Amazon‡

ative images. Searching amounts to computing distances
between the query and database ESVM features. Note that
ESVM features can be derived from arbitrary base features
(e.g., CNN activations) of the exemplar and the images in
the generic negative pool.
One drawback of the ESVM feature encoding approach
is that computing the classifier requires solving an optimization problem for each positive example (i.e., each query and
each database image). This can be time consuming for the
large negative pool sizes required for good ESVM feature
performance. In this work, we propose using the square loss
instead of the hinge loss, in effect converting the ESVM
problem into a ridge regression, one that can be solved in
closed form. We dub the corresponding classifier a squareloss exemplar machine (or SLEM). The square loss has been
used before to replace the hinge loss in classification tasks
(e.g., [37, 40]), and to compare ESVMs to classical classifiers such as the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [21]. In
contrast, we propose here to use SLEMs as feature encoders
for image retrieval.
Since computing the SLEM features requires inverting
a large matrix related to the training set’s covariance matrix, we propose an efficient way to compute this inverse.
Similarly to the cross-validation method of residual error
of [9], we exploit the fact that only a single (positive) example changes in the training set when computing SLEM features for different images. We show experimentally that our
representation matches and even improves upon the performance of ESVM features on three standard datasets using
a wide range of base features at a fraction of the original
computational cost.
We also introduce a kernelized variant of SLEM that
enjoys similar computational advantages and improves retrieval performances. Further computational and storage efficiency is obtained using low-rank factorization methods to
decompose the kernel matrix of negative samples. We claim
this kernelized descriptor and its efficient calculation as the
main contribution of this work.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section
12396

