End-to-end representation learning for Correlation Filter based tracking
Jack Valmadre∗ Luca Bertinetto∗

João Henriques Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

Philip H. S. Torr

{name.surname}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Correlation
Filter

CNN

Crop
17x17x32

49x49x32
Training image: 255x255x3

★
33x33x1

CNN
49x49x32

Test image: 255x255x3

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed network architecture, CFNet. It is an asymmetric Siamese network: after applying the
same convolutional feature transform to both input images, the “training image” is used to learn a linear template, which is
then applied to search the “test image” by cross-correlation.

Abstract
The Correlation Filter is an algorithm that trains a linear
template to discriminate between images and their translations. It is well suited to object tracking because its formulation in the Fourier domain provides a fast solution, enabling the detector to be re-trained once per frame. Previous works that use the Correlation Filter, however, have
adopted features that were either manually designed or
trained for a different task. This work is the first to overcome this limitation by interpreting the Correlation Filter
learner, which has a closed-form solution, as a differentiable layer in a deep neural network. This enables learning
deep features that are tightly coupled to the Correlation Filter. Experiments illustrate that our method has the important practical benefit of allowing lightweight architectures
to achieve state-of-the-art performance at high framerates.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are a powerful tool for learning image representations in computer vision applications.
However, training deep networks online, in order to capture
previously unseen object classes from one or few examples,

is challenging. This problem emerges naturally in applications such as visual object tracking, where the goal is to
re-detect an object over a video with the sole supervision of
a bounding box at the beginning of the sequence. The main
challenge is the lack of a-priori knowledge of the target object, which can be of any class.
The simplest approach is to disregard the lack of a-priori
knowledge and adapt a pre-trained deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to the target, for example by using
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), the workhorse of deep
network optimization [31, 25, 35]. The extremely limited
training data and large number of parameters make this a
difficult learning problem. Furthermore, SGD is quite expensive for online adaptation [31, 25].
A possible answer to these shortcomings is to have no
online adaptation of the network. Recent works have focused on learning deep embeddings that can be used as universal object descriptors [3, 12, 28, 17, 5]. These methods
use a Siamese CNN, trained offline to discriminate whether
two image patches contain the same object or not. The idea
is that a powerful embedding will allow the detection (and
thus tracking) of objects via similarity, bypassing the online
learning problem. However, using a fixed metric to compare
appearance prevents the learning algorithm from exploiting
any video-specific cues that could be helpful for discrimination.
An alternative strategy is to use instead an online learn-

∗ Equal first authorship.

2805

