Fine-grained Image Classification via Combining Vision and Language
Xiangteng He and Yuxin Peng∗
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
hexiangteng@pku.edu.cn, pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Fine-grained image classification is a challenging task
due to the large intra-class variance and small inter-class
variance, aiming at recognizing hundreds of sub-categories
belonging to the same basic-level category. Most existing
fine-grained image classification methods generally learn
part detection models to obtain the semantic parts for better classification accuracy. Despite achieving promising
results, these methods mainly have two limitations: (1)
not all the parts which obtained through the part detection models are beneficial and indispensable for classification, and (2) fine-grained image classification requires
more detailed visual descriptions which could not be provided by the part locations or attribute annotations. For addressing the above two limitations, this paper proposes the
two-stream model combining vision and language (CVL)
for learning latent semantic representations. The vision
stream learns deep representations from the original visual
information via deep convolutional neural network. The
language stream utilizes the natural language descriptions
which could point out the discriminative parts or characteristics for each image, and provides a flexible and compact way of encoding the salient visual aspects for distinguishing sub-categories. Since the two streams are complementary, combining the two streams can further achieves
better classification accuracy. Comparing with 12 state-ofthe-art methods on the widely used CUB-200-2011 dataset
for fine-grained image classification, the experimental results demonstrate our CVL approach achieves the best performance.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained image classification aims to recognize subcategories under some basic-level categories. Models of
fine-grained image classification have made great progress
in recent years[1, 2, 3, 4, 5], due to the progress of deep
neural networks. And on the data side, more fine-grained
∗ Corresponding author.

intra-class variance

Abstract

Heermann Gull

Herring Gull

Slaty-backed Gull

inter-class variance

Western Gull

Figure 1. Examples from CUB-200-2011. Note that it is a technically challenging task even for humans to categorize them due to
large intra-class variance and small inter-class variance.

domains have been covered, such as bird types [6, 7], dog
species [8], plant breeds [9] , car types [10] and aircraft
models [11].It is easy for an inexperienced person to recognize basic-level categories such as bird, flower and car, but
highly hard to recognize 200 or even more sub-categories.
Consequently, fine-grained image classification is a technically challenging task, due to the large intra-class variance
and small inter-class variance, as shown in Figure 1.
The sub-categories are generally same in global appearance, and distinguished by the subtle and local differences,
such as the color of abdomen, the shape of toe and the texture of feather for bird. These subtle differences are located
at the regions of object or its parts, so the localization of object and its parts is crucial for fine-grained image classification. A two-stage learning framework is adopted by most of

5994

