Binary Coding for Partial Action Analysis with Limited Observation Ratios
Jie Qin1,2∗, Li Liu3,4∗, Ling Shao4 , Bingbing Ni5 , Chen Chen6 , Fumin Shen7 and Yunhong Wang1,2†
1
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
3
Malong Technologies Co., Ltd., 4 University of East Anglia, 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
7
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
qinjiebuaa@gmail.com, li.liu@malongtech.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org, nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn
chenchen870713@gmail.com, fumin.shen@gmail.com, yhwang@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional action recognition methods aim to recognize
actions with complete observations/executions. However,
it is often difficult to capture fully executed actions due to
occlusions, interruptions, etc. Meanwhile, action prediction/recognition in advance based on partial observations
is essential for preventing the situation from deteriorating.
Besides, fast spotting human activities using partially observed data is a critical ingredient for retrieval systems.
Inspired by the recent success of data binarization in efficient retrieval/recognition, we propose a novel approach,
named Partial Reconstructive Binary Coding (PRBC), for
action analysis based on limited frame glimpses during any
period of the complete execution. Specifically, we learn discriminative compact binary codes for partial actions via a
joint learning framework, which collaboratively tackles feature reconstruction as well as binary coding. We obtain the
solution to PRBC based on a discrete alternating iteration
algorithm. Extensive experiments on four realistic action
datasets in terms of three tasks (i.e., partial action retrieval,
recognition and prediction) clearly show the superiority of
PRBC over the state-of-the-art methods, along with significantly reduced memory load and computational costs during the online test.

1. Introduction
During the last decade, human action recognition [1, 43,
26, 28, 44, 5, 4, 40] has been extensively studied and most
existing approaches aim to analyze after-the-fact actions,
i.e., fully observed/executed actions (Fig. 1(a)). However,
it is often too luxurious to capture complete actions, when
∗ indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.

Whatisthisaction?

Whatwillthisactionbe?

WhatcĂŶthisactionbe?

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Traditional action recognition/retrieval with full observations; (b) action prediction with partial observations at the beginning; (c) partial action recognition/retrieval with observations
at any time (if partial observations are very limited and of unknown observation ratios, this turns into our problem).

devices or actions of interest are occluded, video transmissions are interrupted, etc. In these cases, we can only have
partially observed actions and we refer to the problem as
partial action recognition (PAR) (Fig. 1(c)). Particularly, if
partial observations are only available from the beginning
of full action executions, PAR becomes action prediction
(AP) (Fig. 1(b)). Note that in this paper, we refer to a
‘full/complete action’ as a video clip containing at least
one complete action execution, and a ‘partial/incomplete
action’ means a shorter temporal segment of the video clip
including incomplete observations of the complete action.
Recognizing partial actions is essential for a wide range
of applications. For instance, in surveillance systems, it is
desirable to prevent potential harmful activities from happening by raising an alarm in advance based on partial
observations. In smart homes, the robot needs to predict people’s future activities and provide necessary services
in time. In addition, content-based action retrieval systems
can beneﬁt a lot. With the help of PAR, there is no need
to obtain complete actions before searching for their similar
ones, which enhances efﬁciencies of retrieval systems a lot.
Several methods [41, 3, 18, 15, 11, 56, 61, 14, 10] have
been proposed for PAR and AP, and most of them addressed

146

