Slow Flow: Exploiting High-Speed Cameras for
Accurate and Diverse Optical Flow Reference Data
Joel Janai1 Fatma Güney1 Jonas Wulff2 Michael Black2 Andreas Geiger1,3
1
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
2
Perceiving Systems Department, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
3
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich
{joel.janai,fatma.guney,jonas.wulff,michael.black,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Existing optical flow datasets are limited in size and
variability due to the difficulty of capturing dense ground
truth. In this paper, we tackle this problem by tracking pixels through densely sampled space-time volumes recorded
with a high-speed video camera. Our model exploits the linearity of small motions and reasons about occlusions from
multiple frames. Using our technique, we are able to establish accurate reference flow fields outside the laboratory
in natural environments. Besides, we show how our predictions can be used to augment the input images with realistic
motion blur. We demonstrate the quality of the produced
flow fields on synthetic and real-world datasets. Finally, we
collect a novel challenging optical flow dataset by applying
our technique on data from a high-speed camera and analyze the performance of the state-of-the-art in optical flow
under various levels of motion blur.

Figure 1: Illustration. This figure shows reference flow
fields with large displacements established by our approach.
Saturated regions (white) are excluded in our evaluation.

1. Introduction
Much of the recent progress in computer vision has been
driven by high-capacity models trained on very large annotated datasets. Examples for such datasets include ImageNet [50] for image classification [26,32], MS COCO [36]
for object localization [45] or Cityscapes [14] for semantic
segmentation [22]. Unfortunately, annotating large datasets
at the pixel-level is very costly [70] and some tasks like optical flow or 3D reconstruction do not even admit the collection of manual annotations. As a consequence, less training
data is available for these problems, preventing progress in
learning-based methods. Synthetic datasets [12, 19, 25, 48]
provide an attractive alternative to real images but require
detailed 3D models and sometimes face legal issues [47].
Besides, it remains an open question whether the realism and variety attained by rendered scenes is sufficient to
match the performance of models trained on real data.

This paper is concerned with the optical flow task. As
there exists no sensor that directly captures optical flow
ground truth, the number of labeled images provided by
existing real world datasets like Middlebury [3] or KITTI
[21, 39] is limited. Thus, current end-to-end learning approaches [16, 38, 44, 61] train on simplistic synthetic imagery like the flying chairs dataset [16] or rendered scenes
of limited complexity [38]. This might be one of the reasons
why those techniques do not yet reach the performance of
classical hand designed models. We believe that having access to a large and realistic database will be key for progress
in learning high-capacity flow models.
Motivated by these observations, we exploit the power
of high-speed video cameras for creating accurate optical
flow reference data in a variety of natural scenes, see Fig. 1.
In particular, we record videos at high spatial (QuadHD:

3597

