Detecting Masked Faces in the Wild with LLE-CNNs
Shiming Ge1 , Jia Li2∗ , Qiting Ye1,3 , Zhao Luo1,3
1
2

Beijing Key Laboratory of IOT information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3

School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Detecting faces with occlusions is a challenging task due
to two main reasons: 1) the absence of large datasets of
masked faces, and 2) the absence of facial cues from the
masked regions. To address these two issues, this paper
first introduces a dataset, denoted as MAFA, with 30, 811
Internet images and 35, 806 masked faces. Faces in the
dataset have various orientations and occlusion degrees,
while at least one part of each face is occluded by mask.
Based on this dataset, we further propose LLE-CNNs for
masked face detection, which consist of three major modules. The Proposal module first combines two pre-trained
CNNs to extract candidate facial regions from the input image and represent them with high dimensional descriptors.
After that, the Embedding module is incorporated to turn
such descriptors into a similarity-based descriptor by using
locally linear embedding (LLE) algorithm and the dictionaries trained on a large pool of synthesized normal faces,
masked faces and non-faces. In this manner, many missing
facial cues can be largely recovered and the influences of
noisy cues introduced by diversified masks can be greatly
alleviated. Finally, the Verification module is incorporated
to identify candidate facial regions and refine their positions
by jointly performing the classification and regression tasks
within a unified CNN. Experimental results on the MAFA
dataset show that the proposed approach remarkably outperforms 6 state-of-the-arts by at least 15.6%.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of machine learning methods, the problem of face detection seems to be well addressed yet. For example, the face detector proposed in
[17] achieves an average precision of 98.0% on the public
image benchmark AFW [37] by using the cascaded Convolutional Neural Networks, while the speed of some face
detectors can reach up to 35 FPS [1] or even 400 FPS [21].
* Corresponding author: Jia Li (email: jiali@buaa.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Masked faces may have diversified orientations, degrees
of occlusion and mask types, making their detection an extremely
challenging task for existing face detectors.

Due to the great success of these face detectors, some of
them have been integrated into applications so as to facilitate auto-focusing [10], human computer interaction [12]
and image database management [27].
Beyond the remarkable success achieved by existing
works, there is increasing concern that the development of
better face detectors is now becoming more and more difficult. In particular, the detection of masked faces, which can
be very helpful for applications like video surveillance and
event analysis, is still a challenging task for many existing
models. As shown in Fig. 1, masked faces may have different orientations, degrees of occlusion and diversified types
of masks, which make the accurate detection of masked
faces a really challenging task even for the state-of-the-art
face detectors [25, 4, 36, 19, 35]. Compared with the classic
task of normal face detection, existing models often have a
sharp performance drop in detecting masked faces, which
may be mainly caused by two reasons. First, there lacks a
large dataset with massive masked faces for exploring the
key attributes shared by various masked faces and identifying the models with the state-of-the-art performance. Second, facial features from the occluded parts are no longer
available in the detection process, while the existence of
masks inevitably bring in certain kinds of noise. With insufficient training and testing data as well as incomplete and
inaccurate features, masked face detection has been becoming a widely recognized challenging task in the area of face
detection. Although this issue has been tentatively studied
4321
2682

