Comprehension-guided referring expressions
Ruotian Luo
TTI-Chicago

Gregory Shakhnarovich
TTI-Chicago

rluo@ttic.edu

greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
We consider generation and comprehension of natural
language referring expression for objects in an image. Unlike generic “image captioning” which lacks natural standard evaluation criteria, quality of a referring expression
may be measured by the receiver’s ability to correctly infer
which object is being described. Following this intuition, we
propose two approaches to utilize models trained for comprehension task to generate better expressions. First, we
use a comprehension module trained on human-generated
expressions, as a “critic” of referring expression generator.
The comprehension module serves as a differentiable proxy
of human evaluation, providing training signal to the generation module. Second, we use the comprehension module
in a generate-and-rerank pipeline, which chooses from candidate expressions generated by a model according to their
performance on the comprehension task. We show that both
approaches lead to improved referring expression generation on multiple benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Image captioning, defined broadly as automatic generation of text describing images, has seen much recent attention. Deep learning, and in particular recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), have led to a significant improvement in
state of the art. However, the metrics currently used to evaluate image captioning are mostly borrowed from machine
translation. This misses the naturally multi-modal distribution of appropriate captions for many scenes.
Referring expressions are a special case of image captions. Such expressions describe an object or region in the
image, with the goal of identifying it uniquely to a listener.
Thus, in contrast to generic captioning, referring expression
generation has a natural evaluation metric: a human should
easily comprehend the description and identify the object(s)
being described.
In this paper, we consider two related tasks. One is the
generation task: generating a discriminative referring expression for an object in an image. The other is the com-

Max likelihood: bowl of food on
left
MMI: bowl of food on left
Proxy: bowl of food on left
bottom left
Rerank: bottom left bowl

Max likelihood: bird with green
MMI: bird with green leaves
Proxy: blurry bird
Rerank: blurry bird

Figure 1: For each image, the top two expressions are generated by baseline models proposed in [23]; the bottom two
expressions are generated by our methods.

prehension task (called natural language object retrieval in
[15]): localizing an object in an image given a referring expression. Most prior work addressed both tasks by building
a sequence generation model. Such a model can be used
discriminatively for the comprehension task, by inferring
the region which maximizes the expression posterior.
In contrast, we draw inspiration from the generatordiscriminator structure in Generative Adversarial
In GANs, the generator module
Networks[10, 26].
tries to generate a signal (e.g., natural image), and the
discriminator module tries to tell real images apart from
the generated ones. For our task, the generator produces
referring expressions. We would like these expressions
to be both intelligible/fluent and unambiguous to human.
Fluency can be encouraged by using the standard cross
entropy loss with respect to human-generated expressions).
On the other hand, we adopt a comprehension model as
the “discriminator” which tells if the expression can be
correctly dereferenced. Note that we can also regard the
comprehension model as a “critic” of the “action” made by
the generator where the “action” is each generated word.
Instead of an adversarial relationship between the two
modules in GANs, our architecture is collaborative – the
17102

