Infinite Variational Autoencoder for Semi-Supervised Learning
M. Ehsan Abbasnejad
Anthony Dick
Anton van den Hengel
The University of Adelaide
{ehsan.abbasnejad, anthony.dick, anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
This paper presents an infinite variational autoencoder
(VAE) whose capacity adapts to suit the input data. This
is achieved using a mixture model where the mixing coefficients are modeled by a Dirichlet process, allowing us to
integrate over the coefficients when performing inference.
Critically, this then allows us to automatically vary the
number of autoencoders in the mixture based on the data.
Experiments show the flexibility of our method, particularly
for semi-supervised learning, where only a small number of
training samples are available.

1. Introduction
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [18] is a newly introduced tool for unsupervised learning of a distribution
p(x) from which a set of training samples x is drawn. It
learns the parameters of a generative model, based on sampling from a latent variable space z, and approximating the
distribution p(x|z). By designing the latent space to be easy
to sample from (e.g. Gaussian) and choosing a flexible generative model (e.g. a deep belief network) a VAE can provide a flexible and efficient means of generative modeling.
One limitation of this model is that the dimension of the
latent space and the number of parameters in the generative model are fixed in advance. This means that while the
model parameters can be optimized for the training data,
the capacity of the model must be chosen a priori, assuming
some foreknowledge of the training data characteristics.
In this paper we present an approach that utilizes
Bayesian non-parametric models [1, 8, 31, 13] to produce
an infinite mixture of autoencoders. This infinite mixture is
capable of growing with the complexity of the data to best
capture its intrinsic structure.
Our motivation for this work is the task of semisupervised learning. In this setting, we have a large volume
of unlabelled data but only a small number of labelled training examples. In our approach, we train a generative model
using unlabelled data, and then use this model combined

with whatever labelled data is available to train a discriminative model for classification.
We demonstrate that our infinite VAE outperforms both
the classical VAE and standard classification methods, particularly when the number of available labelled samples is
small. This is because the infinite VAE is able to more accurately capture the distribution of the unlabelled data. It
therefore provides a generative model that allows the discriminative model, which is trained based on its output, to
be more effectively learnt using a small number of samples.
The main contribution of this paper is twofold: (1) we
provide a Bayesian non-parametric model for combining
autoencoders, in particular variational autoencoders. This
bridges the gap between non-parametric Bayesian methods and the deep neural networks; (2) we provide a semisupervised learning approach that utilizes the infinite mixture of autoencoders learned by our model for prediction
with from a small number of labeled examples.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review relevant methods, while in Section 3 we
briefly provide background on the variational autoencoder.
In Section 4 our non-parametric Bayesian approach to infinite mixture of VAEs is introduced. We provide the mathematical formulation of the problem and how the combination of Gibbs sampling and Variational inference can be
used for efficient learning of the underlying structure of the
input. Subsequently in Section 5, we combine the infinite
mixture of VAEs as an unsupervised generative approach
with discriminative deep models to perform prediction in
a semi-supervised setting. In Section 6 we provide empirical evaluation of our approach on various datasets including
natural images and 3D shapes. We use various discriminative models including Residual Network [12] in combination with our model and show our approach is capable of
outperforming our baselines.

2. Related Work
Most of the successful learning algorithms, specially
with deep learning, require large volume of labeled instance
for training. Semi-supervised learning seeks to utilize the
15888

