Hardware-Efficient Guided Image Filtering For Multi-Label Problem
Longquan Dai1 Mengke Yuan2 Zechao Li1 Xiaopeng Zhang2 Jinhui Tang1∗
1. School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2. National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
{dailongquan, zechao.li, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn, {mengke.yuan, xpzhang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The Guided Filter (GF) is well-known for its linear complexity. However, when filtering an image with an n-channel
guidance, GF needs to invert an n×n matrix for each pixel.
To the best of our knowledge existing matrix inverse algorithms are inefficient on current hardwares. This shortcoming limits applications of multichannel guidance in computation intensive system such as multi-label system. We need
a new GF-like filter that can perform fast multichannel
image guided filtering. Since the optimal linear complexity
of GF cannot be minimized further, the only way thus is to
bring all potentialities of current parallel computing hardwares into full play. In this paper we propose a hardwareefficient Guided Filter (HGF), which solves the efficiency
problem of multichannel guided image filtering and yields
competent results when applying it to multi-label problems
with synthesized polynomial multichannel guidance. Specifically, in order to boost the filtering performance, HGF
takes a new matrix inverse algorithm which only involves
two hardware-efficient operations: element-wise arithmetic
calculations and box filtering. In order to break the linear model restriction, HGF synthesizes a polynomial multichannel guidance to introduce nonlinearity. Benefiting from
our polynomial guidance and hardware-efficient matrix inverse algorithm, HGF not only is more sensitive to the underlying structure of guidance but also achieves the fastest
computing speed. Due to these merits, HGF obtains stateof-the-art results in terms of accuracy and efficiency in the
computation intensive multi-label systems.

1. Introduction
Since 2010, GF has been applied to many computer vision and graphics problems such as image retargeting [6],
color transfer [1] and video dehazing [33]. Among them,
multi-label system maybe one of the most suitable applications for GF to make full use of its efficiency and effectiveness because the heavy computation in multi-label system
* Corresponding author.

is in urgent need of a fast filtering tool. A typical multilabel system [12] records the costs c for choosing a label
l at coordinates x and y in a cost volume (V (x, y, l) = c)
according to the input data. Then WTA (Winner-Takes-All)
label selection strategy is exploited to determine the final
label for each pixel (x, y) after the aggregation (i.e. guided
image smoothing) step operated on each slice of the cost
volume. Besides applying GF to the aggregation step of
the multi-label system, we can also incorporate it into MRF
models [28, 30] since edge-aware filters adopted in these
MRF models can be taken place by GF directly.
Due to the linear complexity and edge-preserving ability,
GF is consider as the best choice [12] among all candidate
filters for the multi-label system. However, a blemish of
GF is that the color image guided filtering algorithm is not
very efficient. More specifically, matrix inverse is a timeconsuming operation, but GF needs to invert a 3 × 3 matrix
for each pixel to calculate both coefficients w
~ p of Eq (1)
and filtering result Z(q) according to the ith channel Ii (q)
Z(q) =

3
X

w
~ p (i)Ii (q) + w
~ p (0)

(1)

i=1

of a color input guidance I. Fig 1a plots the run time of inverting 106 matrices with increasing matrix size, where the
matrix inverse algorithm is the built-in LU algorithms of
OpenCV. We can observe that the run time increases with
the size of matrix dramatically. Hence it is inefficient to apply GF to multi-label system with a multi-channel guidance,
especially for a large channel number.
To decrease the execution time, the most straightforward
method for GF is to launch a set of threads to invert matrices
simultaneously. However this strategy is not very efficient
on current hardwares. This is because 1, both CPU and
GPU rely on SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data) architecture to boost performance; 2, branch instructions are
inevitable for traditional matrix inversion methods such as
LU algorithm [13]; 3, SIMD architecture cannot achieve the
fastest speed to run branch instructions as these instructions
require decomposing each vector into elements and processing them sequentially on the architecture. Fig 1a also
illustrates the run time of inverting 106 matrices simultane15325

