Scene Parsing through ADE20K Dataset
Bolei Zhou1 , Hang Zhao1 , Xavier Puig1 , Sanja Fidler2 , Adela Barriuso1 , Antonio Torralba1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
2
University of Toronto, Canada.

Abstract
Scene parsing, or recognizing and segmenting objects
and stuff in an image, is one of the key problems in computer
vision. Despite the community’s efforts in data collection,
there are still few image datasets covering a wide range of
scenes and object categories with dense and detailed annotations for scene parsing. In this paper, we introduce and
analyze the ADE20K dataset, spanning diverse annotations
of scenes, objects, parts of objects, and in some cases even
parts of parts. A scene parsing benchmark is built upon the
ADE20K with 150 object and stuff classes included. Several
segmentation baseline models are evaluated on the benchmark. A novel network design called Cascade Segmentation
Module is proposed to parse a scene into stuff, objects, and
object parts in a cascade and improve over the baselines.
We further show that the trained scene parsing networks
can lead to applications such as image content removal and
scene synthesis1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic understanding of visual scenes is one of the
holy grails of computer vision. The emergence of largescale image datasets like ImageNet [26], COCO [17] and
Places [35], along with the rapid development of the deep
convolutional neural network (ConvNet) approaches, have
brought great advancements to visual scene understanding.
Nowadays, given a visual scene of a living room, a robot
equipped with a trained ConvNet can accurately predict the
scene category. However, to freely navigate in the scene
and manipulate the objects inside, the robot has far more
information to digest. It needs to recognize and localize not
only the objects like sofa, table, and TV, but also their parts,
e.g., a seat of a chair or a handle of a cup, to allow proper
interaction, as well as to segment the stuff like floor, wall
and ceiling for spatial navigation.
Scene parsing, or recognizing and segmenting objects
and stuff in an image, remains one of the key problems in
1 Dataset
and
pretrained
models
are
http://groups.csail.mit.edu/vision/datasets/ADE20K/

available

at

Figure 1. Images in the ADE20K dataset are densely annotated
in details with objects and parts. The first row shows the sample
images, the second row shows the annotation of objects and stuff,
and the third row shows the annotation of object parts.

scene understanding. Going beyond image-level recognition, scene parsing requires a much denser annotation of
scenes with a large set of objects. However, the current
datasets have limited number of objects (e.g., COCO [17],
Pascal [10]) and in many cases those objects are not the
most common objects one encounters in the world (like frisbees or baseball bats), or the datasets only cover a limited
set of scenes (e.g., Cityscapes [7]). Some notable exceptions are Pascal-Context [21] and the SUN database [32].
However, Pascal-Context still contains scenes primarily focused on 20 object classes, while SUN has noisy labels at
the object level.
Our goal is to collect a dataset that has densely annotated
images (every pixel has a semantic label) with a large and
an unrestricted open vocabulary. The images in our dataset
are manually segmented in great detail, covering a diverse
set of scenes, object and object part categories. The challenges for collecting such annotations include finding reliable annotators, as well as the fact that labeling is difficult
if the class list is not defined in advance. On the other hand,
open vocabulary naming also suffers from naming inconsis1633

