Unambiguous Text Localization and Retrieval for Cluttered Scenes
Xuejian Rong†
Chucai Yi§
Yingli Tian†
†
The City College, City University of New York, USA
§
HERE North America LLC, USA
{xrong, ytian}@ccny.cuny.edu

chucai.yi@here.com

Abstract
Text instance as one category of self-described objects
provides valuable information for understanding and describing cluttered scenes. In this paper, we explore the
task of unambiguous text localization and retrieval, to accurately localize a specific targeted text instance in a cluttered
image given a natural language description that refers to
it. To address this issue, first a novel recurrent Dense Text
Localization Network (DTLN) is proposed to sequentially
decode the intermediate convolutional representations of a
cluttered scene image into a set of distinct text instance detections. Our approach avoids repeated detections at multiple scales of the same text instance by recurrently memorizing previous detections, and effectively tackles crowded text
instances in close proximity. Second, we propose a Context
Reasoning Text Retrieval (CRTR) model, which jointly encodes text instances and their context information through a
recurrent network, and ranks localized text bounding boxes
by a scoring function of context compatibility. Quantitative
evaluations on standard scene text localization benchmarks
and a newly collected scene text retrieval dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of our models for
both scene text localization and retrieval.

1. Introduction
Text instances such as characters, words and strings in
a scene image provide the most concise and accurate natural language expressions to understand and explain the
scene. Reading text information from a camera-based natural scene, named as scene text extraction, plays a significant
role in scene understanding and its associated applications,
such as navigation, localization, context retrieval, end-toend machine translation, and wayfinding for visually impaired, etc. However, most existing scene text extraction
approaches regard text instances as a generic category of
objects, and attempt to encode text instances into separable

white text at the top right

“$398”

red and yellow text in the middle

“SPECIAL”

larger text above a pile of oranges

“$595”

Text Instance Retrieval with Natural Language

Text Recognition

Figure 1: An example of unambiguous text localization and retrieval. Given a cluttered scene image and candidate text bounding
boxes (in white, detected by the proposed DTLN), the proposed
CRTR model is applied to retrieve a specific text instance (in color)
based on a natural language description. It scores and ranks candidate boxes based on text attributes, spatial configurations, and
context information.

feature representations from other categories of objects, and
then assign all text instances existing in the scene to predefined prediction labels. It means that text instance could not
contribute more than other objects to the understanding and
description of a scene, even though the text is more related
to context environment and semantically self-described.
Precisely, for a text instance in a natural scene image,
current mainstream text extraction methods could generate
their locations and sequential character codes, to which we
refer as spatial and literal information afterward. However,
to comprehensively describe and interpret a highly cluttered
natural scene, higher level clues such as semantic and con15494

