Regressing Robust and Discriminative 3D Morphable Models
with a very Deep Neural Network
Anh Tu´ân Tr`ân1 , Tal Hassner2,3 , Iacopo Masi1 , and Gérard Medioni1
1

Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems, USC, CA, USA
2

Information Sciences Institute, USC, CA, USA
3

The Open University of Israel, Israel

Abstract
The 3D shapes of faces are well known to be discriminative. Yet despite this, they are rarely used for face recognition and always under controlled viewing conditions. We
claim that this is a symptom of a serious but often overlooked problem with existing methods for single view 3D
face reconstruction: when applied “in the wild”, their
3D estimates are either unstable and change for different
photos of the same subject or they are over-regularized
and generic. In response, we describe a robust method
for regressing discriminative 3D morphable face models
(3DMM). We use a convolutional neural network (CNN) to
regress 3DMM shape and texture parameters directly from
an input photo. We overcome the shortage of training data
required for this purpose by offering a method for generating huge numbers of labeled examples. The 3D estimates
produced by our CNN surpass state of the art accuracy on
the MICC data set. Coupled with a 3D-3D face matching
pipeline, we show the first competitive face recognition results on the LFW, YTF and IJB-A benchmarks using 3D face
shapes as representations, rather than the opaque deep feature vectors used by other modern systems.

1. Introduction
Single view 3D face shape estimation methods originally
proposed using their 3D shapes for recognition [4, 7, 28].
This makes sense because 3D shapes are discriminative –
different people have different face shapes – yet invariant to
lighting, texture changes and more. Indeed, previous work
showed that when available, high resolution 3D face scans
are excellent face representations which can even be used to
distinguish between the faces of identical twins [9].
Curiously, however, despite their widespread use, single
view face reconstruction methods are rarely employed by
modern face recognition systems. The highly successful 3D
Morphable Models (3DMM), for example, were only ever
used for recognition in limited, controlled viewing conditions [4, 7, 11, 17, 28]. To our knowledge, there are no

Figure 1: Unconstrained, single view, 3D face shape reconstruction. (a) Input images of the same subject with disruptive poses and occlusions. (b-e) 3D reconstructions using
(b) single-view 3DMM [33], (c) flow based method [13]
(d) 3DDFA [47], (e) Our proposed approach. (b-c) Present
different 3D shapes for the same subject and (d) appears
generic, whereas our method (e) is robust, producing similar discriminative 3D shapes for different views.
reports of successfully using single view face shape estimation – 3DMM or any other method – to recognize faces in
challenging unconstrained, in the wild settings.
An important reason why this may be so, is that these
methods can be unstable in unconstrained viewing conditions. We later verify this quantitatively but it can also
be seen in Fig. 1 which presents 3D shapes estimated
from three unconstrained photos by three different methods (Fig. 1 (b-d)). Clearly, though the same subject appears
in all photos, shapes produced by the same method are either very different (b,c) or highly regularized and generic
(d). It is therefore unsurprising that these shapes are poor
representations for recognition. It also explains why some
recently proposed using coarse, simple 3D shape approximations only as proxies when rendering faces to new views
rather than as face representations [13, 15, 25, 26, 39].
Contrary to previous work, we show that robust and dis15163

