Illuminant-Camera Communication to Observe Moving Objects under Strong
External Light by Spread Spectrum Modulation
Ryusuke Sagawa and Yutaka Satoh
The National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
Tsukuba Central 1, 1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8560 Japan
{ryusuke.sagawa,yu.satou}@aist.go.jp

Abstract
Many algorithms of computer vision use light sources
to illuminate objects to actively create situation appropriate to extract their characteristics. For example, the shape
and reflectance are measured by a projector-camera system, and some human-machine or VR systems use projectors and displays for interaction. As existing active lighting
systems usually assume no severe external lights to observe
projected lights clearly, it is one of the limitations of active illumination. In this paper, we propose a method of
energy-efficient active illumination in an environment with
severe external lights. The proposed method extracts the
light signals of illuminants by removing external light using
spread spectrum modulation. Because an image sequence is
needed to observe modulated signals, the proposed method
extends signal processing to realize signal detection projected onto moving objects by combining spread spectrum
modulation and spatio-temporal filtering. In the experiments, we apply the proposed method to a structured-light
system under sunlight, to photometric stereo with external
lights, and to insensible image embedding.

1. Introduction
Some computer vision methods utilize light sources that
actively change the illumination to capture images instead
of acquiring images under uncontrollable ambient light.
This contributes to simplify the problem and improve the
performance of image processing. Various types of lights
are considered as light sources, including video projectors,
PC monitors, LEDs, and laser lights. We have named
the system consisting of light sources and cameras the
illuminant-camera system.
An illuminant-camera system captures images by using
a camera to change the projecting lights spatially and temporally. The system transmits illuminant light and uses a
camera to receive the light directly or indirectly; thus the

problem of the illuminant-camera system is regarded as one
of a communication system between the illuminant and the
camera. One of the characteristics is that the communication channel is the light that travels in 3D space.
One of the advantages of recent cameras is the high
resolution, whereas the disadvantages are a low signal-tonoise ratio (SNR), low dynamic range, and low frame rate.
Many image processing algorithms utilize high resolution
by using spatial signal processing, for example, to reduce
noise to compensate for the above disadvantages. However,
an illuminant-camera system can transmit temporal signals
from the light source to the camera by changing the light
patterns. Moreover, light sources such as LEDs and lasers,
which can change the light rapidly, and high-speed cameras,
which can acquire images at a high frame rate, are currently
commonly available. If these devices are used, a long temporal signal modulated at high frequency can be used for
image processing. In this paper, we propose a method that
solves the problems associated with illuminant-camera systems based on the spatio-temporal signal processing of optical communication between illuminants and cameras.
One of the disadvantages of illuminant-camera systems
is the weakness against external lights because it is necessary to block the light from external lights to observe light
from the illuminants of the system. On the other hand, radio
communication in noisy environments has been realized.
Therefore, we propose signal processing that realizes an
illuminant-camera system under strong external light such
as sunlight based on the idea of temporal signal processing of radio communication. This paper describes the signal processing for illuminant-camera system. This enables
the system to observe moving objects under external lights
based on direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS), which is
used in wireless technologies such as code division multiple
access (CDMA) and Wi-Fi.
We apply the method to three illuminant-camera systems
in this research. The first is a structured-light system of
spatial encoding for 3D reconstruction. As structured-light
systems of temporal encoding change patterns and capture

5097

