End-to-end Concept Word Detection
for Video Captioning, Retrieval, and Question Answering
Youngjae Yu Hyungjin Ko Jongwook Choi Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{yj.yu, hj.ko}@vision.snu.ac.kr, {wookayin, gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/project/lsmdc-2016

Input movie clip

Abstract
We propose a high-level concept word detector that can
be integrated with any video-to-language models. It takes
a video as input and generates a list of concept words as
useful semantic priors for language generation models. The
proposed word detector has two important properties. First,
it does not require any external knowledge sources for training. Second, the proposed word detector is trainable in
an end-to-end manner jointly with any video-to-language
models. To effectively exploit the detected words, we also
develop a semantic attention mechanism that selectively focuses on the detected concept words and fuse them with the
word encoding and decoding in the language model. In order to demonstrate that the proposed approach indeed improves the performance of multiple video-to-language tasks,
we participate in all the four tasks of LSMDC 2016 [18].
Our approach has won three of them, including fill-in-theblank, multiple-choice test, and movie retrieval.

1. Introduction
Video-to-language tasks, including video captioning [6,
8, 17, 27, 32, 35] and video question answering (QA) [23],
are recent emerging challenges in computer vision research.
This set of problems is interesting as one of frontiers in artificial intelligence; beyond that, it can also potentiate multiple practical applications, such as retrieving video content
by users’ free-form queries or helping visually impaired
people understand the visual content. Recently, a number
of large-scale datasets have been introduced as a common
ground for researchers to promote the progress of video-tolanguage research (e.g. [4, 16, 18, 23]).
The objective of this work is to propose a concept word
detector, as shown in Fig.1, which takes a training set of
videos and associated sentences as input, and generates a
list of high-level concept words per video as useful semantic priors for a variety of video-to-language tasks, including video captioning, retrieval, and question answering. We

Concept word detector
Tracing concepts by attention

Tracing LSTMs

Trace

K concept words
drive

down

pull

car

outside

front

house

street

Description

Fill-in-the-blank

Multi-choice

A car pulls up onto
the driveway …

Q: He slows down in

1.The vehicle …
2.Someone eyes …
3.A man is …
4.There is …
5.A boy walks …

front of one _____
with a garage ...

A: house

get

road

Retrieval
Q: A vehicle pulling up

A:

Figure 1. The intuition of the proposed concept word detector.
Given a video clip, a set of tracing LSTMs extract multiple concept
words that consistently appear across frame regions. We then employ semantic attention to combine the detected concepts with text
encoding/decoding for several video-to-language tasks of LSMDC
2016, such as captioning, retrieval, and question answering.

design our word detector to have the following two characteristics, to be easily integrated with any video-to-language
models. First, it does not require any external knowledge
sources for training. Instead, our detector learns the correlation between words in the captions and video regions
from the whole training data. To this end, we use a continuous soft attention mechanism that traces consistent visual
information across frames and associates them with concept
words from captions. Second, the word detector is trainable
in an end-to-end manner jointly with any video-to-language
models. The loss function for learning the word detector
can be plugged as an auxiliary term into the model’s overall
cost function; as a result, we can reduce efforts to separately

3165

