Low-rank Bilinear Pooling for Fine-Grained Classification
Shu Kong, Charless Fowlkes
Dept. of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
{skong2, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Pooling second-order local feature statistics to form
a high-dimensional bilinear feature has been shown to
achieve state-of-the-art performance on a variety of finegrained classification tasks. To address the computational
demands of high feature dimensionality, we propose to represent the covariance features as a matrix and apply a lowrank bilinear classifier. The resulting classifier can be evaluated without explicitly computing the bilinear feature map
which allows for a large reduction in the compute time as
well as decreasing the effective number of parameters to be
learned.
To further compress the model, we propose a classifier co-decomposition that factorizes the collection of bilinear classifiers into a common factor and compact perclass terms. The co-decomposition idea can be deployed
through two convolutional layers and trained in an endto-end architecture. We suggest a simple yet effective initialization that avoids explicitly first training and factorizing the larger bilinear classifiers. Through extensive experiments, we show that our model achieves state-of-theart performance on several public datasets for fine-grained
classification trained with only category labels. Importantly, our final model is an order of magnitude smaller than
the recently proposed compact bilinear model [8], and three
orders smaller than the standard bilinear CNN model [19].

1. Introduction and Related Work
Fine-grained categorization aims to distinguish subordinate categories within an entry-level category, such as
identifying the bird species or particular models of aircraft.
Compared to general purpose visual categorization problems, fine-grained recognition focuses on the characteristic challenge of making subtle distinctions (low inter-class
variance) despite highly variable appearance due to factors
such as deformable object pose (high intra-class variance).
Fine-grained categorization is often made even more challenging by factors such as large number of categories and
the lack of training data.

One approach to dealing with such nuisance parameters
has been to exploit strong supervision, such as detailed partlevel, keypoint-level and attribute annotations [37, 9, 35].
These methods learn to localize semantic parts or keypoints
and extract corresponding features which are used as a
holistic representation for final classification. Strong supervision with part annotations has been shown to significantly
improve the fine-grained recognition accuracy. However,
such supervised annotations are costly to obtain.
To alleviate the costly collection of part annotations,
some have proposed to utilize interactive learning [6]. Partially supervised discovery of discriminative parts from category labels is also a compelling approach, especially given
the effectiveness of training with web-scale datasets [16].
One approach to unsupervised part discovery [27, 26] uses
saliency maps, leveraging the observation that sparse deep
CNN feature activations often correspond to semantically
meaningful regions [34, 20]. Another recent approach [32]
selects parts from a pool of patch candidates by searching
over patch triplets, but relies heavily on training images being aligned w.r.t the object pose. Spatial transformer networks [10] are a very general formulation that explicitly
model latent transformations that align feature maps prior
to classification. They can be trained end-to-end using only
classification loss and have achieved state-of-the-art performance on the very challenging CUB bird dataset [31],
but the resulting models are large and stable optimization is
non-trivial.
Recently, a surprisingly simple method called bilinear
pooling [19] has achieved state-of-the-art performance on
a variety of fine-grained classification problems. Bilinear pooling collects second-order statistics of local features
over a whole image to form a holistic representation for
classification. Second-order or higher-order statistics have
been explored in a number of vision tasks (see e.g. [2, 14]).
In the context of fine-grained recognition, spatial pooling
introduces invariance to deformations while second-order
statistics maintain selectivity.
However, the representational power of bilinear features
comes at the cost of very high-dimensional feature representations (see Figure 1 (b)), which induce substantial
1365

