Boundary-aware Instance Segmentation
Zeeshan Hayder1,2 , Xuming He2,1
1
Australian National University & 2 Data61/CSIRO ∗

Mathieu Salzmann3
3
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
We address the problem of instance-level semantic segmentation, which aims at jointly detecting, segmenting and
classifying every individual object in an image. In this context, existing methods typically propose candidate objects,
usually as bounding boxes, and directly predict a binary
mask within each such proposal. As a consequence, they
cannot recover from errors in the object candidate generation process, such as too small or shifted boxes.
In this paper, we introduce a novel object segment representation based on the distance transform of the object
masks. We then design an object mask network (OMN) with
a new residual-deconvolution architecture that infers such
a representation and decodes it into the final binary object
mask. This allows us to predict masks that go beyond the
scope of the bounding boxes and are thus robust to inaccurate object candidates. We integrate our OMN into a Multitask Network Cascade framework, and learn the resulting boundary-aware instance segmentation (BAIS) network
in an end-to-end manner. Our experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2012 and the Cityscapes datasets demonstrate
the benefits of our approach, which outperforms the stateof-the-art in both object proposal generation and instance
segmentation.

1. Introduction
Instance-level semantic segmentation, which aims at
jointly detecting, segmenting and classifying every individual object in an image, has recently become a core challenge
in scene understanding [5, 23, 9]. Unlike its category-level
counterpart, instance segmentation provides detailed information about the location, shape and number of individual
objects. As such, it has many applications in diverse areas,
such as autonomous driving [35], personal robotics [12] and
plant analytics [30].
Existing approaches to multiclass instance segmentation
typically rely on generic object proposals in the form of
∗ Data61/CSIRO is funded by the Australian Government as represented
by the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

Figure 1. Traditional instance segmentation vs our boundary
based representation. Left: Original image and ground-truth
segmentation. Middle: Given a bounding box, traditional methods directly predict a binary mask, whose extent is therefore limited to that of the box and thus suffers from box inaccuracies.
Right: We represent the object segment with a multi-valued map
encoding the truncated minimum distance to the object boundary.
This can be converted into a mask that goes beyond the bounding
box, which makes our approach robust to box errors.

bounding boxes. These proposals can be learned [14, 21, 8]
or sampled by sliding windows [25, 6], and greatly facilitate
the task of identifying the different instances, may they be
from the same category or different ones. Object segmentation is then achieved by predicting a binary mask within
each box proposal, which can then be classified into a semantic category. This approach to segmentation, however,
makes these methods sensitive to the quality of the bounding boxes; they cannot recover from errors in the object proposal generation process, such as too small or shifted boxes.
In this paper, we introduce a novel representation of object segments that is robust to errors in the bounding box
proposals. To this end, we propose to model the shape of
an object with a dense multi-valued map encoding, for every pixel in a box, its (truncated) minimum distance to the
object boundary, or the fact that the pixel is outside the object. Object segmentation can then be achieved by converting this multi-valued map into a binary mask via the inverse
distance transform [3, 18]. In contrast to existing methods
discussed above, and as illustrated in Fig. 1, the resulting
mask is not restricted to lie inside the bounding box; even
when the box covers only part of the object, the distances
to the boundary in our representation may correspond to an
object segment that goes beyond the box’s spatial extent.
15696

