ECO: Efficient Convolution Operators for Tracking
Martin Danelljan, Goutam Bhat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Michael Felsberg
Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
{martin.danelljan, goutam.bhat, fahad.khan, michael.felsberg}@liu.se

Abstract
In recent years, Discriminative Correlation Filter (DCF)
based methods have significantly advanced the state-of-theart in tracking. However, in the pursuit of ever increasing
tracking performance, their characteristic speed and realtime capability have gradually faded. Further, the increasingly complex models, with massive number of trainable parameters, have introduced the risk of severe over-fitting. In
this work, we tackle the key causes behind the problems of
computational complexity and over-fitting, with the aim of
simultaneously improving both speed and performance.
We revisit the core DCF formulation and introduce: (i) a
factorized convolution operator, which drastically reduces
the number of parameters in the model; (ii) a compact generative model of the training sample distribution, that significantly reduces memory and time complexity, while providing better diversity of samples; (iii) a conservative model
update strategy with improved robustness and reduced complexity. We perform comprehensive experiments on four
benchmarks: VOT2016, UAV123, OTB-2015, and TempleColor. When using expensive deep features, our tracker provides a 20-fold speedup and achieves a 13.0% relative gain
in Expected Average Overlap compared to the top ranked
method [12] in the VOT2016 challenge. Moreover, our fast
variant, using hand-crafted features, operates at 60 Hz on a
single CPU, while obtaining 65.0% AUC on OTB-2015.

1. Introduction
Generic visual tracking is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. It is the task of estimating the trajectory of a target in an image sequence, given only its initial state. Online visual tracking plays a crucial role in numerous real-time vision applications, such as smart surveillance systems, autonomous driving, UAV monitoring, intelligent traffic control, and human-computer-interfaces. Due
to the online nature of tracking, an ideal tracker should
be accurate and robust under the hard computational constraints of real-time vision systems.
In recent years, Discriminative Correlation Filter (DCF)

ECO

C-COT

Figure 1. A comparison of our approach ECO with the baseline
C-COT [12] on three example sequences. In all three cases, CCOT suffers from severe over-fitting to particular regions of the
target. This causes poor target estimation in cases of scale variations (top row), deformations (middle row), and out-of-plane rotations (bottom row). Our ECO tracker successfully tackles the
causes of over-fitting, leading to better generalization of the target
appearance, while achieving a 20-fold speedup.

based approaches have shown continuous performance improvements in terms of accuracy and robustness on tracking benchmarks [23, 37]. The recent advancement in
DCF based tracking performance is driven by the use of
multi-dimensional features [13, 15], robust scale estimation
[7, 11], non-linear kernels [20], long-term memory components [28], sophisticated learning models [3, 10] and reducing boundary effects [9, 16]. However, these improvements in accuracy come at the price of significant reductions
in tracking speed. For instance, the pioneering MOSSE
tracker by Bolme et al. [4] is about 1000× faster than the recent top-ranked DCF tracker, C-COT [12], in the VOT2016
challenge [23], but obtains only half the accuracy.
As mentioned above, the advancement in DCF tracking
performance is predominantly attributed to powerful features and sophisticated learning formulations [8, 12, 27].
This has led to substantially larger models, requiring hundreds of thousands of trainable parameters. On the other
hand, such complex and large models have introduced the

6638

