Visual Dialog
Abhishek Das1 , Satwik Kottur2 , Khushi Gupta2 ,* Avi Singh3 ,* Deshraj Yadav4 , José M.F. Moura2 ,
Devi Parikh1 , Dhruv Batra1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 UC Berkeley, 4 Virginia Tech
1

{abhshkdz, parikh, dbatra}@gatech.edu
3

2

{skottur, khushig, moura}@andrew.cmu.edu

avisingh@cs.berkeley.edu

4

deshraj@vt.edu

visualdialog.org

Abstract
We introduce the task of Visual Dialog, which requires an
AI agent to hold a meaningful dialog with humans in natural, conversational language about visual content. Specifically, given an image, a dialog history, and a question about
the image, the agent has to ground the question in image,
infer context from history, and answer the question accurately. Visual Dialog is disentangled enough from a specific
downstream task so as to serve as a general test of machine
intelligence, while being grounded in vision enough to allow objective evaluation of individual responses and benchmark progress. We develop a novel two-person chat datacollection protocol to curate a large-scale Visual Dialog
dataset (VisDial). VisDial contains 1 dialog (10 questionanswer pairs) on ∼140k images from the COCO dataset,
with a total of ∼1.4M dialog question-answer pairs.
We introduce a family of neural encoder-decoder models
for Visual Dialog with 3 encoders (Late Fusion, Hierarchical Recurrent Encoder and Memory Network) and 2 decoders (generative and discriminative), which outperform a
number of sophisticated baselines. We propose a retrievalbased evaluation protocol for Visual Dialog where the AI
agent is asked to sort a set of candidate answers and evaluated on metrics such as mean-reciprocal-rank of human
response. We quantify gap between machine and human
performance on the Visual Dialog task via human studies.
Our dataset, code, and trained models will be released publicly at visualdialog.org. Putting it all together, we
demonstrate the first ‘visual chatbot’!

1. Introduction
We are witnessing unprecedented advances in computer vision (CV) and artificial intelligence (AI) – from ‘low-level’
AI tasks such as image classification [17], scene recognition [57], object detection [29] – to ‘high-level’ AI tasks
* Work done while KG and AS were interns at Virginia Tech.

Figure 1: We introduce a new AI task – Visual Dialog, where an AI
agent must hold a dialog with a human about visual content. We
introduce a large-scale dataset (VisDial), an evaluation protocol,
and novel encoder-decoder models for this task.

such as learning to play Atari video games [36] and Go [49],
answering reading comprehension questions by understanding short stories [18, 59], and even answering questions
about images [4, 34, 43, 64] and videos [51, 52]!
What lies next for AI? We believe that the next generation of visual intelligence systems will need to posses the
ability to hold a meaningful dialog with humans in natural
language about visual content. Applications include:
• Aiding visually impaired users in understanding their surroundings [5] or social media content [60] (AI: ‘John just
uploaded a picture from his vacation in Hawaii’, Human:
‘Great, is he at the beach?’, AI: ‘No, on a mountain’).
• Aiding analysts in making decisions based on large quantities of surveillance data (Human: ‘Did anyone enter this
room last week?’, AI: ‘Yes, 27 instances logged on camera’, Human: ‘Were any of them carrying a black bag?’),
• Interacting with an AI assistant (Human: ‘Alexa – can
1326

