Non-Local Deep Features for Salient Object Detection
Zhiming Luo1,2,3 , Akshaya Mishra4 , Andrew Achkar4 , Justin Eichel4 , Shaozi Li1,2∗, Pierre-Marc Jodoin3
1
2

Department of Cognitive Science, Xiamen University, China

Fujian Key Laboratory of Brain-Inspired Computing Technique and Applications, Xiamen University, China
3

Department of Computer Science, University of Sherbrooke, Canada
4

Miovision Technologies Inc., Canada

{zhiming.luo, pierre-marc.jodoin}@usherbrooke.ca, szlig@xmu.edu.cn
{amishra, aachkar, jeichel}@miovision.com

Abstract
Saliency detection aims to highlight the most relevant
objects in an image. Methods using conventional models
struggle whenever salient objects are pictured on top of a
cluttered background while deep neural nets suffer from excess complexity and slow evaluation speeds. In this paper,
we propose a simplified convolutional neural network which
combines local and global information through a multiresolution 4 × 5 grid structure. Instead of enforcing spacial
coherence with a CRF or superpixels as is usually the case,
we implemented a loss function inspired by the MumfordShah functional which penalizes errors on the boundary. We
trained our model on the MSRA-B dataset, and tested it on
six different saliency benchmark datasets. Results show that
our method is on par with the state-of-the-art while reducing computation time by a factor of 18 to 100 times, enabling near real-time, high performance saliency detection.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection aims to mimic the human visual system which naturally separates predominant objects of a
scene from the rest of the image. Several applications benefit from saliency detection including image and video compression [14], context aware image re-targeting [25], scene
parsing [50], image resizing [3], object detection [44] and
segmentation [33].
A salient object is often defined as a region whose visual features differ from the rest of the image and whose
shape follows some a priori criteria [5]. Traditional methods typically extract local pixel-wise or region-wise features and compare it with global features. The result of that
comparison is called a saliency score which is stored in a
saliency map. Recently, deep learning has entered the field
of saliency detection and quickly established itself as the de
facto benchmark. Their greatest asset relative to traditional
∗ Corresponding author.

unsupervised approaches is that they can be trained end-toend using simple optimization functions that combine local
and deep features.
While some methods apply a straight forward convolutional neural net (CNN) model [36], others have proposed a model tailored to the saliency detection problem [25, 26, 29, 43, 50]. To achieve state-of-the-art performance, the top performing CNN models require nontrivial steps such as generating object proposals, applying
post-processing, enforcing smoothness through the use of
superpixels or defining complex network architectures, all
the while making predictions far slower than real-time. As
such, there remain opportunities to simplify the model architecture and speed up the computation.
In this paper, we show that the overarching objectives of
state-of-the-art CNN models (enforcing spatial coherence
of the predicted saliency map and using both the local and
global features in the optimization) can be achieved with
a much simplified non-local deep feature (NLDF) model.
Spatial coherence is enforced with a Bayesian loss inspired
by the Mumford-Shah (MS) functional [35]. The loss is expressed as the sum of a cross-entropy term and a boundary
term. As opposed to conventional implementations of the
MS functional, we use non-local features learned by a deep
network instead of raw RGB colors. Also, rather than minimizing the boundary length directly (as done by unsupervised MS implementations), we minimize an intersection
over union loss computed using predicted and ground truth
boundary pixels. This boundary penalty term is shown to
contribute significantly to our model’s performance.
Our model’s network is composed of convolution and
deconvolution blocks organized in a 4 × 5 grid (see Figure 1) where each column of the grid extracts resolutionspecific features. Local contrast processing blocks are also
used along each resolution axis in order to promote features
with strong local contrast. The resulting local and global
features are combined into a “score” processing block that
gives the final output at half of the input resolution.

6609

