Unsupervised Monocular Depth Estimation with Left-Right Consistency
Clément Godard

Oisin Mac Aodha
Gabriel J. Brostow
University College London
http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/monoDepth/

Abstract
Learning based methods have shown very promising results
for the task of depth estimation in single images. However,
most existing approaches treat depth prediction as a supervised
regression problem and as a result, require vast quantities
of corresponding ground truth depth data for training. Just
recording quality depth data in a range of environments is a
challenging problem. In this paper, we innovate beyond existing
approaches, replacing the use of explicit depth data during
training with easier-to-obtain binocular stereo footage.
We propose a novel training objective that enables our convolutional neural network to learn to perform single image depth
estimation, despite the absence of ground truth depth data. Exploiting epipolar geometry constraints, we generate disparity
images by training our network with an image reconstruction
loss. We show that solving for image reconstruction alone results in poor quality depth images. To overcome this problem,
we propose a novel training loss that enforces consistency between the disparities produced relative to both the left and right
images, leading to improved performance and robustness compared to existing approaches. Our method produces state of the
art results for monocular depth estimation on the KITTI driving
dataset, even outperforming supervised methods that have been
trained with ground truth depth.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from images has a long history in computer
vision. Fruitful approaches have relied on structure from motion,
shape-from-X, binocular, and multi-view stereo. However, most
of these techniques rely on the assumption that multiple observations of the scene of interest are available. These can come
in the form of multiple viewpoints, or observations of the scene
under different lighting conditions. To overcome this limitation,
there has recently been a surge in the number of works that pose
the task of monocular depth estimation as a supervised learning
problem [32, 10, 36]. These methods attempt to directly predict
the depth of each pixel in an image using models that have been
trained offline on large collections of ground truth depth data.
While these methods have enjoyed great success, to date they

Figure 1. Our depth prediction results on KITTI 2015. Top to bottom:
input image, ground truth disparities, and our result. Our method is
able to estimate depth for thin structures such as street signs and poles.

have been restricted to scenes where large image collections
and their corresponding pixel depths are available.
Understanding the shape of a scene from a single image,
independent of its appearance, is a fundamental problem in
machine perception. There are many applications such as
synthetic object insertion in computer graphics [29], synthetic
depth of field in computational photography [3], grasping
in robotics [34], using depth as a cue in human body pose
estimation [48], robot assisted surgery [49], and automatic 2D
to 3D conversion in film [53]. Accurate depth data from one
or more cameras is also crucial for self-driving cars, where
expensive laser-based systems are often used.
Humans perform well at monocular depth estimation by
exploiting cues such as perspective, scaling relative to the
known size of familiar objects, appearance in the form of
lighting and shading and occlusion [24]. This combination of
both top-down and bottom-up cues appears to link full scene
understanding with our ability to accurately estimate depth. In
this work, we take an alternative approach and treat automatic
depth estimation as an image reconstruction problem during
training. Our fully convolutional model does not require any
depth data, and is instead trained to synthesize depth as an
intermediate. It learns to predict the pixel-level correspondence
between pairs of rectified stereo images that have a known
camera baseline. There are some existing methods that also
address the same problem, but with several limitations. For
example they are not fully differentiable, making training
suboptimal [16], or have image formation models that do
1270

