Joint Multi-Person Pose Estimation and Semantic Part Segmentation
Fangting Xia1

Peng Wang1

Xianjie Chen1

Alan Yuille2

sukixia@gmail.com

pengwangpku2012@gmail.com

cxj@ucla.edu

alan.yuille@jhu.edu

1

2

University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218

Abstract
Human pose estimation and semantic part segmentation
are two complementary tasks in computer vision. In this
paper, we propose to solve the two tasks jointly for natural
multi-person images, in which the estimated pose provides
object-level shape prior to regularize part segments while
the part-level segments constrain the variation of pose locations. Specifically, we first train two fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs), namely Pose FCN and Part FCN, to
provide initial estimation of pose joint potential and semantic part potential. Then, to refine pose joint location, the two
types of potentials are fused with a fully-connected conditional random field (FCRF), where a novel segment-joint
smoothness term is used to encourage semantic and spatial
consistency between parts and joints. To refine part segments, the refined pose and the original part potential are
integrated through a Part FCN, where the skeleton feature
from pose serves as additional regularization cues for part
segments. Finally, to reduce the complexity of the FCRF, we
induce human detection boxes and infer the graph inside
each box, making the inference forty times faster.
Since there’s no dataset that contains both part segments and pose labels, we extend the PASCAL VOC part
dataset [6] with human pose joints1 and perform extensive
experiments to compare our method against several most
recent strategies. We show that our algorithm surpasses
competing methods by 10.6% in pose estimation with much
faster speed and by 1.5% in semantic part segmentation.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation (i.e. predicting the position of
joints for each human instance) and semantic part segmentation (i.e. decomposing humans into semantic part regions)
are two crucial and correlated tasks in analysing humans
from images. They provide richer representations for many
1 https://sukixia.github.io/paper.html

(a)

head

torso

u-arm

l-arm

u-leg

l-leg

(b1)

(c1)

(b2)

(c2)

Figure 1: Joint human pose estimation and semantic part
segmentation improve both tasks. (a) input image. (b) pose
estimation and semantic part segmentation results before
joint inference. (c) pose estimation and semantic part segmentation results after joint inference. Note that comparing
(b1) and (c1), our result recovers the missing forehead joint
and corrects the location error of right elbow and right wrist
for the woman on the right. Comparing (b2) and (c2), our
result gives more accurate details of lower arms and upper
legs than (b2) for both people.

dependent tasks, e.g. fine-grained recognition [1, 38, 17],
action recognition [32, 30], image/video retrieval [36, 16],
person-identification [24] and video surveillance [23].
Recently, dramatic progress has been made on pose estimation [8, 7, 34, 25] and human part segmentation [3, 31,
33, 20] with the advent of powerful convolutional neural
networks (CNN) [19] and the availability of pose/segment
annotations on large-scale datasets [12, 6, 21]. However,
16769

