Colorization as a Proxy Task for Visual Understanding
Gustav Larsson
University of Chicago

Michael Maire
TTI Chicago

Gregory Shakhnarovich
TTI Chicago

larsson@cs.uchicago.edu

mmaire@ttic.edu

greg@ttic.edu

Abstract
We investigate and improve self-supervision as a dropin replacement for ImageNet pretraining, focusing on automatic colorization as the proxy task. Self-supervised training has been shown to be more promising for utilizing unlabeled data than other, traditional unsupervised learning
methods. We build on this success and evaluate the ability of our self-supervised network in several contexts. On
VOC segmentation and classification tasks, we present results that are state-of-the-art among methods not using ImageNet labels for pretraining representations.
Moreover, we present the first in-depth analysis of selfsupervision via colorization, concluding that formulation
of the loss, training details and network architecture play
important roles in its effectiveness. This investigation is
further expanded by revisiting the ImageNet pretraining
paradigm, asking questions such as: How much training
data is needed? How many labels are needed? How much
do features change when fine-tuned? We relate these questions back to self-supervision by showing that colorization
provides a similarly powerful supervisory signal as various
flavors of ImageNet pretraining.

Learning a representation via (x, y) pairs
Classification



 

, “flamingo” , 



, “hay” , . . .

Self-supervision
Ex. 1: Inpainting (remove patch and then predict it)
 



,

,

,



,...

Ex. 2: Context (given two patches, predict their spatial relation)


 


, “south east” ,
, “west” , . . .
,
,
Ex. 3: Colorization (predict color given intensity)

 


,

,

,



,...

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Using a representation that was originally trained for
classification on (x, y) pairs to initialize a network has become
standard practice in computer vision. Self-supervision is a family
of alternative pretraining methods that do not require any labeled
data, since labels are “manufactured” through unlabeled data. We
focus on colorization, where an image is split into its intensity and
color components, the former predicting the latter.

The success of deep feed-forward networks is rooted in
their ability to scale up with more training data. The availability of more data can generally afford an increase in
model complexity. However, this need for expensive, tedious and error-prone human annotation is severely limiting, reducing our ability to build models for new domains,
and for domains in which annotations are particularly expensive (e.g., image segmentation). At the same time, we
have access to enormous amounts of unlabeled visual data,
which is essentially free. This work is an attempt to improve means of leveraging this abundance. We manage to
bring it one step closer to the results of using labeled data,
but the eventual long term goal of self-supervision may be
to supplant supervised pretraining completely.
Alternatives to supervised training that do not need la-

beled data have seen limited success. Unsupervised learning methods, such as compressed embeddings trained by
minimizing reconstruction error, have seen more success
in image synthesis [18], than for representation learning. Semi-supervised learning, jointly training a supervised
and an unsupervised loss, offers a middle ground [7, 35].
However, recent works tend to prefer a sequential combination instead (unsupervised pretraining, supervised finetuning) [4, 5], possibly because it prevents the unsupervised
loss from being disruptive in the late stages of training.
A related endeavor to unsupervised learning is developing
models that work with weaker forms of supervision [2, 40].
This reduces the human burden only somewhat and pays a

6874

