RefineNet: Multi-Path Refinement Networks
for High-Resolution Semantic Segmentation

1

Guosheng Lin1∗ Anton Milan2 Chunhua Shen2,3 Ian Reid2,3
Nanyang Technological University 2 University of Adelaide 3 Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
Recently, very deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have shown outstanding performance in object
recognition and have also been the first choice for dense
classification problems such as semantic segmentation.
However, repeated subsampling operations like pooling or
convolution striding in deep CNNs lead to a significant decrease in the initial image resolution. Here, we present
RefineNet, a generic multi-path refinement network that
explicitly exploits all the information available along the
down-sampling process to enable high-resolution prediction using long-range residual connections. In this way,
the deeper layers that capture high-level semantic features
can be directly refined using fine-grained features from earlier convolutions. The individual components of RefineNet
employ residual connections following the identity mapping mindset, which allows for effective end-to-end training. Further, we introduce chained residual pooling, which
captures rich background context in an efficient manner. We
carry out comprehensive experiments and set new stateof-the-art results on seven public datasets. In particular,
we achieve an intersection-over-union score of 83.4 on the
challenging PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, which is the best
reported result to date.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a crucial component in image
understanding. The task here is to assign a unique label (or
category) to every single pixel in the image, which can be
considered as a dense classification problem. The related
problem of so-called object parsing can usually be cast as
semantic segmentation. Recently, deep learning methods,
and in particular convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
e.g., VGG [42], Residual Net [24], have shown remarkable results in recognition tasks. However, these approaches
exhibit clear limitations when it comes to dense prediction
∗ This work was done when G. Lin was with The University of Adelaide
and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision.

Figure 1. Example results of our method on the task of object parsing (left) and semantic segmentation (right).

in tasks like dense depth or normal estimation [13, 33, 34]
and semantic segmentation [36, 5]. Multiple stages of spatial pooling and convolution strides reduce the final image
prediction typically by a factor of 32 in each dimension,
thereby losing much of the finer image structure.
One way to address this limitation is to learn deconvolutional filters as an up-sampling operation [38, 36] to generate high-resolution feature maps. The deconvolution operations are not able to recover the low-level visual features
which are lost after the downsampling operation in the convolution forward stage. Therefore, they are unable to output
accurate high-resolution prediction. Low-level visual information is essential for accurate prediction on the boundaries or details. The method DeepLab recently proposed by
Chen et al. [6] employs atrous (or dilated) convolutions to
account for larger receptive fields without downscaling the
image. DeepLab is widely applied and represents state-ofthe-art performance on semantic segmentation. This strategy, although successful, has at least two limitations. First,
it needs to perform convolutions on a large number of detailed (high-resolution) feature maps that usually have highdimensional features, which are computational expensive.
Moreover, a large number of high-dimensional and highresolution feature maps also require huge GPU memory resources, especially in the training stage. This hampers the
computation of high-resolution predictions and usually limits the output size to 1/8 of the original input. Second, dilated convolutions introduce a coarse sub-sampling of features, which potentially leads to a loss of important details.
Another type of methods exploits features from interme-

1925

