Unsupervised Adaptive Re-identification in Open World Dynamic Camera
Networks
Rameswar Panda1,∗ Amran Bhuiyan2,∗,† Vittorio Murino2 Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
2
Department of ECE
Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision (PAVIS)
UC Riverside
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
{rpand002@,amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu

{amran.bhuiyan,vittorio.murino}@iit.it

Abstract
Person re-identification is an open and challenging problem in computer vision. Existing approaches have concentrated on either designing the best feature representation or
learning optimal matching metrics in a static setting where
the number of cameras are fixed in a network. Most approaches have neglected the dynamic and open world nature of the re-identification problem, where a new camera may be temporarily inserted into an existing system
to get additional information. To address such a novel
and very practical problem, we propose an unsupervised
adaptation scheme for re-identification models in a dynamic
camera network. First, we formulate a domain perceptive re-identification method based on geodesic flow kernel that can effectively find the best source camera (already installed) to adapt with a newly introduced target
camera, without requiring a very expensive training phase.
Second, we introduce a transitive inference algorithm for
re-identification that can exploit the information from best
source camera to improve the accuracy across other camera pairs in a network of multiple cameras. Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that the
proposed approach significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art unsupervised learning based alternatives whilst being extremely efficient to compute.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id), which addresses the
problem of matching people across non-overlapping views
in a multi-camera system, has drawn a great deal of attention in the last few years [25, 59, 74]. Much progress
has been made in developing methods that seek either the
best feature representations (e.g., [64, 39, 3, 42]) or propose
to learn optimal matching metrics (e.g., [37, 52, 37, 67]).
While they have obtained reasonable performance on com∗ RP and AB should be considered as joint first authors
† This work was done while AB was a visiting student at UC Riverside

Training Images

No Label

( , )( , )

Model Training

C3
Newly Introduced Camera

C1

Re-ID Model

C2

How can we introduce
the new camera with
minimal effort?

Existing Camera Network

Figure 1. Consider an existing network with two cameras C1 and
C2 where we have learned a re-id model using pair-wise training
data from both of the cameras. During the operational phase, a
new camera C3 is introduced to cover a certain area that is not well
covered by the existing 2 cameras. Most of the existing methods
do not consider such dynamic nature of a re-id model. In contrast,
we propose to adapt the existing re-id model in an unsupervised
way: what is the best source camera to pair with the new camera
and how can we exploit the best source camera to improve the
matching accuracy across the other cameras.

monly used benchmark datasets (e.g., [51, 16, 12, 73]),
we believe that these approaches have not yet considered
a fundamental related problem: Given a camera network
where the inter-camera transformations/distance metrics
have been learned in an intensive training phase, how can
we incorporate a new camera into the installed system with
minimal additional effort? This is an important problem to
address in realistic open-world re-identification scenarios,
where a new camera may be temporarily inserted into an
existing system to get additional information.
To illustrate such a problem, let us consider a scenario
with N cameras for which we have learned the optimal pairwise distance metrics, so providing high re-id accuracy for
all camera pairs. However, during a particular event, a new
camera may be temporarily introduced to cover a certain related area that is not well-covered by the existing network
of N cameras (See Fig. 1 for an example). Despite the dynamic and open nature of the world, almost all work in reidentification assumes a static and closed world model of
the re-id problem where the number of cameras is fixed in a
network. Given a newly introduced camera, traditional re17054

