Unrolling the Shutter: CNN to Correct Motion Distortions
Vijay Rengarajan1∗ , Yogesh Balaji2† , A.N. Rajagopalan3
1,3
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 2 University of Maryland
∗

vijay.ap@ee.iitm.ac.in

D IFFERENT TYPES OF MOTION DISTORTIONS AND CORRECTION METHODS

Abstract
Row-wise exposure delay present in CMOS cameras is
responsible for skew and curvature distortions known as the
rolling shutter (RS) effect while imaging under camera motion. Existing RS correction methods resort to using multiple images or tailor scene-specific correction schemes. We
propose a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture
that automatically learns essential scene features from a
single RS image to estimate the row-wise camera motion
and undo RS distortions back to the time of first-row exposure. We employ long rectangular kernels to specifically
learn the effects produced by the row-wise exposure. Experiments reveal that our proposed architecture performs
better than the conventional CNN employing square kernels. Our single-image correction method fares well even
operating in a frame-by-frame manner against video-based
methods and performs better than scene-specific correction
schemes even under challenging situations.

1. Introduction
The delay in the start of the exposure between the first
row and the last row of the sensor array (total line delay) in
CMOS cameras causes rolling shutter (RS) distortions. In
the presence of camera motion, each row experiences different camera poses unlike in a global shutter camera, which
causes skew and curvature in the recorded image. Irrespective of whether an image or a video is captured, the camera
motion inevitably causes distortions; though the type of distortion varies depending on the exposure duration as compared to the total line delay, and this leads to the need for
different correction methods as shown in Fig. 1 (top). Short
exposure time causes only the RS effect, while medium to
long exposure causes motion blur too. In this work, we
study the short exposure scenario.
While most existing works [8, 14, 3, 10] deal with video
RS correction in short exposure setting, the task is highly
† This work was done when the second author was studying at IIT Madras.

T YPE OF INFORMATION THAT CAN BE USED TO ESTIMATE CAMERA MOTION

Figure 1. Overview of correction techniques for various image
capture and exposure settings.

challenging for the data-starved situation comprising of
only a single image. This situation is very much plausible
given the prevalent hand-held on-the-go imaging using mobile phones. Other sources of information in the camera can
be tapped to facilitate such a data-deserted scenario. The
motion information provided by the gyroscope can be used
for RS correction post-capture, but it is heavily limited by
the sparsity of gyro-samples within the short exposure especially for single-image correction. Electronic image stabilizer (EIS) such as the one present in a Google Pixel phone
camera needs multiple frames making it inapt for single image capture. Optical image stabilizer (OIS) such as in an
iPhone camera can tackle only small motions, and its main
application is in videos and long exposure images.
To handle RS motion distortions, one needs to understand from where the uneasiness of human visualization
comes about. In videos, it is due to the local structural
changes along the temporal axis (through frames); in a
blurred image, it arises due to the unsharpness of edges,
while in a single RS distorted image, it is due to the structural changes compared to a human preconceived perception of the scene. Hence, as shown in Fig. 1 (bottom), different types of information can be utilized for these various

2291

