CATS: A Color and Thermal Stereo Benchmark
Wayne Treible1 Philip Saponaro1 Scott Sorensen1,** Abhishek Kolagunda1
Michael O’Neal1 Brian Phelan2 Kelly Sherbondy2 Chandra Kambhamettu1
1

2
1

University of Delaware, Newark, DE
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD

{wtreible,saponaro,sorensen,abhi,oneal,chandrak}@udel.edu
2

{brian.r.phelan.civ,kelly.d.sherbondy.civ}@mail.mil

Abstract
Stereo matching is a well researched area using visibleband color cameras. Thermal images are typically lower
resolution, have less texture, and are noisier compared
to their visible-band counterparts and are more challenging for stereo matching algorithms. Previous benchmarks
for stereo matching either focus entirely on visible-band
cameras or contain only a single thermal camera. We
present the Color And Thermal Stereo (CATS) benchmark,
a dataset consisting of stereo thermal, stereo color, and
cross-modality image pairs with high accuracy ground truth
(< 2mm) generated from a LiDAR. We scanned 100 cluttered indoor and 80 outdoor scenes featuring challenging
environments and conditions. CATS contains approximately
1400 images of pedestrians, vehicles, electronics, and other
thermally interesting objects in different environmental conditions, including nighttime, daytime, and foggy scenes.
Ground truth was projected to each of the four cameras to
generate color-color, thermal-thermal, and cross-modality
disparity maps. A semi-automatic LiDAR to camera alignment procedure was developed that does not require a calibration target. We compare state-of-the-art algorithms to
baseline the dataset and show that in the thermal and cross
modalities there is still much room for improvement. We
expect our dataset to provide researchers with a more diverse set of imaged locations, objects, and modalities than
previous benchmarks for stereo matching.

1. Introduction
Recent works in robotic vision [4, 40], material classification [27], fault line detection [16], and pedestrian detection [33, 17, 8, 22] show that using multiple modalities
** Now with Vision Systems Incorporated, Providence RI

Figure 1. Sample CATS data consisting of optical stereo images
(top), thermal stereo images (center) and the ground truth LiDAR
point cloud

can improve results and capabilities over single sensor systems. Moreover, as thermal sensors become cheaper and
more accessible (e.g. the FLIR One thermal smartphone at12961

