ScanNet: Richly-annotated 3D Reconstructions of Indoor Scenes
Angela Dai1 Angel X. Chang2 Manolis Savva2 Maciej Halber2 Thomas Funkhouser2 Matthias Nießner1,3
1
Stanford University 2 Princeton University 3 Technical University of Munich
www.scan-net.org

Abstract
A key requirement for leveraging supervised deep learning methods is the availability of large, labeled datasets.
Unfortunately, in the context of RGB-D scene understanding, very little data is available – current datasets cover a
small range of scene views and have limited semantic annotations. To address this issue, we introduce ScanNet, an
RGB-D video dataset containing 2.5M views in 1513 scenes
annotated with 3D camera poses, surface reconstructions,
and semantic segmentations. To collect this data, we designed an easy-to-use and scalable RGB-D capture system
that includes automated surface reconstruction and crowdsourced semantic annotation.We show that using this data
helps achieve state-of-the-art performance on several 3D
scene understanding tasks, including 3D object classification, semantic voxel labeling, and CAD model retrieval.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of commodity RGB-D sensors,
such as the Microsoft Kinect, the field of 3D geometry capture has gained significant attention and opened up a wide
range of new applications. Although there has been significant effort on 3D reconstruction algorithms, general 3D
scene understanding with RGB-D data has only very recently started to become popular. Research along semantic understanding is also heavily facilitated by the rapid
progress of modern machine learning methods, such as neural models. One key to successfully applying theses approaches is the availability of large, labeled datasets. While
much effort has been made on 2D datasets [17, 44, 47],
where images can be downloaded from the web and directly
annotated, the situation for 3D data is more challenging.
Thus, many of the current RGB-D datasets [74, 92, 77, 32]
are orders of magnitude smaller than their 2D counterparts.
Typically, 3D deep learning methods use synthetic data to
mitigate this lack of real-world data [91, 6].
One of the reasons that current 3D datasets are small is
because their capture requires much more effort, and effi-

Figure 1. Example reconstructed spaces in ScanNet annotated with
instance-level object category labels through our crowdsourced
annotation framework.

ciently providing (dense) annotations in 3D is non-trivial.
Thus, existing work on 3D datasets often fall back to polygon or bounding box annotations on 2.5D RGB-D images
[74, 92, 77], rather than directly annotating in 3D. In the
latter case, labels are added manually by expert users (typically by the paper authors) [32, 71] which limits their overall size and scalability.
In this paper, we introduce ScanNet, a dataset of richlyannotated RGB-D scans of real-world environments containing 2.5M RGB-D images in 1513 scans acquired in
707 distinct spaces. The sheer magnitude of this dataset
is larger than any other [58, 81, 92, 75, 3, 71, 32]. However,
what makes it particularly valuable for research in scene
understanding is its annotation with estimated calibration
parameters, camera poses, 3D surface reconstructions, textured meshes, dense object-level semantic segmentations,
and aligned CAD models (see Fig. 2). The semantic segmentations are more than an order of magnitude larger than
any previous RGB-D dataset.
In the collection of this dataset, we have considered two
main research questions: 1) how can we design a framework that allows many people to collect and annotate large
15828

