From Red Wine to Red Tomato: Composition with Context
Ishan Misra
Abhinav Gupta
Martial Hebert
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Compositionality and contextuality are key building
blocks of intelligence. They allow us to compose known
concepts to generate new and complex ones. However, traditional learning methods do not model both these properties and require copious amounts of labeled data to learn
new concepts. A large fraction of existing techniques, e.g.
using late fusion, compose concepts but fail to model contextuality. For example, red in red wine is different from red
in red tomatoes. In this paper, we present a simple method
that respects contextuality in order to compose classifiers of
known visual concepts. Our method builds upon the intuition that classifiers lie in a smooth space where compositional transforms can be modeled. We show how it can generalize to unseen combinations of concepts. Our results on
composing attributes, objects as well as composing subject,
predicate, and objects demonstrate its strong generalization
performance compared to baselines. Finally, we present detailed analysis of our method and highlight its properties.

1. Introduction
Imagine a blue elephant. Having never seen a single example of such a creature, humans have no difficulty imagining it, or even recognizing it. Starting from
Plato’s Theaetetus to the early nineteenth century work of
Gottlob Frege [20], compositionality is often regarded as
a hallmark of intelligence. The core idea is that a complex concept can be developed by combining multiple simple concepts. In fact, the same idea has been explored in
the field of computer vision as well: in the form of attributes [13, 54] or graphical models for SVOs (subjectobject-verb triplets) [53]. While the idea of building complex concepts from simpler ones seems intuitive, current
state-of-the-art methods for recognition or retrieval follow
a more data-driven approach, where complex concepts are
learned using hundreds and thousands of labeled examples
instead of being composed. Why is that?
Interestingly, even in philosophy, there is clear tension
between the idea of compositionality and the principle of
contextuality. The principle of contextuality states that one

snake

small snake

elephant

small elephant

lemon

ripe lemon

coffee

ripe coffee

bike

old bike

laptop

old laptop

Figure 1: Visual concepts like objects and attributes are
compositional. This compositionality depends on the context and the particular instances being composed. A small
elephant is much larger than a small snake! Our surprisingly
simple method models both compositionality and contextuality in order to learn visual classifiers. The results of our
approach show that it composes while respecting context.
cannot create a model of a simple concept without the context. This has often been stated as one of the main arguments against attributes: a red classifier in red wine is remarkably different from a red classifier in red tomato or
even a red car. Figure 1 shows more such examples.
This direct tension between compositionality and contextuality leads to the basic exploration of this paper: do
current vision algorithms have such a compositional nature?
Can we some respect the principle of contextuality yet create compositional visual classifiers? One approach to capture context is to use the text itself to learn how the modifiers should behave. For example, a modifier like “red”
should show similar visual modifications for related concepts like tomatoes and berries. Approaches such as [38]
have tried to use text to capture this idea and compose visual
classifiers. But do we really need taxonomy and knowledge
from language to capture contextuality?
In this paper, we propose an approach that composes
classifiers by directly reasoning about them in model space.
Our intuition behind this is that the model space is smooth
and captures visual similarity, i.e., tomato classifiers are
closer to berry classifiers than cars. Thus, modifiers should
apply similarly to similar classifiers. One task we consider
is composing attribute (adjective) and object (noun) visual
11792

