Indoor Scene Parsing with Instance Segmentation, Semantic Labeling and
Support Relationship Inference
1,3

Wei Zhuo , 2 Mathieu Salzmann , 1,3 Xuming He , and 1,3 Miaomiao Liu
1

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
3
Data61, CSIRO, Canberra, Australia

wei.zhuo@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch {xuming.he, miaomiao.liu}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract

one needs to reason about their semantics and how they are
placed relative to each other.

Over the years, indoor scene parsing has attracted a
growing interest in the computer vision community. Existing methods have typically focused on diverse subtasks of
this challenging problem. In particular, while some of them
aim at segmenting the image into regions, such as object or
surface instances, others aim at inferring the semantic labels of given regions, or their support relationships. These
different tasks are typically treated as separate ones. However, they bear strong connections: good regions should respect the semantic labels; support can only be defined for
meaningful regions; support relationships strongly depend
on semantics. In this paper, we therefore introduce an approach to jointly segment the instances and infer their semantic labels and support relationships from a single input
image. By exploiting a hierarchical segmentation, we formulate our problem as that of jointly finding the regions in
the hierarchy that correspond to instances and estimating
their class labels and pairwise support relationships. We
express this via a Markov Random Field, which allows us
to further encode links between the different types of variables. Inference in this model can be done exactly via integer linear programming, and we learn its parameters in
a structural SVM framework. Our experiments on NYUv2
demonstrate the benefits of reasoning jointly about all these
subtasks of indoor scene parsing.

In essence, indoor scene parsing is a complex problem
that consists of multiple subtasks, such as segmenting the
scene into meaningful regions [2, 7, 18], such as object
or surface instances, predicting semantic labels for every
pixel in the scene [16, 4, 22] and reasoning about the support relationships of different regions [11, 6, 19, 15]. In
the literature, with the exception of [20] that jointly reasons
about regions and semantics, existing approaches typically
tackle these subtasks independently. These subtasks, however, truly are strongly connected. For instance, the support
relationship of two regions is highly correlated with their
semantics; reasoning about support can be facilitated by using semantically meaningful regions. By addressing these
tasks separately, or sequentially, existing methods cannot
leverage the full collective power of all these dependencies.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we therefore introduce an approach to
jointly segment the instances and infer their semantic labels and support relationships in an indoor scene from a
single input image. To this end, we exploit a hierarchical
segmentation and formulate our problem as that of finding the regions corresponding to instances in this hierarchy,
while simultaneously predicting a semantic label for each
such region and the support relationship between any pair of
such regions. We jointly express these subtasks in a single
Markov Random Field (MRF). This allows us to effectively
encode the dependencies between them, thus leveraging all
the connections underlying our overall problem.

Indoor scene understanding is one of the core challenges
in computer vision. It aims at providing detailed information about the objects in a scene, such as their type and how
they interact with each other. Such a level of understanding could have a high impact in many applications, such as
personal robotics, where, to be able to interact with objects,

We perform inference in the resulting MRF exactly by
formulating it as an integer linear programming problem.
To cope with the size of this problem, we propose to make
use of a regressor trained to predict the overlap of each region with a ground-truth instance to effectively prune the
region candidates. Thanks to the efficiency of this reduced
15429

