CASENet: Deep Category-Aware Semantic Edge Detection
Zhiding Yu∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Chen Feng∗ Ming-Yu Liu† Srikumar Ramalingam†
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

yzhiding@andrew.cmu.edu

cfeng@merl.com, mingyul@nvidia.com, srikumar@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Boundary and edge cues are highly beneficial in improving a wide variety of vision tasks such as semantic segmentation, object recognition, stereo, and object proposal generation. Recently, the problem of edge detection has been
revisited and significant progress has been made with deep
learning. While classical edge detection is a challenging
binary problem in itself, the category-aware semantic edge
detection by nature is an even more challenging multi-label
problem. We model the problem such that each edge pixel
can be associated with more than one class as they appear
in contours or junctions belonging to two or more semantic
classes. To this end, we propose a novel end-to-end deep
semantic edge learning architecture based on ResNet and a
new skip-layer architecture where category-wise edge activations at the top convolution layer share and are fused with
the same set of bottom layer features. We then propose a
multi-label loss function to supervise the fused activations.
We show that our proposed architecture benefits this problem with better performance, and we outperform the current
state-of-the-art semantic edge detection methods by a large
margin on standard data sets such as SBD and Cityscapes.

building+pole
building

road+sidewalk
building+vegetation

road
road+pole

(a) Input image

sidewalk+building
building+sky

building+traffic sign
pole+car

building+car
building+person

road+car
pole+vegetation

(b) Ground truth

(c) CASENet output

Figure 1. Edge detection and categorization with our approach.
Given a street view image, our goal is to simultaneously detect
the boundaries and assign each edge pixel with one or more semantic categories. (b) and (c) are color coded by HSV where hue
and saturation together represent the composition and associated
strengths of categories. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction
Figure 1 shows an image of a road scene from Cityscapes
dataset [8] with several object categories such as building,
ground, sky, and car. In particular, we study the problem of
simultaneously detecting edge pixels and classifying them
based on association to one or more of the object categories [18, 42]. For example, an edge pixel lying on the
contour separating building and pole can be associated with
both of these object categories. In Figure 1, we visualize the
boundaries and list the colors of typical category combinations such as “building+pole” and “road+sidewalk”. In our
problem, every edge pixel is denoted by a vector whose individual elements denote the strength of pixel’s association
∗ The authors contributed equally.
† This work was done during the affiliation with MERL.

with different semantic classes. While most edge pixels will
be associated with only two object categories, in the case of
junctions [37] one may expect the edge pixel to be associated with three or even more. We therefore do not restrict
the number of object categories a pixel can be associated
with, and formulate our task as a multi-label learning problem. In this paper, we propose CASENet, a deep network
able to detect category-aware semantic edges. Given K defined semantic categories, the network essentially produces
K separate edge maps where each map indicates the edge
probability of a certain category. An example of separately
visualized edge maps on a test image is given in Figure 2.
The problem of edge detection has been shown to be useful for a number of computer vision tasks such as segmen-

5964

