DenseReg: Fully Convolutional Dense Shape Regression In-the-Wild
Rıza Alp Güler1
1
1

George Trigeorgis2
Epameinondas Antonakos3,∗ Patrick Snape2
Stefanos Zafeiriou2
Iasonas Kokkinos4

INRIA-CentraleSupélec, France

riza.guler@inria.fr

2

2

3

Imperial College London, UK

Amazon, Berlin, Germany

{g.trigeorgis, p.snape, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

3

1. Introduction
Non-planar object deformations, e.g. due to facial pose
or expression, result in challenging but also informative signal variations. Our objective in this paper is to recover this
information in a feedforward manner by employing a discriminatively trained convolutional network. Motivated by
the gap between discriminatively trained systems for detection and category-level deformable models, we propose a
system that combines the merits of both.
In particular, discriminative learning-based approaches
typically pursue invariance to shape deformations, for in∗ E. Antonakos was with Imperial College London during this work.

University College London, UK

antonak@amazon.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose to learn a mapping from image
pixels into a dense template grid through a fully convolutional network. We formulate this task as a regression problem and train our network by leveraging upon manually annotated facial landmarks “in-the-wild”. We use such landmarks to establish a dense correspondence field between
a three-dimensional object template and the input image,
which then serves as the ground-truth for training our regression system. We show that we can combine ideas from
semantic segmentation with regression networks, yielding a
highly-accurate ‘quantized regression’ architecture.
Our system, called DenseReg, allows us to estimate
dense image-to-template correspondences in a fully convolutional manner. As such our network can provide useful
correspondence information as a stand-alone system, while
when used as an initialization for Statistical Deformable
Models we obtain landmark localization results that largely
outperform the current state-of-the-art on the challenging
300W benchmark. We thoroughly evaluate our method on
a host of facial analysis tasks, and demonstrate its use for
other correspondence estimation tasks, such as the human
body and the human ear. DenseReg code is made available
at http://alpguler.com/DenseReg.html along
with supplementary materials.

4

4

i.kokkinos@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Deformation Free Space

FCNN

Template Shape

Figure 1: We introduce a fully convolutional neural network
that regresses from the image to a “canonical”, deformationfree parameterization of the face surface, effectively yielding a dense 2D-to-3D surface correspondence field. Once
this correspondence field is available, one can effortlessly
solve many image-level problems by backward-warping
their canonical solution from the template coordinates to
the image domain for the problems of landmark localization, semantic part segmentation, and face transfer.
stance by employing local ‘max-pooling’ operations to ellicit responses that are invariant to local translations. As
such, these models can reliably detect patterns irrespective
of their deformations through efficient, feedforward algorithms. At the same time, however, this discards useful
shape-related information and only delivers a single categorical decision per position. Several recent works in deep
learning have aimed at enriching deep networks with information about shape by explicitly modelling the effect of
similarity transformations [33] or non-rigid deformations
[20, 18, 9]; several of these have found success in classification [33], fine-grained recognition [20], and also face
detection [9]. There are works [24, 36] that model the deformation via optimization procedures, whereas we obtain

6799

