Relationship Proposal Networks
Ji Zhang∗1 , Mohamed Elhoseiny∗2 , Scott Cohen3 , Walter Chang3 , Ahmed Elgammal1
1

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
2
Facebook AI Research
3
Adobe Research

Abstract
Image scene understanding requires learning the relationships between objects in the scene. A scene with many
objects may have only a few individual interacting objects
(e.g., in a party image with many people, only a handful of
people might be speaking with each other). To detect all relationships, it would be inefficient to first detect all individual objects and then classify all pairs; not only is the number of all pairs quadratic, but classification requires limited object categories, which is not scalable for real-world
images. In this paper we address these challenges by using pairs of related regions in images to train a relationship
proposer that at test time produces a manageable number of
related regions. We name our model the Relationship Proposal Network (Rel-PN). Like object proposals, our Rel-PN
is class-agnostic and thus scalable to an open vocabulary
of objects. We demonstrate the ability of our Rel-PN to localize relationships with only a few thousand proposals. We
demonstrate its performance on Visual Genome dataset and
compare to other baselines that we designed. We also conduct experiments on a smaller subset of 5,000 images with
over 37,000 related regions and show promising results.

1. Introduction
While object detection is progressing at an ever-faster
rate, relatively little work has explored understanding visual
relationships at a large scale with related objects visually
grounded to image regions. Visual relationships [15, 21]
are defined as hsubject, predicate, objecti tuples, where the
“subject” is related to the “object” by the “predicate” relationship. Detecting visual relationships aims at not only
predicting if a relationship exists in an image but also localizing the “subject” and the “object”. The predicate region
can be simply determined by the union of the subject and
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1: Given an image and its object proposals, only a handful
pairs of them can form a set of meaningful relationships. Blue
boxes are individual object proposals and green boxes are relationships that contain subjects and objects. In this figure the
relationships are R1:hperson, take pictures of, personi, R2, R3,
R4:hperson, under, umbrellai, and R5:hperson, sit on, blanketi.
Considering all pairs of object proposals is not only computationally expensive, but will include many false positives, i.e., pairs that
don’t form any relationship.

object box. There are various types of visual relationships
that appear in the real world, non-comprehensively exemplified next. Positional relationships describe relative location between objects like hglass, on, tablei, hbag, under,
deski, etc. Attributive relationships describe that an object
is a part of another or is composed of another (e.g., hbrick,
of, buildingi, hman, with, glassesi). This requires an understanding beyond spatially relating the two objects. A third
type of relationship describes interactions between living
objects like hperson, dancing with, personi, and hman, riding, horsei. Here, a posture-level understanding is needed
since recognizing these interactions rely on how each object is posed to the other. A fourth type of relationship
15678

