Self-Supervised Video Representation Learning With Odd-One-Out Networks
Basura Fernando∗ Hakan Bilen† Efstratios Gavves‡ Stephen Gould∗
∗
ACRV, The Australian National University †University of Oxford ‡QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We propose a new self-supervised CNN pre-training
technique based on a novel auxiliary task called odd-oneout learning. In this task, the machine is asked to identify the
unrelated or odd element from a set of otherwise related elements. We apply this technique to self-supervised video representation learning where we sample subsequences from
videos and ask the network to learn to predict the odd video
subsequence. The odd video subsequence is sampled such
that it has wrong temporal order of frames while the even
ones have the correct temporal order. Therefore, to generate
a odd-one-out question no manual annotation is required.
Our learning machine is implemented as multi-stream convolutional neural network, which is learned end-to-end. Using odd-one-out networks, we learn temporal representations for videos that generalizes to other related tasks such
as action recognition.
On action classification, our method obtains 60.3% on
the UCF101 dataset using only UCF101 data for training which is approximately 10% better than current stateof-the-art self-supervised learning methods. Similarly, on
HMDB51 dataset we outperform self-supervised state-ofthe art methods by 12.7% on action classification task.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [27] have
emerged as the new state-of-the-art learning framework
for many machine learning problems. The success of
CNNs has been largely sustained by the manual annotation of big datasets such as ImageNet [34] and Sports1M [23]. As manual annotations are costly and time consuming supervised learning becomes less appealing, especially when considering tasks involving more complex data
(e.g., videos) and concepts (e.g., for human behavior analysis). In this work we focus on learning video representations
from unlabeled data.
Good video feature learning without using action category labels from videos is crucial for action recognition for
two reasons. First, unlike static images, videos are generally open-ended media and one cannot a priori contain a

Figure 1: The proposed odd-one-out network, where it takes
several video sequences as input to the multi branched network that share weights. Objective is to identify the odd
video sequence in this case it is the second video. To find
the odd video-clip, learning machine has to compare all
video clips, identify the regularities among them, and pick
the one with irregularities. This type of tasks are know as
analogical reasoning tasks.
particular action within a particular frame range. Thus, for
supervised learning one would need to manually annotate
videos frame-by-frame or crop them to a range of frames
to ensure consistency, obviously an unrealistic expectation
for both. Second, existing large video datasets, e.g., Sports1M [23] and the recent YouTube-8M [1], rely on noisy, unreliable YouTube tags. As a result, one cannot truly identify whether it is the architecture or the noisy labels that
contribute to the observed network behavior. Besides, unlabeled videos are abundant and information rich regarding
spatio-temporal structures [5, 33, 3, 32, 45].
Although traditionally unsupervised feature learning
(e.g.
[6, 20]) implies no supervisory signals, recently researchers introduced the self-supervised learning
paradigm [2, 8, 10, 12, 44]. Here the structure of the data is
used as a supervisory signal so the method is unsupervised
in the sense that it does not require human annotation but
supervised machine learning techniques can still be used.
For instance, one can use relative location of the patches in
images [10] or the order of video frames [44] as a supervisory signal. Different from the above works we express supervision in the context of the odd-one-out problem. More
13636

