Object-aware Dense Semantic Correspondence
Fan Yang1 , Xin Li1∗, Hong Cheng2 , Jianping Li1 , Leiting Chen1
1
School of Computer Science & Engineering, UESTC
2
Center for Robotics, School of Automation Engineering, UESTC
fanyang uestc@hotmail.com, xinli uestc@hotmail.com, hcheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
This work aims to build pixel-to-pixel correspondences
between images from the same visual class but with different
geometries and visual similarities. This task is particularly
challenging because (i) their visual content is similar only on the high-level structure, and (ii) background clutters
keep bringing in noises.
To address these problems, this paper proposes an
object-aware method to estimate per-pixel correspondences
from semantic to low-level by learning a classifier for each
selected discriminative grid cell and guiding the localization of every pixel under the semantic constraint. Specifically, an Object-aware Hierarchical Graph (OHG) model is constructed to regulate matching consistency from one
coarse grid cell containing whole object(s), to fine grid cells covering smaller semantic elements, and finally to every
pixel. A guidance layer is introduced as the semantic constraint on local structure matching. In addition, we propose
to learn the important high-level structure for each grid cell
in an “objectness-driven” way as an alternative to handcrafted descriptors in defining a better visual similarity.
The proposed method has been extensively evaluated on
various challenging benchmarks and real-world images.
The results show that our method significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-arts in terms of semantic flow accuracy.

1. Introduction
Dense semantic correspondence, which is defined as the
correlation between pixels in one image and those in another semantically similar image, is an important problem
in computer vision. Many research efforts have been devoted to building dense semantic correspondences due to
its wide application in semantic segmentation [1], depth
estimation [13], scene parsing [16], co-segmentation [22],
salient object detection [31], pose estimation [7], etc.
Unlike optical-flow methods [4] [5] designed to analyze
∗ Corresponding author.

the transformation between images from the same scene
(e.g., adjacent video sequences), semantic flow methods aim at establishing per-pixel correspondences between
visually-related images that may have no spatial or temporal
relations. To this end, prior works [18] [12] [26] [14] typically use descriptor similarity metric (L1 metric) to perform local detection, and then adopt the computational framework of optical flow to achieve global optimization. These
methods are based on assumptions that (i) semantically consistent pixels (or regions) share a sufficiently similar lowlevel structure, and (ii) all pixels (or regions) are equally significant in each image. They can mostly produce accurate
results when local handcrafted features (e.g., SIFT descriptors) are reasonably discriminative, and background clutters
bring in only a small amount of noise. But what about the
cases when the exact appearance of semantically consistent
regions is similar only on the high-level structure, or when
the noise from background clutters cannot be filtered out by
the optimizer? For instance, correspondence methods often need to match images with high intra-class variations
(Fig. 1(a)), changes in viewpoint (Fig. 1(b)) or strong background clutters (Fig. 1(c)). In these cases, the L1 metric is
inadequate to estimate the likelihood of semantically consistent regions. Moreover, treating all regions equally also
may hurt performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to overcome
these drawbacks. The key idea is to build semantic correspondences based on the learned classifier for each discriminative grid cell (object region) and then refine the flow
fields by matching local structures. By integrating these two
processes into a single model and optimizing it in a coarseto-fine manner, we can narrow the “semantic gap” and eliminate background clutters. The contributions of this paper
are as follows:
1) Object-aware Hierarchical Graph model. We design
an object-aware hierarchical graph (OHG) model for dense
correspondence with following novelties: (i) a novel algorithm is proposed to construct an object-aware hierarchical
architecture for the input image; (ii) a guidance layer is introduced to drive the matching of local structures; (iii) the

2777

