What is and What is not a Salient Object?
Learning Salient Object Detector by Ensembling Linear Exemplar Regressors
Changqun Xia1 , Jia Li1,2 , Xiaowu Chen1∗ , Anlin Zheng1 , Yu Zhang1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2

International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University

Abstract
Finding what is and what is not a salient object can be
helpful in developing better features and models in salient
object detection (SOD). In this paper, we investigate the images that are selected and discarded in constructing a new
SOD dataset and find that many similar candidates, complex shape and low objectness are three main attributes of
many non-salient objects. Moreover, objects may have diversified attributes that make them salient. As a result, we
propose a novel salient object detector by ensembling linear exemplar regressors. We first select reliable foreground
and background seeds using the boundary prior and then
adopt locally linear embedding (LLE) to conduct manifoldpreserving foregroundness propagation. In this manner, a
foregroundness map can be generated to roughly pop-out
salient objects and suppress non-salient ones with many
similar candidates. Moreover, we extract the shape, foregroundness and attention descriptors to characterize the extracted object proposals, and a linear exemplar regressor is
trained to encode how to detect salient proposals in a specific image. Finally, various linear exemplar regressors are
ensembled to form a single detector that adapts to various
scenarios. Extensive experimental results on 5 dataset and
the new SOD dataset show that our approach outperforms
9 state-of-art methods.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) is a fundamental problem
that attracts increasing research interests [16, 35, 36]. In
SOD, a key step is to distinguish salient and non-salient objects using the visual attributes. However, in complex scenarios it is often unclear which attributes inherently make an
object pop-out and how to separate salient and non-salient
objects sharing some attributes (see Fig. 1). As a result, an
investigation on what is and what is not a salient object is
necessary before developing SOD models.
* Corresponding author: Xiaowu Chen (email: chen@buaa.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Salient objects can pop-out for having different visual
attributes, which may be partially shared with non-salient objects.
(a) Images, (b) ground-truth, (c) results of [16], (d) results of [36],
(e) results of our approach. The main attributes of salient objects
in the three images are location (1st row), shape (2nd row) and
color (3rd row), while attributes shared with non-salient objects
are shape (1st row), color (2nd row) and location (3rd row).

In the past decade, extensive efforts have been made to
find a comprehensive and convincing definition of salient
objects. For example, Jiang et al. [17] proposed that salient
objects are characterized by the uniqueness, focusness, and
objectness. In [10], salient objects were considered to be
unique and have compact spatial distribution, or be distinctive with respect to both their local and global surroundings [13]. Based on these findings, heuristic features can
be designed to identify whether a region [8, 24, 16, 44],
a superpixel [19, 14] or a pixel [37, 34, 42] is salient or
not. Typically, these models can achieve impressive performance when salient and non-salient objects are remarkably
different. However, in complex scenarios that salient and
non-salient objects may share some visual attributes, making them difficult to be separated (see Fig. 1). Although
such scenarios can be partially addressed by training extremely complex models by using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks [15, 12, 21, 22, 25] or Recurrent Neural Networks [26, 20, 38], such deep models are often difficult to
be trained or fine-tuned, Moreover, it is still unclear what visual attributes contribute the most in separating salient and
non-salient objects due to the ‘black box’ characteristic of
4321
4142

