Semantic Image Inpainting with Deep Generative Models
Raymond A. Yeh∗, Chen Chen∗, Teck Yian Lim,
Alexander G. Schwing, Mark Hasegawa-Johnson, Minh N. Do
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yeh17, cchen156, tlim11, aschwing, jhasegaw, minhdo}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Semantic image inpainting is a challenging task where
large missing regions have to be filled based on the available visual data. Existing methods which extract information from only a single image generally produce unsatisfactory results due to the lack of high level context. In this paper, we propose a novel method for semantic image inpainting, which generates the missing content by conditioning
on the available data. Given a trained generative model,
we search for the closest encoding of the corrupted image
in the latent image manifold using our context and prior
losses. This encoding is then passed through the generative
model to infer the missing content. In our method, inference is possible irrespective of how the missing content is
structured, while the state-of-the-art learning based method
requires specific information about the holes in the training
phase. Experiments on three datasets show that our method
successfully predicts information in large missing regions
and achieves pixel-level photorealism, significantly outperforming the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic inpainting [30] refers to the task of inferring arbitrary large missing regions in images based on image semantics. Since prediction of high-level context is required,
this task is significantly more difficult than classical inpainting or image completion which is often more concerned
with correcting spurious data corruption or removing entire
objects. Numerous applications such as restoration of damaged paintings or image editing [3] benefit from accurate
semantic inpainting methods if large regions are missing.
However, inpainting becomes increasingly more difficult if
large regions are missing or if scenes are complex.
Classical inpainting methods are often based on either
local or non-local information to recover the image. Most
existing methods are designed for single image inpainting.
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Input

TV

LR

PM

Ours

Figure 1. Semantic inpainting results by TV, LR, PM and our
method. Holes are marked by black color.

Hence they are based on the information available in the
input image, and exploit image priors to address the illposed-ness. For example, total variation (TV) based approaches [34, 1] take into account the smoothness property
of natural images, which is useful to fill small missing regions or remove spurious noise. Holes in textured images
can be filled by finding a similar texture from the same image [6]. Prior knowledge, such as statistics of patch offsets [11], planarity [13] or low rank (LR) [12] can greatly
improve the result as well. PatchMatch (PM) [2] searches
for similar patches in the available part of the image and
quickly became one of the most successful inpainting methods due to its high quality and efficiency. However, all single image inpainting methods require appropriate information to be contained in the input image, e.g., similar pixels,
structures, or patches. This assumption is hard to satisfy, if
the missing region is large and possibly of arbitrary shape.
Consequently, in this case, these methods are unable to recover the missing information. Fig. 1 shows some challenging examples with large missing regions, where local
15485

