A Study of Lagrangean Decompositions and Dual Ascent Solvers
for Graph Matching
Paul Swoboda1 , Carsten Rother2 , Hassan Abu Alhaija2 , Dagmar Kainmüller3 and Bogdan Savchynskyy2
1
IST Austria, 2 TU Dresden, 3 MPI-CBG
pswoboda@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We study the quadratic assignment problem, in computer
vision also known as graph matching. Two leading solvers
for this problem optimize the Lagrange decomposition duals with sub-gradient and dual ascent (also known as message passing) updates. We explore this direction further
and propose several additional Lagrangean relaxations of
the graph matching problem along with corresponding algorithms, which are all based on a common dual ascent
framework. Our extensive empirical evaluation gives several
theoretical insights and suggests a new state-of-the-art anytime solver for the considered problem. Our improvement
over state-of-the-art is particularly visible on a new dataset
with large-scale sparse problem instances containing more
than 500 graph nodes each.

1. Introduction
In computer vision and beyond, the quadratic assignment
problem, known also as graph matching, feature correspondence and feature matching, has attracted great interest. This
problem is similar to Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) inference on a discrete pairwise graphical model, also called
conditional random field (CRF) in the literature. It differs
in an additional uniqueness constraint: Each label can be
taken at most once. This uniqueness constraint makes it
well-suited to attack e.g. tracking problems or shape matching. In both cases feature points or object parts have to be
matched between multiple frames one-to-one. Unfortunately,
the uniqueness constraint prevents naive application of efficient message passing solvers for MAP-inference to this
problem. For this reason, many dedicated graph matching
solvers were developed, see related work below.
On the other hand, efficient dual block-coordinate ascent
(also known as message passing) algorithms like TRW-S [33]
count among the most efficient solvers for MAP-inference
in conditional random fields. Also, the graph matching problem, after possibly introducing many additional variables,

can be stated as a MAP-inference problem in a standard
pairwise CRF. Such an approach already surpasses most
state-of-the-art graph matching solvers.
Hence, it is desirable to devise specialized convergent
message passing solvers exhibiting none of the drawbacks
discussed above, i.e. (i) directly operating on a compact
representation of the graph matching problem and (ii) using techniques from the MAP-inference community to gain
computational efficiency.
To achieve this goal, we propose (i) several Lagrangean
decompositions of the graph matching problem and (ii) novel
efficient message passing solvers for these relaxations. We
show their efficacy in an extensive empirical evaluation.
The term graph matching refers to a numRelated work
ber of different optimization problems in pattern recognition,
see [18] for a review. We mean the special version known unambiguously as quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [36].
Recently, the graph matching was generalized to the hypergraph matching problem (see [43] and references therein),
which match between more than two graphs.
The quadratic assignment problem was first formulated
in [13] back in 1957. Since a number of NP-complete problems such as traveling salesman, maximal clique, graph
isomorphism and graph partitioning can be straightforwardly
reduced to QAP, this problem is NP-hard itself. Its importance for numerous applications boosted its analysis a lot:
The (already aged) overview [41] contains 362 references
with over 150 works suggesting new algorithms and over
100 with new theoretical results related to this problem.
Nearly all possible solver paradigms were put to the test
for QAP. These include, but are not limited to, convex relaxations based on Lagrangean decompositions [31, 52], linear [6,22], convex quadratic [9] and semi-definite [46,51,63]
relaxations, which can be used either directly to obtain approximate solutions or just to provide lower bounds. To
tighten these bounds several cutting plane methods were proposed [11, 12]. On the other side, various primal heuristics,
both (i) deterministic, such as local search [5, 44], graduated
assignment methods [25], fixed point iterations [39], spectral
11607

