Universal adversarial perturbations
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli∗ †

Alhussein Fawzi∗ †

seyed.moosavi@epfl.ch

hussein.fawzi@gmail.com

Omar Fawzi‡

Pascal Frossard†

omar.fawzi@ens-lyon.fr

pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
Face powder

Given a state-of-the-art deep neural network classifier,
we show the existence of a universal (image-agnostic) and
very small perturbation vector that causes natural images
to be misclassified with high probability. We propose a systematic algorithm for computing universal perturbations,
and show that state-of-the-art deep neural networks are
highly vulnerable to such perturbations, albeit being quasiimperceptible to the human eye. We further empirically analyze these universal perturbations and show, in particular,
that they generalize very well across neural networks. The
surprising existence of universal perturbations reveals important geometric correlations among the high-dimensional
decision boundary of classifiers. It further outlines potential security breaches with the existence of single directions
in the input space that adversaries can possibly exploit to
break a classifier on most natural images.1

Joystick

Chihuahua

Chihuahua

Jay

Grille

Labrador

Thresher

Labrador

Flagpole

Tibetan mastiff

Tibetan mastiff

1. Introduction
Can we find a single small image perturbation that fools
a state-of-the-art deep neural network classifier on all natural images? We show in this paper the existence of such
quasi-imperceptible universal perturbation vectors that lead
to misclassify natural images with high probability. Specifically, by adding such a quasi-imperceptible perturbation
to natural images, the label estimated by the deep neural network is changed with high probability (see Fig. 1).
Such perturbations are dubbed universal, as they are imageagnostic. The existence of these perturbations is problematic when the classifier is deployed in real-world (and possibly hostile) environments, as they can be exploited by adversaries to break the classifier. Indeed, the perturbation
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
‡ ENS de Lyon, LIP, UMR 5668 ENS Lyon - CNRS - UCBL - INRIA,
Université de Lyon, France
1 The code is available for download on https://github.com/
LTS4/universal. A demo can be found on https://youtu.be/
jhOu5yhe0rc.

Lycaenid

Balloon

Whiptail lizard

Brabancon griffon

Labrador

Border terrier

Figure 1: When added to a natural image, a universal perturbation image causes the image to be misclassified by the
deep neural network with high probability. Left images:
Original natural images. The labels are shown on top of
each arrow. Central image: Universal perturbation. Right
images: Perturbed images. The estimated labels of the perturbed images are shown on top of each arrow.

1765

