Deep Quantization: Encoding Convolutional Activations
with Deep Generative Model ∗
Zhaofan Qiu, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
zhaofanqiu@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com

Abstract

...

∗ This work was performed when Zhaofan Qiu was visiting Microsoft Research as a research intern.

...

The recent advances in deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated high capability in visual recognition. For instance, an ensemble of residual nets [7] achieves 3.57% in terms of top-5 error on the ImageNet dataset [26]. More importantly, when utilizing the
activations of either a fully-connected layer or a convolu-

FV Encoding

...

1. Introduction

Convolutional
Activations

...

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
proven highly effective for visual recognition, where learning a universal representation from activations of convolutional layer plays a fundamental problem. In this paper,
we present Fisher Vector encoding with Variational AutoEncoder (FV-VAE), a novel deep architecture that quantizes the local activations of convolutional layer in a deep
generative model, by training them in an end-to-end manner. To incorporate FV encoding strategy into deep generative models, we introduce Variational Auto-Encoder model,
which steers a variational inference and learning in a neural network which can be straightforwardly optimized using standard stochastic gradient method. Different from the
FV characterized by conventional generative models (e.g.,
Gaussian Mixture Model) which parsimoniously fit a discrete mixture model to data distribution, the proposed FVVAE is more flexible to represent the natural property of data for better generalization. Extensive experiments are conducted on three public datasets, i.e., UCF101, ActivityNet,
and CUB-200-2011 in the context of video action recognition and fine-grained image classification, respectively. Superior results are reported when compared to state-of-theart representations. Most remarkably, our proposed FVVAE achieves to-date the best published accuracy of 94.2%
on UCF101.

Global Activations

Convolutional
Activations
FV-VAE Encoding

Figure 1. Visual representations derived from activations of different layers in CNNs (upper row: global activations of the fullyconnected layer; middle row: convolutional activations with Fisher Vector encoding; bottom row: convolutional activations with
our FV-VAE encoding).

tional layer in a pre-trained CNN as a universal visual representation and applying this representation to other visual recognition tasks (e.g., scene understanding and semantic segmentation), CNNs also manifest impressive performances. The improvements are expected when CNNs are
further fine-tuned with only amount of task-specific data.
The activations of different layers in CNNs are generally
grouped into two dimensions: global activations and convolutional activations. The former directly takes the activations of the fully-connected layer as visual representations,
which are holistic over the entire image, as shown in the
upper row of Figure 1. The latter, in contrast, creates visual representations by encoding a set of regional and local
activations from a convolutional layer to a vectorial representation using quantization strategies. For example, Fisher
Vector (FV) [23] is one of the most successful quantization
approaches, as shown in the middle row of Figure 1. While
superior results by aggregating convolutional activations are
reported in most recent studies [3, 44], convolutional activations are first extracted as local descriptors followed by
another separate quantization step. Thus such descriptors
may not be optimally compatible with the encoding process, making the quantization sub-optimal. Furthermore, as

6759

