Zero Shot Learning via Multi-Scale Manifold Regularization
Shay Deutsch 1,2

Soheil Kolouri 3
Kyungnam Kim 3
Yuri Owechko 3
Stefano Soatto 1
1
UCLA Vision Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
2
Department of Mathematics, University of California Los Angeles 3 HRL Laboratories, LLC, Malibu, CA
{shaydeu@math., soatto@cs.}ucla.edu

Abstract
We address zero-shot learning using a new manifold
alignment framework based on a localized multi-scale
transform on graphs. Our inference approach includes a
smoothness criterion for a function mapping nodes on a
graph (visual representation) onto a linear space (semantic
representation), which we optimize using multi-scale graph
wavelets. The robustness of the ensuing scheme allows us
to operate with automatically generated semantic annotations, resulting in an algorithm that is entirely free of manual supervision, and yet improves the state-of-the-art as
measured on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to enable decisions about
unseen (target) classes by assuming a shared intermediate representation learned from a disjoint set of (source)
classes [17]. Early methods assumed ground truth (human
annotation) was available for intermediate representations
such as object attributes that can be inferred from an image. More recently, methods have emerged that automatically infer such an intermediate “semantic” representation.
Among these, some have cast the problem as joint alignment of the data using graph structures [10, 5] or directly
using regularized sparse representations [23, 15]. Most automatic methods, however, perform at levels insufficient to
support practical applications.
We propose a new alignment algorithm based on Spectral Graph Wavelets (SGWs) [13], a multi-scale graph transform that is localized in the vertex and spectral domains.
The nodes in our graph are visual features, for example
activations of a convolutional neural network or any other
“graph signal.” Such graph signals are considered an embedding of semantic attributes in a linear space, automatically computed using Word2Vec. Learning is based on the
assumption that nearby visual representations should produce similar semantic representations, which translates into
a smoothness criterion for the graph signal. Our approach is

{skolouri, kkim, yowechko,}@hrl.com

performed in a transductive setting, using all unlabeled data
where the classification and learning process on the transfer
data is entirely unsupervised.
While our suggested approach is similar in scope to other
”visual-semantic alignment” methods (see [5, 10] and references therein) it is, to the best of our knowledge, the first
to use multi-scale localized representations that respect the
global (non-flat) geometry of the data space and the finescale structure of the local semantic representation. Moreover, learning the relationship between visual features and
semantic attributes is unified into a single process, whereas
in most ZSL approaches it is divided into a number of independent steps [10].
Our tests show improvements on popular benchmarks
such as the Animals With Attributes (AWA) dataset, demonstrating the ability of our approach to perform multi-scale
manifold alignment using only automated semantic features. In addition we also demonstrate the robustness of our
regularization method on the CUB dataset showing state-ofthe-art results.

1.1. Related Work
Currently there are two main approaches in zero shot
learning. In the first, following [16], given semantic attributes of a previously-unseen image during the test time,
one would like to classify an unseen image when its attributes are given at the test time. In the second, the test attributes are unknown; however, all the test images are available at test time, and one wishes to estimate the attributes
and to classify the test datum simultaneously. Among
the first, [27, 24, 28, 2] suggest learning a cross-domain
matching function to compare attributes and visual features.
Among the second, [10] propose a multi-view transductive approach through multi-view alignment using Canonical Correlation Analysis, and the method in [15].
Several approaches for zero shot learning have been recently proposed. These include kernel alignment with unsupervised domain-invariant component analysis [11] which
addresses the problem from the multi-source domain generalization point of view. It is an extension of Unsupervised
17112

