Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional object detectors
Jonathan Huang
Alireza Fathi

Vivek Rathod
Chen Sun
Menglong Zhu
Ian Fischer
Zbigniew Wojna
Yang Song
Kevin Murphy

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to serve as a guide for selecting a detection architecture that achieves the right
speed/memory/accuracy balance for a given application
and platform. To this end, we investigate various ways to
trade accuracy for speed and memory usage in modern convolutional object detection systems. A number of successful
systems have been proposed in recent years, but apples-toapples comparisons are difficult due to different base feature extractors (e.g., VGG, Residual Networks), different
default image resolutions, as well as different hardware and
software platforms. We present a unified implementation of
the Faster R-CNN [30], R-FCN [6] and SSD [25] systems,
which we view as “meta-architectures” and trace out the
speed/accuracy trade-off curve created by using alternative feature extractors and varying other critical parameters
such as image size within each of these meta-architectures.
On one extreme end of this spectrum where speed and memory are critical, we present a detector that achieves real
time speeds and can be deployed on a mobile device. On
the opposite end in which accuracy is critical, we present
a detector that achieves state-of-the-art performance measured on the COCO detection task.

1. Introduction
A lot of progress has been made in recent years on object
detection due to the use of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Modern object detectors based on these networks
— such as Faster R-CNN [30], R-FCN [6], Multibox [39],
SSD [25] and YOLO [28] — are now good enough to be
deployed in consumer products (e.g., Google Photos, Pinterest Visual Search) and some have been shown to be fast
enough to be run on mobile devices.
However, it can be difficult for practitioners to decide
what architecture is best suited to their application. Standard metrics, such as mean average precision (mAP), do not
tell the entire story, since for real deployments of computer
vision systems, running time and memory usage are also
critical. For example, mobile devices often require a small
memory footprint, and self driving cars require real time
performance. Server-side production systems, like those

Anoop Korattikara
Sergio Guadarrama

used in Google, Facebook or Snapchat, have more leeway
to optimize for accuracy, but are still subject to throughput
constraints. While the methods that win competitions, such
as the COCO challenge [24], are optimized for accuracy,
they often rely on model ensembling and multicrop methods which are too slow for practical usage.
Unfortunately, only a small subset of papers (e.g., RFCN [6], SSD [25] YOLO [28]) discuss running time in
any detail. Furthermore, these papers typically only state
that they achieve some frame-rate, but do not give a full
picture of the speed/accuracy trade-off, which depends on
many other factors, such as which feature extractor is used,
input image sizes, etc.
In this paper, we seek to explore the speed/accuracy
trade-off of modern detection systems in an exhaustive and
fair way. While this has been studied for full image classification( (e.g., [3]), detection models tend to be significantly more complex. We primarily investigate singlemodel/single-pass detectors, by which we mean models
that do not use ensembling, multi-crop methods, or other
“tricks” such as horizontal flipping. In other words, we only
pass a single image through a single network. For simplicity
(and because it is more important for users of this technology), we focus only on test-time performance and not on
how long these models take to train.
Though it is impractical to compare every recently proposed detection system, we are fortunate that many of the
leading state-of-the-art approaches have, at a high level,
converged on a common methodology. This has allowed
us to implement and compare a large number of detection
systems in a unified way. In particular, we have created
implementations of the Faster R-CNN, R-FCN and SSD
meta-architectures, which all consist of a single convolutional network, trained with a mixed regression and classification objective, and use sliding window style predictions.
To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:
• We provide a concise survey of modern convolutional
detection systems, and describe how the leading ones
follow very similar designs.
• We describe our flexible and unified implementation
of three meta-architectures (Faster R-CNN, R-FCN
17310

