The VQA-Machine: Learning How to Use Existing Vision Algorithms
to Answer New Questions
Peng Wang∗1,2 , Qi Wu∗3 , Chunhua Shen2,3 , and Anton van den Hengel2,3
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
One of the most intriguing features of the Visual Question Answering (VQA) challenge is the unpredictability of
the questions. Extracting the information required to answer them demands a variety of image operations from detection and counting, to segmentation and reconstruction.
To train a method to perform even one of these operations
accurately from {image,question,answer} tuples would be
challenging, but to aim to achieve them all with a limited
set of such training data seems ambitious at best. We propose here instead a more general and scalable approach
which exploits the fact that very good methods to achieve
these operations already exist, and thus do not need to be
trained. Our method thus learns how to exploit a set of
external off-the-shelf algorithms to achieve its goal, an approach that has something in common with the Neural Turing Machine [10]. The core of our proposed method is a
new co-attention model. In addition, the proposed approach
generates human-readable reasons for its decision, and can
still be trained end-to-end without ground truth reasons being given. We demonstrate the effectiveness on two publicly
available datasets, Visual Genome and VQA, and show that
it produces the state-of-the-art results in both cases.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is an AI-complete
task lying at the intersection of computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP). Current VQA approaches are predominantly based on a joint embedding [3,
9, 18, 22, 34, 40] of image features and question representations into the same space, the result of which is used to
predict the answer. One of the advantages of this approach
is its ability to exploit a pre-trained CNN model.
∗ The first two authors contributed to this work equally.

Figure 1: Two real example results of our proposed model. Given an
image-question pair, our model generates not only an answer, but also a
set of reasons (as text) and visual attention maps. The colored words in
the question have Top-3 weights, ordered as red, blue and cyan. The highlighted area in the attention map indicates the attention weights on the image regions. The Top-3 weighted visual facts are re-formulated as human
readable reasons. The comparison between the results for different questions relating to the same image shows that our model can produce highly
informative reasons relating to the specifics of each question.

In contrast to this joint embedding approach we propose
a co-attention based method which learns how to use a set of
off-the-shelf CV methods in answering image-based questions. Applying the existing CV methods to the image generates a variety of information which we label the image
facts. Inevitably, much of this information would not be
relevant to the particular question asked. So part of the role
of the attention mechanism is to determine which types of
facts are useful in answering a question.
The fact that the VQA-Machine is able to exploit a set
of off-the-shelf CV methods in answering a question means
that it does not need to learn how to perform these functions
itself. The method instead learns to predict the appropriate

1173

