Accurate Depth and Normal Maps
from Occlusion-Aware Focal Stack Symmetry
Michael Strecke, Anna Alperovich, and Bastian Goldluecke
University of Konstanz
firstname.lastname@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to jointly estimate consistent depth and normal maps from 4D light fields, with
two main contributions. First, we build a cost volume from
focal stack symmetry. However, in contrast to previous approaches, we introduce partial focal stacks in order to be
able to robustly deal with occlusions. This idea already
yields significanly better disparity maps. Second, even recent sublabel-accurate methods for multi-label optimization
recover only a piecewise flat disparity map from the cost
volume, with normals pointing mostly towards the image
plane. This renders normal maps recovered from these approaches unsuitable for potential subsequent applications.
We therefore propose regularization with a novel prior linking depth to normals, and imposing smoothness of the resulting normal field. We then jointly optimize over depth
and normals to achieve estimates for both which surpass
previous work in accuracy on a recent benchmark.

1. Introduction
In light field imaging, robust depth estimation is the limiting factor for a variety of useful applications, such as
super-resolution [30], image-based rendering [22], or light
field editing [13]. More sophisticated models for e.g. intrinsic light field decomposition [1] or reflectance estimation [29] often even require accurate surface normals, which
are much more difficult to achieve as the available cues
about them are subtle [29].
Current algorithms, e.g. [16, 18, 28, 5, 14] and many
more cited in the references, work exceedingly well for estimating depth from light field images. However, methods
are usually not designed with normal estimation in mind.
Thus, depth estimates from algorithms based on cost volumes, even when optimized with sublabel accuracy [19], are
often piecewise flat and thus fail at predicting accurate normal maps. Frequently, their accuracy is also naturally limited around occlusion boundaries [18, 15, 30]. The aim of

Figure 1. We present a novel idea to compute disparity cost volumes which is based on the concept of occlusion-aware focal
stack symmetry. Using the proposed framework, we can optimize
jointly for depth and normals to reconstruct challenging real-world
scenes captured with a Lytro Illum plenoptic camera.

this work is to contribute towards a remedy for these drawbacks.
Contributions. In this work, we make two main contributions. First, we introduce a novel way to handle
occlusions when constructing cost volumes based on the
idea of focal stack symmetry [18]. This novel data term
achieves substantially more accurate results than the previous method when a global optimum is computed with sublabel relaxation [19]. Second, we propose post-processing
using joint regularization of depth and normals, in order to
achieve a smooth normal map which is consistent with the
depth estimate. For this, we employ ideas from Graber et
al. [7] to linearly couple depth and normals, and employ the
relaxation in Zeisl et al. [31] to deal with the non-convexity
of the unit length constraint on the normal map. The resulting sub-problems on depth and normal regularization can
be efficiently solved with the primal-dual algorithm in [4].
Our results substantially outperform all previous work that
has been evaluated on the recent benchmark for disparity
estimation on light fields [12] with respect to accuracy of
disparity and normal maps and several other metrics.

2814

