TGIF-QA: Toward Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in Visual Question Answering
Yunseok Jang1 , Yale Song2 , Youngjae Yu1 , Youngjin Kim1 , Gunhee Kim1
1
Seoul National University, 2 Yahoo Research
1 {yunseok.jang,

gunhee}@snu.ac.kr, {yj.yu, youngjin.kim}@vision.snu.ac.kr

2 yalesong@yahoo-inc.com

http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/tgif-qa

Abstract
Vision and language understanding has emerged as a
subject undergoing intense study in Artificial Intelligence.
Among many tasks in this line of research, visual question
answering (VQA) has been one of the most successful ones,
where the goal is to learn a model that understands visual
content at region-level details and finds their associations
with pairs of questions and answers in the natural language
form. Despite the rapid progress in the past few years, most
existing work in VQA have focused primarily on images. In
this paper, we focus on extending VQA to the video domain
and contribute to the literature in three important ways.
First, we propose three new tasks designed specifically for
video VQA, which require spatio-temporal reasoning from
videos to answer questions correctly. Next, we introduce
a new large-scale dataset for video VQA named TGIF-QA
that extends existing VQA work with our new tasks. Finally,
we propose a dual-LSTM based approach with both spatial
and temporal attention, and show its effectiveness over conventional VQA techniques through empirical evaluations.

1. Introduction
Vision and language understanding has emerged as a
subject undergoing intense study in Artificial Intelligence.
Among many tasks in this line of research, visual question
answering (VQA) has been one of the most successful ones,
where the goal is to learn a model that understands visual
content at region-level details and finds their associations
with pairs of questions and answers in the natural language
form [2]. Part of the reasons for the success of VQA is
that there exists a number of large-scale datasets with welldefined tasks and evaluation protocols [2, 24, 28, 42], which
provided a common ground to researchers to compare their
methods in a controlled setting.
While we have seen a rapid progress in video analysis [17, 31, 34], most existing work in VQA have focused primarily on images. We believe that the limited
progress in video VQA, compared to its image counter-

Image VQA
Q) What is the color of the bird?
A) White

Video VQA

Q) How many times does the cat touch the dog?
A) 4 times
Figure 1. Much of conventional VQA tasks focus on reasoning
from images (top). This work proposes a new dataset with tasks
designed specifically for video VQA that requires spatio-temporal
reasoning from videos to answer questions correctly (bottom).

part, is due in part to the lack of large-scale datasets with
well-defined tasks. Some early attempts have been made
to fill this gap by introducing datasets that leverage movie
data [29, 33], focusing on storyline comprehension either
from short video clips [29] or from movies and scripts [33].
However, existing question-answer pairs are either an extension to the conventional image VQA tasks, e.g., by
adding action verbs as the new answer type [29] to the existing categories of object, number, color, and location [28], or
require comprehensive understanding of long textual data,
e.g., movie scripts [33].
In this paper, we contribute to the literature in VQA in
three important ways. First, we propose three new tasks
designed specifically for video VQA, which require spatiotemporal reasoning from videos to answer questions correctly. Next, we introduce a new large-scale dataset for
video VQA that extends existing work in image VQA with
our new tasks. Finally, we propose a dual-LSTM based approach with an attention mechanism to solve our problem,
and show its effectiveness over conventional VQA tech-

2758

