Polarimetric Multi-View Stereo
Zhaopeng Cui1 Jinwei Gu2 Boxin Shi3 Ping Tan1 Jan Kautz2
1
Simon Fraser University 2 NVIDIA Research
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Center, National Institute of AIST

Abstract

Estimated azimuth angle
Polarizer

Multi-view stereo relies on feature correspondences for
3D reconstruction, and thus is fundamentally flawed in dealing with featureless scenes. In this paper, we propose polarimetric multi-view stereo, which combines per-pixel photometric information from polarization with epipolar constraints from multiple views for 3D reconstruction. Polarization reveals surface normal information, and is thus helpful to propagate depth to featureless regions. Polarimetric
multi-view stereo is completely passive and can be applied
outdoors in uncontrolled illumination, since the data capture
can be done simply with either a polarizer or a polarization
camera. Unlike previous work on shape-from-polarization
which is limited to either diffuse polarization or specular
polarization only, we propose a novel polarization imaging
model that can handle real-world objects with mixed polarization. We prove there are exactly two types of ambiguities
on estimating surface azimuth angles from polarization, and
we resolve them with graph optimization and iso-depth contour tracing. This step significantly improves the initial depth
map estimate, which are later fused together for complete 3D
reconstruction. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
high-quality 3D reconstruction and better performance than
state-of-the-art multi-view stereo methods, especially on featureless 3D objects, such as ceramic tiles, office room with
white walls, and highly reflective cars in the outdoors.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo reconstructs dense 3D models from
multiple images. It has been intensively studied in computer vision [34, 35, 10, 11], with wide applications in computer graphics, robotics, computer-aided design, and humancomputer interactions. Multi-view stereo relies on finding
feature correspondences with epipolar constraints, and thus
it is fundamentally flawed in dealing with featureless objects,
since correspondence cannot be reliably found.
To deal with featureless regions, one approach is to combine multi-view and photometric cues, either from photometric stereo [41, 12, 29] or structured light [26]. These
methods, however, require active/controlled illumination

Multi-view stereo [11]

Ours

Figure 1: Polarimetric multi-view stereo exploits per-pixel
photometric information from polarized images to significantly improve 3D reconstruction quality for challenging
scenes such as highlight and featureless regions. Please refer
to Figure 4 and Figure 9 for more details and results.
and cannot operate in the outdoors. Another approach is to
refine 3D geometry with shape-from-shading [40, 18, 28],
which requires the knowledge of illumination (captured or
estimated), and is generally limited to Lambertian surfaces
or surfaces with uniform reflectance.
In this paper, we propose a novel method called polarimetric multi-view stereo that exploits per-pixel polarization information for dense 3D reconstruction. Polarized images provide information about surface normals for a wide
range of materials (e.g., specular, diffuse, glass, metal, dielectrics) [22, 14, 3, 25], which are additional constraints
for 3D depth recovery for featureless regions. Polarimetric
multi-view stereo is a completely passive approach, and can
be applied to a wide variety of objects in the outdoors with
uncontrolled illumination. Polarized images can be captured
in a single shot with a polarization camera [1, 9, 31, 33] or a
rotating polarizer [38], which makes this approach as simple
and practical as using ordinary cameras.
Polarization has been studied previously for 3D reconstruction. Two recent work includes Polarized3D [16] which
requires RGB-D sensors and thus is limited to indoors, and
[36] which assumes uniform albedo and requires lighting
11558

