Predicting Ground-Level Scene Layout from Aerial Imagery
Menghua Zhai

Zachary Bessinger

Scott Workman

Nathan Jacobs

ted@cs.uky.edu

zach@cs.uky.edu

scott@cs.uky.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

Computer Science, University of Kentucky
Abstract
We introduce a novel strategy for learning to extract semantically meaningful features from aerial imagery. Instead of manually labeling the aerial imagery, we propose
to predict (noisy) semantic features automatically extracted
from co-located ground imagery. Our network architecture
takes an aerial image as input, extracts features using a
convolutional neural network, and then applies an adaptive
transformation to map these features into the ground-level
perspective. We use an end-to-end learning approach to
minimize the difference between the semantic segmentation
extracted directly from the ground image and the semantic
segmentation predicted solely based on the aerial image.
We show that a model learned using this strategy, with no
additional training, is already capable of rough semantic
labeling of aerial imagery. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that by finetuning this model we can achieve more accurate semantic segmentation than two baseline initialization
strategies. We use our network to address the task of estimating the geolocation and geo-orientation of a ground image. Finally, we show how features extracted from an aerial
image can be used to hallucinate a plausible ground-level
panorama.

Extract
Label

Transfer
Semantics

Transform

Cross Entropy Loss

Figure 1. We learn to predict the ground image segmentation directly from an aerial image of the same location, thereby transferring the semantics from the ground to the aerial image domain.

1. Introduction
Learning-based methods for pixel-level labeling of aerial
imagery have long relied on manually annotated training
data. Unfortunately, such data is expensive to create. Furthermore, its value is limited because a method trained on
one dataset will typically not perform well when applied
to another source of aerial imagery. The difficulty in obtaining datasets of sufficient scale for all modalities has
hampered progress in applying deep learning techniques
to aerial imagery. There have been a few notable exceptions [22, 24], but these have all used fairly coarse grained
semantic classes, covered a small spatial area, and are limited to modalities in which human annotators are able to
manually assign labels.
We propose a novel strategy for obtaining semantic la-

bels for aerial image segmentation. See Figure 1 for a
schematic overview of the approach. Our idea is to use
existing methods for semantic image segmentation, which
are tailored for ground images, and apply these to a large
dataset of geotagged ground images. We use these semantically labeled images as a form of weak supervision and
attempt to predict these semantic labels from an aerial image centered around the location of the ground image. We
do not use a parametric transformation between the aerial
and ground-level viewpoints. Instead, we use a dense representation, similar in spirit to the general representation,
dubbed filter flow, described by Seitz and Baker [27].
There has been significant interest recently in predicting
ground image features from aerial imagery for the task of
1867

