Exploiting saliency for object segmentation from image level labels
Seong Joon Oh†

Rodrigo Benenson†

Anna Khoreva†

joon@mpi-inf.mpg.de

benenson@mpi-inf.mpg.de

khoreva@mpi-inf.mpg.de

†,‡

†

†

Zeynep Akata

Mario Fritz

Bernt Schiele†

Z.Akata@uva.nl

mfritz@mpi-inf.mpg.de

schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany

‡

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Abstract
There have been remarkable improvements in the semantic labelling task in the recent years. However, the
state of the art methods rely on large-scale pixel-level annotations. This paper studies the problem of training a
pixel-wise semantic labeller network from image-level annotations of the present object classes. Recently, it has
been shown that high quality seeds indicating discriminative object regions can be obtained from image-level labels. Without additional information, obtaining the full extent of the object is an inherently ill-posed problem due to
co-occurrences. We propose using a saliency model as additional information and hereby exploit prior knowledge on
the object extent and image statistics. We show how to combine both information sources in order to recover 80% of
the fully supervised performance – which is the new state
of the art in weakly supervised training for pixel-wise semantic labelling.

1. Introduction
Semantic image labelling provides rich information about
scenes, but comes at the cost of requiring pixel-wise labelled training data. The accuracy of convnet-based models correlates strongly with the amount of available training data. Collection and annotation of data have become
a bottleneck for progress. This problem has raised interest
in exploring partially supervised data or different means of
supervision, which represents different tradeoffs between
annotation efforts and yields in terms of supervision signal for the learning task. For tasks like semantic segmentation there is a need to investigate the minimal supervision
to reach the quality comparable to the fully supervised case.

person
bicycle

(a)image labels

(b)saliency

training image

(c)our result
test image

Figure 1: We train a semantic labelling network with (a)
image-level labels and (b) saliency masks, to generate (c) a
pixel-wise labelling of object classes at test time.

A reasonable starting point considers that all training
images have image-level labels to indicate the presence or
absence of the classes of interest. The weakly supervised
learning problem can be seen as a specific instance of learning from constraints [38, 47]. Instead of explicitly supervising the output, the available labels provide a constraint
on the desired output. If an image label is absent, no pixel in
the image should take that label; if an image label is present
at least in one pixel the image must take that label. However, the objects of interest are rarely single pixel. Thus to
enforce larger output regions size, shape, or appearance priors are commonly employed (either explicitly or implicitly).
Another reason for exploiting priors, is the fact that the
task is fundamentally ambiguous. Strongly co-occurring
categories (such as train and rails, sculls and oars, snowbikes and snow) cannot be separated without additional information. Because additional information is needed to
solve the task, previous work have explored different avenues, including class-specific size priors [31], crawling additional images [33, 46], or requesting corrections from a
human judge [17, 37].
14410

