Weakly Supervised Actor-Action Segmentation via Robust Multi-Task Ranking
Yan Yan1 , Chenliang Xu2 , Dawen Cai3 , Jason J. Corso1
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
3
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Biophysics, University of Michigan
{tomyan, dwcai, jjcorso}@umich.edu, {chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding fine-grained activities in videos is gaining attention in the video analysis community. Over the past
decade, we have witnessed the shift of interest in the number of activities, e.g. from no more than ten [42, 29] to many
hundreds [24, 5] and thousands [1]; in the scope of activities, e.g. from single person actions [45] to person-person
interactions [43], person-object interactions [17], and even
animal activities [19, 60]; and moreover, in the approaches
to model activities, e.g. from classification [55, 53, 47] to
localization [66, 49, 38, 46, 21], detection [12, 40, 8, 52]
and segmentation [30, 36, 16]. The fine-grained results have
also demonstrated their utilities in various emerging appli-

Actor

Testing
cat-jumping

baby-crawling
dog-crawling

Input Video

baby-walking

...

Time

Fine-grained activity understanding in videos has attracted considerable recent attention with a shift from action classification to detailed actor and action understanding that provides compelling results for perceptual needs of
cutting-edge autonomous systems. However, current methods for detailed understanding of actor and action have significant limitations: they require large amounts of finely
labeled data, and they fail to capture any internal relationship among actors and actions. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a novel, robust multi-task
ranking model for weakly-supervised actor-action segmentation where only video-level tags are given for training
samples. Our model is able to share useful information
among different actors and actions while learning a ranking
matrix to select representative supervoxels for actors and
actions respectively. Final segmentation results are generated by a conditional random field that considers various ranking scores for video parts. Extensive experimental results on the Actor-Action Dataset (A2D) demonstrate
that the proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
weakly supervised methods and performs as well as the topperforming fully supervised method.

Training

Output
Segmentation

bird-eating

Robust Multi-Task Ranking
with only Video-Level Tags
bird-jumping
dog-walking
adult-running

bird-flying

...

bird-eating

bird-eating

Action

Figure 1. The weakly supervised actor-action semantic semgentation problem. Our method learns from weak supervision where
only video-level tags for training videos are available, and generates pixel-level actor-action segmentation for a given testing video.

cations such as robot manipulation [41, 65] and video-andlanguage [48, 61].
Among the many fine-grained activities, there is a growing interest in simultaneously understanding actions and actors, the agents who perform actions. It opens a new window to explore inter-agent and intra-agent activities for a
comprehensive understanding. To address this issue, Xu et
al. [60] introduced a new actor-action segmentation challenge on a difficult actor-action dataset (A2D), where they
focused on spatiotemporal segmentation of seven types of
actors, e.g. human adult, dog and cat, performing eight different actions, e.g. walking, crawling, running. In particular, the method proposed by Xu and Corso [58] sets the
state of the art in this problem where they combine a labeling CRF with a supervoxel hierarchy to consider adaptive and long-ranging interactions among various actors performing various actions. Despite the success in pushing
up the numbers in performance, their method together with
many leading methods in activity segmentation [30, 36, 16]
suffer largely from the following two aspects.
First, except Mosabbeb et al. [39], most methods in spa11298

