Towards a quality metric for dense light fields
Vamsi Kiran Adhikarla1

Marek Vinkler1

Karol Myszkowski1
1 MPI Informatik

Denis Sumin1

Hans-Peter Seidel1

2 Saarland University, MMCI

Abstract
Light fields become a popular representation of threedimensional scenes, and there is interest in their processing,
resampling, and compression. As those operations often
result in loss of quality, there is a need to quantify it. In
this work, we collect a new dataset of dense reference and
distorted light fields as well as the corresponding quality
scores which are scaled in perceptual units. The scores
were acquired in a subjective experiment using an interactive light-field viewing setup. The dataset contains typical
artifacts that occur in light-field processing chain due to
light-field reconstruction, multi-view compression, and limitations of automultiscopic displays. We test a number of
existing objective quality metrics to determine how well they
can predict the quality of light fields. We find that the existing
image quality metrics provide good measures of light-field
quality, but require dense reference light- fields for optimal
performance. For more complex tasks of comparing two
distorted light fields, their performance drops significantly,
which reveals the need for new, light-field-specific metrics.

1. Introduction
A light field can be seen as a generalization of a 2D image,
which encodes most of the depth cues and allows to render
a scene simulating arbitrary optics (e.g., defocus blur) [16].
It is a convenient representation for multiscotopic and lightfield displays [43], but also attractive format for capturing
high-quality cinematographic content, offering new editing
possibilities in post-production [19]. Due the enormous storage requirements, light fields are usually sparsely sampled in
spatial and angular dimensions, stored using lossy compression, and reconstructed later. It is unclear how the distortions
introduced on the way affect the perceived quality.

Rafał K. Mantiuk3

Piotr Didyk1,2

3 The Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge

ous versions of the same content [1]. However, measuring
quality for dense light fields still remains a complex task.
While several works applied the existing metrics to such content [12, 8], their performance has never been systematically
evaluated in this context. One of the challenges is acquiring
dense light-field data to validate a metric. Wide baselines
as in multi-camera rigs [44] need to be considered, and the
reference light fields should be sufficiently dense to avoid
uncontrolled visual artifacts. Obtaining human responses for
light-field distortions is also difficult due to current display
limitations. This work is an attempt to overcome these problems by first building a new dense light-field dataset which
is suitable for testing quality metrics, and second, using a
custom light-field viewing setup to obtain the quality judgments for this dataset. The collected subjective scores are
used to evaluate the performance of existing metrics in the
context of dense light fields.
We focus on light-field-specific angular effects akin to motion parallax, complex surface appearance, and binocular
vision that arise in free viewing experience. To capture a
rich variability over these effects and make quality scaling
in our perceptual experiments tractable, we design fourteen
real and synthetic scenes and introduce light-field distortions
that are specific to light-field reconstruction, compression,
and display. We then run a pair-wise comparison experiment
over light-field pairs, and derive perceptual scaling of differences between original and distorted stimuli. This allows us
to investigate the suitability of a broad spectrum of existing
image, video, and multiview quality metrics to predict such
perceptual scaling. We also propose simple extensions of
selected metrics to capture the angular aspects of light-field
perception. While the original metrics are not meant for
light fields, our results show that they can be used in this
context, given a dense light field as the reference. We also
demonstrate that the robustness of such metrics predictions
drops when evaluating the quality between two distorted
light fields. The main contributions of this work are:
• a publicly available dense light-fields dataset that is
designed for training and evaluating quality metrics;

Similar problems have been addressed for 2D images, videos,
and sparse multiview content. Many quality metrics have
been designed to predict perceived differences between vari-

• a perceptual experiment that provides human quality

58

