Straight to Shapes: Real-time Detection of Encoded Shapes
Saumya Jetley ∗

Michael Sapienza ∗†
Stuart Golodetz
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

Philip H.S. Torr

{sjetley,smg,phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk, m.sapienza@samsung.com

Abstract
Current object detection approaches predict bounding
boxes that provide little instance-specific information beyond location, scale and aspect ratio. In this work, we
propose to regress directly to objects’ shapes in addition to
their bounding boxes and categories. It is crucial to find an
appropriate shape representation that is compact and decodable, and in which objects can be compared for higherorder concepts such as view similarity, pose variation and
occlusion. To achieve this, we use a denoising convolutional
auto-encoder to learn a low-dimensional shape embedding
space. We place the decoder network after a fast end-toend deep convolutional network that is trained to regress
directly to the shape vectors provided by the auto-encoder.
This yields what to the best of our knowledge is the first
real-time shape prediction network, running at 35 FPS on a
high-end desktop. With higher-order shape reasoning wellintegrated into the network pipeline, the network shows the
useful practical quality of generalising to unseen categories
that are similar to the ones in the training set, something
that most existing approaches fail to handle.

1. Introduction
Automatically detecting [13] and delineating [7] object
instances in images is a core problem in computer vision,
with wide-ranging applications. For example, knowing the
individual boundaries of nearby objects can allow robots to
grasp them [31]. To help visually-impaired people become
more independent, specially-designed glasses can highlight
the boundaries of objects with which to interact [18].
For these applications, real-time frame processing is crucial, and the information provided by bounding box predictions [34] or a pixel-wise semantic segmentation of the
scene [43] is not enough. A bounding box captures no
more than the location, scale and aspect ratio of an object,
a fairly coarse representation that provides no information
∗ Authors contributed equally
† M. Sapienza performed this research at the University of Oxford, and
is currently with Samsung Research America, Mountain View CA.

Figure 1: Testing direct regression to shape on a validation image
from PASCAL VOC [11] using (a) binary shape masks, (b) radial
vectors, and (c) a learned shape embedding.

about the object’s boundary. On the other hand, bottomup pixel-labelling approaches have no explicit notion of local and global object shape. To achieve adherence to local
boundaries and impose spatial and appearance consistency
in the semantic space, recent works [4, 43] post-process using conditional random fields (CRFs). Such post-processing
quickly becomes intractable for the higher-order constructs
required to capture object structure, pose and occlusions.
In response to the above-mentioned shortcomings, we
implement an embedding space that incorporates notions of
object shape, pose and occlusion patterns. A deep regression network is then trained to map input image patches to
this embedding space to tease apart an object’s category and
its shape mask. Fig. 1 shows an example of our network regressing to three different shape representations. Observably, object shape and category are correlated for many
classes, so training the learner with a single objective function that includes both terms is mutually-reinforcing.
We propose an embedding space that is learnt on the binary instance masks in a class-agnostic manner. By design,
the embedding space is compact, decodable (supports mapping of binary instance masks in and out of the space), continuous (instance masks degrade gracefully around the point
of interest in the space) and interpretable (one in which we
can reason about the similarities between shapes and their
corresponding categories). Our formulation is thus able to
leverage shape reasoning and extend the prediction of shape
16550

