Dilated Residual Networks
Fisher Yu
Princeton University

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
Convolutional networks for image classification progressively reduce resolution until the image is represented by
tiny feature maps in which the spatial structure of the scene
is no longer discernible. Such loss of spatial acuity can limit
image classification accuracy and complicate the transfer
of the model to downstream applications that require detailed scene understanding. These problems can be alleviated by dilation, which increases the resolution of output
feature maps without reducing the receptive field of individual neurons. We show that dilated residual networks
(DRNs) outperform their non-dilated counterparts in image classification without increasing the model’s depth or
complexity. We then study gridding artifacts introduced by
dilation, develop an approach to removing these artifacts
(‘degridding’), and show that this further increases the performance of DRNs. In addition, we show that the accuracy
advantage of DRNs is further magnified in downstream applications such as object localization and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks were originally developed for
classifying hand-written digits [9]. More recently, convolutional network architectures have evolved to classify much
more complex images [8, 13, 14, 6]. Yet a central aspect of
network architecture has remained largely in place. Convolutional networks for image classification progressively reduce resolution until the image is represented by tiny feature
maps that retain little spatial information (7×7 is typical).
While convolutional networks have done well, the almost complete elimination of spatial acuity may be preventing these models from achieving even higher accuracy, for
example by preserving the contribution of small and thin
objects that may be important for correctly understanding
the image. Such preservation may not have been important
in the context of hand-written digit classification, in which
a single object dominated the image, but may help in the
analysis of complex natural scenes where multiple objects
and their relative configurations must be taken into account.

Thomas Funkhouser
Princeton University

Furthermore, image classification is rarely a convolutional network’s raison d’être. Image classification is most
often a proxy task that is used to pretrain a model before
it is transferred to other applications that involve more detailed scene understanding [4, 10]. In such tasks, severe loss
of spatial acuity is a significant handicap. Existing techniques compensate for the lost resolution by introducing
up-convolutions [10, 11], skip connections [5], and other
post-hoc measures.
Must convolutional networks crush the image in order to
classify it? In this paper, we show that this is not necessary, or even desirable. Starting with the residual network
architecture, the current state of the art for image classification [6], we increase the resolution of the network’s output
by replacing a subset of interior subsampling layers by dilation [18]. We show that dilated residual networks (DRNs)
yield improved image classification performance. Specifically, DRNs yield higher accuracy in ImageNet classification than their non-dilated counterparts, with no increase in
depth or model complexity.
The output resolution of a DRN on typical ImageNet input is 28×28, comparable to small thumbnails that convey
the structure of the image when examined by a human [15].
While it may not be clear a priori that average pooling can
properly handle such high-resolution output, we show that
it can, yielding a notable accuracy gain. We then study gridding artifacts introduced by dilation, propose a scheme for
removing these artifacts, and show that such ‘degridding’
further improves the accuracy of DRNs.
We also show that DRNs yield improved accuracy on
downstream applications such as weakly-supervised object
localization and semantic segmentation. With a remarkably
simple approach, involving no fine-tuning at all, we obtain
state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy in weakly-supervised localization on ImageNet. We also study the performance of
DRNs on semantic segmentation and show, for example,
that a 42-layer DRN outperforms a ResNet-101 baseline on
the Cityscapes dataset by more than 4 percentage points,
despite lower depth by a factor of 2.4.
1472

