Learning to Detect Salient Objects with Image-level Supervision
Lijun Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 , Yifan Wang1 , Mengyang Feng1
Dong Wang1 , Baocai Yin1 , and Xiang Ruan2
1

Dalian University of Technology, China

2

Tiwaki Co., Ltd

E-mails: wlj@mail.dlut.edu.cn lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have substantially improved the state-of-the-art in salient object detection. However, training DNNs requires costly pixel-level annotations.
In this paper, we leverage the observation that imagelevel tags provide important cues of foreground salient objects, and develop a weakly supervised learning method for
saliency detection using image-level tags only. The Foreground Inference Network (FIN) is introduced for this challenging task. In the first stage of our training method, FIN is
jointly trained with a fully convolutional network (FCN) for
image-level tag prediction. A global smooth pooling layer
is proposed, enabling FCN to assign object category tags to
corresponding object regions, while FIN is capable of capturing all potential foreground regions with the predicted
saliency maps. In the second stage, FIN is fine-tuned with
its predicted saliency maps as ground truth. For refinement
of ground truth, an iterative Conditional Random Field is
developed to enforce spatial label consistency and further
boost performance.
Our method alleviates annotation efforts and allows the
usage of existing large scale training sets with image-level
tags. Our model runs at 60 FPS, outperforms unsupervised
ones with a large margin, and achieves comparable or even
superior performance than fully supervised counterparts.

1. Introduction
Driven by the remarkable success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in many computer vision areas [23, 14, 11,
47, 48], there has been a recent surge of interests in training
DNNs using samples with accurate pixel-level annotations
for saliency detection [57, 26, 49]. Compared with unsupervised methods [56, 22], DNNs learned from full supervision are more effective in capturing foreground regions
that are salient in the semantic meaning, yielding accurate
results under complex scenes. Given the data-hunger nature
of DNNs, their superior performance heavily relies on large
amounts of data set with pixel-level annotations for training.

√ Person
√ Ray

√ Pineapple
√ Cup

Image-Level
Class-Specific

Weak
Supervision

Pixel-Level
Class-Agnostic

Figure 1. Image-level tags (left panel) provide informative cues
of dominant objects, which tend to be the salient foreground. We
propose to use image-level tags as weak supervision to learn to
predict pixel-level saliency maps (right panel).

However, the annotation work is very tedious, and training
sets with accurate annotations remain scarce and expensive.
To alleviate the need of large scale pixel-wise annotations, we explore the weak supervision of image-level tags
to train saliency detectors. Image-level tags indicate the
presence or absence of object categories in the images and
are much easier to collect than pixel-wise annotations. The
task of predicting image-level tags focuses on the object
categories in the image and is irresponsible of the object
locations (Figure 1 left), whereas saliency detection aims to
highlight the full extend of foreground objects and neglects
their categories (Figure 1 right). These two tasks seem to be
conceptually different but inherently correlated with each
other. On the one hand, saliency detection provides object
candidates, enabling more accurate category classification.
On the other hand, image-level tags provide the category
information of dominant objects in the images which are
much likely to be the salient foreground. Moreover, recent
works [34, 58] have suggested that DNNs trained with only
image-level tags are also informative of object locations. It
is thus natural to leverage image-level tags as weak supervision to train DNNs for salient object detection. Surpris-

136

