CNN-SLAM: Real-time dense monocular SLAM with learned depth prediction
Keisuke Tateno∗1,2 , Federico Tombari∗1 , Iro Laina1 , Nassir Navab1,3
{tateno, tombari, laina, navab}@in.tum.de
1

CAMP - TU Munich
Munich, Germany

2

Canon Inc.
Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Given the recent advances in depth prediction from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), this paper investigates
how predicted depth maps from a deep neural network can
be deployed for accurate and dense monocular reconstruction. We propose a method where CNN-predicted dense
depth maps are naturally fused together with depth measurements obtained from direct monocular SLAM. Our fusion scheme privileges depth prediction in image locations
where monocular SLAM approaches tend to fail, e.g. along
low-textured regions, and vice-versa. We demonstrate the
use of depth prediction for estimating the absolute scale of
the reconstruction, hence overcoming one of the major limitations of monocular SLAM. Finally, we propose a framework to efficiently fuse semantic labels, obtained from a single frame, with dense SLAM, yielding semantically coherent
scene reconstruction from a single view. Evaluation results
on two benchmark datasets show the robustness and accuracy of our approach.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) are umbrella names for a
highly active research area in the field of computer vision
and robotics for the goal of 3D scene reconstruction and
camera pose estimation from 3D and imaging sensors. Recently, real-time SLAM methods aimed at fusing together
range maps obtained from a moving depth sensor have witnessed an increased popularity, since they can be employed
for navigation and mapping of several types of autonomous
agents, from mobile robots to drones, as well as for many
augmented reality and computer graphics applications. This
is the case of volumetric fusion approaches such as Kinect
Fusion [21], as well as dense SLAM methods based on
RGB-D data [30, 11], which, in addition to navigation and
mapping, can also be employed for accurate scene recon∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this paper.

3

Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, US

(a) Proposed method

(b) LSD-SLAM [3]

Incorrect
Scale

(c) Our Joint 3D and Semantic Reconstruction

Figure 1. The proposed monocular SLAM approach (a) can estimate a much better absolute scale than the state of the art (b),
which is necessary for many SLAM applications such as AR, e.g.
the skeleton is augmented into the reconstruction. c) our approach
can yield joint 3D and semantic reconstruction from a single view.

struction. However, a main drawback of such approaches
is that depth cameras have several limitations: indeed, most
of them have a limited working range, and those based on
active sensing cannot work (or perform poorly) under sunlight, thus making reconstruction and mapping less precise
if not impossible in outdoor environments.
In general, since depth cameras are not as ubiquitous as
color cameras, a lot of research interest has been focused on
dense and semi-dense SLAM methods from a single camera
[22, 4, 20]. These approaches aim at real-time monocular
scene reconstruction by estimating the depth map of the current viewpoint through small-baseline stereo matching over
pairs of nearby frames. The working assumption is that the
camera translates in space over time, so that pairs of consecutive frames can be treated as composing a stereo rig.
Stereo matching is usually carried out through color consistency or by relying on keypoint extraction and matching.
One main limitation of monocular SLAM approaches is
the estimation of the absolute scale. Indeed, even if camera
16243

