Graph-Structured Representations for Visual Question Answering
Damien Teney
Lingqiao Liu
Anton van den Hengel
Australian Centre for Visual Technologies
The University of Adelaide
{damien.teney,lingqiao.liu,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
This paper proposes to improve visual question answering (VQA) with structured representations of both scene
contents and questions. A key challenge in VQA is to require
joint reasoning over the visual and text domains. The predominant CNN/LSTM-based approach to VQA is limited by
monolithic vector representations that largely ignore structure in the scene and in the question. CNN feature vectors
cannot effectively capture situations as simple as multiple
object instances, and LSTMs process questions as series
of words, which do not reflect the true complexity of language structure. We instead propose to build graphs over
the scene objects and over the question words, and we describe a deep neural network that exploits the structure in
these representations. We show that this approach achieves
significant improvements over the state-of-the-art, increasing accuracy from 71.2% to 74.4% on the “abstract scenes”
multiple-choice benchmark, and from 34.7% to 39.1% for
the more challenging “balanced” scenes, i.e. image pairs
with fine-grained differences and opposite yes/no answers
to a same question.

Neural
network

jumping
playing
sleeping
eating

...
What

is

the

white cat

doing ?

Figure 1. We encode the input scene as a graph representing the
objects and their spatial arrangement, and the input question as a
graph representing words and their syntactic dependencies. A neural network is trained to reason over these representations, and to
produce a suitable answer as a prediction over an output vocabulary.

scenes (they are usually referred to as “abstract scenes”, despite this being a misnomer). Our experiments focus on
this dataset of clip art scenes as they allow to focus on semantic reasoning and vision-language interactions, in isolation from the performance of visual recognition (see examples in Fig. 5). They also allow the manipulation of
the image data so as to better illuminate algorithm performance. A particularly attractive VQA dataset was introduced in [30] by selecting only the questions with binary answers (e.g. yes/no) and pairing each (synthetic) image with
a minimally-different complementary version that elicits the
opposite (no/yes) answer (see examples in Fig. 5, bottom
rows). This strongly contrasts with other VQA datasets of
real images, where a correct answer is often obvious without looking at the image, by relying on systematic regularities of frequent questions and answers [4, 30]. Performance
improvements reported on such datasets are difficult to interpret as actual progress in scene understanding and reasoning as they might similarly be taken to represent a better
modeling of the language prior of the dataset. This hampers, or at best obscures, progress toward the greater goal
of general VQA. In our view, and despite obvious limitations of synthetic images, improvements on the aforementioned “balanced” dataset constitute an illuminating measure of progress in scene-understanding, because a language

1. Introduction
The task of Visual Question Answering has received
growing interest in the recent years (see [17, 4, 25] for example). One of the more interesting aspects of the problem
is that it combines computer vision, natural language processing, and artificial intelligence. In its open-ended form,
a question is provided as text in natural language together
with an image, and a correct answer must be predicted, typically in the form of a single word or a short phrase. In the
multiple-choice variant, an answer is selected from a provided set of candidates, alleviating evaluation issues related
to synonyms and paraphrasing.
Multiple datasets for VQA have been introduced with
either real [4, 14, 17, 21, 31] or synthetic images [4, 30].
Our experiments uses the latter, being based on clip art
or “cartoon” images created by humans to depict realistic

1

