On the Effectiveness of Visible Watermarks
Tali Dekel

Michael Rubinstein
Ce Liu
Google Research

William T. Freeman

{tdekel,mrub,celiu,wfreeman}@google.com

Watermark (W)

(a) Input watermarked image collection

Zoom-in

alpha matte (α)

(b) Computed watermark+ alpha matte

(c) Recovered images (our result)

Figure 1. We show that visible watermarks as employed by photographers and stock content marketplaces can be removed automatically.
While removing a watermark from a single image automatically is extremely challenging, watermarks are typically added in a consistent
manner to many images (a). We show that this consistency can be exploited to automatically infer the watermark pattern (b) and to obtain
the original, watermark-free content with high accuracy (c). We then investigate and report how robust such an attack is to different types
of inconsistencies that may be introduced in the watermarking process to improve its security, such as randomly changing the watermark’s
position and blend factor, or applying subtle geometric deformation to the watermark when embedding it in each image.

Abstract
Visible watermarking is a widely-used technique for
marking and protecting copyrights of many millions of images on the web, yet it suffers from an inherent security
ﬂaw—watermarks are typically added in a consistent manner to many images. We show that this consistency allows to
automatically estimate the watermark and recover the original images with high accuracy. Speciﬁcally, we present a
generalized multi-image matting algorithm that takes a watermarked image collection as input and automatically estimates the “foreground” (watermark), its alpha matte, and
the “background” (original) images. Since such an attack
relies on the consistency of watermarks across image collections, we explore and evaluate how it is affected by various types of inconsistencies in the watermark embedding
that could potentially be used to make watermarking more
secure. We demonstrate the algorithm on stock imagery
available on the web, and provide extensive quantitative
analysis on synthetic watermarked data. A key takeaway
message of this paper is that visible watermarks should be
designed to not only be robust against removal from a single
image, but to be more resistant to mass-scale removal from
image collections as well.

1. Introduction
Visible watermarks are used extensively by photographers and stock content services to mark and protect digital photos and videos shared on the web. Such watermarks
typically involve overlaying a semi-transparent image con-

taining a name or a logo on the source image (Figure 1(a)).
Visible watermarks often contain complex structures
such as thin lines and shadows in order to make them harder
to remove. Indeed, removing a watermark from a single image without user supervision or a-priori information is an
extremely difﬁcult task. However, the fact that watermarks
are added in a consistent manner to many images has thus
far been overlooked. For example, stock content marketplaces typically add similar versions of their logos to previews of many millions of images on the web. We show
that the availability of such watermarked image collections
makes it possible to invert the watermarking process and
nearly perfectly recover the images that were intended to be
protected (Fig. 1(c)). This can be achieved automatically by
only observing the watermarked content.
We show how the problem of watermark removal from
an image collection can be formulated as a generalized
multi-image matting problem, where the goal is to estimate the “foreground” (watermark) image and alpha matte,
along with the “background” (original) images, using many
observed examples. Different from natural image matting
methods that rely on user scribbles to constraint the problem, our method leverages the redundancy in the data. In
particular, we ﬁrst extract consistent image structures across
the collection to obtain an initial estimate of the matted watermark and detect the watermark region in all the images.
We then solve an optimization problem that separates the
matted watermark into its image and alpha matte components (Fig. 1(b)) while reconstructing a subset of the background images. In our experiments we found that a few
12146

