Mind the Class Weight Bias: Weighted Maximum Mean Discrepancy
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Hongliang Yan1 , Yukang Ding1 , Peihua Li2 , Qilong Wang2 , Yong Xu3 , Wangmeng Zuo1,∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
3
Bio-Computing Research Center, Shenzhen Graduate School, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
1

yanhl@hit.edu.cn, dingyukang921@163.com, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn,
qlwang@mail.dlut.edu.cn, laterfall@hitsz.edu.cn, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

0.2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great success in various computer vision tasks
such as image classification [21], object detection [12] and
semantic segmentation [24]. Besides the inspiring progress
in model and learning, the achievement of CNN is undoubtedly attributed to the availability of massive labeled dataset∗ Corresponding author.

0.16

weight

In domain adaptation, maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) has been widely adopted as a discrepancy metric between the distributions of source and target domains. However, existing MMD-based domain adaptation methods generally ignore the changes of class prior distributions, i.e.,
class weight bias across domains. This remains an open
problem but ubiquitous for domain adaptation, which can
be caused by changes in sample selection criteria and application scenarios. We show that MMD cannot account
for class weight bias and results in degraded domain adaptation performance. To address this issue, a weighted MMD
model is proposed in this paper. Specifically, we introduce
class-specific auxiliary weights into the original MMD for
exploiting the class prior probability on source and target
domains, whose challenge lies in the fact that the class label
in target domain is unavailable. To account for it, our proposed weighted MMD model is defined by introducing an
auxiliary weight for each class in the source domain, and
a classification EM algorithm is suggested by alternating
between assigning the pseudo-labels, estimating auxiliary
weights and updating model parameters. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our weighted MMD
over conventional MMD for domain adaptation.

MNIST
USPS
SVHN

0.12

0.08

0.04

0

1

2

3

4

class

5

6

7

8

9

Figure 1. Class prior distributions of three domains for digit recognition. As is shown, class bias exists across domains. It is natural
to see that the class weight of 0 and 1 are relatively high in postal
service (USPS), and the class weight of 1 and 2 are relatively high
in house numbers (SVHN).

s. For a CNN trained on large scale datasets [8], while the
lower layers of features are safely transferable, the learned
features gradually moves from general to specific along the
network [40]. When the source and target tasks are significantly diverse, the CNN pretrained on the source task may
not generalize well to the target task. Such scenario leads
to an emerging topic to transfer the CNN from the source
task to the target task with the enhanced and discriminative
representation [2]. In this work, we study a special type of
transfer learning task, i.e., domain adaptation (DA) [30].
One of the most fruitful lines for DA is MMD-based
method [26, 29, 3, 41, 36]. Despite the great success
achieved, existing ones generally ignore the changes of
class prior distributions, dubbed by class weight bias. It
is ubiquitous for domain adaptation and can be caused by
changes in sample selection criteria [19] and application
scenarios [28]. As shown in Fig. 1, the class prior distributions (i.e., class weights) vary with domains for digit recognition. Moreover, a special case of class weight
bias is the imbalanced cross-domain data problem [28]

2272

