Product Manifold Filter: Non-Rigid Shape Correspondence
via Kernel Density Estimation in the Product Space
Matthias Vestner
Technical University Munich

Roee Litman
Tel-Aviv University

Alex Bronstein
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
Perceptual Computing Group, Intel, Israel

Emanuele Rodolà
USI Lugano

Daniel Cremers
Technical University Munich

Abstract
Many algorithms for the computation of correspondences between deformable shapes rely on some variant of
nearest neighbor matching in a descriptor space. Such are,
for example, various point-wise correspondence recovery
algorithms used as a post-processing stage in the functional
correspondence framework. Such frequently used techniques implicitly make restrictive assumptions (e.g., nearisometry) on the considered shapes and in practice suffer
from lack of accuracy and result in poor surjectivity. We
propose an alternative recovery technique capable of guaranteeing a bijective correspondence and producing significantly higher accuracy and smoothness. Unlike other methods our approach does not depend on the assumption that
the analyzed shapes are isometric. We derive the proposed
method from the statistical framework of kernel density estimation and demonstrate its performance on several challenging deformable 3D shape matching datasets.

1. Introduction
Estimating the correspondence between 3D shapes is
among the fundamental problems in computer vision, geometry processing and graphics with a wide spectrum of
applications ranging from 3D scene understanding to texture mapping and animation. Of particular interest is the
case in which the objects are allowed to deform non-rigidly.
In this setting, research has mainly focused on minimizing
a measure of distortion between the input shapes, reaching
in recent years very high levels of accuracy [43]. However,
point-wise accuracy often comes under restricting requirements (isometry assumption), or at the price of a lack of
useful properties on the computed map, namely bijectivity
(each point on either shape should have exactly one corresponding point on the other) and smoothness (nearby points
should match to nearby points).

Figure 1. Our method can be used to recover a dense, smooth, bijective correspondence between highly non-isometric shapes from
minimal input information. In this example, we initialize our algorithm with just two hand-picked matches (red spheres on tail and
front leg). Correspondence quality is visualized by transferring
colors from horse to elephant via the recovered map.

In this paper, we introduce a novel method to recover
smooth bijective maps between deformable shapes. Contrarily to previous approaches, we do not rely on the assumption that the two shapes are isometric. We phrase
our matching problem by using the language of statistical
inference, whereas the input to our algorithm is either 1)
a sparse collection of point-wise matches (as few as two)
which are used as landmark constraints to recover the complete map, or 2) a dense, noisy, possibly non-surjective and
non-smooth map which is converted to a better map with
higher accuracy and the aforementioned properties.

1.1. Related works
A traditional approach to correspondence problems is
finding a point-wise matching between (a subset of) the
points on two or more shapes. Minimum-distortion methods establish the matching by minimizing some structure
distortion, which can include similarity of local features
[32, 14, 8, 45], geodesic [29, 13, 15] or diffusion distances
[17], or a combination thereof [41].
Typically, the computational complexity of such meth13327

