Discovering Causal Signals in Images
David Lopez-Paz
Facebook AI Research

Robert Nishihara
UC Berkeley

Soumith Chintala
Facebook AI Research

dlp@fb.com

rkn@eecs.berkeley.edu

soumith@fb.com

Bernhard Schölkopf
MPI for Intelligent Systems

Léon Bottou
Facebook AI Research

bs@tue.mpg.de

leon@bottou.org

Abstract
This paper establishes the existence of observable footprints that reveal the “causal dispositions” of the object
categories appearing in collections of images. We achieve
this goal in two steps. First, we take a learning approach to
observational causal discovery, and build a classifier that
achieves state-of-the-art performance on finding the causal
direction between pairs of random variables, given samples
from their joint distribution. Second, we use our causal direction classifier to effectively distinguish between features of
objects and features of their contexts in collections of static
images. Our experiments demonstrate the existence of a
relation between the direction of causality and the difference
between objects and their contexts, and by the same token,
the existence of observable signals that reveal the causal
dispositions of objects.

1. Introduction
Imagine an image representing a bridge over a river. On
top of the bridge, a car is speeding through the right lane.
Modern computer vision algorithms excel at answering
questions about the observable properties of the scene, such
as such as “Is there a car in this image?”. This is achieved
by leveraging correlations between pixels and image features
across large datasets of images. However, a more nuanced
understanding of images arguably requires the ability to
reason about how the scene depicted in the image would
change in response to interventions. Since the list of possible
interventions is long and complex, we can, as a first step,
reason about the intervention of removing an object.
To this end, consider the two counterfactual questions
“What would the scene look like if we were to remove the
car?” and “What would the scene look like if we were to
remove the bridge?” On the one hand, the first intervention
seems rather benign. After removing the car, we could argue

object recognizer

score(car)

scene (real world)

car (object)
wheel
(feature)

image (pixels)

score(wheel)
feature extractor

Figure 1: Our goal is to reveal causal relationships between
pairs of real entities composing scenes in the world (e.g.
“the presence of cars cause the presence of wheels”, solid
blue arrow). To this end, we apply a novel observational
causal discovery technique, NCC, to the joint distribution
of a pair of related proxy variables that are computed by
applying CNNs to the image pixels. Since these variables
are expected to be highly correlated with the presence of the
corresponding real entities, the appearance of causation between the proxy variables (dashed blue arrow) suggests that
there is a causal link between the real world entities themselves (e.g. the appearance of causation between score(car)
and score(wheel) suggests that the presence of cars causes
the presence of wheels in the real world.)

that the rest of the scene depicted in the image (the river,
the bridge) would remain invariant. On the other hand, the
second intervention seems more severe. If the bridge had
been removed from the scene, it would, in general, make
little sense to observe the car floating weightlessly above the
river. Thus, we understand that the presence of the bridge has
an effect on the presence of the car. Reasoning about these
and similar counterfactuals allows to begin asking “Why is
there a car in this image?” This question is of course poorly
16979

