Dynamic Facial Analysis: From Bayesian Filtering to Recurrent Neural Network
Jinwei Gu Xiaodong Yang Shalini De Mello Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{jinweig,xiaodongy,shalinig,jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract

Output
(Target)

Facial analysis in videos, including head pose estimation and facial landmark localization, is key for many applications such as facial animation capture, human activity
recognition, and human-computer interaction. In this paper, we propose to use a recurrent neural network (RNN) for
joint estimation and tracking of facial features in videos. We
are inspired by the fact that the computation performed in
an RNN bears resemblance to Bayesian filters, which have
been used for tracking in many previous methods for facial
analysis from videos. Bayesian filters used in these methods, however, require complicated, problem-specific design
and tuning. In contrast, our proposed RNN-based method
avoids such tracker-engineering by learning from training
data, similar to how a convolutional neural network (CNN)
avoids feature-engineering for image classification. As an
end-to-end network, the proposed RNN-based method provides a generic and holistic solution for joint estimation
and tracking of various types of facial features from consecutive video frames. Extensive experimental results on
head pose estimation and facial landmark localization from
videos demonstrate that the proposed RNN-based method
outperforms frame-wise models and Bayesian filtering. In
addition, we create a large-scale synthetic dataset for head
pose estimation, with which we achieve state-of-the-art performance on a benchmark dataset.

Hidden
State

1. Introduction
Analyzing facial features, including estimating head
pose [30] and locating facial landmarks [7], from consecutive video frames is of great importance for many applications, such as facial animation capture, activity recognition,
and human-computer interaction. Videos provide temporal
links among neighboring frames, which have been shown to
be useful for accurate and robust estimation [47].
Prior work on dynamic facial analysis [29, 7] primarily
employ Bayesian filters, e.g., Kalman filters (KF) or particle
filters (PF), to exploit temporal connections. However, for
facial tracking, these Bayesian filters require complicated,

Input
(Measurement)

Bayesian Filters

RNN

Figure 1: Connection between Bayesian filters (left) and
RNN (right). Bayesian filters model the dynamics between
the hidden state ht and the measurement xt as a stochastic Markov process (shown as dash red arrows). Given a
sequence of noisy measurement xt , the goal of Bayesian
filtering is to estimate the optimal states ht and optionally
the target output yt that is a function of the state ht (shown
as solid black arrows). Similarly, RNN learns the prediction from a sequential input xt to the sequential output yt
by passing information over time via the hidden state ht .
problem-specific design and tuning. For example, tracking
can be performed at different levels for different tasks—
tracking of a face’s bounding box [46], of the rigid transformation parameters of heads [28, 52], or of facial features [34]. To deal with drifting, many tracking methods
require a failure detection and reinitialization method as a
backup [28]. For complex tasks (e.g., non-rigid face, hand,
or body tracking), implementing a Bayesian filter can be
challenging. In short, the need for such tracker-engineering
makes these methods cumbersome and less generic for dynamic facial analysis.
In this paper, we propose to use RNN for joint estimation
and tracking of facial features in videos. We are inspired by
the fact that the computation performed in RNN bears resemblance to Bayesian filters, as shown in Figure 1. As a
generic and learning-based approach for time series prediction, RNN avoids tracker-engineering for tasks performed
on videos, much like CNN avoids feature-engineering for
tasks performed on images. The proposed method provides
a generalized and integrated solution for joint estimation
and tracking of various facial features in dynamic facial
analysis. Our main contributions are three-fold:
11548

