Discover and Learn New Objects from Documentaries
Kai Chen Hang Song Chen Change Loy Dahua Lin
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
ck015,hsong,ccloy,dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress in recent years, detecting objects in a new context remains a challenging task. Detectors learned from a public dataset can only work with
a fixed list of categories, while training from scratch usually requires a large amount of training data with detailed
annotations. This work aims to explore a novel approach
– learning object detectors from documentary films in a
weakly supervised manner. This is inspired by the observation that documentaries often provide dedicated exposition of certain object categories, where visual presentations
are aligned with subtitles. We believe that object detectors can be learned from such a rich source of information. Towards this goal, we develop a joint probabilistic
framework, where individual pieces of information, including video frames and subtitles, are brought together via
both visual and linguistic links. On top of this formulation,
we further derive a weakly supervised learning algorithm,
where object model learning and training set mining are
unified in an optimization procedure. Experimental results
on a real world dataset demonstrate that this is an effective
approach to learning new object detectors.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a wave of innovation in
object detection driven by the advances in deep learning
[12, 29, 35]. Despite the great success reported on public
benchmarks, practical applications of such techniques are
impeded by a significant obstacle, namely, the lack of annotated data. Specifically, detectors pre-trained on public
datasets can only cover a limited list of object categories,
which are often not sufficient for real-world applications,
where the objects of interest can go beyond such lists. On
the other hand, training a new detector requires a large
quantity of annotated images with bounding boxes provided
for individual objects. Obtaining such a dataset is an investment that takes tremendous amount of time and resources.
These difficulties call for an alternative approach to
learning object detectors. “There is no record of an Orca
doing any harm in the wild.” – we were deeply touched by

The elephant are about to march
through them. The spiders
themselves have a span as wide as a
human hand.

But the love serenade
is over once a dog arrives.

Australian camels appear sick and
emaciated.

Tigers are one of the few cats that
actually enjoy swimming.

Male koalas play no role in parenting.

About 50 animals have died
in just three months, including this
adult orangutan on the day we
arrived.

Unlike mechanics, langurs are the
friends of spotted deer.

There's a turf war going on and the
koalas are losing. (dog)

The mayor has declined offers of
assistance and expert advice from
animal welfare groups. (elephant)

Figure 1: We wish to devise a method that can automatically learn
object detectors as it watches a documentary, in a weakly supervised fashion. The figures show some examples of the proposed
Wildlife Documentaries (WLD) dataset. The nouns are marked
in red in there is a correspondence between subtitle and object in
the video. Otherwise, we provide the corresponding noun in blue
color when there is a mismatch.
this as we watched Blackfish, a famous documentary film
directed by Gabriela Cowperthwaite. For many of us, the
knowledge about various creatures on the planet are learned
from documentaries as such. Now, as we move steadily towards the era of AI, we are motivated to ask: Can computers
learn in a similar way?
From an intuitive perspective, the idea of exploiting documentaries to learn object detectors is promising. Thousands of documentary films that cover a broad range of
topics are produced every year, and the number is rising
rapidly. A documentary film usually comprises a number
of visual presentations with subtitles that cover the entities
being introduced from different perspectives. Clearly, this
is a rich source of information for visual learning.
In this work, we aim to derive a method that can automatically learn object detectors as it watches a documentary, in a weakly supervised fashion (Fig. 1). Towards this
goal, we are facing multiple challenges. First and foremost, the framework has completely no prior knowledge as

3087

