Temporal Action Co-segmentation in 3D Motion Capture Data and Videos
Konstantinos Papoutsakis1,2 , Costas Panagiotakis1,3 , Antonis A. Argyros1,2
1

Computational Vision and Robotics Laboratory, Institute of Computer Science, FORTH, Greece
2
Computer Science Department, University of Crete, Greece
3
Business Administration Department (Agios Nikolaos), TEI of Crete, Greece
{papoutsa,cpanag,argyros}@ics.forth.gr

Abstract
Given two action sequences, we are interested in
spotting/co-segmenting all pairs of sub-sequences that represent the same action. We propose a totally unsupervised
solution to this problem. No a-priori model of the actions is assumed to be available. The number of common
sub-sequences may be unknown. The sub-sequences can
be located anywhere in the original sequences, may differ in duration and the corresponding actions may be performed by a different person, in different style. We treat
this type of temporal action co-segmentation as a stochastic optimization problem that is solved by employing Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). The objective function that
is minimized by PSO capitalizes on Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) to compare two action sub-sequences. Due to
the generic problem formulation and solution, the proposed
method can be applied to motion capture (i.e., 3D skeletal)
data or to conventional RGB videos acquired in the wild.
We present extensive quantitative experiments on standard
data sets as well as on data sets we introduced in this paper.
The obtained results demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves a remarkable increase in co-segmentation quality
compared to all tested state of the art methods.

1. Introduction
The unsupervised discovery of common patterns in images and videos is considered an important and unsolved
problem in computer vision. We are interested in the temporal aspect of the problem and focus on action sequences
(sequences of 3D motion capture data or video data) that
contain multiple common actions. The problem was introduced in [10] as Temporal Commonality Discovery (TCD).
Our motivation and interest to the problem stems from the
fact that the discovery of common action patterns in two
or more sequences provides an intuitive as well as efficient

Sequence A

Sequence B

Common actions
Throwing a ball Punching

Jumping jacks

Non-common actions
Clapping

Sit down

Jumping in place

Figure 1: Given two image sequences that share common
actions, our goal is to automatically co-segment them in a
totally unsupervised manner. In this example, there are four
common actions and two non-common actions. Notice that
there are two instances of the 1st action of sequence A in sequence B. Each point of the grayscale background encodes
the pairwise distance of the corresponding sequence frames.
way to segment them, to identify a set of elementary actions
performed in the sequences and, at a higher level, to build
models of the performed actions in an unsupervised manner.
We propose a novel method for solving this problem
that operates on multivariate time-series (i.e., a feature vector of fixed dimensionality per frame), representing actionrelevant information. Assuming that two sequences/timeseries contain a number of common action sub-sequences,
we aim at identifying those pairs in a unsupervised manner, in the sense that no prior models, no information on
the lengths and no labels of the actions are available. As
illustrated graphically in Fig. 1, a shared (common) subsequence may appear anywhere in both sequences and may
16827

