Simultaneous Super-Resolution and Cross-Modality Synthesis of 3D Medical
Images using Weakly-Supervised Joint Convolutional Sparse Coding

1

Yawen Huang1 , Ling Shao2 , Alejandro F. Frangi1
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, The University of Sheffield, UK
2
School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, UK
{yhuang36, a.frangi}@sheffield.ac.uk, ling.shao@uea.ac.uk

Abstract
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) offers highresolution in vivo imaging and rich functional and anatomical multimodality tissue contrast. In practice, however,
there are challenges associated with considerations of scanning costs, patient comfort, and scanning time that constrain how much data can be acquired in clinical or research studies. In this paper, we explore the possibility
of generating high-resolution and multimodal images from
low-resolution single-modality imagery. We propose the
weakly-supervised joint convolutional sparse coding to simultaneously solve the problems of super-resolution (SR)
and cross-modality image synthesis. The learning process
requires only a few registered multimodal image pairs as
the training set. Additionally, the quality of the joint dictionary learning can be improved using a larger set of unpaired images1 . To combine unpaired data from different
image resolutions/modalities, a hetero-domain image alignment term is proposed. Local image neighborhoods are naturally preserved by operating on the whole image domain
(as opposed to image patches) and using joint convolutional
sparse coding. The paired images are enhanced in the joint
learning process with unpaired data and an additional maximum mean discrepancy term, which minimizes the dissimilarity between their feature distributions. Experiments show
that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art techniques on both SR reconstruction and simultaneous SR and
cross-modality synthesis.

1. Introduction
With the rapid progress in Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), there are a multitude of mechanisms to generate
tissue contrast that are associated with various anatomical
1 Unpaired data/images: acquisitions are from different subjects without
registration. Paired data/images: acquisitions of the same subject obtained
from different modalities are registered.

or functional features. However, the acquisition of a complete multimodal set of high-resolution images faces constraints associated with scanning costs, scanner availability,
scanning time, and patient comfort. In addition, long-term
longitudinal studies such as ADNI [24] imply that changes
exist in the scanner or acquisition protocol over time. In
these situations, it is not uncommon to have images of the
same subject but obtained from different sources, or to be
confronted with missing or corrupted data from earlier time
points. In addition, high-resolution (HR) 3D medical imaging usually requires long breath-hold and repetition times,
which lead to long-term scanning times that are challenging
or unfeasible in clinical routine. Acquiring low-resolution
(LR) images and/or skipping some imaging modalities altogether from the acquisition are then not uncommon. In all
such scenarios, it is highly desirable to be able to generate
HR data from the desired target modality from the given LR
modality data.
The relevant literature in this area can be divided
into either super-resolution (SR) reconstruction from single/multiple image modalities or cross-modality (image)
synthesis (CMS). On the one hand, SR is typically concerned with achieving improved visual quality or overcoming the resolution limits of the acquired image data. Such
a problem is generally under-determined and ill-posed,
hence, the solution is not unique. To mitigate this fact,
the solution space needs to be constrained by incorporating strong priors. Prior information comes in the form of
smoothness assumptions as in, for example, interpolationbased SR [20, 28]. State-of-the-art methods mostly adopt
either external data or internal data to guide the learning algorithms [25, 30]. On the other hand, due to variations in optimal image representations across modalities,
the learned image model from one modality data may not be
the optimal model for a different modality. How to reveal
the relationship between different representations of the underlying image information is a major research issue to be
explored. In order to synthesize one modality from another,
recent methods in CMS proposed utilizing non-parametric
16070

