Fried Binary Embedding for High-Dimensional Visual Features
Weixiang Hong
Junsong Yuan
Sreyasee Das Bhattacharjee
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wxhong,JSYUAN}@ntu.edu.sg, sreya.iitm@gmail.com

Abstract
Most existing binary embedding methods prefer compact binary codes (b-dimensional) to avoid high computational and memory cost of projecting high-dimensional
visual features (d-dimensional, b < d). We argue that
long binary codes (b ∼ O(d)) are critical to fully utilize
the discriminative power of high-dimensional visual features, and can achieve better results in various tasks such
as approximate nearest neighbour search. Generating long
binary codes involves large projection matrix and highdimensional matrix-vector multiplication, thus is memory
and compute intensive. To tackle these problems, we propose Fried Binary Embedding (FBE) to decompose the projection matrix using adaptive Fastfood transform, which is
the multiplication of several structured matrices. As a result, FBE can reduce the computational complexity from
O(d2 ) to O(d log d), and memory cost from O(d2 ) to O(d),
respectively. More importantly, by using the structured matrices, FBE can regulate the projection matrix against overfitting and lead to even better accuracy than using unconstrained projection matrix (like ITQ [4]) with the same long
code length. Experimental comparisons with state-of-theart methods over various visual applications demonstrate
both the efficiency and performance advantages of the FBE.

1. Introduction
Recently, the vision community has devoted a lot of attention to binary embedding [22, 4, 3, 25, 28, 21] due to
the explosive growth in visual data, which makes efficient
searching and storing to be urgent requirements. Binary
embedding aims at encoding high-dimensional feature vectors to compact binary codes, while preserving the pair-wise
similarities of the original high-dimensional features. By
encoding high-dimensional features into binary codes, one
can perform efficient searching with the Hamming distance
computation; meanwhile, the storage cost is also significantly reduced. Since it is NP-hard to directly learn the

optimal binary codes [22], most existing binary embedding
methods work on a two-stage strategy: projection and quantization. Specifically, given a feature vector x ∈ Rd , these
methods first multiply x with a projection matrix R ∈ Rb×d
to produce a low-dimensional vector of b dimensions, then
quantize this low-dimensional vector to b-dimensional binary codes by assigning it to its nearest vertex in Hamming
space.
Although compact binary codes are preferred to save the
storage, recent works have demonstrated that long-bit codes
can bring superior performance than compact ones, especially when the visual features are of thousands of dimensions. For example, the long binary codes of 4096 dimensions can achieve mAP at 82% on DNN-4096 dataset [23],
while the mAP of 256-dimensional binary codes is only
51%.
However, generating long binary codes requires a large
projection matrix, which leads to two challenges: (1) the
high computational cost of high-dimensional matrix-vector
multiplication, and (2) the risk of overfitting. For the first
challenge, it has been noticed that for input feature vector
of dimensionality d, the length b of binary codes required
to achieve reasonable accuracy is usually O(d) [17, 3, 25].
When d is large and b ∼ O(d), the projection matrix
R ∈ Rb×d could involve millions or even billions of parameters. Such a high cost is not favored when we encode a big
dataset of visual features, or when computational resource
is a concern, e.g., at the mobile platform. For the second
challenge, there have been efforts to address it by regulating the projection matrix and reducing the degree of free
parameters. Interestingly, such regularizations may also
bring fast matrix-vector multiplication, which will benefit
the computation efficiency as well. Representative works
include Circulant Binary Embedding(CBE) [25], Bilinear
Projection(BP) [3], Fast Orthogonal Projection(KBE) [28]
and Sparse Projection(SP) [23], etc. To be more specific, CBE [25] utilizes circulant matrix to accelerate the
matrix-vector multiplication, BP [3] constrains the projection matrix to be Kronecker product of two smaller matrices, while SP [23] seeks for a sparse projection matrix. Al12749

