FASON: First and Second Order Information Fusion Network for Texture
Recognition
Xiyang Dai
Joe Yue-Hei Ng
Larry S. Davis
Institution for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland, College Park
{xdai, yhng, lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Deep networks have shown impressive performance on
many computer vision tasks. Recently, deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have been used to learn discriminative texture representations. One of the most successful
approaches is Bilinear CNN model that explicitly captures
the second order statistics within deep features. However,
these networks cut off the first order information flow in
the deep network and make gradient back-propagation difficult. We propose an effective fusion architecture - FASON
that combines second order information flow and first order information flow. Our method allows gradients to backpropagate through both flows freely and can be trained effectively. We then build a multi-level deep architecture to
exploit the first and second order information within different convolutional layers. Experiments show that our
method achieves improvements over state-of-the-art methods on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Features from pre-trained deep models have been successfully utilized for texture recognition [5, 3, 4, 9]. By
combining off-the-shelf deep features with second order encoding methods such as Locally Aggregated Descriptors
(VLAD) [14] and Fisher Vectors [29], such approaches significantly improve texture recognition performance. However, these approaches require multiple stages of processing
including feature extraction, encoding and SVM training,
which do not take advantage of end-to-end optimization in
deep learning.
Recently, researchers have designed network architectures specifically for texture recognition. One of the most
successful approaches is the deep bilinear model proposed
by Lin et al. [31, 20]. They model the second order statistics of convolutional features within a deep network with
a bilinear pooling layer that enables end-to-end training

and achieved state-of-the-art performance on benchmark
datasets. However, it discards the first order information
within the convolutional features, which is known to be useful to capture spatial characteristic of texture [12] and illumination [27]. The first order information is also known
to be essential for back-propagation based training [22].
Hence, previous deep bilinear models neglect the potential
of first order statistics in convolutional features and make
training difficult.
We propose a novel deep network architecture that fuses
first order and second order information. We first extend the
bilinear network to combine first order information into the
learning process by designing a leaking shortcut which enables the first order statistics to pass through and combine
with bilinear features. Our architecture enables more effective learning by end-to-end training compared to the original deep bilinear model. This allows us to extend our fusion
architecture to combine features from multiple convolution
layers, which captures different style and content information. This multiple level fusion architecture further improves recognition performance. Our experiments show the
proposed fusion architecture achieves consistent improvements over state-of-the-art methods on several benchmark
datasets across different tasks such as texture recognition,
indoor scene recognition and fine-grained object classification.
The contribution of our work is two fold:
• We design a deep fusion architecture that effectively
combines second order information (calculated from a
bilinear model) and first order information (preserved
through our leaking shortcut) in an end-to-end deep
network. To the best of our knowledge, our architecture is the first proposed method to fuse such information directly in a deep network.
• We extend our fusion architecture to take advantage of
the multiple features from different convolution layers.
This paper is organized as following: In section 2, we

7352

