Optical Flow Estimation using a Spatial Pyramid Network
Anurag Ranjan
Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{anurag.ranjan, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We learn to compute optical flow by combining a classical spatial-pyramid formulation with deep learning. This
estimates large motions in a coarse-to-fine approach by
warping one image of a pair at each pyramid level by the
current flow estimate and computing an update to the flow.
Instead of the standard minimization of an objective function at each pyramid level, we train one deep network per
level to compute the flow update. Unlike the recent FlowNet
approach, the networks do not need to deal with large motions; these are dealt with by the pyramid. This has several
advantages. First, our Spatial Pyramid Network (SPyNet)
is much simpler and 96% smaller than FlowNet in terms of
model parameters. This makes it more efficient and appropriate for embedded applications. Second, since the flow
at each pyramid level is small (< 1 pixel), a convolutional
approach applied to pairs of warped images is appropriate. Third, unlike FlowNet, the learned convolution filters
appear similar to classical spatio-temporal filters, giving
insight into the method and how to improve it. Our results
are more accurate than FlowNet on most standard benchmarks, suggesting a new direction of combining classical
flow methods with deep learning.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant progress on the problem of accurately estimating optical flow, as evidenced by
improving performance on increasingly challenging benchmarks. Despite this, most flow methods are derived from
a “classical formulation” that makes a variety of assumptions about the image, from brightness constancy to spatial
smoothness. These assumptions are only coarse approximations to reality and this likely limits performance. The
recent history of the field has focused on improving these
assumptions or making them more robust to violations [7].
This has led to steady but incremental progress.
An alternative approach abandons the classical formulation altogether and starts over using recent neural network
architectures [17, 42]. Such an approach takes a pair (or se-

quence) of images and learns to directly compute flow from
them. Ideally such a network would learn to solve the correspondence problem (short and long range), learn filters relevant to the problem, learn what is constant in the sequence,
and learn about the spatial structure of the flow and how it
relates to the image structure. The first attempts are promising but are not yet as accurate as the classical methods.
We argue that there is an alternative approach that combines the best of both approaches. Decades of research
on flow has produced well engineered systems and principles that are effective. But there are places where these
methods make assumptions that limit their performance.
Consequently, here we apply machine learning to address
the weak points, while keeping the engineered architecture,
with the goal of 1) improving performance over existing
neural networks and the classical methods upon which our
work is based; 2) achieving real-time flow estimates with
accuracy better than the much slower classical methods; and
3) reducing memory requirements to make flow more practical for embedded, robotic, and mobile applications.
Computing flow requires the solution to two problems.
One is to solve for long-range correlations while the other
is to solve for detailed sub-pixel optical flow and precise
motion boundaries. The previous neural network method,
FlowNet [17], attempts to learn both of these at once. In
contrast, we tackle the latter using deep learning and rely
on existing methods to solve the former.
To deal with large motions we adopt a traditional coarseto-fine approach [20] using a spatial pyramid1 . At that top
level of the pyramid, the assumption is that the motions between frames are smaller than a few pixels and that, consequently, the convolutional filters can learn meaningful temporal structure. At each level of the pyramid we solve for
the flow using a convolutional network and up-sample the
flow to the next pyramid level. As is standard, with classical
formulations [38], we warp one image towards the other using the current flow, and repeat this process at each pyramid
level. Instead of minimizing a classical objective function
at each level, we learn a convolutional network to predict
the flow increment at that level. We train the network from
1 This, of course, has well-known limitations, which we discuss later.

4161

