3D Human Pose Estimation = 2D Pose Estimation + Matching
Ching-Hang Chen
Carnegie Mellon University

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

chinghac@andrew.cmu.edu

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Input Image

We explore 3D human pose estimation from a single
RGB image. While many approaches try to directly predict 3D pose from image measurements, we explore a simple architecture that reasons through intermediate 2D pose
predictions. Our approach is based on two key observations (1) Deep neural nets have revolutionized 2D pose estimation, producing accurate 2D predictions even for poses
with self-occlusions (2) ”Big-data”sets of 3D mocap data
are now readily available, making it tempting to “lift” predicted 2D poses to 3D through simple memorization (e.g.,
nearest neighbors). The resulting architecture is straightforward to implement with off-the-shelf 2D pose estimation
systems and 3D mocap libraries. Importantly, we demonstrate that such methods outperform almost all state-of-theart 3D pose estimation systems, most of which directly try
to regress 3D pose from 2D measurements.

3D Pose Library

Output 3D Pose
CNN

Depth added by
3D Exemplar

Estimated 2D Pose

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D human pose from image measurements is
classic task in computer vision, dating back to the iconic
work of Hogg [11] and O’Rourke and Badler [22]. Such a
technology has immediate applications in various tasks such
as action understanding, surveillance, human-robot interaction, and motion capture, to name a few. As such, it has
a long and storied history. We refer the reader to various
surveys for a broad overview of the popular topic [8, 19].
Previous approaches often make use of a highly sensored
environment, including video streams [37, 30], multiview
cameras [3, 10], depth images [23, 36, 27]. In this work, we
focus on the ”pure” and challenging setting of recovering
3D body pose with a single 2D RGB image [17, 35, 25, 32].
Our key insight to the problem is leveraging recent advances in 2D image understanding, made possible through
the undeniable impact of deep learning. While originally explored for coarse recognition tasks such as image classiﬁcation, recent methods have extended such network architectures to “ﬁne-grained” human pose estimation, where the task is formulated as one of 2D heatmap

Figure 1. Overview of our approach for 3D pose estimation: given
an input image, ﬁrst estimate a 2D pose and then estimate its depth
by matching to a library of 3D poses. The ﬁnal prediction is given
by the colored skeleton, while the ground-truth is shown in gray.
Our approach works surprisingly well because 2D pose estimation
is accurate even during occlusions (as illustrated by both wrists
above), suggesting that 2D pose estimates need only be reﬁned by
adding depth values.

prediction [33, 21, 31, 12]. One of the long standing challenges in 2D human pose estimation has been estimating
poses under self-occlusions. Indeed, reasoning about occlusions has been one of the underlying motivations for working in a 3D coordinate frame rather than 2D. But one of
our salient conclusions is that state-of-the-art methods do a
surprisingly good job of 2D pose estimation even under occlusion. Given this observation, the remaining challenge is
predicting depth values for the estimated 2D joints.
Inferring 3D structure from 2D correspondences is also a

7035

