Learning non-maximum suppression
Jan Hosang

Rodrigo Benenson

Bernt Schiele

Max Planck Institut für Informatik
Saarbrücken, Germany
firstname.lastname@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Object detectors have hugely profited from moving towards an end-to-end learning paradigm: proposals, features, and the classifier becoming one neural network
improved results two-fold on general object detection.
One indispensable component is non-maximum suppression
(NMS), a post-processing algorithm responsible for merging all detections that belong to the same object. The de
facto standard NMS algorithm is still fully hand-crafted,
suspiciously simple, and — being based on greedy clustering with a fixed distance threshold — forces a trade-off
between recall and precision. We propose a new network
architecture designed to perform NMS, using only boxes
and their score. We report experiments for person detection
on PETS and for general object categories on the COCO
dataset. Our approach shows promise providing improved
localization and occlusion handling.

1. Introduction
All modern object detectors follow a three step recipe:
(1) proposing a search space of windows (exhaustive by
sliding window or sparser using proposals), (2) scoring/refining the window with a classifier/regressor, and (3)
merging windows that might belong to the same object.
This last stage is commonly referred to as “non-maximum
suppression” (NMS) [10, 9, 21, 7, 20, 16].
The de facto standard for NMS is a simple hand-crafted
test time post-processing, which we call GreedyNMS.
The algorithm greedily selects high scoring detections and
deletes close-by less confident neighbours since they are
likely to cover the same object. This algorithm is simple,
fast, and surprisingly competitive compared to proposed alternatives.
The most notable recent performance breakthrough in
general object detection was marked by R-CNN [10], which
effectively replaced features extraction and classifiers by
a neural network, almost doubling performance on Pascal VOC. Another significant improvement was to absorb

Convnet

Figure 1: We propose a non-maximum suppression convnet that will re-score all raw detections (top). Our network
is trained end-to-end to learn to generate exactly one high
scoring detection per object (bottom, example result).
the object proposal generation into the network [21], while
other works avoid proposals altogether [21, 20], leading to
both speed and quality improvements. We can see a general
trend towards end-to-end learning and it seems reasonable
to expect further improvements by doing complete end-toend training of detectors. NMS is one step in the pipeline
that, for the most part, has evaded the end-to-end learning paradigm. All of the above detectors train the classifier
in a procedure that ignores the fact that the NMS problem
exists and then runs GreedyNMS as a disconnected postprocessing.
There is a need to overcome GreedyNMS due to its significant conceptual shortcomings. GreedyNMS makes hard
decision by deleting detections and bases this decision on
one fixed parameter that controls how wide the suppression
is. A wide suppression would remove close-by high scoring detections that are likely to be false positives that hurt
precision. On the other hand, if objects are close (e.g. in
crowded scenes), close-by detections can be true positives,
in which case suppression should be narrow to improve re14507

