Self-critical Sequence Training for Image Captioning
Steven J. Rennie, Etienne Marcheret1 , Youssef Mroueh, Jerret Ross and Vaibhava Goel1
Watson Multimodal Algorithms and Engines Group
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, NY, USA
{sjrennie, mroueh, rossja}@us.ibm.com, {etiennemarcheret, vaibhavagoel}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently it has been shown that policy-gradient methods
for reinforcement learning can be utilized to train deep endto-end systems directly on non-differentiable metrics for the
task at hand. In this paper we consider the problem of optimizing image captioning systems using reinforcement learning, and show that by carefully optimizing our systems using the test metrics of the MSCOCO task, significant gains
in performance can be realized. Our systems are built using
a new optimization approach that we call self-critical sequence training (SCST). SCST is a form of the popular REINFORCE algorithm that, rather than estimating a “baseline” to normalize the rewards and reduce variance, utilizes
the output of its own test-time inference algorithm to normalize the rewards it experiences. Using this approach, estimating the reward signal (as actor-critic methods must do)
and estimating normalization (as REINFORCE algorithms
typically do) is avoided, while at the same time harmonizing
the model with respect to its test-time inference procedure.
Empirically we find that directly optimizing the CIDEr metric with SCST and greedy decoding at test-time is highly
effective. Our results on the MSCOCO evaluation sever establish a new state-of-the-art on the task, improving the best
result in terms of CIDEr from 104.9 to 114.7.

1. Introduction
Image captioning aims at generating a natural language
description of an image. Open domain captioning is a very
challenging task, as it requires a fine-grained understanding of the global and the local entities in an image, as
well as their attributes and relationships. The recently released MSCOCO challenge [1] provides a new, larger scale
platform for evaluating image captioning systems, complete with an evaluation server for benchmarking competing methods. Deep learning approaches to sequence model1 Authors Etienne Marcheret and Vaibhava Goel were at IBM while
the work was being completed.

ing have yielded impressive results on the task, dominating the task leaderboard. Inspired by the recently introduced encoder/decoder paradigm for machine translation
using recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [2], [3], and [4]
use a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to encode
the input image, and a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
[5] RNN decoder to generate the output caption. These
systems are trained end-to-end using back-propagation, and
have achieved state-of-the-art results on MSCOCO. More
recently in [6], the use of spatial attention mechanisms on
CNN layers to incorporate visual context—which implicitly
conditions on the text generated so far—was incorporated
into the generation process. It has been shown and we have
qualitatively observed that captioning systems that utilize
attention mechanisms lead to better generalization, as these
models can compose novel text descriptions based on the
recognition of the global and local entities that comprise
images.
As discussed in [7], deep generative models for text are
typically trained to maximize the likelihood of the next
ground-truth word given the previous ground-truth word
using back-propagation. This approach has been called
“Teacher-Forcing” [8]. However, this approach creates a
mismatch between training and testing, since at test-time
the model uses the previously generated words from the
model distribution to predict the next word. This exposure
bias [7], results in error accumulation during generation at
test time, since the model has never been exposed to its own
predictions.
Several approaches to overcoming the exposure bias
problem described above have recently been proposed. In
[8] they show that feeding back the model’s own predictions
and slowly increasing the feedback probability p during
training leads to significantly better test-time performance.
Another line of work proposes “Professor-Forcing” [9], a
technique that uses adversarial training to encourage the dynamics of the recurrent network to be the same when training conditioned on ground truth previous words and when
sampling freely from the network.
While sequence models are usually trained using the
17008

