Are Large-Scale 3D Models Really Necessary for Accurate Visual Localization?
Torsten Sattler1 Akihiko Torii2 Josef Sivic3,5
Marc Pollefeys1,4 Hajime Taira2 Masatoshi Okutomi2 Tomas Pajdla5
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 2 Tokyo Institute of Technology
3
Inria∗ 4 Microsoft, Redmond 5 Czech Technical University in Prague

Accurate visual localization is a key technology for autonomous navigation. 3D structure-based methods employ
3D models of the scene to estimate the full 6DOF pose of
a camera very accurately. However, constructing (and extending) large-scale 3D models is still a significant challenge. In contrast, 2D image retrieval-based methods only
require a database of geo-tagged images, which is trivial
to construct and to maintain. They are often considered inaccurate since they only approximate the positions of the
cameras. Yet, the exact camera pose can theoretically be
recovered when enough relevant database images are retrieved. In this paper, we demonstrate experimentally that
large-scale 3D models are not strictly necessary for accurate visual localization. We create reference poses for a
large and challenging urban dataset. Using these poses,
we show that combining image-based methods with local
reconstructions results in a pose accuracy similar to the
state-of-the-art structure-based methods. Our results suggest that we might want to reconsider the current approach
for accurate large-scale localization.

1. Introduction
Determining the location from which a photo was taken
is a key challenge in the navigation of autonomous vehicles such as self-driving cars and drones [28], robotics [30],
mobile Augmented Reality [31, 32], and Structure-fromMotion (SfM) [2, 14, 42, 43]. In addition, solving the visual localization problem enables a system to determine the
content of a photo. This can be used to develop interesting
new applications, e.g., virtual tourism [46] and automatic
annotation of photos [16, 52].
Currently, approaches that tackle the visual localization
problem are divided into two categories (c.f . Fig. 1 and
Tab. 1). Visual place recognition approaches [6, 12, 17, 37,
∗ WILLOW project, Departement d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, PSL Research University.

Query image

Large-scale 3D model

Abstract

?
?

Geotagged images

Local 3D model

Figure 1. The state-of-the-art for large-scale visual localization.
2D image-based methods (bottom) use image retrieval and return
the pose of the most relevant database image. 3D structure-based
methods (top) use 2D-3D matches against a 3D model for camera
pose estimation. Both approaches have been developed largely
independently of each other and never compared properly before.

48, 49] cast the localization problem as an image retrieval,
i.e., instance-level recognition, task and represent a scene as
a database of geo-tagged images. Given a query photo, they
employ 2D image-based localization methods that operate
purely on an image level to determine a set of database images similar to the query. The geo-tag of the most relevant
retrieved photo then often serves as an approximation to the
position from which the query was taken. Image-based localization methods [13, 19, 26, 36, 38, 57] cast the localization problem as a camera resectioning task. They represent
scenes via 3D models, with image descriptors attached to
the 3D points, which are obtained from SfM or by attaching local features/patches to 3D point clouds [7, 44]. 3D
structure-based localization algorithms then use these descriptors to establish a set of 2D-3D matches. In turn, these
matches are used to recover the full 6DOF camera pose, i.e.,
position and orientation, of the query image [18, 25].
A common perception is that 2D image-based approaches can be a part of 3D structure-based methods to
determine which parts of a scene might be visible in the
query [9, 19, 36, 40]. Purely 2D-based techniques are considered unsuited for accurate visual localization due to only
approximating the true camera position of the query. Consequently, 2D- and 3D-based localization methods are only
compared in terms of place recognition performance [36,

1637

