Binge Watching: Scaling Affordance Learning from Sitcoms
Xiaolong Wang∗
Rohit Girdhar∗
Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
In recent years, there has been a renewed interest in
jointly modeling perception and action. At the core of this
investigation is the idea of modeling affordances1 . However, when it comes to predicting affordances, even the state
of the art approaches still do not use any ConvNets. Why is
that? Unlike semantic or 3D tasks, there still does not exist
any large-scale dataset for affordances. In this paper, we
tackle the challenge of creating one of the biggest dataset
for learning affordances. We use seven sitcoms to extract a
diverse set of scenes and how actors interact with different
objects in the scenes. Our dataset consists of more than 10K
scenes and 28K ways humans can interact with these 10K
images. We also propose a two-step approach to predict
affordances in a new scene. In the first step, given a location in the scene we classify which of the 30 pose classes
is the likely affordance pose. Given the pose class and the
scene, we then use a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [23]
to extract the scale and deformation of the pose. The VAE
allows us to sample the distribution of possible poses at test
time. Finally, we show the importance of large-scale data in
learning a generalizable and robust model of affordances.

Query Image

Query Image

Retrievals

Retrievals

…

…

Transferred Poses

Transferred Poses

1. Introduction
One of the long-term goals of computer vision, as it integrates with robotics, is to translate perception into action.
While vision tasks such as semantic or 3D understanding
have seen remarkable improvements in performance, the
task of translating perception into actions has not seen any
major gains. For example, the state of the art approaches in
predicting affordances still do not use any ConvNets with
the exception of [12]. Why is that? What is common
across the tasks affected by ConvNets is the availability of
large scale supervisions. For example, in semantic tasks, the
supervision comes from crowd-sourcing tools like Amazon
Mechanical Turk; and in 3D tasks, supervision comes from
structured light cameras such as the Kinect. But no such
∗ Indicates equal contribution.
1 Affordances are opportunities of interaction in the scene. In other
words, it represents what actions can the object be used for.

Figure 1. We propose to binge-watch sitcoms to extract one of the
largest affordance datasets ever. We use more than 100M frames
from seven different sitcoms to find empty scenes and same scene
with humans. This allows us to create a large-scale dataset with
scenes and their affordances.

datasets exist for supervising actions afforded by a scene.
Can we create a large-scale dataset that can alter the course
in this field as well?
There are several possible ways to create a large-scale
dataset for affordances: (a) First option is to label the data:
given empty images of room, we can ask mechanical turkers to label what actions can be done at different locations. However, labeling images with affordances is ex12596

