Accurate Optical Flow via Direct Cost Volume Processing
Jia Xu

René Ranftl
Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a key building block of computer vision systems. Despite concerted progress, accurate
optical flow estimation remains an open challenge due to
large displacements, textureless regions, motion blur, and
non-Lambertian effects. Tellingly, the accuracy of leading optical flow algorithms is behind the accuracy achieved
for the related problem of stereo matching. This is despite
the close structural similarity of the two problems: stereo
matching can be viewed as a special case of optical flow.
The most successful methods for stereo matching and
optical flow tend to follow different philosophies. Leading
stereo methods treat the search space as a highly regular discrete structure and explicitly construct a complete representation of this structure, known as the cost volume [29, 39].
This enables the application of powerful global and semiglobal optimization techniques that remove outliers and enforce coherence [16, 33]. In contrast, the cost volume for
optical flow is four-dimensional and its explicit construction
and processing have until recently been considered infeasible. For this reason, optical flow methods commonly rely
on nearest neighbor search [25, 3, 12, 2] and coarse-to-fine
analysis [28, 3].
Recent work has indicated that operating on the com-

DeepDiscreteFlow
FlowFields+
SPM-BPv2
FlowFields
CPM-Flow
FullFlow
Ours

200
Runtime (sec)

We present an optical flow estimation approach that operates on the full four-dimensional cost volume. This direct
approach shares the structural benefits of leading stereo
matching pipelines, which are known to yield high accuracy. To this day, such approaches have been considered
impractical due to the size of the cost volume. We show that
the full four-dimensional cost volume can be constructed in
a fraction of a second due to its regularity. We then exploit
this regularity further by adapting semi-global matching to
the four-dimensional setting. This yields a pipeline that
achieves significantly higher accuracy than state-of-the-art
optical flow methods while being faster than most. Our approach outperforms all published general-purpose optical
flow methods on both Sintel and KITTI 2015 benchmarks.

250

150
100
50
0
5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5
5.6
EPE-all

5.7

5.8

5.9

6

Figure 1. Accuracy versus running time on the Sintel benchmark.
We compare to the top-ranking published optical flow methods.
Our approach is significantly more accurate, while maintaining a
competitive running time.

plete cost volume, à la stereo, is in fact feasible and that the
regular structure of this volume supports the use of global
optimization techniques [7]. However, the computational
requirements of this approach appeared to render it impractical, due both to the construction of the cost volume and the
optimization over it. It remained unclear whether we can
translate the successful structure of state-of-the-art stereo
processing pipelines to optical flow without incurring severe computational penalties.
In this paper, we show that an optical flow algorithm can
combine the convenience and accuracy of cost-volume processing with speed. Our work is based on learning an embedding into a compact feature space, such that matching
scores between patches can be computed by inner products
in this space. We show that the full four-dimensional cost
volume can be constructed in a fraction of a second due
to its regularity. We then exploit this regularity further by
adapting semi-global matching [16] to the four-dimensional
setting. Despite the size of the label space, its regularity exposes massive parallelism that can be harnessed to keep running times down. Additional postprocessing is performed
by fitting homographies to image regions and using these to
regularize the flow field.
The resulting pipeline achieves the highest reported accuracy on the Sintel benchmark [6] while maintaining a
competitive running time. Our approach also significantly
11289

