Designing Energy-Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks
using Energy-Aware Pruning
Tien-Ju Yang, Yu-Hsin Chen, Vivienne Sze
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{tjy, yhchen, sze}@mit.edu

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are indispensable to state-of-the-art computer vision algorithms.
However, they are still rarely deployed on battery-powered
mobile devices, such as smartphones and wearable gadgets, where vision algorithms can enable many revolutionary real-world applications. The key limiting factor is the
high energy consumption of CNN processing due to its high
computational complexity. While there are many previous
efforts that try to reduce the CNN model size or the amount
of computation, we find that they do not necessarily result
in lower energy consumption. Therefore, these targets do
not serve as a good metric for energy cost estimation.
To close the gap between CNN design and energy consumption optimization, we propose an energy-aware pruning algorithm for CNNs that directly uses the energy consumption of a CNN to guide the pruning process. The energy estimation methodology uses parameters extrapolated
from actual hardware measurements. The proposed layerby-layer pruning algorithm also prunes more aggressively
than previously proposed pruning methods by minimizing
the error in the output feature maps instead of the filter
weights. For each layer, the weights are first pruned and
then locally fine-tuned with a closed-form least-square solution to quickly restore the accuracy. After all layers are
pruned, the entire network is globally fine-tuned using backpropagation. With the proposed pruning method, the energy consumption of AlexNet and GoogLeNet is reduced by
3.7× and 1.6×, respectively, with less than 1% top-5 accuracy loss. We also show that reducing the number of target
classes in AlexNet greatly decreases the number of weights,
but has a limited impact on energy consumption.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have become the state-of-the-art solution for many
computer vision applications and are ripe for real-world deployment [1]. However, CNN processing incurs high energy consumption due to its high computational complex-

ity [2]. As a result, battery-powered devices still cannot afford to run state-of-the-art CNNs due to their limited energy
budget. For example, smartphones nowadays cannot even
run object classification with AlexNet [3] in real-time for
more than an hour. Hence, energy consumption has become
the primary issue of bridging CNNs into practical computer
vision applications.
In addition to accuracy, the design of modern CNNs
is starting to incorporate new metrics to make it more
favorable in real-world environments. For example, the
trend is to simultaneously reduce the overall CNN model
size and/or simplify the computation while going deeper.
This is achieved either by pruning the weights of existing CNNs, i.e., making the filters sparse by setting some
of the weights to zero [4–14], or by designing new CNNs
with (1) highly bitwidth-reduced weights and operations
(e.g., XNOR-Net and BWN [15]) or (2) compact layers with fewer weights (e.g., Network-in-Network [16],
GoogLeNet [17], SqueezeNet [18], and ResNet [19]).
However, neither the number of weights nor the number of operations in a CNN directly reflect its actual energy
consumption. A CNN with a smaller model size or fewer
operations can still have higher overall energy consumption. This is because the sources of energy consumption
in a CNN consist of not only computation but also memory
accesses. In fact, fetching data from the DRAM for an operation consumes orders of magnitude higher energy than
the computation itself [20], and the energy consumption
of a CNN is dominated by memory accesses for both filter weights and feature maps. The total number of memory
accesses is a function of the CNN shape configuration [21]
(i.e., filter size, feature map resolution, number of channels,
and number of filters); different shape configurations can
lead to different amounts of memory accesses, and thus energy consumption, even under the same number of weights
or operations. Therefore, there is still no evidence showing that the aforementioned approaches can directly optimize the energy consumption of a CNN. In addition, there
is currently no way for researchers to estimate the energy
consumption of a CNN at design time.

5687

