Designing Effective Inter-Pixel Information Flow for Natural Image Matting
Yağız Aksoy1,2 , Tunç Ozan Aydın2 , Marc Pollefeys1
1

ETH Zürich

2

Disney Research Zürich

Abstract
We present a novel, purely affinity-based natural image
matting algorithm. Our method relies on carefully defined
pixel-to-pixel connections that enable effective use of information available in the image and the trimap. We control
the information flow from the known-opacity regions into
the unknown region, as well as within the unknown region
itself, by utilizing multiple definitions of pixel affinities. This
way we achieve significant improvements on matte quality
near challenging regions of the foreground object. Among
other forms of information flow, we introduce color-mixture
flow, which builds upon local linear embedding and effectively encapsulates the relation between different pixel
opacities. Our resulting novel linear system formulation
can be solved in closed-form and is robust against several
fundamental challenges in natural matting such as holes
and remote intricate structures. While our method is primarily designed as a standalone natural matting tool, we
show that it can also be used for regularizing mattes obtained by various sampling-based methods. Our evaluation
using the public alpha matting benchmark suggests a significant performance improvement over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Extracting the opacity information of foreground objects
from an image is known as natural image matting. Natural
image matting has received great interest from the research
community through the last decade and can nowadays be
considered as one of the classical research problems in visual computing. Mathematically, image matting requires
expressing pixel colors in the transition regions from foreground to background as a convex combination of their underlying foreground and background colors. The weight, or
the opacity, of the foreground color is referred to as the alpha value of that pixel. Since neither the foreground and
background colors nor the opacities are known, estimating
the opacity values is a highly ill-posed problem. To alleviate
the difficulty of this problem, typically a trimap is provided
in addition to the original image. The trimap is a rough segmentation of the input image into foreground, background,

Figure 1. For an input image (a) and a trimap (b), we define several forms of information flow inside the image. We begin with
color-mixture flow (c), then add direct channels of information
flow from known to unknown regions (d), and let effective share
of information inside the unknown region (e) to increase the matte
quality in challenging regions. We finally add local information
flow to get our spatially smooth result (f).

and regions with unknown opacity.
Affinity-based methods [4, 5, 11] constitute one of the
prominent natural matting approaches in literature. These
methods make use of pixel similarities to propagate the alpha values from the known-alpha regions to the unknown
region. They provide a clear mathematical formulation, can
be solved in closed-form, are easy to implement, and typically produce spatially consistent mattes. However, current methods fail to effectively handle alpha gradients spanning large areas and spatially disconnected unknown regions (i.e. holes) even in simple cases as demonstrated in
Figure 2. This is because a straightforward formulation using the pixel-to-pixel affinity definitions can not effectively
represent the complex structures that are commonly seen in
real-life objects.
In order to alleviate these shortcomings, we rely on a
careful, case-by-case design of how alpha values should
propagate inside the image. We refer to this propagation as
information flow. The key idea of our paper is a novel strat1 29

