Benchmarking Denoising Algorithms with Real Photographs
Tobias Plötz
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Lacking realistic ground truth data, image denoising
techniques are traditionally evaluated on images corrupted
by synthesized i. i. d. Gaussian noise. We aim to obviate
this unrealistic setting by developing a methodology for
benchmarking denoising techniques on real photographs.
We capture pairs of images with different ISO values and
appropriately adjusted exposure times, where the nearly
noise-free low-ISO image serves as reference. To derive the
ground truth, careful post-processing is needed. We correct
spatial misalignment, cope with inaccuracies in the exposure parameters through a linear intensity transform based
on a novel heteroscedastic Tobit regression model, and remove residual low-frequency bias that stems, e.g., from minor illumination changes. We then capture a novel benchmark dataset, the Darmstadt Noise Dataset (DND), with
consumer cameras of differing sensor sizes. One interesting
finding is that various recent techniques that perform well
on synthetic noise are clearly outperformed by BM3D on
photographs with real noise. Our benchmark delineates realistic evaluation scenarios that deviate strongly from those
commonly used in the scientific literature.

1. Introduction
Noise is inherent to every imaging system. Especially
in low-light scenarios, it often severely degrades the image.
Therefore, a large variety of denoising algorithms have been
developed to deal with image noise, e.g. [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 25,
31, 32, 39]. Even though images with real sensor noise can
be captured easily, it is much less straightforward to know
what the true noise-free image should be. Thus, the quantitative evaluation of denoising methods by and large relies
on adding synthetic i. i. d. Gaussian noise to mostly clean
images, e.g. [19, 31, 32]. Photographs with real noise are
at best used for a qualitative analysis [25, 29], but often not
at all. This is quite problematic, since noise in real photographs is not i. i. d. Gaussian [13, 21], yet even seemingly
minor details of the synthetic noise process, such as whether
the noisy values are rounded to integers, can have a significant effect on the relative performance of methods [6, 33].

(a) Low-ISO image

(b) High-ISO image

(c) Zoom-in of the low-ISO image (left) and the high-ISO image (right)

Figure 1. An image pair of a nearly noise-free low-ISO and a noisy
high-ISO image from our dataset. Note, that we work with RAW
images and show JPEGs for better display.

The goal of this paper is to address these challenges by
developing a methodology for benchmarking denoising algorithms by means of real photographs. At its core is the
simple idea of capturing pairs of noisy and almost noisefree images by imaging the same scene from the same viewpoint with different analog gains (ISO values), see Fig. 1.
By inversely adjusting the exposure time, the underlying
noise-free image intensities should theoretically stay constant. In practice, we observe various causes for changing
image intensities, prohibiting the direct use of the low-ISO
image as ground truth. Since these scene variations are nontrivial, we contribute a careful post-processing procedure
that takes into account the statistical properties of the image formation process. As part of this pipeline we propose
a novel heteroscedastic Tobit regression model generalizing
[35], which allows to remove linear dependencies between
the intensities of both images that arise as neither the analog
gain of the sensor nor the exposure time can be controlled
completely accurately in practice. Our model faithfully accounts for clipping as well as signal-dependent noise, which
is crucial as shown experimentally. Furthermore, minimal
changes in the illumination can lead to a low-frequency
bias, which we remove by high-pass filtering the residual
between noisy and reference image in a transformed domain in which the noise process is zero-mean. Lastly, moving objects and minuscule camera shake between exposures

1586

