Learning from Simulated and Unsupervised Images through Adversarial
Training
Ashish Shrivastava, Tomas Pfister, Oncel Tuzel, Josh Susskind, Wenda Wang, Russ Webb
Apple Inc
{a_shrivastava,tpf,otuzel,jsusskind,wenda_wang,rwebb}@apple.com

Unlabeled Real Images

Abstract
With recent progress in graphics, it has become more
tractable to train models on synthetic images, potentially avoiding the need for expensive annotations. However, learning from synthetic images may not achieve the
desired performance due to a gap between synthetic and
real image distributions. To reduce this gap, we propose Simulated+Unsupervised (S+U) learning, where
the task is to learn a model to improve the realism of
a simulator’s output using unlabeled real data, while
preserving the annotation information from the simulator. We develop a method for S+U learning that uses an
adversarial network similar to Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs), but with synthetic images as inputs
instead of random vectors. We make several key modifications to the standard GAN algorithm to preserve annotations, avoid artifacts, and stabilize training: (i) a
‘self-regularization’ term, (ii) a local adversarial loss,
and (iii) updating the discriminator using a history of
refined images. We show that this enables generation
of highly realistic images, which we demonstrate both
qualitatively and with a user study. We quantitatively
evaluate the generated images by training models for
gaze estimation and hand pose estimation. We show
a significant improvement over using synthetic images,
and achieve state-of-the-art results on the MPIIGaze
dataset without any labeled real data.

Reﬁner
Synthetic

Reﬁned

Figure 1. Simulated+Unsupervised (S+U) learning. The task is
to learn a model that improves the realism of synthetic images
from a simulator using unlabeled real data, while preserving
the annotation information.

data [43, 42, 29, 34]. However, learning from synthetic
images can be problematic due to a gap between synthetic and real image distributions – synthetic data is
often not realistic enough, leading the network to learn
details only present in synthetic images and failing to
generalize well on real images. One solution to closing
this gap is to improve the simulator. However, increasing the realism is often computationally expensive, the
content modeling takes a lot of hard work, and even the
best rendering algorithms may still fail to model all the
characteristics of real images. This lack of realism may
cause models to overfit to ‘unrealistic’ details in the synthetic images.
In this paper, we propose Simulated+Unsupervised
(S+U) learning, where the goal is to improve the realism of synthetic images from a simulator using unlabeled real data. The improved realism enables the training of better machine learning models on large datasets
without any data collection or human annotation effort.
In addition to adding realism, S+U learning should preserve annotation information for training of machine
learning models – e.g. the gaze direction in Figure 1
should be preserved. Moreover, since machine learning
models can be sensitive to artifacts in the synthetic data,

1. Introduction
Large labeled training datasets are becoming increasingly important with the recent rise in high capacity
deep neural networks [4, 20, 48, 48, 1, 24, 17]. However, labeling such large datasets is expensive and timeconsuming. Thus, the idea of training on synthetic
instead of real images has become appealing because
the annotations are automatically available. Human
pose estimation with Kinect [35] and, more recently, a
plethora of other tasks have been tackled using synthetic
1
2107

