Generalized Semantic Preserving Hashing for n-Label Cross-Modal Retrieval
Devraj Mandal Kunal N. Chaudhury Soma Biswas
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560012
{devraj89,kunal,soma.biswas}@ee.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract
Due to availability of large amounts of multimedia data,
cross-modal matching is gaining increasing importance.
Hashing based techniques provide an attractive solution to
this problem when the data size is large. Different scenarios of cross-modal matching are possible, for example, data
from the different modalities can be associated with a single label or multiple labels, and in addition may or may
not have one-to-one correspondence. Most of the existing
approaches have been developed for the case where there
is one-to-one correspondence between the data of the two
modalities. In this paper, we propose a simple, yet effective generalized hashing framework which can work for all
the different scenarios, while preserving the semantic distance between the data points. The approach first learns the
optimum hash codes for the two modalities simultaneously,
so as to preserve the semantic similarity between the data
points, and then learns the hash functions to map from the
features to the hash codes. Extensive experiments on single
label dataset like Wiki and multi-label datasets like NUSWIDE, Pascal and LabelMe under all the different scenarios and comparisons with the state-of-the-art shows the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Availability of large volumes of multimedia data have
made cross-modal retrieval tasks very important in the field
of computer vision. For example, given a text query, we
may want to retrieve all semantically similar images from
the database. More often than not, single labels are often
not sufficient to explain the data, and thus the data are usually annotated with multiple labels (Figure 1). We notice
that though the images are not entirely same, they have
some common labels signifying that there exists varying
amounts of similarity between them. Also, the data (single or multi-label) may be paired or unpaired. For example,
for single label data, say 10 images and 5 text data belong
to the same category ”elephant”, which means that the image and text data cannot be paired. Thus cross-modal re-

Figure 1. Few examples from the LabelMe dataset [18] shows that
a single image usually requires multiple labels to properly describe
them. Common tags are represented using the same color.

trieval tasks can be roughly categorized into the following
- (1) single label paired (SL-P), where there is one-to-one
correspondence between the data of the two modalities, (2)
single label unpaired (SL-U) where such pairing is absent,
(3) multi-label paired (ML-P) where the multi-label data is
given in pairs with same labels and (4) multi-label unpaired
(ML-U) where the number of multi-label data items are different in both the modalities (Figure 2).
Most of the approaches in literature have focused on the
paired scenarios (first and third problem) addressing both
the supervised version [17] [20], where the labels are provided, and the unsupervised version, which does not contain
the labels [7] [8]. Very few approaches have been proposed
to handle the SL-U [17] and ML-U scenario [15]. Hashing
techniques which can efficiently encode the input data into
q-bit binary hash code have gained popularity, because of
low storage costs and high query speeds, in addition to impressive cross-modal retrieval performance. Hashing techniques for both unsupervised [28] [21] [4] [27] and supervised settings [2] [11] [28] [24] for the SL-P and ML-P
problems have been proposed. To the best of our knowledge, the task of SL-U and ML-U are yet to be addressed
by the hashing based approaches.
In this work, we propose a simple, yet effective generalized hashing approach which can seamlessly handle all
the scenarios described above, while preserving the struc-

4076

