SCA-CNN: Spatial and Channel-wise Attention in Convolutional Networks
for Image Captioning
Long Chen1 Hanwang Zhang2 Jun Xiao1∗ Liqiang Nie3 Jian Shao1 Wei Liu4 Tat-Seng Chua5
1

Zhejiang University
4

2

Columbia University

Tencent AI Lab

5

3

Shandong University

National University of Singapore

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual attention has been shown effective in various
structural prediction tasks such as image/video captioning [34, 36] and visual question answering [4, 35, 33]. Its
success is mainly due to the reasonable assumption that human vision does not tend to process a whole image in its
entirety at once; instead, one only focuses on selective parts of the whole visual space when and where as needed [5].
Specifically, rather than encoding an image into a static vector, attention allows the image feature to evolve from the
∗ Corresponding author

conv5_3

input image

Visual attention has been successfully applied in structural prediction tasks such as visual captioning and question answering. Existing visual attention models are generally spatial, i.e., the attention is modeled as spatial probabilities that re-weight the last conv-layer feature map of
a CNN encoding an input image. However, we argue that
such spatial attention does not necessarily conform to the
attention mechanism — a dynamic feature extractor that
combines contextual fixations over time, as CNN features
are naturally spatial, channel-wise and multi-layer. In this
paper, we introduce a novel convolutional neural network
dubbed SCA-CNN that incorporates Spatial and Channelwise Attentions in a CNN. In the task of image captioning,
SCA-CNN dynamically modulates the sentence generation
context in multi-layer feature maps, encoding where (i.e.,
attentive spatial locations at multiple layers) and what (i.e.,
attentive channels) the visual attention is. We evaluate the
proposed SCA-CNN architecture on three benchmark image
captioning datasets: Flickr8K, Flickr30K, and MSCOCO.
It is consistently observed that SCA-CNN significantly outperforms state-of-the-art visual attention-based image captioning methods.

cake

a
woman
sitting

LSTM

at
a

conv5_3 conv5_4

CNN (VGG19)

table

a

with

conv5_4

Figure 1. The illustration of channel-wise visual attention in two
convolutional layers (conv5 3 and conv5 4 in VGG19) when predicting cake from the captioning a woman sitting at a
table with cake. At each layer, top 3 attentive channels are
visualized by showing the 5 most responsive receptive fields in the
corresponding feature maps [40].

sentence context at hand, resulting in richer and longer descriptions for cluttered images. In this way, visual attention
can be considered as a dynamic feature extraction mechanism that combines contextual fixations over time [19, 26].
State-of-the-art image features are generally extracted by
deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [8, 25, 32].
Starting from an input color image of the size W × H × 3,
a convolutional layer consisting of C-channel filters scans
the input image and output a W ′ × H ′ × C feature map,
which will be the input for the next convolutional layer1 .
Each 2D slice of a 3D feature map encodes the spatial visu1 Each convolutional layer is optionally followed by a pooling, downsampling, normalization, or a fully connected layer.

5659

