Simple Does It: Weakly Supervised Instance and Semantic Segmentation
Anna Khoreva1
1

Rodrigo Benenson1

Jan Hosang1

Matthias Hein2

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
Semantic labelling and instance segmentation are two
tasks that require particularly costly annotations. Starting
from weak supervision in the form of bounding box detection annotations, we propose a new approach that does not
require modification of the segmentation training procedure. We show that when carefully designing the input labels
from given bounding boxes, even a single round of training
is enough to improve over previously reported weakly supervised results. Overall, our weak supervision approach
reaches ∼ 95% of the quality of the fully supervised model,
both for semantic labelling and instance segmentation.

1. Introduction
Convolutional networks (convnets) have become the de
facto technique for pattern recognition problems in computer vision. One of their main strengths is the ability to
profit from extensive amounts of training data to reach top
quality. However, one of their main weaknesses is that they
need a large number of training samples for high quality
results. This is usually mitigated by using pre-trained models (e.g. with ∼ 106 training samples for ImageNet classification [37]), but still thousands of samples are needed
to shift from the pre-training domain to the application domain. Applications such as semantic labelling (associating
each image pixel to a given class) or instance segmentation
(grouping all pixels belonging to the same object instance)
are expensive to annotate, and thus significant cost is involved in creating large enough training sets.
Compared to object bounding box annotations, pixelwise mask annotations are far more expensive, requiring
∼ 15× more time [25]. Cheaper and easier to define, box
annotations are more pervasive than pixel-wise annotations.
In principle, a large number of box annotations (and images
representing the background class) should convey enough
information to understand which part of the box content is
foreground and which is background. In this paper we explore how much one can close the gap between training a
convnet using full supervision for semantic labelling (or instance segmentation) versus using only bounding box annotations.
Our experiments focus on the 20 Pascal classes [9] and

Training sample,
with box annotations

Test image, fully
supervised result

Test image, weakly
supervised result

Figure 1: We propose a technique to train semantic labelling
from bounding boxes, and reach 95% of the quality obtained when training from pixel-wise annotations.

show that using only bounding box annotations over the
same training set we can reach ∼ 95% of the accuracy
achievable with full supervision. We show top results for
(bounding box) weakly supervised semantic labelling and,
to the best of our knowledge, for the first time report results
for weakly supervised instance segmentation.
We view the problem of weak supervision as an issue
of input label noise. We explore recursive training as a
de-noising strategy, where convnet predictions of the previous training round are used as supervision for the next
round. We also show that, when properly used, “classic
computer vision” techniques for box-guided instance segmentation are a source of surprisingly effective supervision
for convnet training.
In summary, our main contributions are:
− We explore recursive training of convnets for weakly
supervised semantic labelling, discuss how to reach
good quality results, and what are the limitations of
the approach (Section 3.1).
− We show that state of the art quality can be reached
in a single training round when properly employing
GrabCut-like algorithms to generate training labels
from given bounding boxes, instead of modifying the
segmentation convnet training procedure or using recursive training (Section 3.2).
− We report the best known results when training using bounding boxes only, both using Pascal VOC12
and VOC12+COCO training data, reaching comparable quality with the fully supervised regime (Section
4.2).
1876

