Scribbler: Controlling Deep Image Synthesis with Sketch and Color
Patsorn Sangkloy1 , Jingwan Lu2 ,
1
Georgia Institute of Technology

Chen Fang2 , Fisher Yu3 , James Hays1
Adobe Research 3 Princeton University

2

Generated results

Sketch + Color

Sketch

Figure 1. A user can sketch and scribble colors to control deep image synthesis. On the left is an image generated from a hand drawn
sketch. On the right several objects have been deleted from the sketch, a vase has been added, and the color of various scene elements has
been constrained by sparse color strokes. For best resolution and additional results, see scribbler.eye.gatech.edu

Abstract
Several recent works have used deep convolutional networks to generate realistic imagery. These methods sidestep
the traditional computer graphics rendering pipeline and
instead generate imagery at the pixel level by learning from
large collections of photos (e.g. faces or bedrooms). However, these methods are of limited utility because it is difficult for a user to control what the network produces. In
this paper, we propose a deep adversarial image synthesis
architecture that is conditioned on sketched boundaries and
sparse color strokes to generate realistic cars, bedrooms,
or faces. We demonstrate a sketch based image synthesis
system which allows users to scribble over the sketch to indicate preferred color for objects. Our network can then
generate convincing images that satisfy both the color and
the sketch constraints of user. The network is feed-forward
which allows users to see the effect of their edits in real
time. We compare to recent work on sketch to image synthesis and show that our approach generates more realistic,
diverse, and controllable outputs. The architecture is also
effective at user-guided colorization of grayscale images.

1. Introduction
Recently, numerous image synthesis methods built on
neural networks have emerged [41, 25, 12, 37, 21, 13].
These methods can generate detailed and diverse (if not
quite photorealistic) images in many domains. However,
it is still unclear how to control these powerful new tools.
How can we enable everyday users (non-artists) to harness
the power of deep image synthesis methods and produce realistic imagery? Several recent methods have explored controllable deep synthesis [8, 50, 55, 14, 56, 18, 46] and we focus on two complementary forms of control – sketches and

color strokes. Sketches are a compelling form of control because anyone can draw (potentially very badly) and because
it is easy to edit sketches, e.g. to remove or add objects,
whereas the equivalent operations in the image domain require artistic expertise. Color is a compelling form of control because many sketches or grayscale scenes are fundamentally ambiguous with respect to color [54], but it is easy
for a user to intervene, e.g. to scribble that drapes should be
blue and the valance should be red (Figure 1). Both forms
of control are relatively sparse and require a deep network
to synthesize image detail beyond what is contained in the
input. The deep network must also implicitly learn a significant amount of high-level image understanding, e.g. what
colors are allowable for particular objects, the boundaries
of objects such that color does not bleed beyond a single semantic region, and the appropriate high frequency textures
for different scene elements.
We propose a deep adversarial (GAN) image synthesis
architecture trained to generate realistic images from sparse
and simple sketched boundaries and color strokes. We train
our network on a diverse set of synthetic sketches optionally augmented with randomly sampled color strokes. The
network learns to recover the color and detail lost to the
sketching process and to extrapolate the sparse color indications to semantic scene elements. We show qualitative
results of image synthesis in three domains – faces, cars,
and bedrooms. We test on synthetic sketches as well as imperfect hand-drawn sketches.
Our approach is similar to Sketch Inversion [14], which
also generates images from sketches, although we show the
benefit of adversarial training, introduce color control signals, demonstrate results on image domains beyond faces,
and demonstrate that users can perform simple edits to
sketches to control the synthesis. Our control signals are
15400

