Learning Fully Convolutional Networks for Iterative Non-blind Deconvolution
Jiawei Zhang13∗ Jinshan Pan2 Wei-Sheng Lai3 Rynson W.H. Lau1 Ming-Hsuan Yang3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Dalian University of Technology2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced3

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fully convolutional network
for iterative non-blind deconvolution. We decompose the
non-blind deconvolution problem into image denoising and
image deconvolution. We train a FCNN to remove noise
in the gradient domain and use the learned gradients to
guide the image deconvolution step. In contrast to the existing deep neural network based methods, we iteratively
deconvolve the blurred images in a multi-stage framework.
The proposed method is able to learn an adaptive image
prior, which keeps both local (details) and global (structures) information. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations on the benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably against state-of-the-art
algorithms in terms of quality and speed.

1. Introduction
Single image non-blind deconvolution aims to recover a
sharp latent image given a blurred image and the blur kernel. The community has made active research effort on this
classical problem in the last decade. Assuming the camera motion is spatially invariant, a blurred image y can be
modeled as a convolution using a blur kernel k and a latent
image x:
y = k ∗ x + n,
(1)
where n is additive noise and ∗ is the convolution operator.
In non-blind deconvolution, we solve x from y and k. This
is an ill-posed problem since the noise is unknown.
Conventional approaches, such as the Richardson-Lucy
deconvolution [20] and the Wiener filter [33], suffer from
serious ringing artifacts and thus are less effective to deal
with large motion and outliers. Several methods focus
on developing effective image priors for image restoration, including Hyper-Laplacian priors [14, 15], non-local
means [2], fields of experts [23, 24, 26, 27], patch-based priors [30,39] and shrinkage fields [25]. However, these image
∗ email: zhjw1988@gmail.com

priors are heavily based on the empirical statistics of natural images, and they typically lead to highly non-convex
optimization problems. Meanwhile, most of the aforementioned methods have high computational costs.
Recently, deep neural networks have been applied to image restoration [28, 35]. However, these methods need to
re-train the network for different blur kernels, which is not
practical in real-world scenarios.
Different from existing methods, we propose an iterative
FCNN for non-blind deconvolution, which is able to automatically learn effective image priors and does not need to
re-train the network for different blur kernels. The proposed
method decomposes the non-blind deconvolution into two
steps: image denoising and image deconvolution. In the
image denoising step, we train a FCNN to remove noise
and outliers in the gradient domain. The learned image gradients are treated as image priors to guide image deconvolution. In the image deconvolution step, we concatenate a
deconvolution module at the end of the FCNN to remove
the blur from the input image. We cascade the FCNN into
a multi-stage architecture to deconvolve blurred images in
an iterative manner. The proposed FCNN adaptively learns
effective image priors to preserve image details and structures. In order to effectively suppress ringing artifacts and
noise in the smooth regions, we propose to optimize the
FCNN with a robust L1 loss function instead of a commonly used L2 loss function. In addition, we optimize the
hyper-parameters in the deconvolution modules. Extensive
evaluations on the benchmark datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method performs favorably against state-of-theart algorithms in terms of quality and speed.

2. Related Work
Non-blind deconvolution has been studied extensively
and numerous algorithms have been proposed. In this section, we discuss the most relevant algorithms and put this
work in proper context.
Since non-blind deblurring is an ill-posed problem, it requires some assumptions or prior knowledge to constrain
the solution space. The early approaches, e.g., Wiener
deconvolution [33], assume that the value of every pixel
13817

