DSAC - Differentiable RANSAC for Camera Localization
Eric Brachmann1 , Alexander Krull1 , Sebastian Nowozin2
Jamie Shotton2 , Frank Michel1 , Stefan Gumhold1 , Carsten Rother1
1
TU Dresden, 2 Microsoft

Abstract
RANSAC is an important algorithm in robust optimization and a central building block for many computer vision
applications. In recent years, traditionally hand-crafted
pipelines have been replaced by deep learning pipelines,
which can be trained in an end-to-end fashion. However,
RANSAC has so far not been used as part of such deep
learning pipelines, because its hypothesis selection procedure is non-differentiable. In this work, we present two different ways to overcome this limitation. The most promising
approach is inspired by reinforcement learning, namely to
replace the deterministic hypothesis selection by a probabilistic selection for which we can derive the expected loss
w.r.t. to all learnable parameters. We call this approach
DSAC, the differentiable counterpart of RANSAC. We apply
DSAC to the problem of camera localization, where deep
learning has so far failed to improve on traditional approaches. We demonstrate that by directly minimizing the
expected loss of the output camera poses, robustly estimated
by RANSAC, we achieve an increase in accuracy. In the future, any deep learning pipeline can use DSAC as a robust
optimization component1 .

1. Introduction
Introduced in 1981, the random sample consensus
(RANSAC) algorithm [11] remains the most important algorithm for robust estimation. It is easy to implement, it
can be applied to a wide range of problems and it is able
to handle data with a substantial percentage of outliers,
i.e. data points that are not explained by the data model.
RANSAC and variants thereof [39, 28, 7] have, for many
years, been important tools in computer vision, including
multi-view geometry [16], object retrieval [29], pose estimation [36, 4] and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [27]. Solutions to these diverse tasks often involve a common strategy: Local predictions (e.g. feature
matches) induce a global model (e.g. a homography). In
1 We will make our source code publicly available on the DSAC project
website.

this schema, RANSAC provides robustness to erroneous local predictions.
Recently, deep learning has been shown to be highly
successful at image recognition tasks [37, 17, 13, 31],
and, increasingly, in other domains including geometry
[10, 19, 20, 9]. Part of this recent success is the ability to
perform end-to-end training, i.e. propagating gradients back
through an entire pipeline to allow the direct optimization of
a task-specific loss function, examples include [41, 1, 38].
In this work, we are interested in learning components of
a computer vision pipeline that follows the principle: predict locally, fit globally. As explained earlier, RANSAC is
an integral component of this wide-spread strategy. We ask
the question, whether we can train such a pipeline end-toend. More specifically, we want to learn parameters of a
convolutional neural network (CNN) such that models, fit
robustly to its predictions via RANSAC, minimize a task
specific loss function.
RANSAC works by first creating multiple model hypotheses from small, random subsets of data points. Then
it scores each hypothesis by determining its consensus with
all data points. Finally, RANSAC selects the hypothesis
with the highest consensus as the final output. Unfortunately, this hypothesis selection is non-differentiable, meaning that it cannot directly be used in an end-to-end-trained
deep learning pipeline.
A common approach within the deep learning community is to soften non-differentiable operators, e.g. argmax
in LIFT [41] or visual word assignment in NetVLAD [1]. In
the case of RANSAC, the non-differentiable operator is the
argmax operator which selects the highest scoring hypothesis. Similar to [41], we might substitute the argmax for a
soft argmax, which is a weighted average of arguments [6].
We indeed explore this direction but argue that this substitution changes the underlying principle of RANSAC. Instead
of learning how to select a good hypothesis, the pipeline
learns a (robust) average of hypotheses. We show experimentally that this approach learns to focus on a narrow selection of hypotheses and is prone to overfitting.
Alternatively, we aim to preserve the hard hypothesis selection but treat it as a probabilistic process. We call this

6684

