A Wide-Field-of-View Monocentric Light Field Camera
Donald G. Dansereau1 , Glenn Schuster2 , Joseph Ford2 , and Gordon Wetzstein1
1

Stanford University, Department of Electrical Engineering

donald.dansereau@gmail.com, gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu
2

University of California San Diego, Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
gschuster@ucsd.edu, jeford@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Light field (LF) capture and processing are important
in an expanding range of computer vision applications, offering rich textural and depth information and simplification of conventionally complex tasks. Although LF cameras are commercially available, no existing device offers
wide field-of-view (FOV) imaging. This is due in part to
the limitations of fisheye lenses, for which a fundamentally
constrained entrance pupil diameter severely limits depth
sensitivity. In this work we describe a novel, compact optical design that couples a monocentric lens with multiple
sensors using microlens arrays, allowing LF capture with
an unprecedented FOV. Leveraging capabilities of the LF
representation, we propose a novel method for efficiently
coupling the spherical lens and planar sensors, replacing
expensive and bulky fiber bundles. We construct a singlesensor LF camera prototype, rotating the sensor relative
to a fixed main lens to emulate a wide-FOV multi-sensor
scenario. Finally, we describe a processing toolchain, including a convenient spherical LF parameterization, and
demonstrate depth estimation and post-capture refocus for
indoor and outdoor panoramas with 15 × 15 × 1600 × 200
pixels (72 MPix) and a 138° FOV.

1. Introduction
Light ﬁeld (LF) cameras measure a rich 4D representation of light that encodes color, depth and higher-order
behaviours such as specularity, transparency, refraction and
occlusion [18]. Post-capture capabilities such as perspective shift, depth estimation, and refocus are well known
from consumer-grade LF cameras [24], and these also offer simpliﬁcation of an expanding range of tasks in computer vision [8–10, 26, 28]. A capability for wide ﬁeld of
view (FOV) LF capture would greatly beneﬁt a wide range
of applications from navigation in autonomous vehicles,

Figure 1. We demonstrate for the ﬁrst time the feasibility of a compact wide-FOV LF camera, building on prior work on monocentric
lenses and LF cameras. Shown here are a monocentric lens (right),
a conventional lens with similar FOV and resolution (left), and the
Lytro Illum (center). The monocentric lens achieves a large FOV
with a smaller f-number than the Illum in a tiny form factor.

recognition and tracking, and object segmentation and detection [12, 25, 27].
Unfortunately, wide-FOV LF imaging is currently restricted to either sequential-capture [3, 13, 37] or camera array [2] approaches. While the former restricts applications
to capturing static scenes, multi-camera arrays are usually
expensive and bulky. A limiting factor for building small,
low-cost, wide-FOV LF cameras is that wide angle lenses
are not easily adapted to LF capture. Fisheye lenses are
fundamentally limited in their entrance pupil, as depicted
in Fig. 2, offering only a very small baseline that prevents
effective capture of LF information. Catadioptric systems
employing curved mirrors are bulky, and in both catadioptric and ﬁsheye cases resolution is fundamentally limited to
that of a single sensor.
To overcome these fundamental limitations, optics designers have recently developed wide-FOV 2D imaging
techniques employing monocentric optics [4,29,33]. Mono-

5048

