LCR-Net: Localization-Classification-Regression for Human Pose
Grégory Rogez1
1

Inria∗

Philippe Weinzaepfel2
2

Cordelia Schmid1

Xerox Research Centre Europe

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end architecture for joint 2D and
3D human pose estimation in natural images. Key to our
approach is the generation and scoring of a number of pose
proposals per image, which allows us to predict 2D and
3D pose of multiple people simultaneously. Hence, our approach does not require an approximate localization of the
humans for initialization. Our architecture, named LCRNet, contains 3 main components: 1) the pose proposal generator that suggests potential poses at different locations in
the image; 2) a classifier that scores the different pose proposals; and 3) a regressor that refines pose proposals both
in 2D and 3D. All three stages share the convolutional feature layers and are trained jointly. The final pose estimation
is obtained by integrating over neighboring pose hypotheses, which is shown to improve over a standard non maximum suppression algorithm. Our approach significantly
outperforms the state of the art in 3D pose estimation on
Human3.6M, a controlled environment. Moreover, it shows
promising results on real images for both single and multiperson subsets of the MPII 2D pose benchmark.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art methods for 2D human pose estimation
in real images obtain excellent performance using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures [4, 19]. However, occlusion still remains a significant challenge as analyzed in [19]. Numerical evaluations do not clearly reflect this fact since occluded joints are often not labeled,
and never evaluated in standard datasets. In many cases of
occlusions, the pose is not ambiguous and can still be estimated entirely. One way to recover body part locations
in such cases is to reason about the full-body 3D pose.
Methods for 3D human pose understanding require training data that is only available through Motion Capture (MoCap) systems. Even if they show accurate pose estimation results (including occluded joints) in controlled environments, these approaches do not generalize well to real
images, with the exception of recent work based on data
∗ Thoth team, Inria, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, Grenoble, France.

Figure 1. Examples of joint 2D-3D pose detections in natural images. Even in case of occlusion or truncation, we estimate the joint
locations by reasoning in term of full-body 2D-3D poses.

synthesis that shows promising results in the wild [5, 23].
In this paper, we propose a method that results in multiple
full-body 2D and 3D pose hypotheses in different regions
of the image. These pose proposals are efficiently sampled,
scored and refined using an end-to-end CNN architecture
inspired by the latest work on object detection [22]. Finally,
the pose proposals are combined to estimate both the location and the 2D/3D pose of the individuals present in the
observed scene. Our method recovers full-body poses, even
when the persons are partially occluded or truncated by the
image boundary, see Figure 1.
CNNs have been used for full-body pose estimation both
13433

