Intrinsic Grassmann Averages for Online Linear and Robust Subspace Learning*
Rudrasis Chakraborty1 , Søren Hauberg2 and Baba C. Vemuri1
1
Department of CISE, University of Florida, FL 32611, USA
2
Technical University of Denmark, Richard Petersens Plads, Denmark
1

{rudrasischa, baba.vemuri}@gmail.com

Abstract
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a fundamental
method for estimating a linear subspace approximation to
high-dimensional data. Many algorithms exist in literature
to achieve a statistically robust version of PCA called RPCA.
In this paper, we present a geometric framework for computing the principal linear subspaces in both situations that
amounts to computing the intrinsic average on the space of
all subspaces (the Grassmann manifold). Points on this manifold are defined as the subspaces spanned by K-tuples of
observations. We show that the intrinsic Grassmann average
of these subspaces coincide with the principal components
of the observations when they are drawn from a Gaussian
distribution. Similar results are also shown to hold for the
RPCA. Further, we propose an efficient online algorithm
to do subspace averaging which is of linear complexity in
terms of number of samples and has a linear convergence
rate. When the data has outliers, our proposed online robust subspace averaging algorithm shows significant performance (accuracy and computation time) gain over a recently
published RPCA methods with publicly accessible code. We
have demonstrated competitive performance of our proposed
online subspace algorithm method on one synthetic and two
real data sets. Experimental results depicting stability of
our proposed method are also presented. Furthermore, on
two real outlier corrupted datasets, we present comparison
experiments showing lower reconstruction error using our
online RPCA algorithm. In terms of reconstruction error
and time required, both our algorithms outperform the competition.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA), a key work-horse
of machine learning, can be derived in many ways: Pearson [29] proposed to find the subspace that minimizes the
* This research was funded in part by the NSF grant IIS-1525431 to BCV.
SH was supported by a research grant (15334) from VILLUM FONDEN.

2

sohau@dtu.dk

projection error of the observed data; Hotelling [20] instead
sought the subspace in which the projected data has maximal
variance; and Tipping & Bishop [34] consider a probabilistic
formulation where the covariance of normally distributed
data is predominantly given by a low-rank matrix. All these
derivations lead to the same algorithm. Recently, Hauberg
et al. [18] noted that the average of all one-dimensional
subspaces spanned by normally distributed data coincides
with the leading principal component. Here the average is
computed over the Grassmann manifold of one-dimensional
subspaces (cf. Sec. 2). This average can be computed very
efficiently, but unfortunately their formulation does not generalize to higher-dimensional subspaces.
In this paper, we provide a formulation for estimating the
average K-dimensional subspace spanned by the observed
data, and present a very simple, parameter-free online algorithm for computing this average. When the data is normally
distributed, we show that this average subspace coincides
with that spanned by the leading K principal components.
We further show that our online algorithm has a linear convergence rate. Moreover, since our algorithm is online, it
has a linear complexity in terms of the number of samples.
Furthermore, we propose an online robust subspace averaging algorithm which can be used to get the leading K
robust principal components. Analogous to its non-robust
counterpart, it has a linear time complexity in terms of the
number of samples.

1.1. Related Work
In this paper we consider a simple linear dimensionality reduction algorithm that works in an online setting, i.e.
only uses each data point once. There are several existing
approaches in literature that tackle the online PCA and the
online Robust PCA problems and we discuss some of these
approaches here:
Oja’s rule [28] is a classic online estimator for the
leading principal components of a dataset. Given a basis Vt−1 ∈ RD×K this is updated recursively via Vt =
Vt−1 + γt Xt (XtT Vt−1 ) upon receiving the observation Xt .
Here γt is the step-size (learning rate) parameter that must be
16196

