Scalable Surface Reconstruction
from Point Clouds with Extreme Scale and Density Diversity
Christian Mostegel
Rudolf Prettenthaler
Friedrich Fraundorfer
Horst Bischof
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology ∗
{surname}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
In this paper we present a scalable approach for robustly
computing a 3D surface mesh from multi-scale multi-view
stereo point clouds that can handle extreme jumps of point
density (in our experiments three orders of magnitude). The
backbone of our approach is a combination of octree data
partitioning, local Delaunay tetrahedralization and graph
cut optimization. Graph cut optimization is used twice,
once to extract surface hypotheses from local Delaunay
tetrahedralizations and once to merge overlapping surface
hypotheses even when the local tetrahedralizations do not
share the same topology. This formulation allows us to obtain a constant memory consumption per sub-problem while
at the same time retaining the density independent interpolation properties of the Delaunay-based optimization. On
multiple public datasets, we demonstrate that our approach
is highly competitive with the state-of-the-art in terms of
accuracy, completeness and outlier resilience. Further, we
demonstrate the multi-scale potential of our approach by
processing a newly recorded dataset with 2 billion points
and a point density variation of more than four orders of
magnitude – requiring less than 9GB of RAM per process.

1. Introduction
In this work we focus on surface reconstruction from
multi-scale multi-view stereo (MVS) point clouds. These
point clouds receive increasing attention as their computation only requires simple 2D images as input. Thus the same
reconstruction techniques can be used for all kinds of 2D
images independent of the acquisition platform, including
satellites, airplanes, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
terrestrial mounts. These platforms allow to capture a scene
in a large variety of resolutions (aka scale levels or levels of
details). A multicopter UAV alone can vary the level of de∗ Results incorporated in this paper received funding from the European

Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 730294 and the EC FP7 project 3D-PITOTI (ICT-2011600545).

2.5 km

500 m

50 cm

50 m

5 cm

Figure 1. From kilometer to sub-millimeter. Our approach is capable to compute a consistently connected mesh even in the presence
of vast point density changes, while at the same time keeping a definable constant peak memory usage.

tail by roughly two orders of magnitude. If the point clouds
from different acquisition platforms are combined, there is
no limit to the possible variety of point density and 3D uncertainty. Further, the size of these point clouds can be immense. State-of-the-art MVS approaches [10, 11, 12, 28]
compute 3D points in the order of the total number of acquired pixels. This means that they generate 3D points in
the order of 107 per taken image with a modern camera. In
a few hours of time, it is thus possible to acquire images that
result in several billions of points.
Extracting a consistent surface mesh from this immense
amount of data is a non-trivial task, however, if such a mesh
could be extracted it would be a great benefit for virtual 3D
tourism. Instead of only being able to experience a city from

904

