PointNet: Deep Learning on Point Sets for 3D Classification and Segmentation
Input Point Cloud (point set representation)

Charles R. Qi*

Hao Su*
Kaichun Mo
Stanford University

Abstract
Point cloud is an important type of geometric data
structure. Due to its irregular format, most researchers
transform such data to regular 3D voxel grids or collections
of images. This, however, renders data unnecessarily
voluminous and causes issues. In this paper, we design a
novel type of neural network that directly consumes point
clouds, which well respects the permutation invariance of
points in the input. Our network, named PointNet, provides a unified architecture for applications ranging from
object classification, part segmentation, to scene semantic
parsing. Though simple, PointNet is highly efficient and
effective. Empirically, it shows strong performance on
par or even better than state of the art. Theoretically,
we provide analysis towards understanding of what the
network has learnt and why the network is robust with
respect to input perturbation and corruption.

1. Introduction
In this paper we explore deep learning architectures
capable of reasoning about 3D geometric data such as
point clouds or meshes. Typical convolutional architectures
require highly regular input data formats, like those of
image grids or 3D voxels, in order to perform weight
sharing and other kernel optimizations. Since point clouds
or meshes are not in a regular format, most researchers
typically transform such data to regular 3D voxel grids or
collections of images (e.g, views) before feeding them to
a deep net architecture. This data representation transformation, however, renders the resulting data unnecessarily
voluminous — while also introducing quantization artifacts
that can obscure natural invariances of the data.
For this reason we focus on a different input representation for 3D geometry using simply point clouds
– and name our resulting deep nets PointNets. Point
clouds are simple and unified structures that avoid the
combinatorial irregularities and complexities of meshes,
and thus are easier to learn from. The PointNet, however,
* indicates equal contributions.

Leonidas J. Guibas

PointNet
mug?
table?
car?
Classification

Part Segmentation

Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1. Applications of PointNet. We propose a novel deep net
architecture that consumes raw point cloud (set of points) without
voxelization or rendering. It is a unified architecture that learns
both global and local point features, providing a simple, efficient
and effective approach for a number of 3D recognition tasks.

still has to respect the fact that a point cloud is just a
set of points and therefore invariant to permutations of its
members, necessitating certain symmetrizations in the net
computation. Further invariances to rigid motions also need
to be considered.
Our PointNet is a unified architecture that directly
takes point clouds as input and outputs either class labels
for the entire input or per point segment/part labels for
each point of the input. The basic architecture of our
network is surprisingly simple as in the initial stages each
point is processed identically and independently. In the
basic setting each point is represented by just its three
coordinates (x, y, z). Additional dimensions may be added
by computing normals and other local or global features.
Key to our approach is the use of a single symmetric
function, max pooling. Effectively the network learns a
set of optimization functions/criteria that select interesting
or informative points of the point cloud and encode the
reason for their selection. The final fully connected layers
of the network aggregate these learnt optimal values into the
global descriptor for the entire shape as mentioned above
(shape classification) or are used to predict per point labels
(shape segmentation).
Our input format is easy to apply rigid or affine transformations to, as each point transforms independently. Thus
we can add a data-dependent spatial transformer network
that attempts to canonicalize the data before the PointNet
processes them, so as to further improve the results.
1652

