See the Forest for the Trees: Joint Spatial and Temporal Recurrent Neural
Networks for Video-based Person Re-identification
Zhen Zhou1,3
Yan Huang1,3
Wei Wang1,3
Liang Wang1,2,3
Tieniu Tan1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
{zzhou, yhuang, wangwei, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Surveillance cameras have been widely used in different scenes. Accordingly, a demanding need is to recognize
a person under different cameras, which is called person
re-identification. This topic has gained increasing interests in computer vision recently. However, less attention
has been paid to video-based approaches, compared with
image-based ones. Two steps are usually involved in previous approaches, namely feature learning and metric learning. But most of the existing approaches only focus on either feature learning or metric learning. Meanwhile, many
of them do not take full use of the temporal and spatial information. In this paper, we concentrate on video-based
person re-identification and build an end-to-end deep neural network architecture to jointly learn features and metrics. The proposed method can automatically pick out the
most discriminative frames in a given video by a temporal attention model. Moreover, it integrates the surrounding
information at each location by a spatial recurrent model when measuring the similarity with another pedestrian
video. That is, our method handles spatial and temporal
information simultaneously in a unified manner. The carefully designed experiments on three public datasets show
the effectiveness of each component of the proposed deep
network, performing better in comparison with the state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
The person re-identification research aims to develop
methods for matching pedestrian images/videos under two
non-overlapping cameras. It draws increasing attention in
computer vision because of a wide range of potential applications, such as the security in public places and criminal

Figure 1: The top tries to explain that different frames in an
image sequence provide different information. In this case,
we want to recognize a girl wearing skirt. So “good” frames
are those where the girl can be clearly watched, marked by
green ticks. While “bad” ones are marked by red crosses
and less important ones are marked by gray questions. The
bottom is to illustrate that when matching two image sequences, we need to consider the surrounding pixels around
each location. The figures throughout this paper are best
viewed in colors.
investigation. And more importantly, deep neural networks have shown to be effective for person re-identification,
and have achieved much better performance than traditional
methods [1, 6, 9, 12, 13, 18, 25, 36, 38].
In general, person re-identification methods can be classified into two categories, i.e., single static image-based approaches and the video-based ones. A large portion of existing works lies in the former category [7, 21, 28, 32, 33, 34]
while only a few belong to the latter. Actually, video-based
person re-identification is closer to practical applications since we do not need to manually pick out the desired im4321
4747

