Non-contact full field vibration measurement based on phase-shifting
Hiroyuki Kayaba
Nikon Corporation, Japan

Yuji Kokumai
Nikon Corporation, Japan

Hiroyuki.Kayaba@nikon.com

Yuji.Kokumai@nikon.com

Abstract
Vibration measurement systems are widely used in the
industry. A variety of vibration measurement techniques
are proposed, including methods using an acceleration sensor, a laser displacement meter, and tracking a marker with
a camera. However, these methods have limitations that
allow only one point to be measured and require markers. We present a novel, non-contact full field joint measurement technique both of vibrations and shape based on
phase-shifting. Our key idea is to acquire the frequency of
vibrating objects using FFT to analyze the phase-shift error
of vibrating objects. Our proposed algorithm estimates the
phase-shift error by iterating frame-to-frame optimization
and pixel-to-pixel optimization. A feature of our approach
is to measure the surface of vibration at different frequencies without markers or texture in full fields. Our developed
system is a low cost system, which is composed of a digitallight-processing (DLP) projector and camera (100 frames
per second). The results of our experiments show that low
frequency vibration of objects can be measured in a noncontact manner with high accuracy. Also, reconstruction
of the vibrating object surface can be performed with high
accuracy.

1. Introduction
Measurement of 3D shapes is quite important in many
fields ranging from manufacturing to medicine [3]. This
technique is widely used in fields such as computer vision,
robot navigation, computer graphics, and preservation of
heritage [22]. Therefore, numerous techniques have been
developed so far to acquire the 3D shape of an object. The
phase-shifting technique has been studied and widely used
in many fields due to its high accuracy. Furthermore, a 3D
measurement technique for estimating vibration has been
proposed. In recent years, there is a growing demand for
measurement of vibrating objects in industrial and research
fields. For instance, vibration measurement is used to check
for part defects, perform building maintenance, and observe
the effect of vibration on targets such as a vibrating car en-

gine. A variety of vibration measurement techniques based
on a laser displacement meter and image processing such as
marker tracking or optical flow have been developed. However, the typical vibration measurement systems require that
many markers be placed on the objects and also require a
rich texture object. These techniques require use of a high
resolution, high speed camera. Moreover, a laser displacement meter has further drawbacks in that it cannot measure
the entire surface of an object at the same time. These sensors usually measures one point on the surface of an object.
Therefore, we developed a novel, non-contact full field vibration measurement method for a vibrating object surface
without the need for markers or rich textures.
Our key idea is to estimate the frequency of a vibrating object by analyzing the phase-shift error. Our proposed algorithm estimates the phase-shift error from iterative optimization, on a pixel-to-pixel basis and on frame-to-frame
basis. In pixel-to-pixel optimization, the variables which
represent the DC component of the sinusoidal fringe pattern, amplitude component, and initial phase are estimated.
In frame-to-frame optimization, the variables which represent phase-shifting offset are estimated. The technique
to solve this problem was developed by assuming constant acceleration motion for the movement of vibrating objects [23]. However, the above technique cannot deal with
vibration for movement with non-constant velocity. In general, the movement of vibrating objects usually includes
translation and rotation motion. This movement is nonlinear movement. Therefore, we have developed a method
that corrects phase-shift errors using iterative optimization.
Also, the frequency of a vibrating object is measured by analyzing the estimated phase-shift error during measurement.
Our measurement system is composed of a DLP projector
and a synchronized camera. This system can measure low
frequency vibration of objects. Our system’s limitation is
based on the sampling theorem since a sinusoidal pattern
for calculating phase is projected. The detectable frequency
of our system is limited by the camera frame rate.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes re-

3655

