Learning Non-Lambertian Object Intrinsics across ShapeNet Categories
Jian Shi
SKLCS, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Yue Dong
Microsoft Research Asia
yuedong@microsoft.com

shij@ios.ac.cn

Hao Su
Stanford University

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI

haosu@cs.stanford.edu

stellayu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We focus on the non-Lambertian object-level intrinsic
problem of recovering diffuse albedo, shading, and specular highlights from a single image of an object. Based on
existing 3D models in the ShapeNet database, a large-scale
object intrinsics database is rendered with HDR environment maps. Millions of synthetic images of objects and their
corresponding albedo, shading, and specular ground-truth
images are used to train an encoder-decoder CNN, which
can decompose an image into the product of albedo and
shading components along with an additive specular component. Our CNN delivers accurate and sharp results in this
classical inverse problem of computer vision. Evaluated on
our realistically synthetic dataset, our method consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large margin.
We train and test our CNN across different object categories. Perhaps surprising especially from the CNN classification perspective, our intrinsics CNN generalizes very
well across categories. Our analysis shows that feature
learning at the encoder stage is more crucial for developing a universal representation across categories. We apply our model to real images and videos from Internet, and
observe robust and realistic intrinsics results. Quality nonLambertian intrinsics could open up many interesting applications such as realistic product search based on material
properties and image-based albedo / specular editing.

Figure 1: Specularity is everywhere on objects around us
and is essential for our material perception. Our task is
to decompose an image of a single object into its nonLambertian intrinsics components that include not only
albedo and shading, but also specular highlights. We build a
large-scale object non-Lambertian intrinsics database based
on the ShapeNet dataset, and render millions of synthetic
images with specular materials and environment maps. We
train an encoder-decoder CNN that delivers much sharper
and more accurate results than the prior art of direct intrinsics (DI). Our work enables realistic applications of intrinsics to image-based albedo and specular editing.

1. Introduction
Specular reflection is common to objects encountered in
our daily life. However, existing intrinsic image decomposition algorithms, e.g. SIRFS [4] and Direct Intrinsics
(DI) [22], only deal with Lambertian or diffuse reflection.
Such mismatching between the reality of images and the
model assumption often leads to large errors in the intrinsic

image decomposition of real images (Fig. 1).
In this paper, our target is to handle specular reflection
and solve non-Lambertian object intrinsics from a single
image. According to optical imaging physics, we extend
the old Lambertian model to a non-Lambertian model with
the specular component as an additive residue term:

1685

