WILDCAT: Weakly Supervised Learning of Deep ConvNets for Image
Classification, Pointwise Localization and Segmentation
Thibaut Durand(1)⋆ , Taylor Mordan(1,2)⋆ , Nicolas Thome(3) , Matthieu Cord(1)
(1) Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, LIP6 UMR 7606, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
(2) Thales Optronique S.A.S., 2 Avenue Gay Lussac, 78990 Élancourt, France
(3) CEDRIC - Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, 292 rue St Martin, 75003 Paris, France
{thibaut.durand, taylor.mordan, nicolas.thome, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces WILDCAT, a deep learning
method which jointly aims at aligning image regions for
gaining spatial invariance and learning strongly localized
features. Our model is trained using only global image labels and is devoted to three main visual recognition tasks:
image classification, weakly supervised pointwise object localization and semantic segmentation. WILDCAT extends
state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Networks at three
major levels: the use of Fully Convolutional Networks for
maintaining spatial resolution, the explicit design in the network of local features related to different class modalities,
and a new way to pool these features to provide a global image prediction required for weakly supervised training. Extensive experiments show that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, deep learning and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become state-of-theart methods for visual recognition, including image classification [34, 56, 28], object detection [21, 20, 10] or semantic
segmentation [8, 42, 9]. CNNs often require a huge number
of training examples: a common practice is to use models
pre-trained on large scale datasets, e.g. ImageNet [53], and
to fine tune them on the target domain.
Regarding spatial information, there is however a large
shift between ImageNet, which essentially contains centered objects, and other common datasets, e.g. VOC or
MS COCO, containing several objects and strong scale and
translation variations. To optimally perform domain adaptation in this context, it becomes necessary to align informative image regions, e.g. by detecting objects [44, 29],
⋆ equal contribution
This research was supported by a DGA-MRIS scholarship.

(a) original image

(b) final predictions

(c) dog heatmap 1 (head)

(d) dog heatmap 2 (legs)

Figure 1. WILDCAT example performing localization and segmentation (b), based on different class-specific modalities, here
head (c) and legs (d) for the dog class.

parts [68, 69, 70, 35] or context [23, 13]. Although some
works incorporate more precise annotations during training,
e.g. bounding boxes [43, 21], the increased annotation cost
prevents its widespread use, especially for large datasets
and pixel-wise labeling, i.e. segmentation masks [3].
In this paper, we propose WILDCAT (Weakly supervIsed Learning of Deep Convolutional neurAl neTworks),
a method to learn localized visual features related to class
modalities, e.g. heads or legs for a dog – see Figure 1(c)
and 1(d). The proposed model can be used to perform image classification as well as weakly supervised pointwise
object localization and segmentation (Figure 1(b)).
The overall architecture of WILDCAT (Figure 2) improves existing deep Weakly Supervised Learning (WSL)
models at three major levels. Firstly, we make use of the
latest Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) as back-end
module, e.g. ResNet [28] (left of Figure 2). FCNs have
recently shown outstanding preformances for fully super-

642

