Diverse Image Annotation
Baoyuan Wu†,‡ Fan Jia† Wei Liu‡ Bernard Ghanem†
†
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
‡
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
wubaoyuan1987@gmail.com

fan.jia@kaust.edu.sa

wliu@ee.columbia.edu

bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
In this work, we study a new image annotation task
called diverse image annotation (DIA). Its goal is to describe an image using a limited number of tags, whereby
the retrieved tags need to cover as much useful information
about the image as possible. As compared to the conventional image annotation task, DIA requires the tags to be
not only representative of the image but also diverse from
each other, so as to reduce redundancy. To this end, we treat
DIA as a subset selection problem, based on the conditional
determinantal point process (DPP) model, which encodes
representation and diversity jointly. We further explore semantic hierarchy and synonyms among candidate tags to
define weighted semantic paths. It is encouraged that two
tags with the same semantic path are not retrieved simultaneously for the same image. This restriction is embedded
into the algorithm used to sample from the learned conditional DPP model. Interestingly, we find that conventional
metrics for image annotation (e.g., precision, recall, and
F1 score) only consider an overall representative capacity of all the retrieved tags, while ignoring their diversity.
Thus, we propose new semantic metrics based on our proposed weighted semantic paths. An extensive subject study
verifies that the proposed metrics are much more consistent
with human evaluation than conventional annotation metrics. Experiments on two benchmark datasets show that the
proposed method produces more representative and diverse
tags, compared with existing methods.

1. Introduction
Image annotation aims to provide keyword tags to describe an image. It not only presents a simple way to understand the image’s content, but also provides useful information for other tasks, such as object detection [12] or
caption generation [6][33][14]. Many existing methods for
image annotation are designed to produce a complete list of
tags that cover all contents of an image, such as ML-MG
[30] and FastTag [5]. We argue that such a complete list

Figure 1. This image with its complete tag list is extracted from
the ESP Game [26] dataset. We also show the annotated tags by
ML-MG [30] and our method using 3 and 5 tags, respectively.
Obviously our tags are more representative and diverse than the
tags of ML-MG. Note that the tag list of our method is obtained
from sampling, so the tag orders in 3 and 5 tags could be different.

is unnecessary in many cases, especially when redundancy
exists among the retrieved tags. We also argue that conventional metrics used to evaluate annotation methods (e.g.,
precision, recall or F1 score) should be modified to discourage such redundancy. We will motivate these two points
with an example. In Figure 1, the drummer image has the
following complete (ground truth) tag list: {“band”, “music”, “light”, “man”, “people”, “person”, “colors”, “red”,
“wheel”}. Obviously, there are several redundancies in this
list, including “people” and “person” or “colors” and “red”.
Clearly, this image can be described using a more compact
list (e.g., {“band”, “light”, “man”, “red”, “wheel”}), which
describes the same content of the image as the complete
list, but it is more diverse as it avoids redundancy. Moreover, there is usually an upper limit to the number of tags
in the retrieved list for real-world applications. For example, in a crowd-sourced image annotation task, we may ask
the human annotator to give at most k (e.g., 3 or 5) tags
for each image. Also, this upper limit naturally arises even
when annotators are not confined to a specific number of
tags, since they choose not to generate a longer list than
necessary. As we will show in our experiments, the average size of the tag subsets to describe every image in ESP
Game [26] and IAPRTC-12 [11] is around 5 (see Table 1).
Based on our subject studies (see Section 5.4), annotators
do tend to choose more diverse tags, which hints to the fact

2559

