Co-Occurrence Filter
Roy J. Jevnisek
Tel-Aviv University

Shai Avidan
Tel-Aviv University

jernisek@post.tau.ac.il

avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Co-occurrence Filter (CoF) is a boundary preserving filter. It is based on the Bilateral Filter (BF) but instead of
using a Gaussian on the range values to preserve edges
it relies on a co-occurrence matrix. Pixel values that cooccur frequently in the image (i.e., inside textured regions)
will have a high weight in the co-occurrence matrix. This,
in turn, means that such pixel pairs will be averaged and
hence smoothed, regardless of their intensity differences.
On the other hand, pixel values that rarely co-occur (i.e.,
across texture boundaries) will have a low weight in the
co-occurrence matrix. As a result, they will not be averaged
and the boundary between them will be preserved. The CoF
therefore extends the BF to deal with boundaries, not just
edges. It learns co-occurrences directly from the image. We
can achieve various filtering results by directing it to learn
the co-occurrence matrix from a part of the image, or a different image. We give the definition of the filter, discuss how
to use it with color images and show several use cases.

1. Introduction
There is a long and rich history of edge-preserving filters.
These filters smooth the image while preserving its edges.
This begs the question: what is an edge? The overwhelming
answer in edge-preserving filter literature is that an edge is
a sharp discontinuity in intensity value.
Recent edge detectors give a different answer to this
question. Instead of focusing on edge detection, they focus
on boundary detection where the goal is to detect boundaries between textures. That is, edges within texture should
be ignored while edges that serve as boundaries between
textures should be marked.
Our goal is to design a boundary preserving filter that
will smooth edges within a textured region and not across
texture boundaries.
Co-occurrence Filter (CoF) is the happy marriage of
boundary detection and edge preserving filters. It combines
ideas from the edge detection literature directly into the filtering process. As a result, there is no need for a two-stage

solution.
We start with the Bilateral Filter (BF), which is a well
known edge-preserving filter. The output of the BF at a reference pixel is a weighted average of pixels in its neighborhood. The BF mixes pixel values based on two Gaussians.
The spatial Gaussian assigns weight based on proximity
in the image plane and the range Gaussian assigns weight
based on similarity in appearance. As a result, nearby pixels with small intensity differences will mix, while pixels
that are far away or with large intensity difference will not.
This gives the BF its edge-preserving power.
Because of the way it is defined, the BF can not distinguish between edges within a texture and edges between
textures. This is where Co-occurrence information steps
in. The Co-occurrence Filter (CoF), that we propose, replaces the range Gaussian filter of the BF with a normalized
co-occurrence matrix. Pixel values that co-occur frequently
(i.e., in a textured region) will have a high weight and will
therefore mix together. This way texture will be smoothed.
On the other hand, pixel values that rarely co-occur (i.e., on
the boundary between textures) will have a low weight and
will therefore not mix. This way smoothing will not occur
across texture boundaries.
Figure 1 shows that CoF is about texture and not about
edge strength. The input image consists of two regions
(dark on the left side and light on the right side) corrupted
by white Gaussian noise. In addition, there are several
patches with checkerboard pattern spread across the image
plane. The intensity difference between the two regions
is lower than that of the checkerboard. The co-occurrence
matrix computed from that image gives high weight to the
Gaussian noise and the checkerboard texture because they
are prevalent in the image. It gives a low weight to the
boundary between the two regions of the image, because
it is quite a rare phenomenon. CoF filters out the noise and
smooths out the checkerboard patches while keeping sharp
boundaries between the different textures.
The proposed filter enjoys a couple of advantages. First,
there is no parameter tweaking, as it collects co-occurrence
information directly from the image. Second, the user
can specify from where the filter should collect the co13184

