Model-based Iterative Restoration for Binary Document Image Compression
with Dictionary Learning
Yandong Guo1 ∗
Cheng Lu2
Jan P. Allebach3
Charles A. Bouman3
2
3
Microsoft Research
Sony Electronics Inc.
Purdue University at West Lafayette

1

yandong.guo@microsoft.com, cheng.lu@am.sony.com, {allebach, bouman}@purdue.edu

Abstract
The inherent noise in the observed (e.g., scanned) binary
document image degrades the image quality and harms the
compression ratio through breaking the pattern repentance
and adding entropy to the document images. In this paper, we design a cost function in Bayesian framework with
dictionary learning. Minimizing our cost function produces
a restored image which has better quality than that of the
observed noisy image, and a dictionary for representing
and encoding the image. After the restoration, we use this
dictionary (from the same cost function) to encode the restored image following the symbol-dictionary framework by
JBIG2 standard with the lossless mode. Experimental results with a variety of document images demonstrate that
our method improves the image quality compared with the
observed image, and simultaneously improves the compression ratio. For the test images with synthetic noise, our
method reduces the number of flipped pixels by 48.2% and
improves the compression ratio by 36.36% as compared
with the best encoding methods. For the test images with
real noise, our method visually improves the image quality, and outperforms the cutting-edge method by 28.27% in
terms of the compression ratio.

1. Introduction
To have binary document images with better quality and
smaller sizes are the two goals that have been pursued for
decades. The high compression ratio of document images
mainly relies on the information redundancy embedded in
the repeated patterns of the document image, as well as an
intelligent way to leverage this pattern repentance.
Unfortunately, when the document image is obtained
through scanning or other imaging devices, noise is inevitably introduced. This inherent noise breaks the pattern
repentance, increases the entropy, and therefore lowers the
∗ This research work was done when Yandong Guo and Cheng Lu were
Ph.D. students at Purdue University.

(a)
Unknown,
original image

(b) Input: noisy
observation

(c) Restored by
our method

Figure 1. The imaging and compression pipeline for document
images. In the bottom area of the figure, we zoom in the document
image to visualize the details of the two characters “l”. As shown
in subfigure (b), the input of our system contains noise inevitably
introduced by using the imaging device (scanners, cameras, etc.).
Our method restores the input noisy image and compresses the
restored image. As shown in subfigure (c), our method successfully removes the noise and maintains/recovers the very fine details (one-pixel width stroke). Moreover, we present in Sec. 5 that
encoding our restored images, compared with encoding the observed images, improves the compression ratio by 36.36% in the
synthetic noise setup and 28.27% in the real noise setup.

compression ratio. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the same letter “l” look different from each other in the observed image,
though they used to have the same typeface and font size in
the original image in Figure 1 (a). The stroke lost its smooth
boundary in the observed image. In most of the scenarios,
only the observed noisy images are available. More examples are shown in Figure 4 and 7.
Conventionally, there are two options to compress these
observed images. In the first option, people encode the observed image as it is (lossless mode). In this case, the quality of the compressed image is equal to the quality of the observed image, while a significant portion of the bits are used
to store nothing but noise. Option two is the lossy mode,
which tends to have high compression ratio, but would typically make the image quality worse than the quality of the
observed image input, or even introduces semantic errors to
15984

