Single Image Reflection Suppression
Nikolaos Arvanitopoulos, Radhakrishna Achanta and Sabine Süsstrunk
School of Computer and Communication Sciences (IC)
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
{nick.arvanitopoulos,radhakrishna.achanta,sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Reflections are a common artifact in images taken
through glass windows. Automatically removing the reflection artifacts after the picture is taken is an ill-posed
problem. Attempts to solve this problem using optimization
schemes therefore rely on various prior assumptions from
the physical world. Instead of removing reflections from
a single image, which has met with limited success so far,
we propose a novel approach to suppress reflections. It is
based on a Laplacian data fidelity term and an l0 gradient
sparsity term imposed on the output. With experiments on
artificial and real-world images we show that our reflection
suppression method performs better than the state-of-theart reflection removal techniques.

1. Introduction
Images taken through glass or windows often contain undesirable reflections. It is possible to minimize their effect by using special hardware, multiple images, or manual post-processing. For example, professional photographers use polarizing filters to mitigate, if not eliminate,
reflection artifacts. Similarly, using multiple photographs
taken with small displacements makes the problem easier to
tackle [5, 6, 11, 14, 18, 20, 21, 24]. However, given the skill
and resources of an average user, none of these methods are
feasible. For everyday photography done with consumer
grade cameras, we need single image reflection removal.
Barrow and Tenenbaum [2] first presented a linear model
assumption for an image Y that contains reflections as a
sum of two other images (or layers) as follows:
Y = T + R,

(a) Original Image

(b) Our result

Figure 1. Our reflection suppression method applied on a realworld image taken through a glass window. Notice how we succeed in suppressing the reflections and yet preserve the details of
the original image.

Existing approaches for reflection removal from a single
image rely on natural image priors to formulate objective
functions. Depending on the nature of these priors, all methods have their specific limitations. We discuss these limitations with experiments conducted on synthetic images.
Instead of trying to separate transmission and reflection
from the original image, we develop an algorithm whose
output is an image where reflections are suppressed (see
Fig. 1). This makes the problem more tractable. We propose a novel and efficient optimization function, which is
based on an l0 prior on the gradient sparsity of the transmission layer. Additionally, we propose a data fidelity term
that penalizes the difference between the Laplacian of the
input image and the desired transmission layer.
We show that our formulation provides better reflection
suppression and color reproduction results than the state-ofthe-art in single image reflection removal on both real and
synthetic images. Our main contributions are:

(1)

• We propose a novel and computationally tractable single image reflection suppression algorithm based on
an l0 gradient sparsity prior and on a Laplacian data
fidelity term.

n×m

where Y 2 R
is the observed image and T, R are the
transmission and reflection layers, respectively. Since we
have one equation for two unknowns, this problem is highly
ill-posed. Methods to solve the problem have to impose
constraints based on assumptions from the physical world
and prior knowledge.

• We conduct quantitative experiments on synthetic images that we create based on reflection model assump-

4498

