Group-Wise Point-Set Registration based on Rényi’s Second Order Entropy
Luis G. Sanchez Giraldo
University of Miami, FL, USA
lgsanchez@cs.miami.edu

Erion Hasanbelliu, Murali Rao, Jose C. Principe
University of Florida, FL, USA
ehasanbelliu@gmail.com, mrao@ufl.edu, principe@cnel.ufl.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we describe a set of robust algorithms
for group-wise registration using both rigid and non-rigid
transformations of multiple unlabelled point-sets with no
bias toward a given set. These methods mitigate the need
to establish a correspondence among the point-sets by representing them as probability density functions where the
registration is treated as a multiple distribution alignment.
Holder’s and Jensen’s inequalities provide a notion of similarity/distance among point-sets and Rényi’s second order
entropy yields a closed-form solution to the cost function
and update equations. We also show that the methods can
be improved by normalizing the entropy with a scale factor.
These provide simple, fast and accurate algorithms to compute the spatial transformation function needed to register
multiple point-sets. The algorithms are compared against
two well-known methods for group-wise point-set registration. The results show an improvement in both accuracy
and computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Point-set registration is a common problem in computer
vision, pattern recognition, medical imaging, robotics, and
many other fields. Tasks such as image registration, face
recognition, object tracking, image stitching or 3D object
fusion all require registration of features/point-sets. Features representing an object’s contour or other distinguishing characteristics are extracted from an image and compared against those of other objects or templates, where
first, a correspondence between the point-sets is established,
and then, the spatial transformation that aligns them is retrieved. A similarity measure is used to compare the pointsets, where the choice depends on the object features and
the problem.
The research community has developed many techniques
to solve point-set registration. The iterative closest point
(ICP) algorithm [1] is the most popular method, which uses
the nearest neighbour relationship to assign binary correspondence and then determines the least squares transfor-

mation relating the point-sets. The method is very simple,
but it exhibits local convergence due to a non-differentiable
cost function. In addition, it suffers in the presence of outliers and is not suitable for non-rigid transformations. Robust point matching (RPM) [4] improves upon ICP by employing a global to local search and soft assignment for the
correspondence. The method jointly determines the correspondence and the transformation between the two point-sets
via deterministic annealing and soft-assignment. However,
the method is not stable in the presence of outliers, and
due to the soft-assignment approach, the complexity of the
method is high.
To eliminate the point correspondence requirement, a
global approach is taken where the point-sets are represented as probability density functions (PDF). Tsin and
Kanade [21] were the first to propose such a method where
they modelled the two point-sets as kernel density functions and evaluated their similarity and transformation updates using the kernel correlation between the two density estimates. Glaunes et al. [8] matched the two pointsets by representing them as weighted sums of Dirac delta
functions, where Gaussian functions were used to ‘soften’
the Dirac delta functions and diffeomorphic transformations
were used to minimize the distance between the two distributions. Jian and Vemuri [12], [13] extended this approach
by representing the densities as Gaussian mixture models
(GMM). They derive a closed-form expression to compute
the L2 distance between the two Gaussian mixtures and the
update method to align the two point-sets.
All these methods are limited to registering only a pair
of point-sets. In certain applications, such as medical image registration, there is a need to simultaneously register
a group of point-sets. None of these methods is directly
extendible to group-wise alignment of multiple point-sets.
In addition, these methods are all biased (unidirectional update) where one point-set acts as the target and the other is
transformed to align with it. In applications where groupwise registration is required, there may not be an actual
template to match against (e.g. medical images). Therefore, there is a need to determine a middle, common orientation/position to align the point-sets. Estimating a meaning16693

