Visual Translation Embedding Network for Visual Relation Detection
Hanwang Zhang† , Zawlin Kyaw‡ , Shih-Fu Chang† , Tat-Seng Chua‡
†

Columbia University, ‡ National University of Singapore

{hanwangzhang, kzl.zawlin}@gmail.com; sfchang@ee.columbia.edu; dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
We are witnessing the impressive development in connecting computer vision and natural language, from the arguably mature visual detection [16, 35] to the burgeoning
visual captioning and question answering [2, 4]. However,
most existing efforts to the latter vision-language tasks attempt to directly bridge the visual model (e.g., CNN) and
the language model (e.g., RNN), but fall short in modeling
and understanding the relationships between objects. As
a result, poor generalization ability was observed as those
models are often optimized on specialized datasets for speciﬁc tasks such as image captioning or image QA. [17, 40].
As illustrated in Figure 1, we take a step forward from

Low-level
Vision

Visual
Relation

CNN

Visual relations, such as “person ride bike” and “bike
next to car”, offer a comprehensive scene understanding
of an image, and have already shown their great utility in
connecting computer vision and natural language. However, due to the challenging combinatorial complexity of
modeling subject-predicate-object relation triplets, very little work has been done to localize and predict visual relations. Inspired by the recent advances in relational representation learning of knowledge bases and convolutional
object detection networks, we propose a Visual Translation
Embedding network (VTransE) for visual relation detection.
VTransE places objects in a low-dimensional relation space
where a relation can be modeled as a simple vector translation, i.e., subject + predicate ≈ object. We propose a novel
feature extraction layer that enables object-relation knowledge transfer in a fully-convolutional fashion that supports
training and inference in a single forward/backward pass.
To the best of our knowledge, VTransE is the ﬁrst end-toend relation detection network. We demonstrate the effectiveness of VTransE over other state-of-the-art methods on
two large-scale datasets: Visual Relationship and Visual
Genome. Note that even though VTransE is a purely visual
model, it is still competitive to the Lu’s multi-modal model
with language priors [27].

verb

spatial

person - talk - person

clock - above - person

preposition

comparative

car - with - wheel

High-level
Language

person - taller - person

Image Captioning

Visual QA

The man in red is
talking with the man in
gray on a street.

Q: What color is the
jacket of the man
under the clock?
A: Gray

RNN

Figure 1. We focus on detecting visual relations (dashed boxes in
the middle layer) in this paper. Different from the direct connection between low-level vision and high-level language, visual relations offer the direct understanding of object interactions, which
provide further semantic information for applications such as image captioning and QA.

the lower-level object detection and a step backward from
the higher-level language modeling, focusing on the visual relations between objects in an image. We refer to
a visual relation as a subject-predicate-object
triplet1 , where the predicate can be verb (person1-talkperson2), spatial (clock-above-person2), preposition (car-with-wheel), and comparative (person1taller-person2) [23, 27]. Visual relations naturally
bridge the vision and language by placing objects in a semantic context of what, where, and how objects are connected with each other. For example, if we can detect
clock-above-person2 and person2-wear-jacket
successfully, the reasoning behind the answer “gray” to the
question asked in Figure 1 will be explicitly interpretable
using dataset-independent inference, e.g., QA over knowl1 When the context is clear, we always refer to object in normal font as
a general object and object in teletype to the tail object in a relation.

15532

