Link the head to the “beak”: Zero Shot Learning
from Noisy Text Description at Part Precision
Mohamed Elhoseiny1,2∗ , Yizhe Zhu1∗ , Han Zhang1 , and Ahmed Elgammal1
elhoseiny@fb.com, yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu, {han.zhang, elgammal}@cs.rutgers.edu
1
Rutgers University, Department of Computer Science, 2 Facebook AI Research
Abstract
In this paper, we study learning visual classifiers from unstructured text descriptions at part precision with no training
images. We propose a learning framework that is able to connect text terms to its relevant parts and suppress connections
to non-visual text terms without any part-text annotations.
For instance, this learning process enables terms like “beak”
to be sparsely linked to the visual representation of parts
like head, while reduces the effect of non-visual terms like
“migrate” on classifier prediction. Images are encoded by a
part-based CNN that detect bird parts and learn part-specific
representation. Part-based visual classifiers are predicted
from text descriptions of unseen visual classifiers to facilitate classification without training images (also known as
zero-shot recognition). We performed our experiments on
CUBirds 2011 dataset and improves the state-of-the-art textbased zero-shot recognition results from 34.7% to 43.6%.
We also created large scale benchmarks on North American
Bird Images augmented with text descriptions, where we also
show that our approach outperforms existing methods. Our
code, data, and models are publically available link [1].

1. Introduction
Recognizing visual categories only from the class description is an appealing characteristic of human learning
and generalization, which is desirable to be modeled for
better machine intelligence. This problem is known as “zeroshot” learning/classification. In practice, this is motivated by
the lack of annotated training data for most object categories
and especially at the fine-grained level, which has been observed by several researches (e.g., [40, 52]). For instance,
there exist tens of thousands of bird categories among which
images are available for only few-hundred-categories in existing datasets (< 5%) [48]. Some bird categories are scarce
in the real-world– it is very hard to find the “Crested ibis”
around us and even in a zoo.
Earlier zero-shot recognition methods rely on describing
* Both authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1. People can learn from text descriptions at part-level

visual classes by a set of semantically meaningful properties known as attributes [16, 24]. The underlying principle behind the success of attributes on zero-shot learning
is that they are modeled as an intermediate layer between
class labels and images, which enable transfer of shared concepts/attributes from seen classes to unseen classes. More
recent attribute methods improve the information transfer
across classes by joint embedding of images and attributes
[4, 49, 10, 5]. While attributes can semantically describe
classes with human interpretability without any images, they
typically require domain experts to be defined. It is also necessary to collect hundreds of these attribute annotations for
each of the seen and unseen classes which is discouraging.
Towards reducing the gap between machine and human
intelligence on this task, recent methods [14, 26, 6, 36]
explored zero-shot learning from online text descriptions,
which in turn avoids the burden of heavy attributes annotations for each class. What makes this setting very challenging is that these descriptions comes in the form of noisy
encyclopedia articles that include not only visual descriptions about the visual appearance but also discussion about
the category’s behavior, breading, immigration, etc. Our
work aims at designing an interpretable model in this direction. Prior works [36, 39, 26, 6] use a wholistic feature
representation for both the object and the text description
(e.g., term frequency vector is common for the bird text
description and a visual feature vector for the whole object).
Contributions In our work, we propose an effective model
that can relate text information of visual categories to images with part-based regularization. Fig. 1 illustrates the
text-part connectivity capability that we aim to model in our
work, where birds are recognized from text description by
relating text terms to parts in the image (e.g, relating the
15640

