Efficient Multiple Instance Metric Learning using Weakly Supervised Data
Marc T. Law1
1

Yaoliang Yu2

University of Toronto

Raquel Urtasun1
2

University of Waterloo

Abstract
We consider learning a distance metric in a weakly supervised setting where “bags” (or sets) of instances are
labeled with “bags” of labels. A general approach is
to formulate the problem as a Multiple Instance Learning
(MIL) problem where the metric is learned so that the distances between instances inferred to be similar are smaller
than the distances between instances inferred to be dissimilar. Classic approaches alternate the optimization over
the learned metric and the assignment of similar instances.
In this paper, we propose an efficient method that jointly
learns the metric and the assignment of instances. In particular, our model is learned by solving an extension of
kmeans for MIL problems where instances are assigned to
categories depending on annotations provided at bag-level.
Our learning algorithm is much faster than existing metric
learning methods for MIL problems and obtains state-ofthe-art recognition performance in automated image annotation and instance classification for face identification.

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning [33] aims at learning a distance
metric that satisfies some similarity relationships among
objects in the training dataset. Depending on the context and the application task, the distance metric may be
learned to get similar objects closer to each other than dissimilar objects [20, 33], to optimize some k nearest neighbor criterion [31] or to organize similar objects into the
same clusters [15, 18]. Classic metric learning approaches
[15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 31, 33] usually consider that each object is represented by a single feature vector. In the face
identification task, for instance, an object is the vector representation of an image containing one face; two images are
considered similar if they represent the same person, and
dissimilar otherwise.
Although these approaches are appropriate when each
example of the dataset represents only one label, many visual benchmarks such as Labeled Yahoo! News [2], UCI
Corel5K [7] and Pascal VOC [8] contain images that in-

Richard S. Zemel1
3

Eric P. Xing3

Carnegie Mellon University

DOCUMENT

Caption: Cast members of
'The Lord of the Rings: The
Two Towers,' Elijah Wood
(L), Liv Tyler, Karl Urban
and Andy Serkis (R) are seen
prior to a news conference
in Paris, December 10, 2002.

DETECTED FACES

BAG

Detected labels:
- Elijah Wood
- Karl Urban
- Andy Serkis

Figure 1. Labeled Yahoo! News document with the automatically
detected faces and labels on the right. The bag contains 4 instances
and 3 labels; the name of Liv Tyler was not detected from text.

clude multiple labels. We focus in this paper on such multilabel contexts which may differ significantly. In particular,
the way in which labels are provided differs in the applications that we consider. To facilitate the presentation, Fig. 1
illustrates an example of the Labeled Yahoo! News dataset:
the item is a document which contains one image representing four celebrities. Their presence in the image is extracted
by a text detector applied on the caption related to the image in the document; the labels extracted from text indicate
the presence of several persons in the image but do not indicate their exact locations, i.e., the correspondence between
the labels and the faces in the image is unknown. In the
Corel5K dataset, image labels are tags (e.g., water, sky, tree,
people) provided at the image level.
Some authors [11, 12] have proposed to learn a distance
metric in such weakly supervised contexts where the labels
(e.g., tags) are provided only at the image level. Inspired by
a multiple instance learning (MIL) formulation [6] where
the objects to be compared are sets (called bags) that contain one or multiple instances, they learn a metric so that the
distances between similar bags (i.e., bags that contain instances in the same category) are smaller than the distances
between dissimilar bags (i.e., none of their instances are in
the same category). In the context of Fig. 1, the instances
of a bag are the feature vectors of the faces extracted in the
image with a face detector [28]. Two bags are considered
similar if at least one person is labeled to be present in both
images; they are dissimilar otherwise. In the context of im1576

