Residual Expansion Algorithm: Fast and Effective Optimization for
Nonconvex Least Squares Problems
Daiki Ikami

Toshihiko Yamasaki
Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan

{ikami, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose the residual expansion (RE) algorithm: a
global (or near-global) optimization method for nonconvex least squares problems. Unlike most existing nonconvex optimization techniques, the RE algorithm is not based
on either stochastic or multi-point searches; therefore, it
can achieve fast global optimization. Moreover, the RE
algorithm is easy to implement and successful in highdimensional optimization. The RE algorithm exhibits excellent empirical performance in terms of k-means clustering,
point-set registration, optimized product quantization, and
blind image deblurring.

1. Introduction
Many problems in computer vision and machine learning
can be formulated as optimization problems. If we can formulate a problem as a convex optimization, we can solve it
by convex optimization techniques such as gradient-based
methods. However, most optimization problems are nonconvex and often have many local minima. In these cases,
convex optimization techniques can find only local minima.
Global optimization of nonconvex problems is an NPhard problem in most cases. Therefore, heuristic methods
are often used to find a global (or near-global) optimum.
There are two major approaches: good initialization and
stochastic optimization. The former is fast and effective if
we can obtain a good initial guess [2]; however, many optimization problems do not provide this. The latter is random
search or multiple-point search, which is represented by
simulated annealing (SA) [13], particle swarm optimization
(PSO) [12], and genetic algorithms (GA) [19]. Although
these methods are effective with low-dimensional optimization problems, it is difficult to obtain good solutions with
high-dimensional ones. Moreover, these approaches often
require excessive computation time to obtain a good solution.
In this paper, we propose a fast and effective opti-

(a) The global optimum result.

(b) The local minimum result.

Fig 1: K-means clustering results with different RE convergence. Gray circles denote original data points and red,
blue, and green circles denote α-expanded data points from
each cluster center. Fig. 1(a) shows α RE convergence with
α = 1; however, Fig. 1(b) does not show this. In this case,
the solution with a larger RE constant achieves the global
optimum. The details of RE convergence and the RE constant are described in Section 3.
mization method for nonconvex least squares (LS) problems such as k-means clustering and point-set registration.
First, we propose a novel measure of convergence called
RE convergence: this represents how far we can expand
data points along their residual directions under convergence. Fig. 1 shows k-means results and expanded data
points. Fig. 1(a) depicts convergence on expanded data
while Fig. 1(b) shows a case that is not converged. We presume that RE convergence is associated with global convergence. In fact, we can prove that the solution that is stable
on a large expansion is the global optimum in the case of a
one-dimensional quartic minimization problem.
Additionally, we propose a heuristic algorithm to find a
solution that is stable on the large expansion, which we term
the residual expansion (RE) algorithm. This algorithm is
based on neither multiple-point search nor random search,
and thus fast computation can be achieved.
Our contribution is as follows:
1. We propose a novel concept of convergence, RE con15819

