Online Graph Completion: Multivariate Signal Recovery in Computer Vision
Won Hwa Kim† , Mona Jalal§ , Seongjae Hwang† , Sterling C. Johnson‡ , Vikas Singh§,†
†

§

Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
Dept. of Biostatistics & Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
‡
GRECC, William S. Middleton VA Hospital, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/∼wonhwa

Abstract
The adoption of “human-in-the-loop” paradigms in
computer vision and machine learning is leading to various
applications where the actual data acquisition (e.g., human
supervision) and the underlying inference algorithms are
closely interwined. While classical work in active learning provides effective solutions when the learning module
involves classification and regression tasks, many practical
issues such as partially observed measurements, financial
constraints and even additional distributional or structural
aspects of the data typically fall outside the scope of this
treatment. For instance, with sequential acquisition of partial measurements of data that manifest as a matrix (or tensor), novel strategies for completion (or collaborative filtering) of the remaining entries have only been studied recently. Motivated by vision problems where we seek to annotate a large dataset of images via a crowdsourced platform or alternatively, complement results from a state-ofthe-art object detector using human feedback, we study the
“completion” problem defined on graphs, where requests
for additional measurements must be made sequentially. We
design the optimization model in the Fourier domain of the
graph describing how ideas based on adaptive submodularity provide algorithms that work well in practice. On a
large set of images collected from Imgur, we see promising
results on images that are otherwise difficult to categorize.
We also show applications to an experimental design problem in neuroimaging.

1. Introduction
The problem of missing or partially observed data is
ubiquitous in science — an issue that is becoming more relevant within the translational/operational aspects of modern
computer vision and machine learning. Occasionally, we
may be restricted by the number of distinct types of measurements (feedback or supervision) that can be acquired
per participant due to budget constraints. In other situations,
a subset (or even a majority) of features/responses may be
missing in a portion of the data due to logistic reasons. Separately, equipment malfunction, human negligence or fa-

tigue, noise and other factors common in data acquisition
lead to scenarios where a subset of the data to be analyzed is
missing, partially observed or systematically corrupted. Occasionally, this phenomena may be prospective — a design
choice where the experiment can acquire extensive supervision only for a few samples. Alternatively, it may be a nuisance that must be accounted for in a retrospective manner
(e.g., 10% of participants labeled merely half of the objects
in the image). As the number of computer vision and machine learning systems deployed in the real world continues
to grow and “human-in-the-loop” paradigms become mainstream, such issues will emerge as a first order constraint
that should inform the design of algorithms.
Example 1. We are tasked with collecting human annotations on 1M+ images, via a crowdsourced platform. The
allocated budget, unfortunately, is only enough for 500K
image-wise annotations. Assume that 250K randomly selected images in the corpus have already been annotated in
the first phase. We may ask an interesting question: based
on image features calculated (e.g., using a deep network
[33, 36, 17]) on the full dataset, if we could only acquire
partial data based on financial constraints, can we come
up with a “policy” to decide which subset of 250K images
should we request user feedback on? Is one ‘order’ of requests (policy) better than the other? If we know that we
will run a simple logistic regression using the annotations
what properties of the data will ensure that we obtain guarantees on the downstream machine learning model?
Example 2. Consider the setting where we have access
to an (already trained) model for object detection. When we
use this system on images obtained via a platform such as
Reddit or Imgur, it works well but fails for η% of the images. Let us assume that the already learned system offers
good specificity, i.e., when the model is highly confident, its
predictions correlate with ground truth labels. Separately,
we also have auxiliary information (e.g., comments, captions associated with each image). While not perfect, such
secondary data provide some sense of associations between
images. If this were a partially observed distribution (with
η% of missing observations), can we provide new object
13568

