Predictive-Corrective Networks for Action Detection
Achal Dave

Olga Russakovsky
Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
While deep feature learning has revolutionized techniques for static-image understanding, the same does not
quite hold for video processing. Architectures and optimization techniques used for video are largely based off those for
static images, potentially underutilizing rich video information. In this work, we rethink both the underlying network
architecture and the stochastic learning paradigm for temporal data. To do so, we draw inspiration from classic theory on linear dynamic systems for modeling time series. By
extending such models to include nonlinear mappings, we
derive a series of novel recurrent neural networks that sequentially make top-down predictions about the future and
then correct those predictions with bottom-up observations.
Predictive-corrective networks have a number of desirable
properties: (1) they can adaptively focus computation on
“surprising” frames where predictions require large corrections, (2) they simplify learning in that only “residuallike” corrective terms need to be learned over time and (3)
they naturally decorrelate an input data stream in a hierarchical fashion, producing a more reliable signal for learning at each layer of a network. We provide an extensive
analysis of our lightweight and interpretable framework,
and demonstrate that our model is competitive with the twostream network on three challenging datasets without the
need for computationally expensive optical flow.

1. Introduction
Computer vision is undergoing a period of rapid
progress. While the state-of-the-art in image recognition
is disruptively increasing, the same does not quite hold for
video analysis. Understanding human action in videos, for
example, largely remains an unsolved, open problem. Despite a considerable amount of effort, CNN-based features
do not yet significantly outperform their hand-designed
counterparts for human action understanding [1, 48]. We
believe that one reason is that many architectures and optimization techniques used for video have largely been inspired by those for static images (so-called “two-stream”
models [38, 50, 51, 8]), though notable exceptions that di-

Observe(!=0

Predict(for(!=1

Observe(!=1

Correct

Figure 1. Our model first predicts the future and then updates its
predictions with corrections from observing subsequent frames.

rectly process spatio-temporal volumes exist [42, 43]. In
terms of benchmark results, two-stream models currently
outperform the latter, perhaps because of the large computational demands of processing spatio-temporal volumes.
Recurrent models: An attractive solution to the above
are state-based models that implicitly process large spatiotemporal volumes by maintaining a hidden state over time,
rather than processing the whole block at once. Classic temporal models based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
or Kalman filters do exactly this. Their counterpart in the
world of neural nets would be recurrent models. While an
active area of research in the context of language [44, 6],
they are relatively less explored for video-based feature
learning (with the important exceptions of [56, 58, 40]). We
posit that one reason could be the difficulty of stream-based
training with existing SGD solvers. Temporal data streams
are highly correlated, while most solvers rely heavily on
uncorrelated i.i.d. data for efficient training [30]. Typical methods for ensuring uncorrelated data (such as random
data permutations) would remove the very temporal structure that we are trying to exploit!
Our approach: We rethink both the underlying network architecture and stochastic learning paradigm. To
do so, we draw inspiration from classic theory on linear
dynamic systems for time-series learning models. By extending such iconic models to include nonlinear hierarchi1981

