YouTube-BoundingBoxes: A Large High-Precision
Human-Annotated Data Set for Object Detection in Video
Esteban Real
Google Brain

Jonathon Shlens
Google Brain

Stefano Mazzocchi
Google Research

Xin Pan
Google Brain

ereal@google.com

shlens@google.com

stefanom@google.com

xpan@google.com

Vincent Vanhoucke
Google Brain
vanhoucke@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a new large-scale data set of video URLs
with densely-sampled object bounding box annotations
called YouTube-BoundingBoxes (YT-BB). The data set consists of approximately 380,000 video segments about 19s
long, automatically selected to feature objects in natural
settings without editing or post-processing, with a recording quality often akin to that of a hand-held cell phone
camera. The objects represent a subset of the COCO [32]
label set. All video segments were human-annotated with
high-precision classification labels and bounding boxes at
1 frame per second. The use of a cascade of increasingly precise human annotations ensures a label accuracy
above 95% for every class and tight bounding boxes. Finally, we train and evaluate well-known deep network architectures and report baseline figures for per-frame classification and localization to provide a point of comparison for future work. We also demonstrate how the temporal contiguity of video can potentially be used to improve such inferences. The data set can be found at
https://research.google.com/youtube-bb. We hope the availability of such large curated corpus will spur new advances
in video object detection and tracking.

1. Introduction
The exceptional pace of progress in recent years on the
tasks of object recognition and detection in still images was
enabled by the creation of large-scale, publicly available
data sets [9, 13, 14, 19, 32, 33, 34, 42, 52, 57]. These
data sets established challenging benchmarks to evaluate
new methods for visual object recognition that have substantially improved the state-of-the-art across a broad range
of computer vision tasks [20, 28, 46, 48, 49].

Open academic challenges paired with open-source
recipes have further accelerated the development of the field
[6, 43, 51]. Most notably, systems that perform well on image recognition and object detection may be applied to other
computer vision problems in which minimal training data
is available [24]. Such systems have also become part of
larger machine learning pipelines that stretch beyond visual
recognition (e.g. multi-modal learning [36, 53]).
The increased speed and memory of modern computing
architectures places the research community in a position
to aim for comparable results in video, a natural goal for
machine perception. The quest for large video data sets,
however, has been more elusive. One challenge is that the
online corpus of videos is weakly labeled, i.e. the label information is very noisy [50]. Sifting through a large sample
may therefore require considerable human involvement.
Exacerbating this problem is the recognition that large
data sets are necessary to prevent over-fitting of cuttingedge models (e.g. [35, 45]). Although the temporal dimension provides vastly more data, much of the information is
redundant due to correlations of pixels across frames. Thus,
increasing the data set size is not merely about gathering
more sequential frames from a small number of videos. Instead, we need a large, diverse sample of videos. Attaining it requires paying special attention to how the videos
are mined. Some of the larger existing vision data sets
rely indirectly on aggregate measurements of human preference [18]. Consequently, those data sets favor aesthetically
pleasing viewpoints of labeled objects. This leads to object
recognition systems that are precise but may lack variety
in terms of realistic lighting conditions, occlusions or the
non-canonical viewpoints often observed in real life. Video
may be less prone to some of these biases (especially the
viewpoint bias), but a random YouTube sample would still
suffer drastically from them. Mining videos with diversity
in mind, on the other hand, can address this problem explic15296

