Coarse-to-Fine Volumetric Prediction for Single-Image 3D Human Pose
Georgios Pavlakos1 , Xiaowei Zhou1 , Konstantinos G. Derpanis2 , Kostas Daniilidis1
1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Ryerson University

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of 3D human pose
estimation from a single color image. Despite the general
success of the end-to-end learning paradigm, top performing approaches employ a two-step solution consisting of a
Convolutional Network (ConvNet) for 2D joint localization
and a subsequent optimization step to recover 3D pose. In
this paper, we identify the representation of 3D pose as a
critical issue with current ConvNet approaches and make
two important contributions towards validating the value of
end-to-end learning for this task. First, we propose a fine
discretization of the 3D space around the subject and train a
ConvNet to predict per voxel likelihoods for each joint. This
creates a natural representation for 3D pose and greatly improves performance over the direct regression of joint coordinates. Second, to further improve upon initial estimates,
we employ a coarse-to-fine prediction scheme. This step addresses the large dimensionality increase and enables iterative refinement and repeated processing of the image features. The proposed approach outperforms all state-of-theart methods on standard benchmarks achieving a relative
error reduction greater than 30% on average. Additionally,
we investigate using our volumetric representation in a related architecture which is suboptimal compared to our endto-end approach, but is of practical interest, since it enables
training when no image with corresponding 3D groundtruth
is available, and allows us to present compelling results for
in-the-wild images.

1. Introduction
Estimating the full-body 3D pose of a human from a single monocular image is an open challenge, which has garnered significant attention since the early days of computer
vision [18]. Given its ill-posed nature, researchers have
generally approached 3D human pose estimation in simplified settings, such as assuming background subtraction
is feasible [1], relying on groundtruth 2D joint locations
to estimate 3D pose [26, 43], employing additional camera views [7, 15], and capitalizing on temporal consistency
to improve upon single frame predictions [38, 3]. This di-

Image

ConvNet

Volumetric Output

Figure 1: Illustration of our volumetric representation for
3D human pose. We discretize the space around the subject
and use a ConvNet to predict per voxel likelihoods for each
joint from a single color image.

versity of assumptions and additional information sources
exemplifies the challenge presented by the task.
With the introduction of more powerful discriminative
approaches, such as Convolutional Networks (ConvNets),
many of these restrictive assumptions have been relaxed.
End-to-end learning approaches attempt to estimate 3D
pose directly from a single image by addressing it as coordinate regression [19, 35], nearest neighbor between images and poses [20], or classification over a set of pose
classes [27]. Yet to date, these approaches have been outperformed by more traditional two-step pipelines, e.g., [45,
6]. In these cases, ConvNets are used only for 2D joint
localization and 3D poses are generated during a postprocessing optimization step. Combining accurate 2D joint
localization with strong and expressive 3D priors has been
proven to be very effective. In this work, we show that
ConvNets are able to provide much richer information than
simply 2D joint locations.
To fully exploit the potential of ConvNets in the context
of 3D human pose, we propose the following items, and justify them empirically. First, we cast 3D pose estimation as
a keypoint localization problem in a discretized 3D space.
Instead of directly regressing the coordinates of the joints
(e.g., [19, 35]), we train a ConvNet to predict per voxel
likelihoods for each joint in this volume. This volumetric
representation, illustrated in Figure 1, is much more sensible for the 3D nature of our problem and improves learning.
17025

