Joint Detection and Identification Feature Learning for Person Search
Tong Xiao1,2∗
1

Shuang Li2∗ Bochao Wang3

Liang Lin3,4

Xiaogang Wang2

Shenzhen key lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Sun Yat-Sen University 4 SenseTime Group Limited

{xiaotong,sli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, wangboch@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Existing person re-identification benchmarks and methods mainly focus on matching cropped pedestrian images
between queries and candidates. However, it is different
from real-world scenarios where the annotations of pedestrian bounding boxes are unavailable and the target person needs to be searched from a gallery of whole scene images. To close the gap, we propose a new deep learning
framework for person search. Instead of breaking it down
into two separate tasks—pedestrian detection and person
re-identification, we jointly handle both aspects in a single
convolutional neural network. An Online Instance Matching (OIM) loss function is proposed to train the network effectively, which is scalable to datasets with numerous identities. To validate our approach, we collect and annotate
a large-scale benchmark dataset for person search. It contains 18, 184 images, 8, 432 identities, and 96, 143 pedestrian bounding boxes. Experiments show that our framework outperforms other separate approaches, and the proposed OIM loss function converges much faster and better
than the conventional Softmax loss.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) [8, 39] aims at matching a target person with a gallery of pedestrian images.
It has many video surveillance applications, such as finding criminals [33], cross-camera person tracking [38], and
person activity analysis [23]. The problem is challenging because of complex variations of human poses, camera viewpoints, lighting, occlusion, resolution, background
clutter, etc., and thus draws much research attention in recent years [4, 19, 21, 24, 35, 43].
Although numerous person re-id datasets and methods
have been proposed, there is still a big gap between the
problem setting itself and real-world applications. In most
benchmarks [10, 14, 18, 19, 45], the gallery only contains
manually cropped pedestrian images (Figure 1a), while in
∗ Tong Xiao and Shuang Li are co-first authors with equal contributions.

(a) Person re-id: matching with manually cropped pedestrians

(b) Person search: finding from whole scene images

Figure 1. Comparison between person re-identification and
person search. The person search problem setting is closer
to real-world applications and more challenging, as detecting pedestrians would inevitably produce false alarms, misdetections, and misalignments.
real applications, the goal is to find a target person in a
gallery of whole scene images, as shown in Figure 1b. Following the protocols of these benchmarks, most of the existing person re-id methods assume perfect pedestrian detections. However, these manually cropped bounding boxes
are unavailable in practical applications. Off-the-shelf
pedestrian detectors would inevitably produce false alarms,
misdetections, and misalignments, which could harm the final searching performance significantly.
In 2014, Xu et al. [36] made the first step towards closing this gap. They introduced the person search problem
to the community, and proposed a sliding window searching strategy based on a combination of pedestrian detection
and person matching scores. However, the performance is
limited by the handcrafted features, and the sliding window

3415

