LSTM Self-Supervision for Detailed Behavior Analysis
Biagio Brattoli1∗, Uta Büchler1∗, Anna-Sophia Wahl2 , Martin E. Schwab2 , Björn Ommer1
1
HCI / IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
2
Department of HST, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{biagio.brattoli,uta.buechler,bjoern.ommer}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de,
{wahl,schwab}@hifo.uzh.ch
Abstract
Behavior analysis provides a crucial non-invasive and
easily accessible diagnostic tool for biomedical research.
A detailed analysis of posture changes during skilled motor tasks can reveal distinct functional deficits and their
restoration during recovery. Our specific scenario is based
on a neuroscientific study of rodents recovering from a large
sensorimotor cortex stroke and skilled forelimb grasping is
being recorded. Given large amounts of unlabeled videos
that are recorded during such long-term studies, we seek
an approach that captures fine-grained details of posture
and its change during rehabilitation without costly manual
supervision. Therefore, we utilize self-supervision to automatically learn accurate posture and behavior representations for analyzing motor function. Learning our model
depends on the following fundamental elements: (i) limb
detection based on a fully convolutional network is initialized solely using motion information, (ii) a novel selfsupervised training of LSTMs using only temporal permutation yields a detailed representation of behavior, and (iii)
back-propagation of this sequence representation also improves the description of individual postures. We establish a
novel test dataset with expert annotations for evaluation of
fine-grained behavior analysis. Moreover, we demonstrate
the generality of our approach by successfully applying it to
self-supervised learning of human posture on two standard
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Motor behavior is the main form of an individual to express and interact with the environment. Analysis and precise quantification of motor kinematics, therefore, provide
a detailed, non-invasive understanding of functional deficits
of the sensorimotor cortex. Furthermore, videos of behavior recorded during long-term studies on the recovery af∗ Indicates equal contribution

Figure 1: Overview of our self-supervised approach for
posture and sequence representation learning using CNNLSTM. After the initial training with motion-based detections we retrain our model for enhancing the learning of the
representations.

ter neurological diseases provide an easily available, rich
source of information to evaluate and adjust drug application and rehabilitative paradigms. The main bottleneck is
presently that all analysis of skilled motor function depends
on a time-intensive, error-prone, and costly manual evaluation of behavior, e.g., by aggregating a large set of subtle
characteristics of limb posture and its deformation over time
[1]. Consequently, this detailed behavior representation required for studying skilled motor functions goes far beyond
a trajectory analysis [23] as can also be seen from Fig. 6.
Thus, there is a dire need for an automatic evaluation of
subtle differences in behavior and the underlying postures
[4]. Given the large amounts of available unlabeled video
data, we seek a self-supervised method that can learn (i) to
detect the limb, which is performing skilled motor function,
(ii) to represent its posture so that it captures subtle differences due to impairment while being invariant to variations
between animals, (iii) and to compare behavior sequences
with another.
Our specific setting involves long-term recordings of rats
recovering from a large stroke in the sensorimotor cortex

6466

