A Non-Convex Variational Approach to
Photometric Stereo under Inaccurate Lighting
Yvain Q U ÉAU, Tao W U
Technical University of Munich, Germany

François L AUZE
University of Copenhagen, Denmark

{yvain.queau, tao.wu}@tum.de

francois@di.ku.dk

Jean-Denis D UROU
University of Toulouse, France

Daniel C REMERS∗
Technical University of Munich, Germany

durou@irit.fr

cremers@tum.de

Abstract
This paper tackles the photometric stereo problem in the
presence of inaccurate lighting, obtained either by calibration or by an uncalibrated photometric stereo method.
Based on a precise modeling of noise and outliers, a robust variational approach is introduced. It explicitly accounts for self-shadows, and enforces robustness to castshadows and specularities by resorting to redescending Mestimators. The resulting non-convex model is solved by
means of a computationally efficient alternating reweighted
least-squares algorithm. Since it implicitly enforces integrability, the new variational approach can refine both the
intensities and the directions of the lighting.

Ball

Bear

Cat

Pot1

Reading

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo (PS) is the problem of inferring the
shape and, possibly, the reflectance of a surface, from a set
of m images taken from a still camera under varying lighting. Assuming Lambertian reflectance, the surface normal
and the albedo can be unambiguously determined in each
surface point when m = 3 [35], but considering m > 3 images makes possible their robust estimation in the presence
of noise, shadows and specularities (see Figure 1).
Yet, the accuracy of lighting calibration remains a bottleneck for robust methods: the effective intensities and directions of the lighting are never exactly equal to the calibrated
ones. Hence, a robust PS method which can automatically
refine some initial lighting estimate would be worthwile.
However, existing robust methods do not propose this feature, and existing uncalibrated methods lack robustness.
This contribution fills this gap, by introducing a robust
variational framework for the joint refinement of shape,
albedo and lighting, given an initial lighting estimate which
can be obtained by calibration or uncalibrated PS.
∗ Yvain Q U ÉAU , Tao W U and Daniel C REMERS were supported by the
ERC Consolidator Grant “3D Reloaded”.

Figure 1. Top: five real-world PS datasets [31], containing selfshadows (all), cast-shadows (all except Ball), specular spikes
(Ball and Reading), or broader specular lobes (Bear). Bottom: 3D-models estimated by the proposed method, taking as initial lighting the calibration from [31]. Qualitatively similar results
are obtained using uncalibrated PS as initialization, see Figure 7.

1.1. Related Work
Robust Pointwise Photometric Stereo methods estimate
the normal and the albedo in each pixel. Assuming Lambertian reflectance and neglecting self-shadows, PS can be formulated in each pixel as an overdetermined system of linear
equations in the normal and the albedo [35]. The baseline
method solves this system in the least-squares sense, which
is fast, but justified only in the presence of Gaussian noise.
Yet, specularities can hardly be considered as Gaussian
noise. If they consist of wide lobes, they can be explicitly handled by non-Lambertian reflectance models [9, 16,
20, 30]. The present work rather considers specular spikes,
hence specularities are viewed as outliers to the Lambertian
1 99

