Light Field Blind Motion Deblurring
Pratul P. Srinivasan1 , Ren Ng1 , Ravi Ramamoorthi2
1
2
University of California, Berkeley
University of California, San Diego
1

{pratul,ren}@eecs.berkeley.edu, 2 ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of deblurring light fields of general
3D scenes captured under 3D camera motion and present
both theoretical and practical contributions. By analyzing
the motion-blurred light field in the primal and Fourier domains, we develop intuition into the effects of camera motion on the light field, show the advantages of capturing a
4D light field instead of a conventional 2D image for motion
deblurring, and derive simple methods of motion deblurring
in certain cases. We then present an algorithm to blindly deblur light fields of general scenes without any estimation of
scene geometry, and demonstrate that we can recover both
the sharp light field and the 3D camera motion path of real
and synthetically-blurred light fields.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is the result of relative motion between the
scene and camera, where photons from a single incoming
ray of light are spread over multiple sensor pixels during the
exposure. In this work, we make both theoretical and practical contributions by studying the effects of camera motion
on light fields and presenting a method to restore motionblurred light fields. Light field cameras are typically used
in situations with optically significant scene depth ranges
and out-of-plane camera motion, so it is important to consider how motion blur varies both spatially within each subaperture image and angularly between sub-aperture images.
Theory We derive a forward model that describes a
motion-blurred light field as an integration over transformations of the sharp light field along the camera motion path.
By analyzing the motion-blurred light field in the primal
and Fourier domains (Sec. 3 and Figs. 3, 4, 5), we show that
capturing a light field enables novel methods of motion deblurring that are not possible with just a conventional image.
First, we show that a light field blurred with in-plane camera
motion is a simple convolution of the sharp light field with
the camera motion path kernel, regardless of the depth contents of the scene (Sec. 3.2.1). This allows us to use simple
deconvolution to restore the sharp light field, which cannot
be done with conventional images because the magnitude
of the motion blur is depth-dependent (Figs. 4, 6). Addi-

Figure 1. We theoretically study the effects of motion blur on a
captured light field and present a practical algorithm to deblur light
fields of general scenes captured with 3D camera motion. Left: a
4D light field (visualized as a 2D sub-aperture image and a 2D
epipolar slice) is blurred by the synthetic camera motion shown in
the inset. Right: absent knowledge of the synthetic motion path,
our algorithm is able to accurately recover the sharp light field
and the motion path. See Fig. 9 for examples with real handheld
camera motion.

tionally, we show that a light field blurred with out-of-plane
camera motion is an integral over shears of the sharp light
field (Sec. 3.2.2). Therefore, we can blindly deblur a light
field of a textured plane captured with out-of-plane camera
motion by modulating a slice of the Fourier spectrum of the
motion-blurred light field (Figs. 4, 7). This is not possible
for conventional images due to the spatially-varying blur
caused by out-of-plane camera motion.
Practical Algorithm General light fields of 3D scenes
captured with 3D camera motion are integrals over compositions of shears and shifts of the sharp light field. The
general light field blind motion deblurring problem lacks a
simple analytic approach and is severely ill-posed because
there is an infinite set of pairs of sharp light fields and motion paths that explain any observed motion-blurred light
field. We propose a practical light field blind motion deblurring algorithm to correct the complex blurring that occurs in
situations where light field cameras are useful (Sec. 4). Our
forward model is differentiable with respect to the camera
motion path parameterization and the estimated light field,

3958

