Memory-Augmented Attribute Manipulation Networks for
Interactive Fashion Search
Bo Zhao1,2
1

Jiashi Feng2

Southwest Jiaotong University

2

Xiao Wu1

Shuicheng Yan3,2

National University of Singapore

3

360 AI Institute

zhaobo@my.swjtu.edu.cn, elezhf@nus.edu.sg, wuxiaohk@swjtu.edu.cn, yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract
We introduce a new fashion search protocol where attribute manipulation is allowed within the interaction between users and search engines, e.g. manipulating the color
attribute of the clothing from red to blue. It is particularly
useful for image-based search when the query image cannot
perfectly match user’s expectation of the desired product.
To build such a search engine, we propose a novel memoryaugmented Attribute Manipulation Network (AMNet) which
can manipulate image representation at the attribute level.
Given a query image and some attributes that need to modify, AMNet can manipulate the intermediate representation
encoding the unwanted attributes and change them to the
desired ones through following four novel components: (1)
a dual-path CNN architecture for discriminative deep attribute representation learning; (2) a memory block with an
internal memory and a neural controller for prototype attribute representation learning and hosting; (3) an attribute
manipulation network to modify the representation of the
query image with the prototype feature retrieved from the
memory block; (4) a loss layer which jointly optimizes the
attribute classification loss and a triplet ranking loss over
triplet images for facilitating precise attribute manipulation and image retrieving. Extensive experiments conducted
on two large-scale fashion search datasets, i.e. DARN and
DeepFashion, have demonstrated that AMNet is able to
achieve remarkably good performance compared with welldesigned baselines in terms of effectiveness of attribute manipulation and search accuracy.

1. Introduction
Image based fashion search is to retrieve fashion products based on query images that reflect users’ needs, such as
those containing clothes [14, 22, 23, 24, 32, 36], shoes [18,
34, 36] or bags [36]. Image based retrieval provides a convenient way for users to search for products with rich details
that are hard to verbally and comprehensively describe.
However, in many scenarios, users may also want to

I want to buy a
coat like this, but
with blue color
and plush collar.

Figure 1. Fashion search with attribute manipulation. The user
provides a clothing image with additional description about
wanted attributes yet not included in the image. The search engine
manipulates the representation of the query image to incorporate
the user’s desired attributes and retrieves images in the gallery.

change the available query images interactively in order
to match their specific mental models better. The WittleSearch [18] partially addresses this problem by providing additional relative attribute description, such as “more
bright in color”, in an iterative manner. One drawback of
this method is that the user cannot easily change the attribute from one to another. More recently, the Generative Visual Manipulation model [36] performs the attribute
manipulation by editing the query image using several predefined operations, i.e. coloring, sketching, and warping,
which requires more interactions with the search engine.
For building a more precise and convenient fashion
search engine, we consider a new search protocol which
takes advantage of textual description and visual editing,
that is to retrieve fashion products through exploiting a
query image plus descriptions on how to change certain visual properties of the query image. More specifically, with
this search engine, in addition to a query image, a user is
also allowed to provide extra keywords to describe the desired product attributes that are absent in the query image.
A usage case is provided in Figure 1. Based on the query
image (a pink dress with round collar), the girl also tells the
search engine her desired color (one type of attributes) is
“blue” instead of “pink”, and desired collar type is “plush”
(another type of attributes) instead of “round”. Beyond be11520

