SyncSpecCNN: Synchronized Spectral CNN for 3D Shape Segmentation
Li Yi1
Hao Su1
Xingwen Guo2
Leonidas Guibas1
1
2
Stanford University
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of semantic annotation on 3D models that are represented as shape graphs. A
functional view is taken to represent localized information
on graphs, so that annotations such as part segment or
keypoint are nothing but 0-1 indicator vertex functions.
Compared with images that are 2D grids, shape graphs are
irregular and non-isomorphic data structures. To enable
the prediction of vertex functions on them by convolutional
neural networks, we resort to spectral CNN method that enables weight sharing by parametrizing kernels in the spectral domain spanned by graph Laplacian eigenbases. Under this setting, our network, named SyncSpecCNN, strives
to overcome two key challenges: how to share coefficients
and conduct multi-scale analysis in different parts of the
graph for a single shape, and how to share information
across related but different shapes that may be represented
by very different graphs. Towards these goals, we introduce
a spectral parametrization of dilated convolutional kernels
and a spectral transformer network. Experimentally we
tested SyncSpecCNN on various tasks, including 3D shape
part segmentation and keypoint prediction. State-of-the-art
performance has been achieved on all benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
As has already happened in the image domain, the wide
availability of 3D models brings with it the need to associate
semantic information with the 3D data. In this work we
focus on the problem of annotating 3D models represented
by 2D meshes with part information. Understanding of the
parts of an object (e.g., the back, seat and legs of a chair)
is essential to its geometric structure, to its style, and to its
function. There has been significant recent progress [29]
in the large scale part annotation of 3D models (e.g., for
a subset of the ShapeNet [4] models) – our aim here is to
leverage this rich data set so as to infer parts of new 3D
object models. Our techniques can also be used to infer
keypoints and other substructures within 3D models.
It is not straightforward to apply traditional deep learning

SyncSpecCNN

shape graph

part segmentation

keypoint prediction

Figure 1. Our SyncSpecCNN takes a shape graph equipped with
vertex functions (i.e. spatial coordinate function) as input and
predicts a per-vertex label. The framework is general and not
limited to a specific type of output. We show 3D part segmentation
and 3D keypoint prediction as example outputs here.

approaches to 3D models because a mesh representation
can be combinatorially irregular and does not permit the
optimizations exploited by convolutional approaches, such
as weight sharing, which depend on regular grid structures.
In this paper we take a functional approach to represent
information about shapes, starting with the observation that
a shape part is itself nothing but a 0-1 indicator function
defined on the shape.
Our basic problem is to learn functions on shapes. We
start with example functions provided on a given shape
collection in the training set and build a neural net that can
infer the same function when given a new 3D model. This
suggests the use of a spectral formulation, based on a dual
graph representing the shape, yielding bases for a function
space built over the mesh.
With this graph representation we face multiple challenges in building a convolutional neural architecture. One
is how to share coefficients and conduct multi-scale analysis
in different parts of the graph for a single shape. Another
is how to share information across related but different
shapes that may be represented by very different graphs. We
introduce a novel architecture, the Synchronized Spectral
CNN (SyncSpecCNN) to address these issues.
The basic architecture of our neural network is similar
to the fully convolutional segmentation network of [17],
namely, we repeat the operation of convolving a vertex
function by kernels and applying a non-linear transforma-

2282

