Revisiting the Variable Projection Method for
Separable Nonlinear Least Squares Problems
Je Hyeong Hong
University of Cambridge

Christopher Zach
Toshiba Research Europe

Andrew Fitzgibbon
Microsoft

jhh37@cam.ac.uk

christopher.m.zach@gmail.com

awf@microsoft.com

Abstract
Variable Projection (VarPro) is a framework to solve optimization problems efficiently by optimally eliminating a
subset of the unknowns. It is in particular adapted for Separable Nonlinear Least Squares (SNLS) problems, a class
of optimization problems including low-rank matrix factorization with missing data and affine bundle adjustment as
instances. VarPro-based methods have received much attention over the last decade due to the experimentally observed large convergence basin for certain problem classes,
where they have a clear advantage over standard methods
based on Joint optimization over all unknowns. Yet no clear
answers have been found in the literature as to why VarPro
outperforms others and why Joint optimization, which has
been successful in solving many computer vision tasks, fails
on this type of problems. Also, the fact that VarPro has
been mainly tested on small to medium-sized datasets has
raised questions about its scalability. This paper intends to
address these unsolved puzzles.

1. Introduction
Optimization methods play an ubiquitous role in computer vision and related fields, and improvements in their
performance can enable new capabilities and applications.
In recent years, it has been understood that significant improvements in convergence can come from the use of a nonminimal parametrization. Examples include convex relaxations for binary segmentation (e.g. [8]), and lifting methods for MAP inference (e.g. [16, 29]), 3D model fitting [7],
and robust costs [31]. In these examples it has been proved
theoretically or shown empirically that a non-minimal representation of the unknowns leads to solutions with significantly lower objective values, often because the ”nonlifted” optimization stalls far from a good optimum. In contrast, there is one class of problems where the opposite is
frequently observed in the literature: using a non-minimal
parametrization for low-rank matrix factorization problems

(a) Estimated 3D points

(b) Estimated cameras

Figure 1: For an affine bundle adjustment problem, standard Joint optimization (Schur-complement bundle adjustment with inner point iterations) does not reach a useful reconstruction from an arbitrary initialization (Red). In contrast, VarPro (Blue) often finds the best known optimum
from random starts. This paper shows how the ostensibly
small differences between the two methods give rise to very
different convergence properties.

with missing data has notably inferior performance than
methods based on Variable Projection (VarPro). Variable
Projection optimally eliminates some of the unknowns in
an optimization problem, and is therefore especially applicable to separable non-linear least-squares problems described below. Low-rank matrix factorization is a problem
class appearing in signal processing (e.g. blind source separation), in machine learning (e.g. factor analysis), but also
in 3D computer vision to obtain e.g. affine and non-rigid
reconstructions. The success of VarPro methods is often
reported in the literature (especially for geometric reconstruction problems), but to our knowledge there is lack of
understanding why Variable Projection is so beneficial in
this case.
Our work sheds some light on the relation between Variable Projection methods and Joint optimization methods using explicit factors for low-rank matrix factorization. It will
be revealed in this paper that Joint optimization suffers from
an intrinsic numerical ill-conditioning for matrix factorization problems, and therefore is prone to “stalling”.
1127

