The Surfacing of Multiview 3D Drawings via Lofting and Occlusion Reasoning
Anil Usumezbas
SRI International
201 Washington Rd, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
anil.usumezbas@sri.com

Ricardo Fabbri
State University of Rio de Janeiro
R. So Francisco Xavier, 524 - Sala 1006 A - Maracan, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, 20550-900, Brazil
rfabbri@gmail.com

Benjamin B. Kimia
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912, USA
benjamin kimia@brown.edu

Abstract
The three-dimensional reconstruction of scenes from
multiple views has made impressive strides in recent years,
chiefly by methods correlating isolated feature points, intensities, or curvilinear structure. In the general setting, i.e.,
without requiring controlled acquisition, limited number of
objects, abundant patterns on objects, or object curves to
follow particular models, the majority of these methods produce unorganized point clouds, meshes, or voxel representations of the reconstructed scene, with some exceptions
producing 3D drawings as networks of curves. Many applications, e.g., robotics, urban planning, industrial design,
and hard surface modeling, however, require structured representations which make explicit 3D curves, surfaces, and
their spatial relationships. Reconstructing surface representations can now be constrained by the 3D drawing acting like a scaffold to hang on the computed representations,
leading to increased robustness and quality of reconstruction. This paper presents one way of completing such 3D
drawings with surface reconstructions, by exploring occlusion reasoning through lofting algorithms.

1. Introduction
Dense 3D surface reconstruction is an important problem in computer vision which remains challenging in
general scenarios. Most existing multiview reconstruction methods suffer from some common problems such

Figure 1: The proposed approach transforms a 3D curve
drawing (top) obtained from a fully calibrated set of 27
views, into a collection of dense surface patches (bottom)
obtained via lofting and occlusion reasoning.
as: (i) Holes in the 3D model corresponding to homogeneous/reflective/transparent image regions, (ii) Oversmoothing of semantically-important details such as ridges,
(iii) Lack of semantically meaningful surface features, organization and geometric detail.
In computer vision and graphics literature, there has been
scattered but persistent interest in using 3D curves to infer
aspects of an underlying shape [28, 56], shape-related features linked to shading [6], or closed 3D curves [55]. For
example, the approach in Sadri and Singh [44] exploits the
flow complex, a structure that captures both the topology
and the geometry of a set of 3D curves, to construct an
intersection-free triangulated 3D shape. Similarly, the approach in Pan et al. [39] explores a similar concept with flow
lines, which are designed to encapsulate principal curvature
lines on a surface. As another example, the approach in Abbasinejad et al. [1] identifies potential surface patches de4321
2980

