AnchorNet: A Weakly Supervised Network
to Learn Geometry-sensitive Features For Semantic Matching
Diane Larlus2

2

Visual Geometry Group
Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{david,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Computer Vision Group
Xerox Research Centre Europe
diane.larlus@xrce.xerox.com

Input
Target image
Source image

Filter heatmaps

Resulting warp

Semantic matching

Output

Target image

Cross-category semantic matching

Source image

Abstract
Despite significant progress of deep learning in recent
years, state-of-the-art semantic matching methods still rely
on legacy features such as SIFT or HoG. We argue that the
strong invariance properties that are key to the success of
recent deep architectures on the classification task make
them unfit for dense correspondence tasks, unless a large
amount of supervision is used. In this work, we propose a
deep network, termed AnchorNet, that produces image representations that are well-suited for semantic matching. It
relies on a set of filters whose response is geometrically consistent across different object instances, even in the presence of strong intra-class, scale, or viewpoint variations.
Trained only with weak image-level labels, the final representation successfully captures information about the object
structure and improves results of state-of-the-art semantic
matching methods such as the deformable spatial pyramid
or the proposal flow methods. We show positive results on
the cross-instance matching task where different instances
of the same object category are matched as well as on a
new cross-category semantic matching task aligning pairs
of instances each from a different object class.

Andrea Vedaldi1

Resulting warp

David Novotny1,2
1

Filter heatmaps

Figure 1: We propose AnchorNet, a novel deep architecture
that produces an image representation which significantly
improves state-of-the-art semantic matching methods. Key
to its success is a set of filters with a sparse response that
is geometrically consistent across different instances of a
category or of two similar categories. Although these filters are learned in a weakly supervised manner (i.e. only
image-level labels are used) they tend to anchor reliably on
meaningful object parts.

1. Introduction
Matching, i.e. the problem of establishing correspondences between images, is one of the tent-poles of image
understanding. It is well known that, given matches between images of the same object or scene, it is possible to
estimate 3D geometry (stereo and structure from motion)
and motion (visual odometry, optical flow, and tracking).
But matching can be applied to much more abstract levels of
understanding as well. For example, aligning different object instances of the same type [32, 21] allows to discover
analogies between objects, inducting abstractions such as
object categories.
While reliable techniques exist for low-level matching,
high-level matching of different object instances remains a

heavily-researched topic. Most of the work in this area has
focused on finding powerful geometric regularizers, such
as hierarchical correspondences [35] or deformable spatial
pyramids [32], to compensate for the still brittle visual descriptors. Surprisingly, even powerful convolutional neural network (CNN) descriptors have been found lacking for
cross-instance matching [37, 21, 63], and in fact comparable or even inferior to old hand-crafted features such as
SIFT [38] and HoG [11] for this task.
It is unclear why CNN representations, which perform
well for many challenging vision tasks, including object detection [16] and segmentation [36], image captioning [57],
15277

