Joint Gap Detection and Inpainting of Line Drawings
Kazuma Sasaki
Satoshi Iizuka
Edgar Simo-Serra
Hiroshi Ishikawa
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
milky_kaid.lc@ruri.waseda.jp

{iizuka, esimo}@aoni.waseda.jp

Abstract
We propose a novel data-driven approach for automatically detecting and completing gaps in line drawings with
a Convolutional Neural Network. In the case of existing
inpainting approaches for natural images, masks indicating
the missing regions are generally required as input. Here, we
show that line drawings have enough structures that can be
learned by the CNN to allow automatic detection and completion of the gaps without any such input. Thus, our method
can find the gaps in line drawings and complete them without
user interaction. Furthermore, the completion realistically
conserves thickness and curvature of the line segments. All
the necessary heuristics for such realistic line completion
are learned naturally from a dataset of line drawings, where
various patterns of line completion are generated on the fly
as training pairs to improve the model generalization. We
evaluate our method qualitatively on a diverse set of challenging line drawings and also provide quantitative results
with a user study, where it significantly outperforms the state
of the art.

1. Introduction
Line drawings, either drawn by pencil on paper or by
digital pen on tablet, are used in many situations such as
drafting or illustrating to express object contours or shapes.
However, a scanned image of line drawings on paper or
roughly-drawn illustrations may be missing some parts of
the lines. Completing these line segments contributes in
enhancing line drawings visually and in making them more
precise. Line drawing is also the ﬁrst step in creating color
illustrations or animations, where appropriate completion of
line segments are important, lest the gaps cause unintentional
colorization in a later step when the ﬂood ﬁll (i.e., paint
bucket) tool is used. However, it is onerous and timeconsuming to ﬁnd the gaps and manually complete the line
segments while keeping natural thickness and curvature.
For natural images, various approaches to image inpainting
have been proposed. For instance, methods that synthesize
nearest neighbor patches [1, 17, 19] have shown especially

hfs@waseda.jp

good results in completion of natural images. Darabi et al. [5]
proposed an method that considers not only the patch-color
information but also the gradient of images, which conserved
inpainting results better than previous works. However, these
methods do not work very well when there are complex
structures such as lines and curves in the removed region.
As a result, they are incapable of completing line drawings
adequately (Fig. 1(b)), especially in continuing the thickness
and the curvature of the line. Moreover, these approaches
require the missing regions speciﬁed as input, which is a
real drawback in applications where there are numerous
such regions. Our approach can overcome these limitations
and detect and complete the gaps without any input mask
specifying inpainting regions.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for automatically ﬁlling-in the gaps in line drawings. To our knowledge,
there is no known method that can naturally “inpaint” line
drawings in this way. Moreover, in contrast with most inpainting methods, our approach can both automatically detect the
missing line segments and complete them, adaptively recognizing and generating lines, curves, and corners suitable for
the structure of the line drawing. Our approach to this problem is training a Convolutional Neural Network end-to-end
with many diﬀerent image patterns in a line drawing dataset.
By generating training data pairs that contain many diﬀerent
image patterns in real-time, we train our model eﬃciently for
the task of joint gap detection and completion.
We compare and evaluate our approach to the state of the
art in inpainting, both qualitatively and quantitatively, with a
user study. Our approach is preferred to others over 90% of
the time, and obtains a 1.5 point advantage on a scale of 1
to 5 when absolutely scored. Note that, while our approach
does not require a mask indicating what regions to inpaint,
other approaches require such a mask.
In summary, the key features of our contribution are:
• a novel method for inpainting raster images of line
drawings, with
• automatic detection of missing regions,
• natural continuation of thickness and curvature, and
• training data generated on-the-ﬂy using a small dataset.
15725

