Semantic Multi-view Stereo: Jointly Estimating Objects and Voxels
Ali Osman Ulusoy1,2 Michael J. Black1 Andreas Geiger2,3
1
Perceiving Systems Department, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
2
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
3
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich
{osman.ulusoy,michael.black,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Dense 3D reconstruction from RGB images is a highly
ill-posed problem due to occlusions, textureless or reflective
surfaces, as well as other challenges. We propose objectlevel shape priors to address these ambiguities. Towards
this goal, we formulate a probabilistic model that integrates
multi-view image evidence with 3D shape information from
multiple objects. Inference in this model yields a dense 3D
reconstruction of the scene as well as the existence and precise 3D pose of the objects in it. Our approach is able to
recover fine details not captured in the input shapes while
defaulting to the input models in occluded regions where
image evidence is weak. Due to its probabilistic nature, the
approach is able to cope with the approximate geometry of
the 3D models as well as input shapes that are not present
in the scene. We evaluate the approach quantitatively on
several challenging indoor and outdoor datasets.

(a) Images

(b) 3D Shape Models

1. Introduction
Dense 3D reconstruction from RGB images is a highly
ill-posed problem. Occlusions and textureless or reflective
surfaces cause fundamental ambiguities in 3D reconstruction [4, 34]. In this work, we address these ambiguities by
leveraging semantic information. In particular, we propose
object-level shape priors for 3D reconstruction. Our approach takes as input RGB images and a set of plausible
3D shape models, and solves for the existence and pose of
each object while reconstructing a dense 3D model of the
entire scene. See Fig. 1 for an illustration.
The proposed object-level shape priors yields two key
benefits. First, the output of our approach is a dense reconstruction of the entire scene as well as a structural representation of the objects in it. This output yields not only
an accurate mapping of the environment but also a semantic
understanding in terms of the objects.
Second, the proposed prior allows for powerful regularization that can resolve large ambiguities common in 3D re-

(c) Reconstruction

Figure 1: Given input images (a) and a set of object shape
models (b), our approach jointly reconstructs a dense 3D
model of the entire scene and solves for the existence and
pose of each object model. In (c), we visualize the output
of our method as a point cloud sampling of the dense reconstruction and object poses (yellow= unlikely, red=likely).
construction. For instance, our shape prior can help reconstruct the back-side of an object even though it is occluded

2414

