NID-SLAM: Robust Monocular SLAM using Normalised Information Distance
Geoffrey Pascoe, Will Maddern, Michael Tanner, Pedro Piniés and Paul Newman
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford, UK
{gmp,wm,mtanner,ppinies,pnewman}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a direct monocular SLAM algorithm based
on the Normalised Information Distance (NID) metric. In
contrast to current state-of-the-art direct methods based on
photometric error minimisation, our information-theoretic
NID metric provides robustness to appearance variation
due to lighting, weather and structural changes in the scene.
We demonstrate successful localisation and mapping across
changes in lighting with a synthetic indoor scene, and
across changes in weather (direct sun, rain, snow) using
real-world data collected from a vehicle-mounted camera.
Our approach runs in real-time on a consumer GPU using
OpenGL, and provides comparable localisation accuracy to
state-of-the-art photometric methods but significantly outperforms both direct and feature-based methods in robustness to appearance changes.

1. Introduction
Real-time monocular simultaneous localisation and
mapping (SLAM) is a key technology enabling augmented
and virtual reality applications [3]; 3D survey and reconstruction [7]; and robotics, in particular micro aerial vehicle (MAV) navigation [9]. Monocular SLAM approaches
typically track a sparse set of visual features matched using descriptors that are robust to limited lighting, scale and
viewpoint changes.
By using sparse key-point matching and efficient bundle adjustment, feature-based methods offer computational
savings at the cost of reduced accuracy and robustness,
since most of the information contained in each image is
discarded [6]. Recent methods that directly minimise the
photometric error between image and map are designed to
address these limitations [32], providing increased accuracy, dense reconstructions and some robustness to viewpoint change and blur [7, 24]. However, the key limitation
for these methods is the implicit assumption of static scene
illumination required for the photometric error metric; this
only holds in controlled indoor environments or over short

Figure 1. Robust monocular SLAM in changing conditions with
NID-SLAM. After traversing an outdoor environment (red) and
building key-frame depth maps, we are able to re-localise and refine the map under different lighting (orange) and weather (green)
conditions using the robust Normalised Information Distance metric. Depth maps projected into images (center) show the alignment
and camera frustrums (bottom) show the tracked sim(3) poses.

periods of time outdoors. This severely limits applications
of photometric visual SLAM methods, since maps can only
be used in the lighting conditions in which they were generated.
In this paper we address the challenge of long-term visual SLAM in the presence of outdoor lighting, weather and
structural scene changes. We present a monocular SLAM
approach based on the Normalised Information Distance
(NID) metric, dubbed NID-SLAM, and demonstrate ro11435

