Learning Adaptive Receptive Fields for Deep Image Parsing Network
Zhen Wei1,4 , Yao Sun1∗, Jinqiao Wang2 , Hanjiang Lai3 , Si Liu1
1. State Key Laboratory of Information Security (SKLOIS),
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, China
2. National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
3. School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China
4. University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 101408, China
{weizhen,sunyao,liusi}@iie.ac.cn, jqwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, laihanj@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to regulate receptive field in deep image parsing network automatically. Unlike previous works which have stressed much
importance on obtaining better receptive fields using manually selected dilated convolutional kernels, our approach
uses two affine transformation layers in the network’s backbone and operates on feature maps. Feature maps will be
inflated/shrinked by the new layer and therefore receptive
fields in following layers are changed accordingly. By endto-end training, the whole framework is data-driven without laborious manual intervention. The proposed method is
generic across dataset and different tasks. We conduct extensive experiments on both general image parsing task and
face parsing task as concrete examples to demonstrate the
method’s superior regulation ability over manual designs.

1. Introduction
In deep neural network, the notion of receptive field
refers to the extent of data that are path-connected to a neuron [12]. After the introduction of Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [11], receptive field has become especially important for deep image parsing network and could significantly affect the network’s performance. As discussed in
[14], a small receptive field may lead to inconsistent parsing
results on large objects while a large receptive field often ignores small objects and classify them as background. Even
not to such extreme extents, unsuitable receptive fields can
also impair performance.
Recent works such as [2, 19] have already accentuated
on adapting network’s structures to realizing different receptive fields. Dilated convolutional kernels are often used
∗ corresponding author

to achieve this kind of adaptation. By setting different dilation values (mostly integers), the convolutional kernels
could expand its receptive field accordingly. However, there
are several main drawbacks in this approach that should be
addressed. Firstly, these dilation values are always treated
as hyper-parameters in network design. The selection of dilation values is based on designers’ observation or results of
a series of trials on a certain dataset, which is laborious and
time-consuming. Secondly, such selection results are not
generic across different image parsing tasks or even various
dataset under the same task. During network transfer, such
selection procedure would be repeated again. Thirdly, dilated convolutional kernels only produce discrete values of
receptive fields. When dilation value is added by 1, the receptive field (e.g. the fc6 layer in VGG [15]) may expand
by tens or even hundreds of pixels, making it even harder to
find a finer receptive field.
The contribution of this paper is to propose a learning
based, data-driven method for regulating receptive field in
deep image parsing network automatically. The main idea
is to introduce a novel affine transformation layer (the ’inflation layer’) before the convolutional layer whose receptive field needs to be regulated. This inflation layer uses
derivable interpolation algorithms to enlarge or shrink feature maps. The following layers perform inference on these
inflated features and thus receptive fields after the inflation
layer are changed. Then, inference results (before SoftMax
normalization) will be resized to a fixed size by ’interpolation layer’. During training, the ’inflation factor’ (denoted
as f ) embedded in both inflation layer and interpolation
layer is derivable and is trained end-to-end together with
the network backbone. As f may be a float number, the inflation layer is able to produce a more fine-grained receptive
field and is only trained once. To corroborate the method’s
effectiveness, we conduct experiments on both general im-

2434

