Differential Angular Imaging for Material Recognition
Jia Xue 1 Hang Zhang 1 Kristin Dana 1 Ko Nishino 2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854
2
Department of Computer Science, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104
{jia.xue,zhang.hang}@rutgers.edu, kdana@ece.rutgers.edu, kon@drexel.edu

Abstract
Material recognition for real-world outdoor surfaces has
become increasingly important for computer vision to support its operation “in the wild.” Computational surface
modeling that underlies material recognition has transitioned from reflectance modeling using in-lab controlled
radiometric measurements to image-based representations
based on internet-mined images of materials captured in
the scene. We propose a middle-ground approach that takes
advantage of both rich radiometric cues and flexible image
capture. We develop a framework for differential angular
imaging, where small angular variations in image capture
provide an enhanced appearance representation and significant recognition improvement. We build a large-scale material database, Ground Terrain in Outdoor Scenes (GTOS),
geared towards real use for autonomous agents. This publicly available database1 consists of over 30,000 images
covering 40 classes of outdoor ground terrain under varying weather and lighting conditions. We develop a novel
approach for material recognition called a Differential Angular Imaging Network (DAIN) to fully leverage this large
dataset. With this network architecture, we extract characteristics of materials encoded in the angular and spatial gradients of their appearance. Our results show that
DAIN achieves recognition performance that surpasses single view or coarsely quantized multiview images. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of differential angular
imaging as a means for flexible, in-place material recognition.

1. Introduction
Real world scenes consist of surfaces made of numerous materials, such as wood, marble, dirt, metal, ceramic
and fabric, which contribute to the rich visual variation we
find in images. Material recognition has become an active
1 http://ece.rutgers.edu/vision/

Figure 1: (Top) Example from GTOS dataset comprising
outdoor measurements with multiple viewpoints, illumination conditions and angular differential imaging. The
example shows scene-surfaces imaged at different illumination/weather conditions. (Bottom) Differential Angular
Imaging Network (DAIN) for material recognition.
area of research in recent years with the goal of providing
detailed material information for applications such as autonomous agents and human-machine systems.
Modeling the apparent or latent characteristic appearance of different materials is essential to robustly recognize them in images. Early studies of material appearance
modeling largely concentrated on comprehensive lab-based
measurements using dome systems, robots, or gonioreflectometers collecting measurements that are dense in angular space (such as BRDF, BTF) [10]. These reflectancebased studies have the advantage of capturing intrinsic in-

764

