Deep 360 Pilot: Learning a Deep Agent for Piloting through 360◦ Sports Videos
Hou-Ning Hu1∗, Yen-Chen Lin1∗, Ming-Yu Liu2 , Hsien-Tzu Cheng1 , Yung-Ju Chang3 , Min Sun1
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 NVIDIA research 3 National Chiao Tung University
{eborboihuc, hsientzucheng}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

armuro@cs.nctu.edu.tw,

{yenchenlin1994, sean.mingyu.liu}@gmail.com

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Watching a 360◦ sports video requires a viewer to continuously select a viewing angle, either through a sequence
of mouse clicks or head movements. To relieve the viewer
from this “360 piloting” task, we propose “deep 360 pilot”
– a deep learning-based agent for piloting through 360◦
sports videos automatically. At each frame, the agent observes a panoramic image and has the knowledge of previously selected viewing angles. The task of the agent is
to shift the current viewing angle (i.e. action) to the next
preferred one (i.e., goal). We propose to directly learn an
online policy of the agent from data. Specifically, we leverage a state-of-the-art object detector to propose a few candidate objects of interest (yellow boxes in Fig. 1). Then, a
recurrent neural network is used to select the main object
(green dash boxes in Fig. 1). Given the main object and
previously selected viewing angles, our method regresses a
shift in viewing angle to move to the next one. We use the
policy gradient technique to jointly train our pipeline, by
minimizing: (1) a regression loss measuring the distance
between the selected and ground truth viewing angles, (2) a
smoothness loss encouraging smooth transition in viewing
angle, and (3) maximizing an expected reward of focusing
on a foreground object. To evaluate our method, we built a
new 360-Sports video dataset consisting of five sports domains. We trained domain-specific agents and achieved the
best performance on viewing angle selection accuracy and
users’ preference compared to [53] and other baselines.

1. Introduction
360◦ video gives a viewer immersive experiences
through displaying full surroundings of a camera in a spherical canvas, which differentiates itself from traditional multimedia. As consumer- and production-grade 360◦ cameras
become readily available, 360◦ videos are captured every
minute. Moreover, the promotion of 360◦ videos by social media giants including YouTube and Facebook further
boosts their fast adoption. It is expected that 360◦ videos
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Panel (a) overlaps three panoramic frames sampled from
a 360◦ skateboarding video with two skateboarders. One skateboarder is more active than the other in this example. For each
frame, the proposed “deep 360 pilot” selects a view – a viewing
angle, where a Natural Field of View (NFoV) (cyan box) is centered at. It first extracts candidate objects (yellow boxes), and then
selects a main object (green dash boxes) in order to determine a
view (just like a human agent). Panel (b) shows the NFoV from a
viewer’s perspective.

will become a major video format in the near future. Studying how to display 360◦ videos to a human viewer, who has
a limited field of visual attention, emerges as an increasingly important problem.
Hand Manipulation (HM) and Virtual Reality (VR) are
two main ways for displaying 360◦ videos on a device with
a Natural Field of View (NFoV) (typically a 60◦ to 110◦
FoV as shown in Fig. 1). In HM, a viewer navigates a
360◦ video via a sequence of mouse clicks; whereas, in
VR, a viewer uses embedded motion sensors in a VR headset for navigation. Note that both HM and VR require a
viewer to select a viewing angle at each frame, while the
FoV is defined by the device. For sports videos, such a
selection mechanism could be cumbersome because “foreground objects” of interest change their locations continuously. In fact, a recent study [32] showed that both HM

3451

