On human motion prediction using recurrent neural networks
Julieta Martinez∗1 , Michael J. Black2 , and Javier Romero3
1

University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
2
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Body Labs Inc., New York, NY

julm@cs.ubc.ca, black@tuebingen.mpg.de, javier.romero@bodylabs.com

Abstract

2

∗ Research carried out while Julieta was an intern at MPI.

1

0.5
0
-400

-300

-200

-100

0

100

200

300

400

SRNN

LSTM-3LR

ERD

Ground truth

milliseconds

Conditioning ground truth

1. Introduction
An important component of our capacity to interact with
the world resides in the ability to predict its evolution over
time. Handing an object to another person, playing sports,
or simply walking in a crowded street would be extremely
challenging without our understanding of how people move,
and our ability to predict what they are likely to do in the
following instants. Similarly, machines that are able to perceive and interact with moving people, either in physical
or virtual environments, must have a notion of how people
move. Since human motion is the result of both physical
limitations (e.g. torque exerted by muscles, gravity, moment
preservation) and the intentions of subjects (how to perform

ERD
LSTM-3LR
SRNN
Ours

Ours

Human motion modelling is a classical problem at the
intersection of graphics and computer vision, with applications spanning human-computer interaction, motion synthesis, and motion prediction for virtual and augmented reality. Following the success of deep learning methods in
several computer vision tasks, recent work has focused on
using deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to model human motion, with the goal of learning time-dependent representations that perform tasks such as short-term motion
prediction and long-term human motion synthesis. We examine recent work, with a focus on the evaluation methodologies commonly used in the literature, and show that, surprisingly, state-of-the-art performance can be achieved by a
simple baseline that does not attempt to model motion at all.
We investigate this result, and analyze recent RNN methods
by looking at the architectures, loss functions, and training
procedures used in state-of-the-art approaches. We propose
three changes to the standard RNN models typically used
for human motion, which result in a simple and scalable
RNN architecture that obtains state-of-the-art performance
on human motion prediction.

error
Error

1.5

Prediction

Figure 1. Top: Mean average prediction error for different motion
prediction methods. Bottom: Ground truth passed to the network
is shown in grey, and short-term motion predictions are shown in
colour. Previous work, based on deep RNNs, produces strong discontinuities at the start of the prediction (middle column). Our
method produce smooth, low-error predictions.

an intentional motion), motion modeling is a complex task
that should be ideally learned from observations.
Our focus in this paper is to learn models of human motion from motion capture (mocap) data. More specifically,
we are interested in human motion prediction, where we
forecast the most likely future 3D poses of a person given
their past motion. This problem has received interest in a
12891

