FCSS: Fully Convolutional Self-Similarity for Dense Semantic Correspondence
Seungryong Kim1 , Dongbo Min2 , Bumsub Ham1 , Sangryul Jeon1 , Stephen Lin3 , Kwanghoon Sohn1
1
Yonsei University 2 Chungnam National University 3 Microsoft Research
{srkim89,mimo,cheonjsr,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

dbmin@cnu.ac.kr

stevelin@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a descriptor, called fully convolutional selfsimilarity (FCSS), for dense semantic correspondence. To
robustly match points among different instances within the
same object class, we formulate FCSS using local selfsimilarity (LSS) within a fully convolutional network. In
contrast to existing CNN-based descriptors, FCSS is inherently insensitive to intra-class appearance variations because of its LSS-based structure, while maintaining the precise localization ability of deep neural networks. The sampling patterns of local structure and the self-similarity measure are jointly learned within the proposed network in
an end-to-end and multi-scale manner. As training data
for semantic correspondence is rather limited, we propose
to leverage object candidate priors provided in existing
image datasets and also correspondence consistency between object pairs to enable weakly-supervised learning.
Experiments demonstrate that FCSS outperforms conventional handcrafted descriptors and CNN-based descriptors
on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences across semantically
similar images is essential for numerous tasks such as scene
recognition, image registration, semantic segmentation, and
image editing [17, 31, 24, 48, 53]. Unlike traditional dense
correspondence approaches for estimating depth [39] or optical flow [3, 44], in which visually similar images of the
same scene are used as inputs, semantic correspondence estimation poses additional challenges due to intra-class variations among object instances, as exemplified in Fig. 1.
Often, basic visual properties such as colors and gradients are not shared among different object instances in the
same class. These variations, in addition to other complications from occlusion and background clutter, lead to significant differences in appearance that can distract matching by
handcrafted feature descriptors [34, 46]. Although powerful
optimization techniques can help by enforcing smoothness
constraints over a correspondence map [31, 24, 53, 45, 18],

(a) Source image

(c) Window

(d) Window

(b) Target image

(e) FCSS in (c)

(f) FCSS in (d)

Figure 1. Visualization of local self-similarity. Even though there
are significant differences in appearance among different instances
within the same object class in (a) and (b), their local selfsimilarities computed by our FCSS descriptor are preserved as
shown in (e) and (f), providing robustness to intra-class variations.

they are limited in effectiveness without a proper matching
descriptor for semantic correspondence estimation.
Over the past few years, convolutional neural network
(CNN) based features have become increasingly popular for correspondence estimation thanks to their localization precision of matched points and their invariance to
minor geometric deformations and illumination changes
[19, 50, 41, 49]. However, for computing semantic correspondences within this framework, greater invariance is
needed to deal with the more substantial appearance differences. This could potentially be achieved with a deeper
convolutional network [42], but would come at the cost of
significantly reduced localization precision in matching details (see [32, 21] for examples). Furthermore, as training
data for semantic correspondence is rather limited, a network cannot be trained properly in a supervised manner.
To address these issues, we introduce a CNN-based descriptor that is inherently insensitive to intra-class appearance variations while maintaining precise localization ability. The key insight, illustrated in Fig. 1, is that among
different object instances in the same class, their local structural layouts remain roughly the same. Even with dissimi16560

