Video Propagation Networks
Varun Jampani1 , Raghudeep Gadde1,2 and Peter V. Gehler1,2
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
{varun.jampani,raghudeep.gadde,peter.gehler}@tuebingen.mpg.de
Abstract
We propose a technique that propagates information forward through video data. The method is conceptually simple and can be applied to tasks that require the propagation
of structured information, such as semantic labels, based
on video content. We propose a Video Propagation Network that processes video frames in an adaptive manner.
The model is applied online: it propagates information forward without the need to access future frames. In particular we combine two components, a temporal bilateral
network for dense and video adaptive filtering, followed
by a spatial network to refine features and increased flexibility. We present experiments on video object segmentation and semantic video segmentation and show increased
performance comparing to the best previous task-specific
methods, while having favorable runtime. Additionally we
demonstrate our approach on an example regression task of
color propagation in a grayscale video.

1. Introduction
In this work, we focus on the problem of propagating structured information across video frames. This problem appears in many forms (e.g., semantic segmentation or
depth estimation) and is a pre-requisite for many applications. An example instance is shown in Fig. 1. Given an object mask for the first frame, the problem is to propagate this
mask forward through the entire video sequence. Propagation of semantic information through time and video color
propagation are other problem instances.
Videos pose both technical and representational challenges. The presence of scene and camera motion lead to
the difficult pixel association problem of optical flow. Video
data is computationally more demanding than static images.
A naive per-frame approach would scale at least linear with
frames. These challenges complicate the use of standard
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for video processing. As a result, many previous works for video propagation
use slow optimization based techniques.
We propose a generic neural network architecture that

Prev. frame masks

Bilateral

Spatial

Network

Network

Video Propagation Network (VPN)
Guidance

Frame 1

Given Mask

Present frame mask

Input Video Frames

Frame 13

Frame 22

Frame 63

Predicted Masks

Figure 1. Video Propagation with VPNs. The end-to-end trained
VPN network is composed of a bilateral network followed by a
standard spatial network and can be used for propagating information across frames. Shown here is an example propagation of
foreground mask from the 1st frame to other video frames.

propagates information across video frames. The main innovation is the use of image adaptive convolutional operations that automatically adapts to the video stream content. This yields networks that can be applied to several
types of information, e.g., labels, colors, etc. and runs online, that is, only requiring current and previous frames.
Our architecture is composed of two components (see
Fig. 1). A temporal bilateral network that performs imageadaptive spatio-temporal dense filtering. The bilateral network allows to connect densely all pixels from current and
previous frames and to propagate associated pixel information to the current frame. The bilateral network allows
the specification of a metric between video pixels and allows a straight-forward integration of temporal information.
This is followed by a standard spatial CNN on the bilateral
network output to refine and predict for the present video
frame. We call this combination a Video Propagation Network (VPN). In effect, we are combining video-adaptive filtering with rather small spatial CNNs which leads to a favorable runtime compared to many previous approaches.
VPNs have the following suitable properties for video
1451

