End-to-End Training of Hybrid CNN-CRF Models for Stereo
Patrick Knöbelreiter1

Christian Reinbacher1

Alexander Shekhovtsov1

knoebelreiter@icg.tugraz.at

reinbacher@icg.tugraz.at

shekhovtsov@icg.tugraz.at

Thomas Pock1,2
pock@icg.tugraz.at
2

1

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology

Center for Vision, Automation & Control
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology

Abstract
We propose a novel and principled hybrid CNN+CRF
model for stereo estimation. Our model allows to exploit the
advantages of both, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and conditional random fields (CRFs) in an unified approach. The CNNs compute expressive features for matching and distinctive color edges, which in turn are used to
compute the unary and binary costs of the CRF. For inference, we apply a recently proposed highly parallel dual
block descent algorithm which only needs a small fixed
number of iterations to compute a high-quality approximate minimizer. As the main contribution of the paper, we
propose a theoretically sound method based on the structured output support vector machine (SSVM) to train the hybrid CNN+CRF model on large-scale data end-to-end. Our
trained models perform very well despite the fact that we
are using shallow CNNs and do not apply any kind of postprocessing to the final output of the CRF. We evaluate our
combined models on challenging stereo benchmarks such
as Middlebury 2014 and Kitti 2015 and also investigate the
performance of each individual component.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a fundamental low-level vision problem. It is an ill-posed inverse problem, asking to reconstruct
the depth from a pair of images. This requires robustness to
all kinds of visual nuisances as well as a good prior model
of the 3D environment. Prior to deep neural network datadriven approaches, progress had been made using global
optimization techniques [20, 24, 37, 41, 50] featuring robust surface models and occlusion mechanisms. Typically,
these methods had to rely on engineered cost matching and
involved choosing a number of parameters experimentally.
Recent deep CNN models for stereo [12, 28, 55] learn
from data to be robust to illumination changes, occlusions,

Contrast Sensitive / Pairwise CNN
I0

Unary CNN
Correlation

I1

CRF

D

Unary CNN

Figure 1: Architecture: A convolutional neural network, which
we call Unary-CNN computes features of the two images for each
pixel. The features are compared using a Correlation layer. The
resulting matching cost volume becomes the unary cost of the
CRF. The pairwise costs of the CRF are parametrized by edge
weights, which can either follow a usual contrast sensitive model
or estimated by the Pairwise-CNN.

reflections, noise, etc. A deep and possibly multi-scale
architecture is used to leverage the local matching to a
global one. However, also deep CNN models for stereo
rely a lot on post-processing, combining a set of filters and
optimization-like heuristics, to produce final accurate results.
In this work we combine CNNs with a discrete optimization model for stereo. This allows complex local matching
costs and parametrized geometric priors to be put together
in a global optimization approach and to be learned end-toend from the data. Even though our model contains CNNs,
it is still easily interpretable. This property allows us to shed
more light on the learning our network performs. We start
from a CRF formulation and replace all hand-crafted terms
with learned ones.
We propose a hybrid CNN-CRF model illustrated
in Fig. 1. Our Unary-CNN computes local features of
both images which are then compared in a fixed correlation metric. Our Pairwise-CNN can additionally estimate
contrast-sensitive pairwise costs in order to encourage or
discourage label jumps. Using the learned unary and pairwise costs, the CRF tries to find a joint solution optimizing the total sum of all unary and pairwise costs in a 4-

2339

