Fine-grained recognition of thousands of object categories with single-example
training
Leonid Karlinsky∗, Joseph Shtok∗, Yochay Tzur, Asaf Tzadok
IBM Research
{leonidka,josephs,yochayt,asaf}@il.ibm.com

Abstract
We approach the problem of fast detection and recognition of a large number (thousands) of object categories
while training on a very limited amount of examples, usually one per category. Examples of this task include: (i)
detection of retail products, where we have only one studio
image of each product available for training; (ii) detection
of brand logos; and (iii) detection of 3D objects and their
respective poses within a static 2D image, where only a
sparse subset of (partial) object views is available for training, with a single example for each view. Building a detector
based on so few examples presents a significant challenge
for the current top-performing (deep) learning based techniques, which require large amounts of data to train. Our
approach for this task is based on a non-parametric probabilistic model for initial detection, CNN-based refinement
and temporal integration where applicable. We successfully
demonstrate its usefulness in a variety of experiments on
both existing and our own benchmarks achieving state-ofthe-art performance.

1. Introduction
Most of the current top-performing learning-based approaches, especially deep learning methods, rely on large
amounts of annotated data for training. This poses a significant challenge in situations when we need to recognize
many thousands of visually similar (fine-grained) categories
for which only a few examples are available. This situation
frequently arises in recognition of retail product categories
which are inherently fine-grained, and where we usually
have just a single studio-image example of a product to train
on. Another example is the detection of the camera pose of
a query image with respect to a large scene modeled by a
3D point-cloud. Here we train on a sparsely sampled set of
partial views of the modeled scene, and the task is to detect
unseen views. Yet another example is the detection of brand
∗ authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1. Qualitative examples of the performance of the proposed approach on various datasets (Section 4): (a)GroZi-3.2K,
(b) GroZi-120, (c) GameStop, (d) Retail121, (e) PCPE, (f)
FlickrLogos-32. The images are shown in greyscale, the cyan detection boxes are annotated with the detected category images in
the bottom left corner. Best viewed in color.

logos in community photos.
In this paper we propose an approach for the scenario of
fine-grained object detection and recognition with limited
training data and large-scale datasets. Designed to work for
both image and video inputs, the method consists of three
main components: a fast initial detection and classification
algorithm, Deep Neural Network (DNN) based fine-grained
14113

