Learning from Synthetic Humans
Gül Varol∗ †
Inria

Javier Romero¶
Body Labs

Michael J. Black‡
MPI

Xavier Martin∗ §
Inria
Ivan Laptev∗ †
Inria

Naureen Mahmood‡
MPI

Cordelia Schmid∗ §
Inria

Abstract
Estimating human pose, shape, and motion from images
and videos are fundamental challenges with many applications. Recent advances in 2D human pose estimation use
large amounts of manually-labeled training data for learning convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Such data is
time consuming to acquire and difficult to extend. Moreover, manual labeling of 3D pose, depth and motion is impractical. In this work we present SURREAL (Synthetic
hUmans foR REAL tasks): a new large-scale dataset with
synthetically-generated but realistic images of people rendered from 3D sequences of human motion capture data. We
generate more than 6 million frames together with ground
truth pose, depth maps, and segmentation masks. We show
that CNNs trained on our synthetic dataset allow for accurate human depth estimation and human part segmentation in real RGB images. Our results and the new dataset
open up new possibilities for advancing person analysis using cheap and large-scale synthetic data.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks provide significant
gains to problems with large amounts of training data. In the
field of human analysis, recent datasets [4, 36] now gather
a sufficient number of annotated images to train networks
for 2D human pose estimation [22, 39]. Other tasks such as
accurate estimation of human motion, depth and body-part
segmentation are lagging behind as manual supervision for
such problems at large scale is prohibitively expensive.
Images of people have rich variation in poses, clothing, hair styles, body shapes, occlusions, viewpoints, motion blur and other factors. Many of these variations, how∗ Inria, France
† Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,
CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
‡ Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
§ Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, Grenoble, France
¶ Currently at Body Labs Inc., New York, NY. This work was performed while JR was at MPI-IS.

Figure 1. We generate photo-realistic synthetic images and their
corresponding ground truth for learning pixel-wise classification
problems: human part segmentation and depth estimation. The
convolutional neural network trained only on synthetic data generalizes to real images sufficiently for both tasks. Real test images
in this figure are taken from MPII Human Pose dataset [4].

ever, can be synthesized using existing 3D motion capture
(MoCap) data [3, 17] and modern tools for realistic rendering. Provided sufficient realism, such an approach would be
highly useful for many tasks as it can generate rich ground
truth in terms of depth, motion, body-part segmentation and
occlusions.
Although synthetic data has been used for many years,
realism has been limited.
In this work we present
SURREAL: a new large-scale dataset with syntheticallygenerated but realistic images of people. Images are rendered from 3D sequences of MoCap data. To ensure realism, the synthetic bodies are created using the SMPL body
model [19], whose parameters are fit by the MoSh [20]
method given raw 3D MoCap marker data. We randomly
sample a large variety of viewpoints, clothing and lighting. SURREAL contains more than 6 million frames together with ground truth pose, depth maps, and segmenta-

109

