Deep Multimodal Representation Learning from Temporal Data
Xitong Yang∗1 , Palghat Ramesh2 , Radha Chitta∗3 , Sriganesh Madhvanath∗3 ,
Edgar A. Bernal∗4 and Jiebo Luo5
1

University of Maryland, College Park 2 PARC 3 Conduent Labs US
4
United Technologies Research Center 5 University of Rochester
1

xyang35@cs.umd.edu, 2 Palghat.Ramesh@parc.com, 3 {Radha.Chitta,
Sriganesh.Madhvanath}@conduent.com, 4 bernalea@utrc.utc.com, 5 jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
In recent years, Deep Learning has been successfully
applied to multimodal learning problems, with the aim of
learning useful joint representations in data fusion applications. When the available modalities consist of time series
data such as video, audio and sensor signals, it becomes
imperative to consider their temporal structure during the
fusion process. In this paper, we propose the Correlational
Recurrent Neural Network (CorrRNN), a novel temporal
fusion model for fusing multiple input modalities that are
inherently temporal in nature. Key features of our proposed
model include: (i) simultaneous learning of the joint representation and temporal dependencies between modalities,
(ii) use of multiple loss terms in the objective function, including a maximum correlation loss term to enhance learning of cross-modal information, and (iii) the use of an attention model to dynamically adjust the contribution of different input modalities to the joint representation. We validate our model via experimentation on two different tasks:
video- and sensor-based activity classification, and audiovisual speech recognition. We empirically analyze the contributions of different components of the proposed CorrRNN
model, and demonstrate its robustness, effectiveness and
state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets.

1. Introduction
Automated decision-making in a wide range of realworld scenarios often involves acquisition and analysis of
data from multiple sources. For instance, human activity
may be more robustly monitored using a combination of
video cameras and wearable motion sensors than with either
∗ Work carried out while at PARC, a Xerox Company

Figure 1. Different multimodal learning tasks. (a) Non-temporal
model for non-temporal data [21]. (b) Non-temporal model for
temporal data [13]. (c) Proposed CorrRNN model: temporal
model for temporal data.

sensing modality by itself. When analyzing spontaneous
socio-emotional behaviors, researchers can use multimodal
cues from video, audio and physiological sensors such as
electro-cardiograms (ECG) [17]. However, fusing information from different modalities is usually nontrivial due to
the distinct statistical properties and highly non-linear relationships between low-level features [21] of the modalities.
Prior work has shown that multimodal learning often provides better performance on tasks such as retrieval, classification and description [9, 13, 21, 12]. When the modalities
being fused are temporal in nature, it becomes desirable to
design a model for temporal multimodal learning (TML)
that can simultaneously fuse the information from different
sources, and capture temporal structure within the data.
In the past five years, several deep learning based approaches have been proposed for TML, in particular, for
audio-visual data. Early models proposed for audiovi-

5447

