A Unified Approach of Multi-scale Deep and Hand-crafted Features for Defocus
Estimation
Jinsun Park†

Yu-Wing Tai‡

Donghyeon Cho†

In So Kweon†

zzangjinsun@gmail.com

yuwing@gmail.com

cdh12242@gmail.com

iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

†

Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST, Korea, Republic of
‡
Tencent YouTu Lab., China

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce robust and synergetic handcrafted features and a simple but efficient deep feature from
a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture for defocus estimation. This paper systematically analyzes the effectiveness of different features, and shows how each feature can compensate for the weaknesses of other features
when they are concatenated. For a full defocus map estimation, we extract image patches on strong edges sparsely,
after which we use them for deep and hand-crafted feature
extraction. In order to reduce the degree of patch-scale dependency, we also propose a multi-scale patch extraction
strategy. A sparse defocus map is generated using a neural
network classifier followed by a probability-joint bilateral
filter. The final defocus map is obtained from the sparse defocus map with guidance from an edge-preserving filtered
input image. Experimental results show that our algorithm
is superior to state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of defocus
estimation. Our work can be used for applications such as
segmentation, blur magnification, all-in-focus image generation, and 3-D estimation.

1. Introduction
The amount of defocus represents priceless information
can be obtained from a single image. If we know the amount
of defocus at each pixel in an image, higher level information can be inferred based on defocus values such as
depth [43], salient region [13] and foreground and background of a scene [26] and so on. Defocus estimation, however, is a highly challenging task, not only because the estimated defocus values vary spatially, but also because the
estimated solution contains ambiguities [17], where the appearances of two regions with different amounts of defocus
can be very similar. Conventional methods [2, 35, 42] rely
on strong edges to estimate the amount of defocus. Determining the amount of defocus only based on the strength
of strong edges, however, may lead to overconfidence and

(a) Image

(b) Defocus Map

(c) Refocused

Figure 1: Our defocus estimation result and a digital refocusing application example.
misestimations. Thus, we need a more reliable and robust
defocus descriptor for defocus estimations.
In this paper, we present hand-crafted and deep features
which assess various aspects of an image for defocus estimation, and a method to obtain a reliable full defocus map
of a scene. Our hand-crafted features focus on three components of an image: the frequency domain power distribution, the gradient distribution and the singular values of
an image. We also utilize a convolutional neural network
(CNN) to extract high-dimensional deep features directly
learnt from millions of in-focus and blurred image patches.
All of the features are concatenated to construct our defocus feature vector and are fed into a fully connected neural
network classifier to determine the amount of defocus.
One of the challenges associated with the defocus estimation is the vagueness of the amount of defocus in homogeneous regions, as such regions show almost no difference
in appearance when they are in-focus or blurred. To avoid
this problem, we first estimate the amount of defocus using
multi-scale image patches from only strong edges, and then
propagate the estimated values into homogeneous regions
with the guidance of edge-preserving filtered input image.
The full defocus map is obtained after the propagation step.
We use the defocus map for various applications, such as
segmentation, blur magnification, all-in-focus image generation, and 3-D estimation. Figure 1 shows an example of
our defocus estimation result and a refocusing application.

2. Related Work
Defocus Estimation Defocus estimation plays an important role in many applications in the computer vision
11736

