Loss Max-Pooling for Semantic Image Segmentation
Samuel Rota Bulò⋆,†

Gerhard Neuhold†

Peter Kontschieder†

⋆

†

FBK - Trento, Italy - rotabulo@fbk.eu
Mapillary - Graz, Austria - {samuel,gerhard,pkontschieder}@mapillary.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel loss max-pooling concept for handling imbalanced training data distributions, applicable as
alternative loss layer in the context of deep neural networks for semantic image segmentation. Most real-world
semantic segmentation datasets exhibit long tail distributions with few object categories comprising the majority
of data and consequently biasing the classifiers towards
them. Our method adaptively re-weights the contributions of each pixel based on their observed losses, targeting under-performing classification results as often encountered for under-represented object classes. Our approach
goes beyond conventional cost-sensitive learning attempts
through adaptive considerations that allow us to indirectly
address both, inter- and intra-class imbalances. We provide
a theoretical justification of our approach, complementary
to experimental analyses on benchmark datasets. In our
experiments on the Cityscapes and Pascal VOC 2012 segmentation datasets we find consistently improved results,
demonstrating the efficacy of our approach.

1. Introduction
Deep learning approaches have undoubtedly matured to
the new de facto standards for many traditional computer
vision tasks like image classification, object detection or
semantic segmentation. Semantic segmentation aims to assign categorical labels to each pixel in an image and therefore constitutes the basis for high-level image understanding. Recent works have contributed to the progress in this
research field by building upon convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [30] and enriching them with task-specific
functionalities. Extending CNNs to directly cast dense, semantic label maps [2, 34], including more contextual information [9, 16, 33, 46] or refining results with graphical
models [31, 47], have led to impressive results in many realworld applications and on standard benchmark datasets.
Few works have focused on how to properly handle imbalanced (or skewed) class distributions, as often encountered in semantic segmentation datasets, within deep neural network training so far. With imbalanced, we refer to

datasets having dominant portions of their data assigned to
(few) majority classes while the rest belongs to minority
classes, forming comparably under-represented categories.
As (mostly undesired) consequence, it can be observed that
classifiers trained without correction mechanisms tend to be
biased towards the majority classes during inference.
One way to mitigate this class-imbalance problem is
to emphasize on balanced compilations of datasets in the
first place by collecting their samples approximately uniformly. Datasets following such an approach are ImageNet [11], Caltech 101/256 [15, 17] or CIFAR 10/100 [29],
where training, validation and test sets are roughly balanced w.r.t. the instances per class. Another widely used
procedure is conducting over-sampling of minority classes
or under-sampling from the majority classes when compiling the actual training data. Such approaches are known
to change the underlying data distributions and may result in suboptimal exploitation of available data, increased
computational effort and/or risk of over-fitting when repeatedly visiting the same samples from minority classes
(c.f . SMOTE and derived variants [6, 8, 19, 24] on ways
to avoid over-fitting). However, its efficiency and straightforward application for tasks like image-level classification
rendered sampling a commonly-agreed practice.
Another approach termed cost-sensitive learning
changes the algorithmic behavior by introducing classspecific weights, often derived from the original data statistics. Such methods were recently investigated [7, 35, 44, 45]
for deep learning, some of them following ideas previously applied in shallow learning methods like random
forests [27, 28] or support vector machines [38, 42].
Many of these works use statically-defined cost matrices [7, 12, 35, 44, 45] or introduce additional parameter
learning steps [26]. Due to the spatial arrangement and
strong correlations of classes between adjacent pixels, costsensitive learning techniques are preferred over resampling
methods when performing dense, pixel-wise classification
as in semantic segmentation tasks. However, current trends
of semantic segmentation datasets show strong increase in
complexity with more minority classes being added.
12126

