Instance-aware Image and Sentence Matching with Selective Multimodal LSTM
Yan Huang1,3
Wei Wang1,3
Liang Wang1,2,3
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
{yhuang, wangwei, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
An old man with his bag and

An old man with his bag and
dog is sitting on the bench
beside the road and grass.
LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

Matching score

beside the road and grass

Multimodal contextmodulated attention

dog is sitting on the bench

Figure 1. The proposed selective multimodal Long Short-Term Memory network (sm-LSTM) (best viewed in colors).

Abstract
Effective image and sentence matching depends on how
to well measure their global visual-semantic similarity.
Based on the observation that such a global similarity arises from a complex aggregation of multiple local similarities
between pairwise instances of image (objects) and sentence
(words), we propose a selective multimodal Long ShortTerm Memory network (sm-LSTM) for instance-aware image and sentence matching. The sm-LSTM includes a multimodal context-modulated attention scheme at each timestep
that can selectively attend to a pair of instances of image and sentence, by predicting pairwise instance-aware
saliency maps for image and sentence. For selected pairwise instances, their representations are obtained based on
the predicted saliency maps, and then compared to measure
their local similarity. By similarly measuring multiple local
similarities within a few timesteps, the sm-LSTM sequentially aggregates them with hidden states to obtain a final
matching score as the desired global similarity. Extensive
experiments show that our model can well match image and
sentence with complex content, and achieve the state-of-theart results on two public benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Matching image and sentence plays an important role
in many applications, e.g., finding sentences given an im-

age query for image annotation and caption, and retrieving
images with a sentence query for image search. The key
challenge of such a cross-modal matching task is how to
accurately measure the image-sentence similarity. Recently, various methods have been proposed for this problem,
which can be classified into two categories: 1) one-to-one
matching and 2) many-to-many matching.
One-to-one matching methods usually extract global representations for image and sentence, and then associate
them using either a structured objective [9, 18, 34] or a
canonical correlation objective [40, 20]. But they ignore
the fact that the global similarity commonly arises from a
complex aggregation of local similarities between imagesentence instances (objects in an image and words in a sentence). Accordingly, they fail to perform accurate instanceaware image and sentence matching.
Many-to-many matching methods [16, 17, 29, 32] propose to compare many pairs of image-sentence instances,
and aggregate their local similarities. However, it is not optimal to measure local similarities for all the possible pairs
of instances without any selection, since only partial salient instance pairs describing the same semantic concept can
actually be associated and contribute to the global similarity. Other redundant pairs are less useful which could act as
noise that degenerates the final performance. In addition, it
is not easy to obtain instances for either image or sentence,
so these methods usually have to explicitly employ additional object detectors [6], dependency tree relations [11],

2310

