Toroidal Constraints for Two-Point Localization under High Outlier Ratios
Federico Camposeco1

Torsten Sattler1 Andrea Cohen1 Andreas Geiger1,2 Marc Pollefeys1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen

{federico.camposeco,torsten.sattler,andreas.geiger,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Localizing a query image against a 3D model at large
scale is a hard problem, since 2D-3D matches become more
and more ambiguous as the model size increases. This creates a need for pose estimation strategies that can handle very low inlier ratios. In this paper, we draw new insights on the geometric information available from the 2D3D matching process. As modern descriptors are not invariant against large variations in viewpoint, we are able to find
the rays in space used to triangulate a given point that are
closest to a query descriptor. It is well known that two correspondences constrain the camera to lie on the surface of
a torus. Adding the knowledge of direction of triangulation,
we are able to approximate the position of the camera from
two matches alone. We derive a geometric solver1 that can
compute this position in under 1 microsecond. Using this
solver, we propose a simple yet powerful outlier filter which
scales quadratically in the number of matches. We validate
the accuracy of our solver and demonstrate the usefulness
of our method in real world settings.

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose of a query image from a set of
2D-3D matches is a central task in image-based localization [4, 15, 21, 22, 26, 28], with many applications in, e.g.,
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [12, 24, 25, 27], simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) [3, 5], augmented reality [1, 17], or camera calibration [2]. Wrong 2D-3D correspondences are typically handled through RANSAC [9] as
long as the percentage of such outliers among all matches is
not too large.
Image-based localization approaches establish 2D-3D
correspondences by matching descriptors extracted from
the query image (e.g., SIFT [16]) against descriptors associated with the 3D model points. However, at large scale or in
1 MATLAB sample code available at
research/toroidal-constraints/

www.cvg.ethz.ch/

complex scenes with many repetitive elements, establishing
2D-3D correspondences becomes a challenging task due to
the inherent ambiguities of the local appearance [15]. As it
becomes harder to distinguish between correct and incorrect
matches based on local descriptors alone [15], localization
algorithms must be able to cope with large outlier ratios in
order to enable reliable pose estimation. This in turn creates
a strong need for developing efficient outlier filtering strategies which are able to identify and remove wrong matches.
In this paper, we derive a new previously unused geometric constraint that can aid large-scale localization. Exploiting this constraint, we present a novel filtering strategy that can cope with arbitrary outlier ratios, while retaining a runtime that scales quadratically with the number
of matches. Previous approaches either require knowledge
about the gravity direction in combination with a prior on
camera height [26, 28] or knowledge about the full camera
orientation [13]. In contrast, our approach does not depend
on such external information and can approximate the full
6 DOF pose from just two 2D-3D correspondences. For
our application, however, we only use the position from the
pose to efficiently prune outliers (c.f . Section 3.5). Whereas
most reconstruction methods consider viewpoint variance
[18] of descriptors as a weakness, we view it as a strength
useful to infer the viewpoint of the camera.
Our main observation is that, during the SfM process
used to generate a 3D model, each 3D point is associated
with the descriptors of the image features from which it
was triangulated. Thus, each of these descriptors is associated with the viewing direction under which the point was
observed. Empirically, we found that the best matching descriptor of a 3D point for a given 2D feature provides a
good approximation to the viewing direction of the query
image, c.f . Section 3.3 and Fig. 1, typically being within
10◦ of the closest match. We call this viewing direction
constraint the triangulation constraint. Additionally, given
two 2D-3D matches, it is known that the camera will lie on
the surface of a torus [7]. The toroidal constraint combined
with the triangulation constraint allows us to formulate a
solver that estimates the position of the camera from only

4545

