SST: Single-Stream Temporal Action Proposals
Shyamal Buch1 , Victor Escorcia2 , Chuanqi Shen1 , Bernard Ghanem2 , Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Stanford University, 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{shyamal, shencq, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu, {victor.escorcia, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract

sliding windows

SST
Our paper presents a new approach for temporal detection of human actions in long, untrimmed video sequences. We introduce Single-Stream Temporal Action Proposals (SST), a new effective and efficient deep architecture for the generation of temporal action proposals. Our
network can run continuously in a single stream over very
long input video sequences, without the need to divide input
into short overlapping clips or temporal windows for batch
processing. We demonstrate empirically that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art on the task of temporal action
proposal generation, while achieving some of the fastest
processing speeds in the literature. Finally, we demonstrate
that using SST proposals in conjunction with existing action classifiers results in improved state-of-the-art temporal
action detection performance.

t

…

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We tackle the problem of temporal action localization
of human actions in long, untrimmed video sequences. We introduce a new model (SST) that outputs temporal action proposals at
multiple scales in a single processing stream. Our method simultaneously provides stronger action proposals while being significantly more efficient than prior work, which require constructing
and processing multiple temporally overlapping sliding windows.

The millions of cameras that are deployed every year
generate a large amount of recorded, stored and transmitted
video. In particular, a large proportion of this video depicts
events about people, their activities, and behaviors. In order
to effectively interpret this data, computer vision algorithms
need the ability to understand and recognize human actions.
This has motivated a large body of computer vision literature on the problem of action recognition in videos.
Up until recently, the vast majority of the computer vision work tackles the action recognition problem as one
of video classification, where an oracle has pre-segmented
videos into short clips that contain a single action. In that
case, the task is reduced to classifying the video into one
of the relevant actions of interest. In practice, applications
(such as smart surveillance, robotics or autonomous driving) require cameras to record video streams continuously
and vision algorithms to perform temporal action detection
in such long streams. To achieve this, the computer vision
system must simultaneously decide both the temporal interval and the category of the action as they occur.
Temporally detecting human actions can be challenging

for computer vision algorithms. Algorithms must process
very long video sequences and output the starting and ending times of each action in each video. The number and
duration of actions can vary significantly, and action intervals can be very short in comparison to the video length.
Recent work has leveraged temporal action proposals
[29, 2, 9] for efficient action detection, where the proposals identify relevant temporal windows that are then independently classified by an action classifier in a second
stage. These proposals are generated by a sliding window
approach, dividing the video into short overlapping temporal windows. To handle the issue of temporal variations
in actions, windows are applied at multiple temporal scales
[29]. However, this is computationally expensive due to the
exhaustive search in temporal location and scale. Alternatively, one can adopt an architecture that runs a sliding window at a fixed temporal scale but outputs proposals at varied
temporal scales [9]. This approach still needs to perform
computations on overlapping temporal windows, which results in possibly redundant computations as each frame is

2911

