Video Segmentation via Multiple Granularity Analysis
Rui Yang† , Bingbing Ni† , Chao Ma‡ , Yi Xu† , Xiaokang Yang†
†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University ‡ The University of Adelaide
†

{yangrui,nibingbing,xuyi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn,‡ c.ma@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

little from the recent progress of visual tracking algorithms [24, 28].

We introduce a Multiple Granularity Analysis framework
for video segmentation in a coarse-to-fine manner. We cast
video segmentation as a spatio-temporal superpixel labeling problem. Benefited from the bounding volume provided by off-the-shelf object trackers, we estimate the foreground/background super-pixel labeling using the spatiotemporal multiple instance learning algorithm to obtain
coarse foreground/background separation within the volume. We further refine the segmentation mask in the pixel
level using the graph-cut model. Extensive experiments on
benchmark video datasets demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed video segmentation algorithm.

To address these challenges, we present a novel framework of applying the multiple instance learning (MIL) algorithm [8] to both spatial and temporal domains for video
segmentation. In contrast to most machine learning algorithms that assign every training instance with a label, MIL
assigns bags of instances with labels. In the binary case, a
bag is labeled positive if at least one instance in that bag is
positive, and the bag is labeled negative if all the instances
in it are negative. MIL is able to classify instances with
missing or noisy labels based on the labeled bags as training
data. This motivates us to apply the MIL algorithm to compute the temporal consistency in the temporal domain. For
example, temporal adjacent and similar superpixels always
belongs to the same label (i.e, foreground or background), since motion between consecutive frames can not be too significant. On the other hand, object level motions estimated
by visual tracking algorithms in the form of bounding boxes
provide rich information for the video segmentation task despite partial noisy background inside bounding boxes. Built
on state-of-the-art tracking algorithms, we properly enlarge
the tracked bounding boxes to meet the requirement of applying MIL as in [42]. We find that MIL deals with the
noisy background well and provides an accurate envelop of
the true foreground object masks. This significantly facilitates video segmentation.

1. Introduction
Video segmentation aims at separating target objects of
interest from noisy background, and has received considerable attention with a wide range of computer vision applications, such as 3D reconstruction [34], video summarization [11], etc. Numerous algorithms have been proposed
during the past decade with focus on developing graphical
models, e.g., Markov Random Field (MRF), and Conditional Random Field (CRF), to estimate target motions for each
pixel (optical flow) [6, 30, 5] or superpixel [22, 41]. Despite their favorable performance in several datasets, video
segmentation still faces two main challenges. First, when
graphical models are leveraged to compute temporal consistency in the pixel or superpixel level, there often exist mismatching pairs between consecutive frames. For example,
the supervoxel algorithm [15, 44, 38] models the temporal
consistency using superpixels for each frame. The inaccuracy caused by the mismatching of superpixels is inevitably
aggregated frame by frame, and finally leads video segmentation algorithms to fail. We also note that developing a
superpixel model across several frames is computationally inefficient. Second, object level motions estimated by
visual tracking algorithms often contain noisy background
as tracking results in the form of bounding boxes are not
tightly around target objects. Video segmentation benefits

Similar to [42], we use superpixels [1] as instances for
learning the spatio-temporal MIL algorithm. Since MIL often benefits from more discriminative features, we propose
a multi-scale CNN feature based descriptor to strengthen
the discriminative power of each superpixel. To obtain
better segmentation in the temporal domain, we use the
tracking results from the state-of-the-art tracker [24, 28]
to construct positive and negative bags of superpixels. To
make full use of temporal consistency, we take the spatiotemporal consistency into consideration and use the superpixels over a short temporal span to construct bags. To
initialize the labels of bags, we use a superpixel clustering paradigm by grouping superpixels with similar features.
In addition, once we have the spatio-temporal segmentation
13010

