Flight Dynamics-based Recovery of a UAV Trajectory using Ground Cameras
Artem Rozantseva
a

Sudipta N. Sinhab

Debadeepta Deyb
b

Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL

{artem.rozantsev, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch

Pascal Fuaa

Microsoft Research

{sudipta.sinha, dedey}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a new method to estimate the 6-dof trajectory of a flying object such as a quadrotor UAV within a 3D
airspace monitored using multiple fixed ground cameras. It
is based on a new structure from motion formulation for
the 3D reconstruction of a single moving point with known
motion dynamics. Our main contribution is a new bundle
adjustment procedure which in addition to optimizing the
camera poses, regularizes the point trajectory using a prior
based on motion dynamics (or specifically flight dynamics).
Furthermore, we can infer the underlying control input sent
to the UAV’s autopilot that determined its flight trajectory.
Our method requires neither perfect single-view tracking
nor appearance matching across views. For robustness, we
allow the tracker to generate multiple detections per frame
in each video. The true detections and the data association
across videos is estimated using robust multi-view triangulation and subsequently refined during our bundle adjustment procedure. Quantitative evaluation on simulated data
and experiments on real videos from indoor and outdoor
scenes demonstrates the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Rapid adoption of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) and
drones for civilian applications will create demand for lowcost aerial drone surveillance technology in the near future.
Although, acoustics [1], radar [2] and radio frequency (RF)
detection [3] have shown promise, they are expensive and
often ineffective at detecting small, autonomous UAVs [4].
Motion capture systems such as Vicon [5] and OptiTrack [6]
work for moderate sized scenes. However, the use of active
sensing and special markers on the target makes them ineffective for tracking non-cooperative drones in large and
bright outdoor scenes. With the exception of some recent
works [7, 8], visual detection and tracking of drones using
passive video cameras remains a largely unexplored topic.
Existing single-camera detection and tracking methods
are mostly unsuitable for drone surveillance due to their

Figure 1: A quadrotor UAV was manually flown to a height
of 45 meters above a farm within a 100×50m2 area with six
cameras on the ground. [T OP] Two input frames along with
the detections and zoomed-in views of the UAV are shown.
[M IDDLE] 3D trajectory for a 4 minute flight and camera locations estimated by our method. The inset figure shows the
top-down view. [B OTTOM] Estimated throttle signal (one of
the control inputs sent to the autopilot).
limited field of view and the fact that it is difficult to accurately estimate the distance of objects far from the camera that occupy very few pixels in the video frame. Using
multiple overlapping cameras can address these limitations.
However, existing multi-camera tracking methods are designed to track people, vehicles to address indoor and outdoor surveillance tasks, where the targets are often on the
ground. In contrast, small drones must be tracked within a
3D volume that is orders of magnitude larger. As a result
16030

