Incremental Kernel Null Space Discriminant Analysis for Novelty Detection
Juncheng Liu1 , Zhouhui Lian1∗, Yi Wang2,3 , Jianguo Xiao1
1
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
2
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, China

Abstract
Novelty detection, which aims to determine whether a
given data belongs to any category of training data or not,
is considered to be an important and challenging problem
in areas of Pattern Recognition, Machine Learning, etc.
Recently, kernel null space method (KNDA) was reported
to have state-of-the-art performance in novelty detection.
However, KNDA is hard to scale up because of its high computational cost. With the ever-increasing size of data, accelerating the implementing speed of KNDA is desired and
critical. Moreover, it becomes incapable when there exist
successively injected data. To address these issues, we propose the Incremental Kernel Null Space based Discriminant
Analysis (IKNDA) algorithm. The key idea is to extract new
information brought by newly-added samples and integrate
it with the existing model by an efficient updating scheme.
Experiments conducted on two publicly-available datasets
demonstrate that the proposed IKNDA yields comparable
performance as the batch KNDA yet significantly reduces
the computational complexity, and our IKNDA based novelty detection methods markedly outperform approaches using deep neural network (DNN) classifiers. This validates
the superiority of our IKNDA against the state of the art in
novelty detection for large-scale data.

1. Introduction
Novelty detection, which aims to identify new or unknown data that a system has not been trained with and was
not previously aware of [17], is a fundamental and on-going
research problem in areas of Pattern Recognition, Machine
Learning, Computer Vision, etc [21]. The novelty detection
procedure can be regarded as a binary classification task
where the positive exemplars are available and the negative
ones are insufficient or absent. To be a good classification
system, the ability to differentiate between known and unknown objects during testing is desired. Yet, the problem
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

(a) Null space projections

(b) Incremental update

Figure 1: An illustration of our IKNDA algorithm. Each
class is projected into a single point in the joint null space
as illustrated in (a). During updating stage, our approach
updates the null space basis from novel classes (grapes in
this example) using the proposed incremental null space
method, taking advantage of previous information. Adding
new class is equivalent to updating and adding a single point
in this subspace as illustrated in (b).

is tough since only the statistics of the already known information can be utilized. Novelty detection finds many
real applications in our daily lives. For animals, novelty
probably means a potential predator or a threat. Recognizing these unusual objects swiftly could survive themselves.
Novelty detection also has practical significance in medical
diagnoses. Doctors always need to pick up abnormality in a
patient’s index which has large possibility to be diagnosed
as a disease.
However, existing classification methods typically neglect the importance of this property. Most of these advanced classifiers including deep neural network (DNN)
based approaches that are widely used today make the assumption of “closed world”, in which the categories of testing instances should not be out of the range of training
classes. This rarely holds in real cases since many important classes might be under-represented and some classes
might not be included in the training set. To solve this problem, a number of novelty detection methods have been proposed. For a thorough review please refer to [18, 21]. In
1792

