Awesome Typography: Statistics-Based Text Effects Transfer
Shuai Yang, Jiaying Liu∗, Zhouhui Lian and Zongming Guo
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
In this work, we explore the problem of generating fantastic special-effects for the typography. It is quite challenging due to the model diversities to illustrate varied text
effects for different characters. To address this issue, our
key idea is to exploit the analytics on the high regularity of
the spatial distribution for text effects to guide the synthesis
process. Specifically, we characterize the stylized patches
by their normalized positions and the optimal scales to depict their style elements. Our method first estimates these
two features and derives their correlation statistically. They
are then converted into soft constraints for texture transfer
to accomplish adaptive multi-scale texture synthesis and to
make style element distribution uniform. It allows our algorithm to produce artistic typography that fits for both local
texture patterns and the global spatial distribution in the example. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
our method for various text effects over conventional style
transfer methods. In addition, we validate the effectiveness
of our algorithm with extensive artistic typography library
generation.

1. Introduction
Typography is the technology to design the special text
effects to render the character into an original and unique
artwork. These amazing text styles include basic effects
such as shadows, outlines, colors and sophisticated effects
such as burning flames, flowing smokes, multicolored neons, as shown in Fig. 1. Texts decorated by well-designed
special effects become much more attractive. It can also
better reflect the thoughts and emotions from the designer.
The beauty and elegance of text effects are well appreciated,
making it widely used in the publishing and advertisement. However, creating vivid text effects requires a series of
subtle processes by an experienced designer using the editing software: determine color styles, warp textures to match
text shapes and adjust the transparency for visual plausibleness, etc. These advanced editing skills are far beyond the
∗ Corresponding author
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
under contract No. 61472011 and No. 61472015.

Source text S

Source effects S'

Target text T

Our result T'

Input

flame

denim fabric

Output

lava

neon

Figure 1. Overview: Our method takes as input the source text image S, its counterpart stylized image S ′ and the target text image
T , then automatically generates the target stylized image T ′ with
the special effects as in S ′ .

abilities of most casual users. This practical requirement
motivates our work: We investigate an approach to automatically transfer various fantastic text effects designed by
artists onto raw plain texts, as shown in Fig. 1.
Text effects transfer is a brand new sub-topic of style
transfer. Style transfer can be related to color and texture
transfer, respectively. Color transfer matches global [27] or
local [31] color distributions of the target and source images. Texture transfer relies on texture synthesis technologies, where the texture generation is constrained by guidance images. Meanwhile, texture synthesis can be divided
into two categories: non-parametric methods [7, 6, 15, 35]
and parametric methods [14, 9, 17, 11]. The former generates new textures by resampling pixels or patches from
the original texture, while the latter models textures using
statistical measurements and produces a new texture that
shares the same parametric results with the original one.
From a technical perspective, it is quite challenging and
impractical to directly exploit the traditional style transfer
methods to generate new text effects. The challenges lie in
three aspects: (i) The extreme diversity of the text effects
and character shapes: The style diversity makes the transfer task difficult to model uniformly. Further, the algorithm
should be robust to the tremendous variety of characters. (ii) The complicated composition of style elements: A text
effects image often contains multiple intertwined style elements (we call them text sub-effects) that have very dif17464

