Re-Sign: Re-Aligned End-to-End Sequence Modelling
with Deep Recurrent CNN-HMMs
Oscar Koller, Sepehr Zargaran and Hermann Ney
Human Language Technology & Pattern Recognition Group
RWTH Aachen University, Germany
{koller,ney}@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
This work presents an iterative re-alignment approach
applicable to visual sequence labelling tasks such as gesture recognition, activity recognition and continuous sign
language recognition. Previous methods dealing with video
data usually rely on given frame labels to train their classifiers. Looking at recent data sets, these labels often
tend to be noisy which is commonly overseen. We propose an algorithm that treats the provided training labels
as weak labels and refines the label-to-image alignment onthe-fly in a weakly supervised fashion. Given a series of
frames and sequence-level labels, a deep recurrent CNNBLSTM network is trained end-to-end. Embedded into an
HMM, the resulting deep model corrects the frame labels
and continuously improves its performance in several realignments. We evaluate on two challenging publicly available sign recognition benchmark data sets featuring over
1000 classes. We outperform the state-of-the-art by up to
10% absolute and 30% relative.

1. Introduction

els achieve outstanding results in speech recognition, hand
writing recognition, machine translation, image captioning
and image translation, until now they have not been successfully trained on real-life continuous gesture and sign
language recognition tasks distinguishing a large number
of classes. Our experimental evidence suggests that label to video re-alignments are needed to permit such successful training. Natural continuous sign language, as opposed to its artificial counterparts, poses a truly challenging
large-scale classification task with inherent segmentation.
The stream of continuous sign gestures constitutes overlapping context- and user-dependent interactions that make use
of multi-modal channels which can often be observed in
non-synchronous realisations. In this paper, we introduce
new guidelines for outperforming the current state-of-theart in the field of human gesture and sign language recognition. We propose a multilayer bi-directional LSTM that is
trained end-to-end with a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The joint model is embedded into a HiddenMarkov-Model (HMM) for iterative refinement and final
recognition outperforming the state of the art on two publicly available benchmark data sets by a large margin. As
such we make several contributions addressing short comings in the current state-of-the-art:

Sequence data is difficult to annotate, when trying to attribute a label to each frame. Large amounts of continuous
data usually contain labelling ambiguities and are not free of
errors. The community needs to find ways how to deal with
that. Sequence data annotations should be expected to vary
in quality and weakly supervised approaches could cope
with that. Evaluation metrics could judge on the sequence
level rather than at exact frame matches, favouring those approaches that generalise over annotation imperfections. In
this work we are proposing an iterative re-alignment algorithm to overcome such challenges. The presented approach
has a direct impact on training classifiers for challenging sequence tasks like gesture or sign language recognition and
relevant neighbouring fields.
Even though Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) mod-

1. We empirically validate the importance of realignments for continuous gesture and sign language
recognition tasks and propose an iterative re-alignment
algorithm based on a hybrid CNN-BLSTM embedded
into a HMM.
2. To promote reproducibility on the selected corpora we
will make the best alignments publicly available 1 .
3. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to successfully train end-to-end CNN-BLSTMs for continuous gesture and sign language tasks distinguishing
over 1000 classes.
1 http://www-i6.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/˜koller/RWTH-PHOENIX/

14297

