Fine-Grained Recognition as HSnet Search for Informative Image Parts
Michael Lam, Behrooz Mahasseni† , Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR
{lamm,sinisa}@oregonstate.edu † behrooz.mahasseni@gmail.com

Abstract
This work addresses fine-grained image classification.
Our work is based on the hypothesis that when dealing with
subtle differences among object classes it is critical to identify and only account for a few informative image parts, as
the remaining image context may not only be uninformative
but may also hurt recognition. This motivates us to formulate our problem as a sequential search for informative
parts over a deep feature map produced by a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). A state of this search is a
set of proposal bounding boxes in the image, whose “informativeness” is evaluated by the heuristic function (H),
and used for generating new candidate states by the successor function (S). The two functions are unified via a Long
Short-Term Memory network (LSTM) into a new deep recurrent architecture, called HSnet. Thus, HSnet (i) generates proposals of informative image parts and (ii) fuses all
proposals toward final fine-grained recognition. We specify
both supervised and weakly supervised training of HSnet
depending on the availability of object part annotations.
Evaluation on the benchmark Caltech-UCSD Birds 2002011 and Cars-196 datasets demonstrate our competitive
performance relative to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of fine-grained object
recognition. Recent work has made significant progress in
terms of improving accuracy on an increasing number of
object classes [26, 21, 16, 38]. In contrast to general object recognition, where contextual cues are widely considered important, fine-grained recognition has been shown to
benefit from identifying critical object parts and learning
only off of these parts to discriminate among similar classes
[4, 5, 44, 45, 8]. In this paper, we continue this research
direction by introducing and evaluating a new deep searchbased framework.
It seems that our line of work stands somewhat isolated, but still rather necessary, in the context of recent

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. Given an image,
we use HSnet to sequentially search for discriminative
bounding boxes in the image, and fuse all uncovered image parts for fine-grained recognition. HSnet provides a
unified framework to jointly learn the heuristic function,
which evaluates the search states, and the successor function, which proposes new states in the search space.

advances in deep learning for various vision problems, including object tracking [34], activity recognition [27], as
well as fine-grained object recognition [22, 38]. All these
approaches demonstrate significant performance improvements when the initial training dataset is augmented with
additional noisy data – e.g., for learning a tracker, by random sampling around ground truth trajectories, or for learning a fine-grained object detector, by downloading noisy results of Google searches on the Internet for images of finegrained classes. Thus, the recent findings support and motivate a flurry of new research on how to obtain more training data from various multimodal sources, as this typically
leads to better performance of deep methods. However, in
a wide range of applications requiring fine-grained recognition, it is very difficult (if not impossible) to obtain additional ground truth or “noisy” annotations (e.g. military, bi-

2520

