StyleNet: Generating Attractive Visual Captions with Styles
Chuang Gan1

Zhe Gan2 Xiaodong He3 Jianfeng Gao 3
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University, China
2
Duke University, USA
3
Microsoft Research Redmond, USA

Li Deng3

Abstract
We propose a novel framework named StyleNet to address the task of generating attractive captions for images
and videos with different styles. To this end, we devise a
novel model component, named factored LSTM, which automatically distills the style factors in the monolingual text
corpus. Then at runtime, we can explicitly control the style
in the caption generation process so as to produce attractive visual captions with the desired style. Our approach
achieves this goal by leveraging two sets of data: 1) factual image/video-caption paired data, and 2) stylized monolingual text data (e.g., romantic and humorous sentences).
We show experimentally that StyleNet outperforms existing approaches for generating visual captions with different
styles, measured in both automatic and human evaluation
metrics on the newly collected FlickrStyle10K image caption dataset, which contains 10K Flickr images with corresponding humorous and romantic captions.

1. Introduction
Generating a natural language description of an image
is an emerging interdisciplinary problem at the intersection
of computer vision, natural language processing, and artificial intelligence. This task is often referred to as image
captioning. It serves as the foundation of many important
applications, such as semantic image search, visual intelligence in chatting robots, photo and video sharing on social media, and aid for people to perceive the world around
them. However, we observed that the captions generated by
most of the existing state-of-the-art image captioning systems [50, 32, 22, 5, 10, 9, 52, 54, 55, 2, 46] usually provide a factual description of the image content, while style
is the often-overlooked element in the caption generation
process. These systems usually use a language generation
model that mixes the style with other linguistic patterns of
language generation, thereby lacking a mechanism to control the style explicitly.
On the other hand, a stylized (e.g., romantic or humor-

CaptionBot: A man on a rocky hillside
next to a stone wall.
Romantic: A man uses rock climbing to
conquer the high.

Humorous: A man is climbing the rock
like a lizard.
CaptionBot: A dog runs in the grass.
Romantic: A dog runs through the
grass to meet his lover.
Humorous: A dog runs through the
grass in search of the missing bones.

Figure 1. We address the problem of visual captioning with Styles.
Given an image, our StyleNet can generate attractive image captions with different styles.

ous) description will greatly enrich the expressibility of the
caption and make it more attractive. An attractive image
caption will add more visual interest to images and can
even become a distinguishing trademark of the system. This
is particularly valuable for certain applications such as increasing user engagement in chatting bots, or enlightening
users in photo captioning for social media.
Figure 1 gives two examples to illustrate the setting of
the problem. For the image at the top, the Microsoft CaptionBot [46] produces a caption that reads “A man on a
rocky hillside next to a stone wall”. Compared to this factual caption, the proposed StyleNet is able to generate captions with specific styles. For example, if romantic style is
required, it describes the image as “A man uses rock climbing to conquer the high”, while the caption is “A man is
climbing the mountain likes a lizard” if a humorous style is
demanded. Similarly, for the image at the bottom, the Microsoft CaptionBot produces a caption like “A dog runs in
the grass”. In contrast, the StyleNet can describe this image
in a romantic style, such as “A dog runs through the grass to
13137

