MCMLSD: A Dynamic Programming Approach to Line Segment Detection
Emilio J. Almazàn
Nielsen
Madrid, Spain

Ron Tal
Uber Technologies
San Francisco, USA

Yiming Qian
York University
Toronto, Canada

James H. Elder
York University
Toronto, Canada

ealmazanm@gmail.com

ron@uber.com

yimingq@cse.yorku.ca

jelder@yorku.ca

Abstract
Prior approaches to line segment detection typically involve perceptual grouping in the image domain or global
accumulation in the Hough domain. Here we propose a
probabilistic algorithm that merges the advantages of both
approaches. In a first stage lines are detected using a global
probabilistic Hough approach. In the second stage each detected line is analyzed in the image domain to localize the
line segments that generated the peak in the Hough map.
By limiting search to a line, the distribution of segments
over the sequence of points on the line can be modeled as a
Markov chain, and a probabilistically optimal labelling can
be computed exactly using a standard dynamic programming algorithm, in linear time. The Markov assumption
also leads to an intuitive ranking method that uses the local
marginal posterior probabilities to estimate the expected
number of correctly labelled points on a segment. To assess
the resulting Markov Chain Marginal Line Segment Detector (MCMLSD) we develop and apply a novel quantitative
evaluation methodology that controls for under- and oversegmentation. Evaluation on the YorkUrbanDB dataset
shows that the proposed MCMLSD method outperforms the
state-of-the-art by a substantial margin.

1. Introduction
Much of our visual world can be approximated as piecewise planar, particularly in built environments. The boundaries and creases of these piecewise planar surfaces project
to the image as line segments, and as a consequence the
accurate detection of line segments continues to be one of
the most important low-level problems in the field of computer vision. Line segments are important features for many
tasks, including feature matching across views [23], vanishing point detection [15] and 3D reconstruction [22, 30, 12].
Two frameworks have been popular for line segment detection: perceptual grouping and global Hough analysis.

1.1. The perceptual grouping approach
In the perceptual grouping framework, a set of heuristics
typically based upon geometric grouping cues (e.g., proximity, good continuation) is used to group roughly collinear
local features (e.g., edges or vectors tangent to isophotes)
into extended line segments, which are evaluated according
to some quality of fit measure. An early example is the
hierarchical heuristic framework developed by Boldt and
colleagues [3]. More recent multi-stage grouping efforts
include the SSWMS approach of Nieto et al. [21], which
involves an iterative selection of image points with strongly
oriented gradient structure, followed by an iterative growing
process, the approach of Lu et al. [19], which involves both
linking and splitting, and the biologically inspired approach
of Liu et al. [18], which employs ‘simple cell’ filters to
detect local oriented structure, ‘complex cell’ mechanisms
that locally integrate these responses and ‘hyper-complex’
mechanisms to detect endpoints.
An alternative to this multi-stage grouping approach is
to analyze the covariance matrix of image locations in a set
of connected edges and label a set as a line segment if the
smallest eigenvalue falls below a threshold [11, 17]. While
beautifully simple, these methods are not robust to gaps or
intersections in the edge map.
Another issue in this perceptual grouping framework is
that some threshold on the quality of fit measure must be applied in order to discriminate ‘true’ line segments from false
conjunctions that might arise by chance. This issue was addressed in the LSD framework introduced by von Gioi et al.
[26] and based on earlier work by Desolneux et al. [7]. In
this framework the so-called a-contrario approach is used
to explicitly compute the probability that inferred line segments might have occurred by chance, given a maximum
entropy model of the edge map. (This is related to the minimum reliable scale null hypothesis testing framework for
edge detection developed by Elder & Zucker [8].) While
this approach does not eliminate the need for a threshold,
it transfers the threshold to a quantity (e.g., expected number of false positives per image) that is much easier to set
rationally. A much faster version of this method dubbed
12031

