IRINA: Iris Recognition (even) in Inaccurately Segmented Data
Hugo Proença and João C. Neves
IT - Instituto de Telecomunicações
University of Beira Interior, Portugal
{hugomcp,jcneves}@di.ubi.pt

Abstract
The effectiveness of current iris recognition systems depends on the accurate segmentation and parameterisation
of the iris boundaries, as failures at this point misalign
the coefficients of the biometric signatures. This paper describes IRINA, an algorithm for Iris Recognition that is robust against INAccurately segmented samples, which makes
it a good candidate to work in poor-quality data. The process is based in the concept of ”corresponding” patch between pairs of images, that is used to estimate the posterior
probabilities that patches regard the same biological region,
even in case of segmentation errors and non-linear texture
deformations. Such information enables to infer a free-form
deformation field (2D registration vectors) between images,
whose first and second-order statistics provide effective biometric discriminating power. Extensive experiments were
carried out in four datasets (CASIA-IrisV3-Lamp, CASIAIrisV4-Lamp, CASIA-IrisV4-Thousand and WVU) and show
that IRINA not only achieves state-of-the-art performance
in good quality data, but also handles effectively severe segmentation errors and large differences in pupillary dilation
/ constriction.

/ constricted pupils, which cause non-linear deformations in the iris texture that are only partially compensated by the normalisation phase. Pupil movements
laterally pressure the iris, with some of the fibers folding underneath others and changing texture appearance.
Note that 1) varying lighting conditions change the levels of pupillary dilation; and 2) less constrained acquisition protocols reduce data quality and make hard to accurately parameterise the iris boundaries. Hence, the robustness of recognition can be seen as the major concern behind the method proposed in this paper (IRINA), keeping as
main goal to achieve state-of-the-art performance in goodquality data while also handling segmentation inaccuracies
and non-linear texture deformations.
A cohesive perspective of IRINA is given in Fig. 1, with
a processing chain divided into three phases:
1. we estimate the posterior probabilities that patches
from two iris samples correspond, even in case of nonlinear texture deformations. Starting from a learning
set of manually annotated point correspondences that
define convex polygons, we densely sample these regions and obtain a large number of patches considered
to regard the same biological region. This information
feeds a convolution neural network (CNN), that: a) explicitly discriminates between the corresponding and
non-corresponding patches; and b) implicitly learns
the typical iris texture deformations;

1. Introduction
Iris recognition is a mature technology, with systems
successfully deployed in domains such as border controls,
computers login and national ID cards. Since the pioneer algorithm [5] proposed in 1993, a long road has been travelled
in iris biometrics research [2], with two major weaknesses
subsisting:

2. we infer a free-form deformation field (set of 2D vectors) that registrates pairs of samples represented in
normalised coordinates. This step is formulated using a discrete Markov random field (MRF), with unary
costs provided by the responses of the CNN, and pairwise costs imposing smooth solutions that penalize local gradients of the deformation field. The loopy belief
propagation (LBP) algorithm [8] is used to solve the
image registration problem;

• accurate segmentation and parameterization of the iris
boundaries is required to image normalisation. As
most of the iris encoding / matching strategies are
phase-based, failures in segmentation lead to bit shifting in the biometric signatures, with a corresponding
increase of false rejections;
• false rejections also increase in case of severely dilated
1538

