Discretely Coding Semantic Rank Orders for Supervised Image Hashing
Li Liu1 , Ling Shao1 , Fumin Shen2 , and Mengyang Yu3
1

2

School of Computing Science, University of East Anglia, UK
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{li.liu, ling.shao}@uea.ac.uk, fumin.shen@gmail.com, mengyangyu@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning to hash has been recognized to accomplish
highly efficient storage and retrieval for large-scale visual
data. Particularly, ranking-based hashing techniques have
recently attracted broad research attention because ranking accuracy among the retrieved data is well explored and
their objective is more applicable to realistic search tasks.
However, directly optimizing discrete hash codes without
continuous-relaxations on a nonlinear ranking objective
is infeasible by either traditional optimization methods or
even recent discrete hashing algorithms. To address this
challenging issue, in this paper, we introduce a novel supervised hashing method, dubbed Discrete Semantic Ranking
Hashing (DSeRH), which aims to directly embed semantic
rank orders into binary codes. In DSeRH, a generalized
Adaptive Discrete Minimization (ADM) approach is proposed to discretely optimize binary codes with the quadratic
nonlinear ranking objective in an iterative manner and is
guaranteed to converge quickly. Additionally, instead of using 0/1 independent labels to form rank orders as in previous works, we generate the listwise rank orders from the
high-level semantic word embeddings which can quantitatively capture the intrinsic correlation between different categories. We evaluate our DSeRH, coupled with both linear
and deep convolutional neural network (CNN) hash functions, on three image datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10, SUN397 and
ImageNet100, and the results manifest that DSeRH can outperform the state-of-the-art ranking-based hashing methods.

1. Introduction
Hashing or binary coding is becoming increasingly popular due to its ability to help manipulate large-scale data
with significant reduction on both memory and computation

complexities, and is demonstrably powerful in many visual
information retrieval applications. The core idea of hashing
is encoding the high-dimensional feature vectors, e.g., of
images, documents or videos, into a set of low-dimensional
binary strings in a Hamming space, which effectively preserves the original data similarities of interest.
Existing hashing methods can be roughly divided into
two groups: unsupervised [2, 16, 44, 24, 23, 35, 15, 18,
19, 4, 3, 30, 9] and supervised (including semi-supervised)
[39, 8, 28, 22, 33, 12, 40]. Among unsupervised hashing,
the most well-known method is Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [2], which randomly projects nearby data points
from the Euclidean space to a Hamming space with similar binary codes. Unlike LSH, Spectral Hashing (SpH) [44]
is a data-dependent method, which aims to learn compact
binary codes preserving the data similarity in the original
space. Many other unsupervised hashing methods have also
been proposed [23, 3, 14, 19, 4, 34, 25, 21, 20, 1, 32] and
effectively applied to large-scale data retrieval tasks.
Alternatively, (semi-)supervised hashing methods optimize hash codes by involving the semantic label information in the learning phase, which usually yields a significant performance improvement. Representative methods
in this group include the Semi-Supervised Hashing (SSH)
[40], Linear Discriminant Analysis Hashing (LDAH) [39],
Kernel-Based Supervised Hashing (KSH) [22], Binary Reconstructive Embeddings (BRE) [8], Minimal Loss Hashing
(MLH) [28], Supervised Discrete Hashing (SDH) [33] and
Evolutionary Compact Embedding (ECE) [17].
Most of the above supervised hashing methods generate
binary codes by respecting the piecewise label [33] or pairwise similarity of data points [28, 22]. However, their objectives would be suboptimal for realistic search tasks since
the ranking information, which quantitatively indicates semantic nearest neighbors of a specific query, is not fully
exploited. Inspired by this, many ranking-based hashing approaches [11, 29, 5, 13, 42, 37, 43, 38, 41, 47, 46, 27, 48]
11425

