Teaching Compositionality to CNNs
Austin Stone
Yi Liu

Huayan Wang
D. Scott Phoenix

Michael Stark
Dileep George

Vicarious FPC, San Francisco, CA, USA
{austin, huayan, michael, yi, scott, dileep}@vicarious.com

Abstract
input
images

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown
great success in computer vision, approaching human-level
performance when trained for specific tasks via applicationspecific loss functions. In this paper, we propose a method
for augmenting and training CNNs so that their learned
features are compositional. It encourages networks to
form representations that disentangle objects from their surroundings and from each other, thereby promoting better
generalization. Our method is agnostic to the specific details of the underlying CNN to which it is applied and can in
principle be used with any CNN. As we show in our experiments, the learned representations lead to feature activations that are more localized and improve performance over
non-compositional baselines in object recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown remarkable performance in many computer vision tasks [21,
20, 42, 37, 35] including image classification [20], object
class detection [41, 12], instance segmentation [13], image
captioning [18, 44], and scene understanding [6]. Their success is typically attributed to two factors; they have large
enough capacity to make effective use of the ever-increasing
amount of image training data available today, while at the
same time managing the number of free parameters through
the use of inductive biases from neuroscience. Specifically,
the interleaving of locally connected filter and pooling layers [15] bears similarity to the visual cortex’s interleaving
of simple cells, which have localized receptive fields, and
complex cells, which have wider receptive fields and greater
local invariance.
Recently, researchers have investigated more inductive
biases from neuroscience to improve CNN architectures.
Examples include learning representations from video sequences [2, 10, 17], encouraging the utilization of depth information [14], and using physical interaction with the en-

standard
CNN

compositional
CNN (ours)

Figure 1: For a standard CNN (VGG, [37]), the presence
of a nearby object (cup) greatly affects the activations in
the region of an object of interest (airplane). In contrast, a
CNN trained with our method demonstrates better compositionality in its feature representations – the activations in
the airplane region represent primarily the airplane and are
therefore less affected by the presence of the cup.

vironment [31] to bias representations.
In this paper, we follow a similar philosophy, but focus
our attention on the inductive bias of compositionality: the
notion that the representation of the whole should be composed of the representation of its parts (we give a precise
formal definition of this notion in Sect. 3). Intuitively, encouraging this property during training results in representations that are more robust to re-combination (e.g., when
seeing a familiar object in a novel context) and less prone
to focusing on discriminative but irrelevant background features. It is also in line with findings from neuroscience that
suggest separate processing of figure and ground regions in
the visual cortex [16, 32]. Note that a typical CNN does
not exhibit this property (Fig. 1 visualizes the difference in
activations between a CNN trained without (VGG [37]) and
with our compositionality objective1 ).
In contrast to previous work that designs compositional
1 Fig. 1 shows the activation difference in the airplane region between

the current frame and a frame where the airplane is shown in isolation.
Activations are taken from intermediate conv. layers with spatial resolution
28 × 28. We marginalize over feature channels to create visualization.

15058

