Reconstructing Transient Images from Single-Photon Sensors
Matthew O’Toole, Felix Heide, David B. Lindell, Kai Zang, Steven Diamond, Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University

Abstract
Computer vision algorithms build on 2D images or 3D
videos that capture dynamic events at the millisecond time
scale. However, capturing and analyzing “transient images” at the picosecond scale—i.e., at one trillion frames
per second—reveals unprecedented information about a
scene and light transport within. This is not only crucial
for time-of-flight range imaging, but it also helps further
our understanding of light transport phenomena at a more
fundamental level and potentially allows to revisit many assumptions made in different computer vision algorithms.
In this work, we design and evaluate an imaging system
that builds on single photon avalanche diode (SPAD) sensors to capture multi-path responses with picosecond-scale
active illumination. We develop inverse methods that use
modern approaches to deconvolve and denoise measurements in the presence of Poisson noise, and compute transient images at a higher quality than previously reported.
The small form factor, fast acquisition rates, and relatively
low cost of our system potentially makes transient imaging
more practical for a range of applications.

1. Introduction
In 1978, Abramson recorded the first holographic image of a light pulse propagating through a scene [1]. Each
pixel in this so-called “transient image” is a time impulse
response function τ , representing the amount of light received at time t in response to a pulse of light emitted into
the scene at time t = 0 (Figure 1). While the transient nature of light is hidden in images captured by conventional
cameras or seen by the naked eye, these transient images
unveil the sequence of complex scattering events that occur
when light interacts with real-world environments.
Recent developments in sensing technologies have revitalized interest in transient imaging and, more importantly,
the use of transient information for scene analysis [18]. For
example, transient images provide a way to measure the 3D
shape and albedo of objects [20, 21], to distinguish between
objects composed of different scattering properties [29, 32],
or measure the reflectance and scattering properties of ma-

Figure 1. Row 1: Images of a scene captured with regular vision
camera under ambient lighting (left) and a single-photon sensitive
SPAD array under diffused laser illumination (right). Row 2: The
temporal response approximately 703 ps (left) and 1171 ps (right)
after emitting a pulse of light into the scene.

terials [13, 23]. Transient imaging has also enabled unprecedented imaging capabilities such as looking-aroundcorners [5, 30], seeing through diffusers and thick scatterers [19, 26], or even lensless imaging [33].
While several imaging technologies now exist for capturing transient images (e.g., holography [1], streak camera [30, 31], photon mixer device (PMD) [15, 19], optical interferometry [12]), each approach has weighty practical limitations as outlined in Table 1. Although transient images record high-speed optical events, the physical
process to capture these transient images may require upwards of several hours. In addition, these devices are often
mounted onto vibration isolated tables (e.g., [12]), or are
prohibitively expensive (e.g., [30, 31])—factors that prevent
their use in everyday scenarios.
An emerging sensing technology known as singlephoton avalanche diodes (SPAD) is a silicon-based photodetector capable of detecting and timestamping individual photon events (Figure 2). A SPAD pixel collects a histogram of photon arrival times (i.e., a discretized version
of the time impulse response τ [t]) by repeatedly measuring the scene’s response to a sequence of light pulses being
emitted at MHz rates (Figure 3). SPAD pixels detect timestamped photon events at picosecond timescale resolutions,

1539

