Incorporating Copying Mechanism in Image Captioning
for Learning Novel Objects
Ting Yao, Yingwei Pan, Yehao Li, and Tao Mei
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
{tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, {panyw.ustc, yehaoli.sysu}@gmail.com

Detected Objects:

Abstract

cat, suitcase, clothes, bag, luggage, eyes...

Image captioning often requires a large set of training
image-sentence pairs. In practice, however, acquiring sufficient training pairs is always expensive, making the recent captioning models limited in their ability to describe
objects outside of training corpora (i.e., novel objects). In
this paper, we present Long Short-Term Memory with Copying Mechanism (LSTM-C) — a new architecture that incorporates copying into the Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) plus Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) image captioning framework, for describing novel objects in captions. Specifically, freely available object recognition datasets
are leveraged to develop classifiers for novel objects. Our
LSTM-C then nicely integrates the standard word-by-word
sentence generation by a decoder RNN with copying mechanism which may instead select words from novel objects at
proper places in the output sentence. Extensive experiments
are conducted on both MSCOCO image captioning and ImageNet datasets, demonstrating the ability of our proposed
LSTM-C architecture to describe novel objects. Furthermore, superior results are reported when compared to stateof-the-art deep models.

1. Introduction
Automatically describing the content of an image with
a complete and natural sentence, a problem known as image captioning, has great potential impact for instance on
robotic vision or helping visually impaired people. Intensive research interests from both computer vision and natural language processing communities have been paid for
this emerging topic. Most of recent attempts on this problem [4, 23, 26, 29] are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) plus Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) based sequence
learning methods, which are mainly inspired from the advances by using RNN in machine translation [21]. The ba-

LRCN: a cat sitting on top of a red chair

LSTM-C: a cat laying on a suitcase

Figure 1. An example of object recognition and image captioning.
The input is an image, while the output is the detected objects and
a natural sentence, respectively. (upper row: the detected objects
in the image; middle row: the sentence generated by LRCN [4]
image captioning approach; bottom row: the sentence generated
by our LSTM-C model.)

sic idea is an encoder-decoder mechanism for translation.
Specifically, a CNN is employed to encode image content
and then a decoder RNN is exploited to generate a natural sentence. While encouraging performances are reported, the sequence learning methods learn directly from image and sentence pairs, which fail in their ability to describe
the objects out of the training data, i.e., novel objects. Take
the image in Figure 1 as an example, the output sentence
generated by a popular image captioning method Long-term
Recurrent Convolutional Networks (LRCN) [4] is unable to
describe “suitcase” as this object is non-existent in the training corpora. More importantly, manually labeling a largescale image captioning dataset is an intellectually expensive
and time-consuming process.
We demonstrate in this paper that the above limitations
could be mitigated by incorporating the knowledge from external visual recognition datasets, which are freely available
for developing object detectors. Specifically, we present
a novel Long Short-Term Memory with Copying Mechanism (LSTM-C) framework to generate words by integrating “copying mechanism.” Copying mechanism is originated from human language communication and refers to
the mechanism that locates a certain segment of the input
sequence and directly puts the segment in the output sequence [7]. The spirit behind is the rote memorization in
language processing of human being, which needs to refer

6580

