Learning a Deep Embedding Model for Zero-Shot Learning
Li Zhang Tao Xiang Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London
{david.lizhang, t.xiang, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) models rely on learning a joint
embedding space where both textual/semantic description
of object classes and visual representation of object images
can be projected to for nearest neighbour search. Despite
the success of deep neural networks that learn an end-toend model between text and images in other vision problems
such as image captioning, very few deep ZSL model exists
and they show little advantage over ZSL models that utilise
deep feature representations but do not learn an end-to-end
embedding. In this paper we argue that the key to make
deep ZSL models succeed is to choose the right embedding
space. Instead of embedding into a semantic space or an
intermediate space, we propose to use the visual space as
the embedding space. This is because that in this space,
the subsequent nearest neighbour search would suffer much
less from the hubness problem and thus become more effective. This model design also provides a natural mechanism
for multiple semantic modalities (e.g., attributes and sentence descriptions) to be fused and optimised jointly in an
end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks show that our model significantly outperforms the
existing models.

1. Introduction
A recent trend in developing visual recognition models is
to scale up the number of object categories. However, most
existing recognition models are based on supervised learning and require a large amount (at least 100s) of training
samples to be collected and annotated for each object class
to capture its intra-class appearance variations [6]. This
severely limits their scalability – collecting daily objects
such as chair is easier, but many other categories are rare
(e.g., a newly identified specie of beetle on a remote pacific
island). None of these models can work with few or even
no training samples for a given class. In contrast, humans
are very good at recognising objects without seeing any visual samples, i.e., zero-shot learning (ZSL). For example, a
child would have no problem recognising a zebra if she has

seen horses before and also read elsewhere that a zebra is
a horse but with black-and-white stripes on it. Inspired by
humans’ ZSL ability, recently there is a surge of interest in
machine ZSL [2, 47, 22, 1, 37, 43, 10, 31, 11, 14, 24, 46,
34, 4, 13, 3, 5, 48, 49].
A zero-shot learning method relies on the existence of
a labelled training set of seen classes and the knowledge
about how an unseen class is semantically related to the
seen classes. Seen and unseen classes are usually related
in a high dimensional vector space, called semantic space,
where the knowledge from seen classes can be transferred
to unseen classes. The semantic spaces used by most early
works are based on semantic attributes [8, 9, 32]. Given
a defined attribute ontology, each class name can be represented by an attribute vector and termed as a class prototype.
More recently, semantic word vector space [43, 10] and sentence descriptions/captions [34] have started to gain popularity. With the former, the class names are projected into a
word vector space so that different classes can be compared,
whilst with the latter, a neural language model is required to
provide a vector representation of the description.
With the semantic space and a visual feature representation of image content, ZSL is typically solved in two steps:
(1) A joint embedding space is learned where both the semantic vectors (prototypes) and the visual feature vectors
can be projected to; and (2) nearest neighbour (NN) search
is performed in this embedding space to match the projection of an image feature vector against that of an unseen class prototype. Most state-of-the-arts ZSL models
[11, 13, 2, 3, 37, 47, 22] use deep CNN features for visual feature representation; the features are extracted with
pretrained CNN models. They differ mainly in how to learn
the embedding space given the features. They are thus not
end-to-end deep learning models.
In this paper, we focus on end-to-end learning of a deep
embedding based ZSL model which offers a number of
advantages. First, end-to-end optimisation can potentially
lead to learning a better embedding space. For example,
if sentence descriptions are used as the input to a neural
language model such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
for computing a semantic space, both the neural language

2021

