Photorealistic Facial Texture Inference Using Deep Neural Networks
Shunsuke Saito*†§
*

Pinscreen

input picture

†

Lingyu Wei*†§

Liwen Hu*†
‡

University of Southern California

output albedo map

rendering

Koki Nagano‡

Hao Li*†‡

USC Institute for Creative Technologies

rendering (zoom)

rendering

rendering (zoom)

Figure 1: We present an inference framework based on deep neural networks for synthesizing photorealistic facial texture
along with 3D geometry from a single unconstrained image. We can successfully digitize historic figures that are no longer
available for scanning and produce high-fidelity facial texture maps with mesoscopic skin details.

Abstract
We present a data-driven inference method that can synthesize a photorealistic texture map of a complete 3D face
model given a partial 2D view of a person in the wild. After
an initial estimation of shape and low-frequency albedo, we
compute a high-frequency partial texture map, without the
shading component, of the visible face area. To extract the
fine appearance details from this incomplete input, we introduce a multi-scale detail analysis technique based on midlayer feature correlations extracted from a deep convolutional neural network. We demonstrate that fitting a convex
combination of feature correlations from a high-resolution
face database can yield a semantically plausible facial detail description of the entire face. A complete and photorealistic texture map can then be synthesized by iteratively
optimizing for the reconstructed feature correlations. Using
these high-resolution textures and a commercial rendering
framework, we can produce high-fidelity 3D renderings that
are visually comparable to those obtained with state-of-theart multi-view face capture systems. We demonstrate successful face reconstructions from a wide range of low resolution input images, including those of historical figures. In
addition to extensive evaluations, we validate the realism of
our results using a crowdsourced user study.

§- indicates equal contribution

1. Introduction
Until recently, the digitization of photorealistic faces
has only been possible in professional studio settings, typically involving sophisticated appearance measurement devices [52, 31, 18, 3, 17] and carefully controlled lighting
conditions. While such a complex acquisition process is acceptable for production purposes, the ability to build highend 3D face models from a single unconstrained image
could widely impact new forms of immersive communication, education, and consumer applications. With virtual
and augmented reality becoming the next generation platform for social interaction, compelling 3D avatars could
be generated with minimal efforts and pupeteered through
facial performances [28, 36]. Within the context of cultural heritage, iconic and historical personalities could be
restored to life in captivating 3D digital forms from archival
photographs. For example: can we use Computer Vision to
bring back our favorite boxing legend, Muhammad Ali, and
relive his greatest moments in 3D?
Capturing accurate and complete facial appearance properties from images in the wild is a fundamentally ill-posed
problem. Often the input pictures have limited resolution, only a partial view of the subject is available, and
the lighting conditions are unknown. Most state-of-the-art
monocular facial capture frameworks [49, 42] rely on linear PCA models [5] and important appearance details for
photorealistic rendering such as complex skin pigmentation variations and mesoscopic-level texture details (freckles, pores, stubble hair, etc.), cannot be modeled. Despite
4321
5144

