Detailed, accurate, human shape estimation from clothed 3D scan sequences
Chao Zhang1,2 , Sergi Pujades1 , Michael Black1 , and Gerard Pons-Moll1
1

2

MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Dept. of Computer Science, The University of York, UK

Figure 1: Given static 3D scans or 3D scan sequences (in pink), we estimate the naked shape under clothing (beige). Our
method obtains accurate results by minimizing an objective function that captures the visible details of the skin, while being
robust to clothing. We show several pairs of clothed scan sequences and the estimated body shape underneath.

Abstract
We address the problem of estimating human pose and
body shape from 3D scans over time. Reliable estimation
of 3D body shape is necessary for many applications including virtual try-on, health monitoring, and avatar creation for virtual reality. Scanning bodies in minimal clothing, however, presents a practical barrier to these applications. We address this problem by estimating body shape
under clothing from a sequence of 3D scans. Previous
methods that have exploited body models produce smooth
shapes lacking personalized details. We contribute a new
approach to recover a personalized shape of the person.
The estimated shape deviates from a parametric model to
fit the 3D scans. We demonstrate the method using high
quality 4D data as well as sequences of visual hulls extracted from multi-view images. We also make available
BUFF, a new 4D dataset that enables quantitative evaluation http://buff.is.tue.mpg.de/. Our method outperforms the state of the art in both pose estimation and
shape estimation, qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of estimating the body shape
of a person wearing clothing from 3D scan sequences or
visual hulls computed from multi-view images. Reliably
estimating the shape under clothing is useful for many applications including virtual try-on, biometrics, and fitness.
It is also a key component for virtual clothing and cloth
simulation where garments need to be synthesized on top
of the minimally-clothed body. Furthermore, most digital recordings of humans are done wearing clothes and
therefore automatic methods to extract biometric information from such data are needed. While clothes occlude the
minimally-clothed shape (MCS) of the human and make the
task challenging, different poses of the person provide different constraints on the shape under the clothes. Previous work [2, 45] exploits this fact by optimizing shape using different poses. They use the statistical shape model
SCAPE [1] that factorizes human shape into subject identity and pose. The main limitation of such approaches is
that only the parameters of the statistical model are opti-

4191

