Controlling Perceptual Factors in Neural Style Transfer
Leon A. Gatys1

Alexander S. Ecker1 Matthias Bethge1 Aaron Hertzmann2
1
2
University of Tübingen
Adobe Research

(a) Content

(b) Spatial Control

(c) Colour Control

Eli Shechtman2

(d) Scale Control

Figure 1: Overview of our control methods. (a) Content image, with spatial mask inset. (b) Spatial Control. The sky is stylised using the
sky of Style II from Fig. 2(c). The ground is stylised using Style I from Fig. 4(b). (c) Colour Control. The colour of the content image
is preserved using luminance-only style transfer described in Section 5.1. (d) Scale Control. The fine scale is stylised using using Style I
from Fig. 4(b) and the coarse scale is stylised using Style III from Fig. 4(b). Colour is preserved using the colour matching described in
section 5.2.

Abstract
Neural Style Transfer has shown very exciting results enabling new forms of image manipulation. Here we extend
the existing method to introduce control over spatial location, colour information and across spatial scale12 . We
demonstrate how this enhances the method by allowing
high-resolution controlled stylisation and helps to alleviate
common failure cases such as applying ground textures to
sky regions. Furthermore, by decomposing style into these
perceptual factors we enable the combination of style information from multiple sources to generate new, perceptually
appealing styles from existing ones. We also describe how
these methods can be used to more efficiently produce large
size, high-quality stylisation. Finally we show how the introduced control measures can be applied in recent methods
for Fast Neural Style Transfer.

1. Introduction
Example-based style transfer is a major way to create
new, perceptually appealing images from existing ones. It
takes two images xS and xC as input, and produces a new
image x̂ applying the style of xS to the content of xC . The
concepts of “style” and “content” are both expressed in
terms of image statistics; for example, two images are said
1 Code: github.com/leongatys/NeuralImageSynthesis
2 Supplement: bethgelab.org/media/uploads/stylecontrol/supplement/

to have the same style if they embody the same correlations
of specific image features. To provide intuitive control over
this process, one must identify ways to access perceptual
factors in these statistics.
In order to identify these factors, we observe some of the
different ways that one might describe an artwork such as
Vincent van Gogh’s A Wheatfield with Cypresses (Fig. 2(c)).
First, one might separately describe different styles in different regions, such as in the sky as compared to the ground.
Second, one might describe the colour palette, and how
it relates to the underlying scene, separately from factors
like image composition or brush stroke texture. Third, one
might describe fine-scale spatial structures, such as brush
stroke shape and texture, separately from coarse-scale structures like the arrangements of strokes and the swirly structure in the sky of the painting. These observation motivates
our hypothesis: image style can be perceptually factorised
into style in different spatial regions, colour and luminance
information, and across spatial scales, making them meaningful control dimensions for image stylisation.
Here we build on this hypothesis to introduce meaningful control to a recent image stylisation method known as
Neural Style Transfer [8] in which the image statistics that
capture content and style are defined on feature responses in
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [22]. Namely, we
introduce methods for controlling image stylisation independently in different spatial regions (Fig. 1(b)), for colour
and luminance information (Fig. 1(c)) as well as on different
spatial scales (Fig. 1(d)). We show how they can be applied
13985

