Multi-Context Attention for Human Pose Estimation
Xiao Chu1 ∗ Wei Yang1 ∗ Wanli Ouyang1,4 Cheng Ma2 Alan L. Yuille3 Xiaogang Wang1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
4
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
1
2

{xchu, wyang, wlouyang, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

macheng13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

3

alan.yuille@jhu.edu

High

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a challenging task in computer vision due to the articulation of body limbs, self occlusion, various clothing, and foreshortening. Significant
improvements have been achieved by Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) [37, 38, 9, 39, 36, 28]. However,
for cluttered background with objects which are similar to
body parts or limbs, or body parts with heavy occlusion,
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

Estimation

Heatmap

Low

In this paper, we propose to incorporate convolutional
neural networks with a multi-context attention mechanism
into an end-to-end framework for human pose estimation.
We adopt stacked hourglass networks to generate attention maps from features at multiple resolutions with various semantics. The Conditional Random Field (CRF) is utilized to model the correlations among neighboring regions
in the attention map. We further combine the holistic attention model, which focuses on the global consistency of
the full human body, and the body part attention model,
which focuses on detailed descriptions for different body
parts. Hence our model has the ability to focus on different
granularity from local salient regions to global semanticconsistent spaces. Additionally, we design novel Hourglass
Residual Units (HRUs) to increase the receptive field of the
network. These units are extensions of residual units with a
side branch incorporating filters with larger receptive field,
hence features with various scales are learned and combined within the HRUs. The effectiveness of the proposed
multi-context attention mechanism and the hourglass residual units is evaluated on two widely used human pose estimation benchmarks. Our approach outperforms all existing
methods on both benchmarks over all the body parts. Code
has been made publicly available.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Motivation. The 1st row shows the input image, the
holistic attention maps, and the part attention maps. The 2nd row
shows the predicted heatmaps for part locations, where different
colors correspond to different body parts. The 3rd row visualizes the predicted poses. We observe that (a) ConvNets may produce erroneous estimations due to cluttered background and selfocclusion. (b) Visual attention provides an explicit way to model
spatial relationships among human body parts, which is more robust. (c) Part attention maps can help further refine the part locations by addressing the double counting problem.

ConvNets may have difficulty to locate each body part correctly, as demonstrated in Fig. 1 (a). In the literature, the
combination of multiple contextual information has been
proved essential for vision tasks such as image classification [25], object detection [15, 14, 49] and human pose estimation [33, 36]. Intuitively, larger context region captures
global spatial configurations of object, while smaller context region focuses on local part appearance. However, previous works usually use manually designed multi-context
representations, e.g., multiple bounding boxes [33] or multiple image crops [25], and hence lack of flexibility and di-

1831

