Material Classification using Frequency- and Depth-Dependent
Time-of-Flight Distortion
Kenichiro Tanaka1
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa1
1
Hiroyuki Kubo
Yasuyuki Matsushita2
1
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST)

Takuya Funatomi1
Yasushi Yagi 2
2
Osaka Univerisity

{ktanaka,mukaigawa,funatomi,hkubo}@is.naist.jp, {yasumat@ist,yagi@sanken}.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a material classification method using an off-the-shelf Time-of-Flight (ToF) camera. We use a
key observation that the depth measurement by a ToF camera is distorted in objects with certain materials, especially
with translucent materials. We show that this distortion is
caused by the variations of time domain impulse responses
across materials and also by the measurement mechanism
of the existing ToF cameras. Specifically, we reveal that the
amount of distortion varies according to the modulation frequency of the ToF camera, the material of the object, and
the distance between the camera and object. Our method
uses the depth distortion of ToF measurements as features
and achieves material classification of a scene. Effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated by numerical
evaluation and real-world experiments, showing its capability of even classifying visually similar objects.

1. Introduction
Material classification plays an important role for computer vision applications, such as semantic segmentation
and object recognition. One of the major challenges in material classification is that different materials may yield very
similar appearance. For example, artificial plastic fruits
and real fruits confronting a camera produce visually similar RGB images that are difficult to distinguish. One of
the possible strategies to distinguish similar appearance is
to use the optical responses of the target object such as
spatial, angular, and temporal spread of the incident light.
Because different materials may have different optical responses due to their own subsurface scattering and diffuse
reflection properties, it is expected that a more reliable material classification can be achieved using such optical cues
on top of the RGB observations.
Recently, Heide et al. [13] have developed a method that
recovers transient images from observations by a low-cost

(a) Mayonnaise bottle

(b) Distorted depth

Mayonnaise
Paper label
Plastic cap
Undefined

(c) Material classification

(d) Corrected depth

Figure 1: Depth distortion of a ToF camera. (a) A mayonnaise bottle is measured by a Kinect. (b) Measured depth in
a 3D view. There is a gap in depth between the mayonnaise
and label regions. We use this depth distortion for material
classification. (c) Material segmentation result. The material label is assigned for each pixel. (d) Application of
material classification to depth correction. Depths are corrected based on the segmentation result and the distortion
database. Depth gaps among materials are corrected and a
faithful 3D shape is recovered.

Time-of-Flight (ToF) camera, which is originally designed
for depth measurement. There are other related studies
that use ToF cameras for recovering ultra-fast light propagation, e.g., impulse response, of the scene [20, 32, 33]
with some hardware modifications and computation. Motivated by these previous approaches that exploit the temporal
spread of light, we aim to classify materials using an indirect temporal cue from an off-the-shelf ToF camera without
explicitly recovering impulse response.
1 79

