Unsupervised part learning for visual recognition
Ronan Sicre1 , Yannis Avrithis1 , Ewa Kijak1 and Frédéric Jurie2
1
INRIA / IRISA 2 Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS - UMR GREYC
{ronan.sicre, ioannis.avrithis}@inria.fr ewa.kijak@irisa.fr frederic.jurie@unicaen.fr

Abstract

suited, in terms of performance, to computer vision tasks
such as image classification, recognition, or retrieval.

Part-based image classification aims at representing categories by small sets of learned discriminative parts, upon
which an image representation is built. Considered as a
promising avenue a decade ago, this direction has been neglected since the advent of deep neural networks. In this
context, this paper brings two contributions: first, this work
proceeds one step further compared to recent part-based
models (PBM), focusing on how to learn parts without using any labeled data. Instead of learning a set of parts per
class, as generally performed in the PBM literature, the
proposed approach both constructs a partition of a given
set of images into visually similar groups, and subsequently
learns a set of discriminative parts per group in a fully unsupervised fashion. This strategy opens the door to the use of
PBM in new applications where labeled data are typically
not available, such as instance-based image retrieval. Second, this paper shows that despite the recent success of endto-end models, explicit part learning can still boost classification performance. We experimentally show that our
learned parts can help building efficient image representations, which outperform state-of-the art Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DCNN) on both classification and
retrieval tasks.

Owing to their attractive properties, part-based models
were addressed extensively in the past, some of the major representatives being the constellation model [30], Ullman’s fragment-based model [28], or the Interleaved Categorization and Segmentation model [11].

1. Introduction
Part-based models – i.e. the family of models considering categories, objects, etc. as sets of elements that are
meaningful, discrete, and limited in number – offer several
interesting properties for the representation of images. First
of all, as they rely on limited meaningful sets of image regions, they explicitly provide strong cues for discovering
images structures, i.e. they explicitly break images into useful components. In addition, they also provide more compact representations than methods based on the pooling of
large numbers of regions, as the number of parts is generally low compared to the number of different regions an
image contains. Finally, as they focus on the key parts of images, they are expected to give image representations better

Despite the relative success of these works, it has to
be recognized that the recent success of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) raised a tsunami which
swept away most of the past models, leaving space only
for statistical models that use very dense sampling of image
regions, and alternate between pooling and convolutional
steps. Such models, incredibly good in terms of performance, have heavy computational costs and require massive
amounts of labeled data.
In this context, one contribution of this paper is to address one strong limitation of most of the existing partbased models, namely the necessity to rely on annotated
images to learn (or discover) task specific parts. This supervised part learning stage is crucial in most of the past
methods and prevent their use in tasks for which labeled
data are not available, e.g. image retrieval.
Another contribution of this paper is to bring a strong
empirical evidence that part-based models can exceed the
performance of DCNNs representations for both classification and image retrieval tasks. More precisely, we experimentally show that a part-based model can compete with
state-of-the-art DCNNs, encoding very dense representations of images.
This article demonstrates experimentally, on two classification tasks (Willow and MIT67) and on two retrieval
tasks (Oxford5k and Paris6k ), that the proposed part-based
representations, learned without any annotated images, can
efficiently encode the images, improving the performance
of state-of-the art DCNN representations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
introduces the related works, Section 3 exposes the proposed method while Section 4 presents the experimental
validation.
16271

