All You Need is Beyond a Good Init: Exploring Better Solution for Training
Extremely Deep Convolutional Neural Networks with Orthonormality and
Modulation
Di Xie
xiedi@hikvision.com

Jiang Xiong

Shiliang Pu

xiongjiang@hikvision.com

pushiliang@hikvision.com

Hikvision Research Institute
Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Deep neural network is difficult to train and this predicament becomes worse as the depth increases. The essence
of this problem exists in the magnitude of backpropagated
errors that will result in gradient vanishing or exploding
phenomenon. We show that a variant of regularizer which
utilizes orthonormality among different filter banks can alleviate this problem. Moreover, we design a backward error modulation mechanism based on the quasi-isometry assumption between two consecutive parametric layers. Equipped with these two ingredients, we propose several novel optimization solutions that can be utilized for training a
specific-structured (repetitively triple modules of Conv-BNReLU) extremely deep convolutional neural network (CNN)
WITHOUT any shortcuts/ identity mappings from scratch.
Experiments show that our proposed solutions can achieve
distinct improvements for a 44-layer and a 110-layer plain
networks on both the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets.
Moreover, we can successfully train plain CNNs to match
the performance of the residual counterparts.
Besides, we propose new principles for designing network structure from the insights evoked by orthonormality.
Combined with residual structure, we achieve comparative
performance on the ImageNet dataset.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have improved performance across a wider variety of computer vision tasks,
especially for image classification [17, 34, 39, 31, 45], object detection [42, 26, 33] and segmentation [20, 5, 25].
Much of this improvement should give the credit to gradually deeper network architectures. In just four years, the
layer number of networks escalates from several to hundreds, which learns more abstract and expressive representations from large amount of data, e.g. [27]. Simply s-

tacking more layers onto current architectures is not a reasonable solution, which incurs vanishing/exploding gradients [4, 9]. To handle the relatively shallower networks,
a variety of initialization and normalization methodologies
are proposed [9, 30, 12, 37, 15, 22, 13, 1], while deep residual learning [11] is utilized to deal with extremely deep
ones.
Though other works, e.g. [36, 35], have also announced
that they can train an extremely deep network with improved performance, deep residual network [11] is still the
best and most practical solution for dealing with the degradation of training accuracy as depth increases. However, it
is substantial that residual networks are exponential ensembles of relatively shallow ones (usually only 10-34 layers
deep), as an interpretation by Veit et al. [41], it avoids the
vanishing/exploding gradient problem instead of resolving
it directly. Intrinsically, the performance gain of networks
is determined by its multiplicity, not the depth. So how to
train an ultra-deep network is still an open research question
with which few works concern. Most researches still focus
on designing more complicated structures based on residual
block and its variants [18, 43]. Anyway, dose there exist
an applicable methodology that can be used for training a
genuinely deep network?
In this paper, we try to find a direct feasible solution
to answer above question. We think batch normalization
(BN) [13] is necessary to ensure the propagation stability in the forward pass in ultra-deep networks and the key
of learning availability exists in the backward pass which
propagates errors with a top-down way. We constrain the
network’s structure to repetitive modules consisted by Convolution, BN and ReLU [23] layers (Fig. 1) and analyze
the Jacobian of the output with respect to the input between
consecutive modules. We show that BN cannot guarantee
the magnitude of errors to be stable in the backward pass
and this amplification/attenuation effect to signal will accumulate layer-wisely which results in gradients explod16176

