Direct Photometric Alignment by Mesh Deformation
Kaimo Lin1,2 Nianjuan Jiang2,4 Shuaicheng Liu3 Loong-Fah Cheong1 Minh Do2 Jiangbo Lu2,4
1

National University of Singapore 2 Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
Shenzhen Cloudream Technology, China

Abstract
The choice of motion models is vital in applications like
image/video stitching and video stabilization. Conventional
methods explored different approaches ranging from simple global parametric models to complex per-pixel optical
flow. Mesh-based warping methods achieve a good balance between computational complexity and model flexibility. However, they typically require high quality feature correspondences and suffer from mismatches and low-textured
image content. In this paper, we propose a mesh-based photometric alignment method that minimizes pixel intensity
difference instead of Euclidean distance of known feature
correspondences. The proposed method combines the superior performance of dense photometric alignment with the
efficiency of mesh-based image warping. It achieves better
global alignment quality than the feature-based counterpart
in textured images, and more importantly, it is also robust
to low-textured image content. Abundant experiments show
that our method can handle a variety of images and videos,
and outperforms representative state-of-the-art methods in
both image stitching and video stabilization tasks.

1. Introduction
A variety of motion models have been employed in applications like image stitching [6, 30, 31, 4, 13, 14], video
stitching [10, 23, 15, 11], and video stabilization [17, 19].
Global parametric models can be estimated robustly and efficiently given its simplicity and were popular among the
early works (e.g., [2, 21]). However, they only work well
when the scene is a plane or the camera motion is a rotation. For images with parallax, a global parametric model
is usually used to estimate an initial alignment for other
more sophisticated methods [17, 30, 14]. Apart from the
global parametric model, we can categorize most of the
existing motion models into three types depending on the
model complexity (Fig. 1), i.e., mesh-based image warping [17, 12, 15], spatially-varying parametric motion field

[16, 30], and optical flow [23, 20].
Mesh-based image warping allows spatially varying motion models and only local rigidity is imposed. This type
of methods require high quality feature matches and aim
to minimize the geometric alignment error of matched
features. Local rigidity is imposed by constraining the
mesh cells to undergo similarity transformation [17, 31, 12]
or affine transformation [32]. These methods have been
proven to be sufficiently flexible for handling complex
scene geometry and camera motion in most image stitching tasks (e.g., [17, 19, 12]). However, their performance
is highly dependent on the quality and distribution of the
feature correspondences and can easily suffer from lowtextured content. Spatially-varying parametric motion field
models like APAP [30] and ‘spatially varying affine’ [16]
can produce good stitching results even with non-ideal feature matches by interpolating a 2D transformation for each
image pixel. Nevertheless, these methods still require a
handful of quality feature matches to begin with, not to
mention that they are computationally more expensive. Optical flow, instead, directly estimates 2D pixel motion with
the minimum rigidity assumption. It is often used in video
applications because of the good alignment quality and density it provides on both low- and rich-textured scenes. However, optical flow estimation is in general computationally
expensive and an over-kill for ‘synthesis quality’-driven applications, where estimating a physically accurate motion at
every pixel is not necessary.
In this paper, we propose a Mesh-based Photometric
Alignment (MPA) method that stems from the concept of
optical flow but is formulated as mesh deformation. We replace geometric errors of known correspondences with photometric errors on sampled points in the current alignment,
and minimize this error for near pixel-level alignment. The
displacement of each sampled point is parameterized by the
four nearest mesh vertices, and hence the size of the optimization problem is independent of the number of sampled
points. Therefore, the proposed method not only takes advantage of the density and reliability of the variational opti12405

