Learned Contextual Feature Reweighting for Image Geo-Localization
Hyo Jin Kim
UNC Chapel Hill

Enrique Dunn
Stevens Institute of Technology

Jan-Michael Frahm
UNC Chapel Hill

hyojin@cs.unc.edu

edunn@stevens.edu

jmf@cs.unc.edu

image representation

Abstract
We address the problem of large scale image geolocalization where the location of an image is estimated by
identifying geo-tagged reference images depicting the same
place. We propose a novel model for learning image representations that integrates context-aware feature reweighting in order to effectively focus on regions that positively
contribute to geo-localization. In particular, we introduce
a Contextual Reweighting Network (CRN) that predicts the
importance of each region in the feature map based on the
image context. Our model is learned end-to-end for the image geo-localization task, and requires no annotation other
than image geo-tags for training. In experimental results,
the proposed approach significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art on the standard geo-localization benchmark datasets.We also demonstrate that our CRN discovers
task-relevant contexts without any additional supervision.

1. Introduction
Visual image geo-localization has been an active research area for the past decade [2, 28, 48, 53], owing to
its wide range of applications including augmented reality
[36], autonomous driving [33], adding and refining geo-tags
in image collections [19, 65], large-scale 3D reconstruction
[11], and photo editing [68].
Finding regions of interest has long been of great interest in computer vision. Much research has been done
in the areas of feature selection, attention, and saliency
[20, 63, 37]. Because task-relevant information is not generally uniformly distributed throughout an image [1], focusing on “interesting” areas, as opposed to “irrelevant” or
even “distracting” areas, can often achieve better performance [51, 28, 13]. This is especially true for image geolocalization, where challenges come not only from photometric and geometric changes between the query and the
database images, but also from confusing visual elements
[29]. For instance, features extracted from time-varying objects such as pedestrians and trees, or ubiquitous objects,
like vehicles and fences, can introduce misleading cues into

Contextual
Reweighting
Network

reweighted
features
CRN
feature map

(b)

conv layers

input image

(a)
(c)
Figure 1. Image representation with contextual feature reweighting. (a) A contextual reweighting network takes convolutional features of a deep CNN as input to produce a spatial weighting mask
(b) based on the learned contexts. The mask is used for weighted
aggregation of input features to produce the representation of the
input image (c).

the geo-localization process.
To address this problem, there has been a recent push
to intelligently select or reweight local features for image
geo-localization [4, 49, 29, 28]. These methods focus on
features with high distinctiveness in feature space [4] or in
geographical space [49, 29]. Recently, Kim et al. [28] proposed a data-driven notion of “good” features as features
that offer relatively high matching score to correct locations.
However, these approaches focus their analysis on individual local features in general. What is often overlooked is
that a feature’s usefulness depends largely on the context in
the scene. For example, signage on buildings is useful for
geo-localization, while signage on buses and t-shirts is misleading. There have been attempts to use top-down information such as semantic segmentation to restrict features to
man-made structures [38], or repetitive structure detection
to avoid over-counting of visual words in the bag-of-words
representation [58]. We point out that such supervised priors are limited and do not capture all relevant contexts about
which regions to focus on for image geo-localization.
Hence, we aim to provide contextual guidance for
reweighting features in an unspervised data-driven manner.
To this end, we propose a novel end-to-end convolutional
neural network (CNN) model for learning image represen12136

