Weakly Supervised Affordance Detection
Johann Sawatzky∗
University of Bonn

Abhilash Srikantha∗
Carl Zeiss AG

Juergen Gall
University of Bonn

sawatzky@iai.uni-bonn.de

abhilash.srikantha@zeiss.com

gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Localizing functional regions of objects or affordances
is an important aspect of scene understanding and relevant
for many robotics applications. In this work, we introduce
a pixel-wise annotated affordance dataset of 3090 images
containing 9916 object instances. Since parts of an object
can have multiple affordances, we address this by a convolutional neural network for multilabel affordance segmentation. We also propose an approach to train the network
from very few keypoint annotations. Our approach achieves
a higher affordance detection accuracy than other weakly
supervised methods that also rely on keypoint annotations
or image annotations as weak supervision.

1. Introduction
The capability to perceive functional aspects of an environment is highly desired because it forms the essence of
devices intended for collaborative use. These aspects can
be categorized into abstract descriptive properties called attributes [28, 25, 30] or physically grounded regions called
affordances. Affordances are important as they form the
key representation to describe potential interactions. For
instance, autonomous navigation depends heavily on understanding outdoor semantics to decide if the lane is changeable or if the way ahead is drivable [5]. Similarly, assistive
robots must have the capability of anticipating indoor semantics like which regions of the kitchen are openable or
placeable [20]. Further, because forms of interaction are
given for virtually any object class, it is desirable to have
recognition systems that are capable of localizing functionally meaningful regions or affordances alongside contemporary object recognition systems.
Existing methods [15, 17, 26, 13, 32] learn to infer
pixel-wise affordance labels using supervised learning techniques. Since creating pixel wise annotated datasets is heavily labor intensive, recent works focus mainly on coarse affordance classes like walkable or reachable which are at a
∗ contributed equally

scene level but not at an object level [32]. An exception is
the UMD part affordance dataset [26], which provides annotations for objects. In order to simplify the annotation
process, a turntable setting has been used to capture the objects. This setup, however, simplifies the task since each
image contains only one object that is easy to segment. We
therefore propose a more challenging dataset containing images captured in a kitchen environment. The dataset consists of 3090 images containing 9916 object instances. As
in [26], each pixel is annotated by none or several affordance classes. This is different to other semantic segmentation tasks where a pixel is usually labeled by only one
semantic class. To address this, we extend a convolutional
neural network (CNN) architecture for segmentation from
singlelabel to multilabel classification.
Since CNNs require large amounts of annotated data,
it is desirable to train them in a weakly supervised setting. In [2], supervision in form of keypoints has been
proposed. Instead of providing segmentation masks, only
a very small set of pixels in an image are annotated. We
therefore propose an approach for affordance detection that
can be learned by such keypoint annotations. In our experiments, we show that our approach outperforms [2] for
affordance detection by a large margin. Our approach also
achieves a higher affordance detection accuracy than other
state-of-the-art methods that utilize weaker supervision at
image level [27, 19].

2. Related Work
Properties of objects can be described at various levels of
abstraction by a variety of attributes including visual properties [28, 16, 10, 23], e.g. object color, shape and object
parts, physical properties [11, 41], e.g. weight, size and material characteristics, and categorical properties [1, 8]. Object affordances, which describe potential uses of an object,
can also be considered as other attributes. For instance, [4]
describes affordances by object-action pairs whose plausibility is determined either by mining word co-occurrences
in textual data or by measuring visual consistency in images
returned by an image search. [41] proposes to represent objects in a densely connected graph structure. While a node
12795

