Transition Forests: Learning Discriminative Temporal Transitions for Action
Recognition and Detection
Guillermo Garcia-Hernando
Imperial College London

Tae-Kyun Kim
Imperial College London

ggarciah@imperial.ac.uk

tk.kim@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
A human action can be seen as transitions between one’s
body poses over time, where the transition depicts a temporal relation between two poses. Recognizing actions thus
involves learning a classifier sensitive to these pose transitions as well as to static poses. In this paper, we introduce a
novel method called transitions forests, an ensemble of decision trees that both learn to discriminate static poses and
transitions between pairs of two independent frames. During training, node splitting is driven by alternating two criteria: the standard classification objective that maximizes
the discrimination power in individual frames, and the proposed one in pairwise frame transitions. Growing the trees
tends to group frames that have similar associated transitions and share same action label incorporating temporal
information that was not available otherwise. Unlike conventional decision trees where the best split in a node is determined independently of other nodes, the transition forests
try to find the best split of nodes jointly (within a layer) for
incorporating distant node transitions. When inferring the
class label of a new frame, it is passed down the trees and
the prediction is made based on previous frame predictions
and the current one in an efficient and online manner. We
apply our method on varied skeleton action recognition and
online detection datasets showing its suitability over several
baselines and state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Recognizing and localizing human actions is an important and classic problem in computer vision [1, 7] with a
wide range of applications including pervasive health-care,
robotics, game control, etc. With recently introduced costeffective depth sensors and reliable real-time body pose
estimation [22], skeleton-based action recognition has become popular because of the advantage of pose features
over raw RGB video approaches in both accuracy and efficiency [33].

Popular approaches for action recognition and localization include using generative models such as state-space
models [14, 31]; or tackling it as a classification problem
of either the whole sequence [26, 40], a small chunk of
frames [10, 36] or deep recurrent models [9, 16]. The best
performing methods focus either on modelling the temporal dynamics using time-series models [37] or recognizing
key-poses [38], showing that both static and dynamic information are important cues for actions. Motivated by this,
we consider decision forests [3], which have been widely
adopted in computer vision [22, 24, 33], owing to many desired properties: clusters obtained in leaf nodes, scalability,
robustness to overfitting, multiclass learning and efficiency.
The main challenge of using decision forests for temporal problems lies in dealing with temporal dependencies.
Previous approaches encode the temporal variable in the
feature space by stacking multiple frames [10], handcrafting temporal features [34, 40] or creating codebooks [34].
However, these methods require the temporal cues to be explicitly given instead of automatically learning them. Attempting to relieve this, [11, 33] add a temporal regression term and frames individually vote for an action center, breaking the temporal continuity and thus not fully capturing the temporal dynamics. [14] proposed a generative
state-space without exploiting the benefit of having rich labelled data. [6] groups pairs of distant frames and grows
trees using handcrafted split functions to cover different
label transitions, with the difficulty of designing domainspecific functions and making the model complexity to increase with the number of labels.
In this work, we propose ‘transition forests’, an ensemble of randomized tree classifiers that learns both static
pose information and temporal transitions in a discriminative way. Temporal dynamics are learned while training
the forest (besides any temporal dependencies in the feature
space) and predictions are made by taking into account previous predictions. Introducing previous predictions makes
the learning problem more challenging as a consequence
of the “chicken and egg” problem: making a decision in a
node that depends on the decision in other nodes and vice

432

