Parametric T-spline Face Morphable Model for Detailed Fitting in Shape
Subspace

1

Weilong Peng1 , Zhiyong Feng2 , Chao Xu2 , Yong Su1
School of Computer Science and Technology, 2 School of Computer Software
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{wlpeng, zyfeng✉, xuchao, suyong}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-learnt subspace methods, e.g., 3DMMs, are significant exploration for the synthesis of 3D faces by assuming
that faces are in a linear class. However, the human face is
in a nonlinear manifold, and a new test are always not in
the pre-learnt subspace accurately because of the disparity
brought by ethnicity, age, gender, etc. In the paper, we propose a parametric T-spline morphable model (T-splineMM)
for 3D face representation, which has great advantages of
fitting data from an unknown source accurately. In the model, we describe a face by C 2 T-spline surface, and divide
the face surface into several shape units (SUs), according
to facial action coding system (FACS), on T-mesh instead of
on the surface directly. A fitting algorithm is proposed to
optimize coefficients of T-spline control point components
along pre-learnt identity and expression subspaces, as well
as to optimize the details in refinement progress. As any
pre-learnt subspace is not complete to handle the variety
and details of faces and expressions, it covers a limited span of morphing. SUs division and detail refinement make
the model fitting the facial muscle deformation in a larger span of morphing subspace. We conduct experiments on
face scan data, kinect data as well as the space-time data to
test the performance of detail fitting, robustness to missing
data and noise, and to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
model. Convincing results are illustrated to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model compared with the popular
methods.

1. Introduction
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs), being originally formulated by Blanz and Vetter [4], are powerful 3D statistical
models of human face shape and texture, and now have been
widely applied in numerous areas, such as computer vision,
human behavioral analysis, computer graphics [5, 2, 1]. By
assuming that human faces are in a linear class, 3DMMs are

generally constructed by performing typical Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on a training set of facial meshes
and textures, and any new face shape as well as its texture
can be represented by the linear combination of components
(or basis).
Generally, 3DMMs is used as a tool to encode any 3D
face in a low dimensional feature space, a compact representation that makes tractable many 3D facial analysis
problems such as recognition and expression normalization [5, 11, 29]. And 3DMMs owning rich shape priors can
be leveraged in fitting algorithms to reconstruct good 3D
representations of faces from data-deficient sources like inthe-wild 2D landmarks [24] or reconstruct noisy 3D depth
scan data [7] accurately.
In fact, not only identity fitting but also expression fitting
is a very important performance index of the model. Recently, Booth et al build 3DMM from 10,000 high-quality
neutral 3D facial scans considering different ages, genders,
and ethnic backgrounds [7], and report the stat-of-art fitting
results. Cao et al propose an expressions model containing
19 expressions of 150 individuals [10], which can fit the image expression and perform good-looking animation. One
problem is that pre-learnt subspace is not complete due to
the variety and uncertain details of faces and expressions,
resulting in a limited performance of fitting details. Therefore, a defective fitting result always happens when a new
test is not exactly in the pre-learnt face subspace. Another
problem is that fitting result mixes identity information and
expression information when the identity is unknown.
Motivated by the linear subspace idea of 3DMMs, as
well as amendable limitations, in the paper we propose a
parametric T-spline morphable model (T-splineMM) based
on a pre-learnt face subspace for 3D face representation.
To enlarge the representation span, shape units (SUs) division is done on a T-mesh according to the facial action
coding system (FACS) [12]. Being compared with segment
dividing proposed by Blanz et al [4] on the surface directly,
the SUs dividing is based on parametric space of T-splines
shape, and contribute to continuous transitions between ad16139

