Learning Deep Binary Descriptor with Multi-Quantization
Yueqi Duan1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3,∗, Ziwei Wang1,4 , Jianjiang Feng1,2,3 , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Beijing, China
4
Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
duanyq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn; zw-wa14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
jfeng@tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised feature
learning method called deep binary descriptor with multiquantization (DBD-MQ) for visual matching. Existing
learning-based binary descriptors such as compact binary face descriptor (CBFD) and DeepBit utilize the rigid
sign function for binarization despite of data distributions,
thereby suffering from severe quantization loss. In order
to address the limitation, our DBD-MQ considers the binarization as a multi-quantization task. Specifically, we
apply a K-AutoEncoders (KAEs) network to jointly learn
the parameters and the binarization functions under a deep
learning framework, so that discriminative binary descriptors can be obtained with a fine-grained multi-quantization.
Extensive experimental results on different visual analysis
including patch retrieval, image matching and image retrieval show that our DBD-MQ outperforms most existing
binary feature descriptors.

1. Introduction
Feature description is a fundamental computer vision
problem which is widely applicable in a number of applications, such as object recognition [11, 27], face recognition [29,32,43], image classification [15,26] and many others. There are two essential properties for an effective feature descriptor: strong discriminative power and low computational cost. On one hand, since real-world applications
usually suffer from large intra-class variances, it is critical to extract desirable feature descriptors with high quality representation. On the other hand, mobile devices with
limited computational capabilities and large amount of data
require efficient feature descriptors with high computational
speed and low memory cost.
∗ Corresponding author.

In recent years, deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) has achieved state-of-the-art performance in various visual analysis tasks, and numerous discriminative
CNN features have been proposed, such as AlexNet [23],
VGG [32, 41], GoogLeNet [44] and ResNet [17]. CNN features obtain high quality representation by training a feature
learning model with large amount of labeled data to estimate extensive number of parameters. However, they suffer
from heavy storage costs and low matching speed as they
are high-dimensional real-valued descriptors.
Several local binary features have been proposed over
the past decade. Representative binary features include
local binary pattern (LBP) [1, 30] as well as its variants [36, 37], binary robust independent elementary feature (BRIEF) [6], binary robust invariant scalable keypoint (BRISK) [25], oriented FAST and rotated BRIEF
(ORB) [38] and fast retina keypoint (FREAK) [2]. These
methods reduce the computational cost by substituting the
Euclidean distance with Hamming distance and compute
the distances between binary codes using XOR operations.
Inspired by the fact that CNN features deliver strong discriminative power and binary features present low computational cost, DeepBit [26] learns deep compact binary descriptors in an unsupervised manner, which achieves the
state-of-the-art in binary feature description. However, it
simply utilizes the rigid sign function for binarization despite of data distributions. For many distributions, the handcrafted zero is not a reasonable threshold for binarization,
which may lead to severe quantization loss. In order to address the limitation, we consider the binarization problem as
a general multi-quantization task, where the sign function is
a special case to cluster positives into one class and negatives into another. Specifically, we apply a K-AutoEncoders
(KAEs) network and propose a deep binary descriptor with
multi-quantization (DBD-MQ) learning method. Figure 1
illustrates the flowchart of the proposed approach. With the
KAEs based multi-quantization, we jointly learn the param11183

