A dataset and exploration of models for understanding video data through
fill-in-the-blank question-answering
Tegan Maharaj1
Nicolas Ballas2
Anna Rohrbach3
Aaron Courville2
1
1
2
Christopher Pal
Polytechnique Montréal
Université de Montréal
3
Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Saarland Informatics Campus
1

tegan.maharaj,christopher.pal@polymtl.ca
3

2

nicolas.ballas,aaron.courville@umontreal.ca

arohrbach@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
While deep convolutional neural networks frequently approach or exceed human-level performance in benchmark
tasks involving static images, extending this success to moving images is not straightforward. Video understanding is
of interest for many applications, including content recommendation, prediction, summarization, event/object detection, and understanding human visual perception. However,
many domains lack sufficient data to explore and perfect
video models. In order to address the need for a simple,
quantitative benchmark for developing and understanding
video, we present MovieFIB, a fill-in-the-blank questionanswering dataset with over 300,000 examples, based on
descriptive video annotations for the visually impaired. In
addition to presenting statistics and a description of the
dataset, we perform a detailed analysis of 5 different models’ predictions, and compare these with human performance. We investigate the relative importance of language,
static (2D) visual features, and moving (3D) visual features;
the effects of increasing dataset size, the number of frames
sampled; and of vocabulary size. We illustrate that: this
task is not solvable by a language model alone; our model
combining 2D and 3D visual information indeed provides
the best result; all models perform significantly worse than
human-level. We provide human evaluation for responses
given by different models and find that accuracy on the
MovieFIB evaluation corresponds well with human judgment. We suggest avenues for improving video models, and
hope that the MovieFIB challenge can be useful for measuring and encouraging progress in this very interesting field.

1. Introduction
Most current work investigating multimodal question answering (QA) focuses either on the natural language aspects of the problem (e.g. [41, 36]), or QA in static im-

Figure 1. Two examples from the training set of our fill-in-theblank dataset.

ages (e.g. [3, 21, 43]). Our goal is to use QA to eliminate
ambiguity in natural language evaluation, in order to target the benchmarking and development of video models.
More specifically, we are interested in models of moving
visual information which will be leveraged for a task in another modality - in this case, text-based QA. Our proposed
dataset, MovieFIB, is used in the fill-in-the-blank track of
LSMDC (Large Scale Movie Description and Understanding Challenge) [29].

1.1. Video understanding
A long-standing goal in computer vision research is
complete understanding of visual scenes: recognizing entities, describing their attributes and relationships. In
video data, this difficult task is complicated by the need
to understand and remember temporal dynamics. The
task of automatically translating videos containing rich
and open-domain activities into natural language (or some
other modality) requires tackling the above-mentioned challenges, which stand as open problems for computer vision.
A key ingredient sparking the impressive recent progress
in object category recognition [17] has been the development of large scale image recognition datasets [8].
Accordingly, several large video datasets have been pro-

6884

