Adaptive Class Preserving Representation for Image Classification
Jian-Xun Mi1, 2, Qiankun Fu1, 2, Weisheng Li1, 2
1
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
mijianxun@gmail.com, S150201028@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, liws@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
In linear representation-based image classification, an
unlabeled sample is represented by the entire training set.
To obtain a stable and discriminative solution,
regularization on the vector of representation coefficients is
necessary. For example, the representation in sparse
representation-based classification (SRC) uses L1 norm
penalty as regularization, which is equal to lasso. However,
lasso overemphasizes the role of sparseness while ignoring
the inherent structure among samples belonging to a same
class. Many recent developed representation classifications
have adopted lasso-type regressions to improve the
performance. In this paper, we propose the adaptive class
preserving representation for classification (ACPRC). Our
method is related to group lasso based classification but
different in two key points: When training samples in a
class are uncorrelated, ACPRC turns into SRC; when
samples in a class are highly correlated, it obtains similar
result as group lasso. The superiority of ACPRC over other
state-of-the-art regularization techniques including lasso,
group lasso, sparse group lasso, etc. are evaluated by
extensive experiments.

OLS results in more stable and interpretable solution. The
linear regression model used in SRC is built under the
principle of parsimony which is also important in human
perception. Representation of y by a small subset of entire
training samples is a practice of parsimony [2]. In SRC, the
lasso regression is a promising approach to select a subset of
training samples by imposing a L1 norm penalty on x which
produces a sparse vector [3]. This constrained least squares
model is given by:
2

x = arg min y − Ax 2 + λ x 1

(2)

x

where ⋅ 2 is L2 norm (vector norm), ⋅ 1 is L1 norm, and

λ balances the fidelity term with the regularization term.
However, there is a limitation to lasso regression. If there
are some samples whose correlation are high, lasso prefers
to select only one sample from them and ignores others [4].
Such phenomenon leads to inconsistent selection of training
samples [5]. Elastic net (EN) regression provides a flexible
model to address problem above [4]. Elastic net criterion is
defined as the following optimization problem:
2

2

x = arg min y − Ax 2 + λ (1 − α ) x 1 + λα x 2 .
x

(3)
2

The complex regularization function (1 − α ) x 1 + α x 2 is
1. Introduction
SRC is a widely used method in many computer vision
applications including face recognition and other image
classification problems [1]. In SRC, a test sample is
collaboratively represented by a dictionary consisting of all
the training samples, which is formulated as
y = Ax
(1)
where y is the test sample, A is the dictionary matrix in
which each column represents a sample, and x is the
corresponding representation vector for y . A model fitting
procedure is used to produce the solution of x . Ordinary
least squares (OLS) is a simple way to estimate x and it is
well known that to incorporate regularization on x into

7427

a convex combination of the lasso and ridge penalty where
α ∈ [ 0,1] . Besides the sparsity of x , the solution of EN
regression has the effect of grouping that highly corrected
samples share similar regression coefficients. Many other
improvement studies of lasso regression also tend to address
the correlation problem. In [6], sample de-correlation is
considered in the lasso regression. A covariate-correlated
lasso is proposed to select covariates most strongly
correlating with response variable in [7]. Another recent
study [8] also considers correlation among training samples
which proposes adaptive model balancing the L1 norm with
L2 norm guided by training set itself.
There is an obvious drawback for the mentioned methods
above in classification. They do not incorporate the class

