A Non-Local Low-Rank Framework for Ultrasound Speckle Reduction
Lei Zhu1 , Chi-Wing Fu1,3 , Michael S. Brown2 , and Pheng-Ann Heng1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 York University,
3
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lzhu, cwfu, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca
Abstract
‘Speckle’ refers to the granular patterns that occur in ultrasound images due to wave interference. Speckle removal
can greatly improve the visibility of the underlying structures in an ultrasound image and enhance subsequent postprocessing. We present a novel framework for speckle removal based on low-rank non-local filtering. Our approach
works by first computing a guidance image that assists in
the selection of candidate patches for non-local filtering
in the face of significant speckles. The candidate patches are further refined using a low-rank minimization estimated using a truncated weighted nuclear norm (TWNN)
and structured sparsity. We show that the proposed filtering
framework produces results that outperform state-of-the-art
methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. This framework also provides better segmentation results when used
for pre-processing ultrasound images.

1. Motivation and Related Work
Medical ultrasound is a widely used noninvasive imaging modality that can reveal internal anatomic structures.
Ultrasound makes use of a transducer to emit ultra-highfrequency sound waves, which change direction when a reflective surface is encountered. Careful timing of the emitted sound signal and its observed echo is used to determine the anatomical structures. One drawback of ultrasound imaging is the ‘speckle’ that results from wave interference when the scattered waves constructively and destructively combine to produce the black and white spot
pattern characteristic of ultrasound images [3, 14]. Fig. 1
shows a typical ultrasound image and the speckle pattern.
The presence of speckles lowers the overall image quality and makes the interpretation of ultrasound images challenging for nonspecialists [23, 31]. Like noise, speckle can
also adversely affect the identification of normal and pathological tissues by trained specialists [8, 20]. Furthermore,
it lowers the accuracy of computer-aided diagnosis [8] and

Figure 1: Top A typical clinical ultrasound image corrupted
with speckles. Bottom The despeckled and speckle noise
layers recovered by our proposed method.
adversely affects subsequent image processing tasks such
as segmentation [2, 5]. Ultrasound speckle patterns usually contain information on the microstucture, but, to be fair,
being able to remove speckles as a pre-processing step allows a much larger range of existing methods to be directly
applied; see Section 3.3 for our segmentation example.
Over the last two decades there have been a number of
methods proposed to reduce speckle noise. A number of
wavelet-based methods have been proposed to decompose
the ultrasound image into frequency subbands and then use
various strategies to filter wavelet coefficients associated
with speckle noise (see [7] for an overview of wavelet-based
methods). However, these frequency domain approaches
tend to oversmooth the image details by filtering excessive
frequencies, or produce ringing artifacts due to removal of
incorrect bands [33].
Another popular strategy for speckle removal are local
image filtering methods. Among these methods, the most
successful ones are those based on anisotropic diffusion
(e.g., [20, 8, 32]) and the bilateral filter (e.g., [2]). While
local filters are successful for speckle reduction, their performance suffers in the presence of strong noise, which

5650

