3D Shape Segmentation with Projective Convolutional Networks
Evangelos Kalogerakis1
1

Melinos Averkiou2

University of Massachusetts Amherst
Abstract

This paper introduces a deep architecture for segmenting
3D objects into their labeled semantic parts. Our architecture combines image-based Fully Convolutional Networks
(FCNs) and surface-based Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs) to yield coherent segmentations of 3D shapes. The
image-based FCNs are used for efficient view-based reasoning about 3D object parts. Through a special projection layer, FCN outputs are effectively aggregated across
multiple views and scales, then are projected onto the
3D object surfaces. Finally, a surface-based CRF combines the projected outputs with geometric consistency
cues to yield coherent segmentations. The whole architecture (multi-view FCNs and CRF) is trained end-to-end.
Our approach significantly outperforms the existing stateof-the-art methods in the currently largest segmentation
benchmark (ShapeNet). Finally, we demonstrate promising segmentation results on noisy 3D shapes acquired from
consumer-grade depth cameras.

1. Introduction
In recent years there has been an explosion of 3D shape
data on the web. In addition to the increasing number of
community-curated CAD models, depth sensors deployed
on a wide range of platforms are able to acquire 3D geometric representations of objects in the form of polygon
meshes or point clouds. Although there have been significant advances in analyzing color images, in particular
through deep networks, existing semantic reasoning techniques for 3D geometric shape data mostly rely on heuristic
processing stages and hand-tuned geometric descriptors.
Our work focuses on the task of segmenting 3D shapes into
labeled semantic parts. Compositional part-based reasoning for 3D shapes has been shown to be effective for a large
number of vision, robotics and virtual reality applications,
such as cross-modal analysis of 3D shapes and color images [60, 24], skeletal tracking [42], objection detection in
images [11, 30, 36], 3D object reconstruction from images
and line drawings [54, 24, 21], interactive assembly-based
3D modeling [5, 4], generating 3D shapes from a small
number of examples [25], style transfer between 3D objects
[33], robot navigation and grasping [40, 8], to name a few.
The shape segmentation task, while fundamental, is challenging because of the variety and ambiguity of shape parts

Subhransu Maji1
2

University of Cyprus

Siddhartha Chaudhuri3
3

IIT Bombay

that must be assigned the same semantic label; because accurately detecting boundaries between parts can involve extremely subtle cues; because local and global features must
be jointly examined; and because the analysis must be robust to noise and undersampling.
We propose a deep architecture for segmenting and labeling
3D shapes that simply and effectively addresses these challenges, and significantly outperforms prior methods. The
key insights of our technique are to repurpose image-based
deep networks for view-based reasoning, and aggregate
their outputs onto the surface representation of the shape in
a geometrically consistent manner. We make no geometric,
topological or orientation assumptions about the shape, nor
exploit any hand-tuned geometric descriptors.
Our view-based approach is motivated by the success of
deep networks on image segmentation tasks. Using rendered shapes lets us initialize our network with layers that
have been trained on large image datasets, allowing better
generalization. Since images depict shapes of photographed
objects (along with texture), we expect such pre-trained layers to already encode some information about parts and their
relationships. Recent work on view-based 3D shape classification [47, 38] and RGB-D recognition [15, 46] have
shown the benefits of transferring learned representations
from color images to geometric and depth data.
A view-based approach to 3D shape segmentation must
overcome several technical obstacles. First, views must
be selected such that they together cover the shape surface as much as possible and minimize occlusions. Second, shape parts can be visible in more than one view, thus
our method must effectively consolidate information across
multiple views. Third, we must guarantee that the segmentation is complete and coherent. This means all the surface
area, including any heavily occluded portions, should be labeled, and neighboring surface areas should likely have the
same label unless separated by a strong boundary feature.
Our approach, shown in Figure 1, systematically addresses
these difficulties using a single feed-forward network.
Given a raw 3D polygon mesh as input, our method generates a set of images from multiple views that are automatically selected for optimal surface coverage. These images
are fed into the network, which outputs confidence maps per
part via image processing layers. The confidence maps are
13779

