Fractal Dimension Invariant Filtering and Its CNN-based Implementation
Hongteng Xu1,2 , Junchi Yan3∗, Nils Persson4 , Weiyao Lin5 , Hongyuan Zha2
School of 1 ECE, 2 CSE, 4 Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Tech
3
IBM Research – China, 5 Department of EE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{hxu42, npersson3}@gatech.edu, yanjc@cn.ibm.com, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn, zha@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Fractal analysis has been widely used in computer vision, especially in texture image processing and texture
analysis. The key concept of fractal-based image model
is the fractal dimension, which is invariant to bi-Lipschitz
transformation of image, and thus capable of representing
intrinsic structural information of image robustly. However,
the invariance of fractal dimension generally does not hold
after filtering, which limits the application of fractal-based
image model. In this paper, we propose a novel fractal dimension invariant filtering (FDIF) method, extending the
invariance of fractal dimension to filtering operations. Utilizing the notion of local self-similarity, we first develop a
local fractal model for images. By adding a nonlinear postprocessing step behind anisotropic filter banks, we demonstrate that the proposed filtering method is capable of preserving the local invariance of the fractal dimension of image. Meanwhile, we show that the FDIF method can be reinstantiated approximately via a CNN-based architecture,
where the convolution layer extracts anisotropic structure
of image and the nonlinear layer enhances the structure
via preserving local fractal dimension of image. The proposed filtering method provides us with a novel geometric
interpretation of CNN-based image model. Focusing on a
challenging image processing task — detecting complicated
curves from the texture-like images, the proposed method
obtains superior results to the state-of-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Many complex natural scenes can be modeled as fractals [21, 29]. In the field of computer vision, fractal analysis
has been proven to be a useful tool for modeling textures,
and many research fruits have been proposed. Taking textures as fractals, the work in [39] learns local fractal dimensions and lengths as features for classifying textures. Similarly, the work in [45] learns the spectrum of fractal dimen∗ corresponding author

Input

Input

Anisotropic
Filtering

Convolution
Layer

Nonlinear
Post-processing

Nonlinear
Layer

Sigmoid or
Thresholding

Sigmoid or
Thresholding

N Layers

Output

(a)

Anisotropic
Filter
Bank

Max(.)

Mean
Filter

Square
X2

Multiply

1/X

Mean
Filter

Output

(b) Iterative FDIF

(c) CNN-based Implementation

Local Fractal Dimension

Input

After Anisotropic Filtering

After Nonlinear Processing

(d) Illustration of the FDIF-based Curve Detector

Figure 1. Given real-world noisy images (i.e., material images)
having complicated curves in (a), we apply the proposed iterative
FDIF method in (b) to detect curves. The FDIF can be efficiently
and approximately re-instantiated via a CNN in (c). The illustration of the FDIF-based curve detector is shown in (d).

sion as textures’ features via the box-counting method [10].
It is easy to find that all of these methods treat the fractal
dimension as a key concept of fractal-based image model
because the fractal dimension is invariant to bi-Lipschitz
transformation. This property means that the fractal dimension is robust to geometrical deformation (e.g., ridge and
non-ridge transformation) of image. Hence, the fractal dimension reflects intrinsic structural information of image,
which can be treated as a representative feature of image.
Unfortunately, the fractal dimension of image cannot be
preserved after filtering, which might lead to the loss of
structural information. A typical example is the interpolation of digital image, where the result can be viewed as
a low-pass filtering of ground truth. The low-pass filtering
suppresses the high-resolution details of image, and thus,
leads to the loss of structural information. The work in [44]
shows that the fractal dimension of interpolated image is
13491

