Disentangled Representation Learning GAN for Pose-Invariant Face Recognition
Luan Tran, Xi Yin, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{tranluan, yinxi1, liuxm}@msu.edu
Abstract
Identity Representation

The large pose discrepancy between two face images is
one of the key challenges in face recognition. Conventional
approaches for pose-invariant face recognition either perform face frontalization on, or learn a pose-invariant representation from, a non-frontal face image. We argue that it is
more desirable to perform both tasks jointly to allow them
to leverage each other. To this end, this paper proposes Disentangled Representation learning-Generative Adversarial
Network (DR-GAN) with three distinct novelties. First, the
encoder-decoder structure of the generator allows DR-GAN
to learn a generative and discriminative representation, in
addition to image synthesis. Second, this representation is
explicitly disentangled from other face variations such as
pose, through the pose code provided to the decoder and
pose estimation in the discriminator. Third, DR-GAN can
take one or multiple images as the input, and generate one
unified representation along with an arbitrary number of
synthetic images. Quantitative and qualitative evaluation
on both controlled and in-the-wild databases demonstrate
the superiority of DR-GAN over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the most widely studied topics in computer vision. Recently, great progress is achieved
with Deep Learning-based methods [28, 33]. For example,
suppressing-human performance is reported by Schroff et
al. [33] on LFW database, which consists of mostly nearfrontal faces. However, Pose-Invariant Face Recognition
(PIFR) is far from solved [2, 8, 21, 22]. A recent study [34]
shows that the performance of most algorithms degrades
over 10% from frontal-frontal to frontal-profile face verification, while human performance only drops slightly. This
indicates that the pose variation remains to be a significant
challenge in face recognition and warrants future study.
Existing PIFR methods can be grouped into two categories. First, some work employ face frontalization [11, 14,
31, 40, 43, 45] to synthesize a frontal face, where traditional
face recognition methods are applicable. The ability to gen-

DR-GAN
…
…
Noise

…
Pose Code

Figure 1: With one or multiple face images as the input, DR-GAN
can produce an identity representation that is both discriminative
and generative, i.e., the representation demonstrates superior PIFR
performance, and can synthesize identity-preserving faces at target
poses specified by the pose code.

erate a realistic frontal face is also beneficial for law enforcement practitioners to identify suspects. Second, other
work focus on learning discriminative features directly from
the non-frontal faces through either one joint model [28,33]
or multiple pose-specific models [7,25]. In contrast, we propose a novel framework to take the best of both worlds —
simultaneously learn pose-invariant identity representation
and synthesize faces with arbitrary poses.
As shown in Fig. 1, we propose Disentangled Representation learning-Generative Adversarial Network (DR-GAN)
for PIFR. GAN [9] can generate samples similar to a data
distribution through a two-player game between a generator
G and a discriminator D. Despite many promising developments [5, 23, 26], image synthesis remains the main objective of GAN. Motivated by this objective, and the desire to
learn an identity representation for PIFR, we construct G
with an encoder-decoder structure (Fig. 2 (d)). The input
to the encoder Genc is a face image of any pose, the output of the decoder Gdec is a synthetic face at a target pose,
and the learnt representation bridges Genc and Gdec . While
G serves as a face rotator, D is trained to not only distinguish real vs. synthetic images, but also predict the identity
and pose of a face. With the additional classifications, D
strives for the rotated face to have the same identity as the
input real face, which has two effects on G: 1) The rotated
11415

