Social Scene Understanding:
End-to-End Multi-Person Action Localization and Collective Activity
Recognition
Timur Bagautdinov1 , Alexandre Alahi2 , François Fleuret1,3 , Pascal Fua1 , Silvio Savarese2
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
2
Stanford University
3
IDIAP Research Institute
{timur.bagautdinov, francois.fleuret, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch, {alahi, ssilvio}@stanford.edu

Abstract
We present a unified framework for understanding human social behaviors in raw image sequences. Our model
jointly detects multiple individuals, infers their social actions, and estimates the collective actions with a single
feed-forward pass through a neural network. We propose
a single architecture that does not rely on external detection algorithms but rather is trained end-to-end to generate
dense proposal maps that are refined via a novel inference
scheme. The temporal consistency is handled via a personlevel matching Recurrent Neural Network. The complete
model takes as input a sequence of frames and outputs detections along with the estimates of individual actions and
collective activities. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of our algorithm on multiple publicly available
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Human social behavior can be characterized by “social
actions” – an individual act which nevertheless takes into
account the behaviour of other individuals – and “collective
actions” taken together by a group of people with a common
objective. For a machine to perceive both of these actions, it
needs to develop a notion of collective intelligence, i.e., reason jointly about the behaviour of multiple individuals. In
this work, we propose a method to tackle such intelligence.
Given a sequence of image frames, our method jointly locates and describes the social actions of each individual in
a scene as well as the collective actions (see Figure 1). This
perceived social scene representation can be used for sports
analytics, understanding social behaviour, surveillance, and
social robot navigation.
Recent methods for multi-person scene understanding
take a sequential approach [21, 11, 31]: i) each person is
detected in every given frame; ii) these detections are asso-

right spike
standing

standing

waiting

moving
spiking

waiting
moving

standing
blocking
blocking

waiting
moving

Figure 1. Jointly reasoning on social scenes. Our method takes as
input raw image sequences and produces a comprehensive social
scene interpretation: locations of individuals (as bounding boxes),
their individual social actions (e.g., “blocking”), and the collective
activity (“right spike” in the illustrated example).

ciated over time by a tracking algorithm; iii) a feature representation is extracted for each individual detection; and
finally iv) these representations are joined via a structured
model. Whereas the aforementioned pipeline seems reasonable, it has several important drawbacks. First of all, the
vast majority of state-of-the-art detection methods do not
use any kind of joint optimization to handle multiple objects, but rather rely on heuristic post-processing, and thus
are susceptible to greedy non-optimal decisions. Second,
extracting features individually for each object discards a
large amount of context and interactions, which can be useful when reasoning about collective behaviours. This point
is particularly important because the locations and actions
of humans can be highly correlated. For instance, in team
sports, the location and action of each player depend on
the behaviour of other players as well as on the collective
strategy. Third, having independent detection and tracking
pipelines means that the representation used for localization
is discarded, whereas re-using it would be more efficient.
Finally, the sequential approach does not scale well with
14315

