Deep Future Gaze: Gaze Anticipation on Egocentric Videos
Using Adversarial Networks
Mengmi Zhang1,2 , Keng Teck Ma2 , Joo Hwee Lim2 , Qi Zhao3,1 , and Jiashi Feng1
mengmi@u.nus.edu, {makt,joohwee}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, qzhao@cs.umn.edu, elefjia@nus.edu.sg
1

2

National University of Singapore, Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
University of Minnesota, USA

Abstract
We introduce a new problem of gaze anticipation on egocentric videos. This substantially extends the conventional gaze prediction problem to future frames by no longer
confining it on the current frame. To solve this problem, we
propose a new generative adversarial neural network based
model, Deep Future Gaze (DFG). DFG generates multiple
future frames conditioned on the single current frame and
anticipates corresponding future gazes in next few seconds. It consists of two networks: generator and discriminator.
The generator uses a two-stream spatial temporal convolution architecture (3D-CNN) explicitly untangling the foreground and the background to generate future frames. It
then attaches another 3D-CNN for gaze anticipation based
on these synthetic frames. The discriminator plays against
the generator by differentiating the synthetic frames of the
generator from the real frames. Through competition with
discriminator, the generator progressively improves quality
of the future frames and thus anticipates future gaze better.
Experimental results on the publicly available egocentric
datasets show that DFG significantly outperforms all wellestablished baselines. Moreover, we demonstrate that DFG
achieves better performance of gaze prediction on current
frames than state-of-the-art methods. This is due to benefiting from learning motion discriminative representations in
frame generation. We further contribute a new egocentric
dataset (OST) in the object search task. DFG also achieves
the best performance for this challenging dataset.

1. Introduction
Egocentric video analysis [2], i.e. analyzing videos captured from the first person perspective, is an emerging field
in computer vision which can benefit many applications,
such as virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR).

Figure 1. Problem illustration: gaze anticipation on future frames
within a few seconds on egocentric videos. Given the current
frame, the task is to predict the future gaze locations. Our proposed DFG method solves this problem through synthesizing future frames (transparent ones) and predicting corresponding future
gaze locations (red circles).

One of the key components in egocentric video analysis is
gaze prediction — the process of predicting the point of
gaze (where human is fixating) in the head-centered coordinate system. Extending the gaze prediction problem to go
beyond the current frame [37, 25], our paper presents the
new and important problem of gaze anticipation: the prediction of gaze in future1 frames of egocentric videos and
proposes a promising solution.
Gaze anticipation enables the predictive computation
and is useful in many applications, such as human-machine
interaction [39, 9, 32], attention-driver user interface [22]
and interactive advertisements [29]. For example, VR headsets, as one category of egocentric devices, require high
computation power and fast speed for synthesizing virtual
realities upon interaction from users [28, 8]. As gaze information reflects human intent and goal inferences [16, 38],
gaze anticipation facilitates the computation-demanding
systems to plan ahead on VR rendering with increased
buffer time [39]. Thus, pre-rendering of the virtual scenes
1 By “future” we mean within a few seconds.

14372

