FC4 : Fully Convolutional Color Constancy with Confidence-weighted Pooling
Yuanming Hu1∗ Baoyuan Wang2 Stephen Lin2
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Microsoft Research
yuanmhu@gmail.com, {baoyuanw,stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Improvements in color constancy have arisen from the
use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, the
patch-based CNNs that exist for this problem are faced with
the issue of estimation ambiguity, where a patch may contain insufﬁcient information to establish a unique or even a
limited possible range of illumination colors. Image patches with estimation ambiguity not only appear with great frequency in photographs, but also signiﬁcantly degrade the
quality of network training and inference. To overcome
this problem, we present a fully convolutional network architecture in which patches throughout an image can carry different conﬁdence weights according to the value they
provide for color constancy estimation. These conﬁdence
weights are learned and applied within a novel pooling layer where the local estimates are merged into a global solution. With this formulation, the network is able to determine “what to learn” and “how to pool” automatically from color constancy datasets without additional supervision. The proposed network also allows for end-to-end
training, and achieves higher efﬁciency and accuracy. On standard benchmarks, our network outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art while achieving 120× greater efﬁciency.

1. Introduction
Computational color constancy is a longstanding problem, where the goal is to remove illumination color casts
in images. This form of color correction can beneﬁt downstream applications such as visual recognition, where color
is an important feature for distinguishing objects. Despite
various needs for accurate color constancy, there remains
much room for improvement among current algorithms due
to the signiﬁcant challenges that this task presents.
State-of-the-art techniques [38, 6, 7, 31, 5] have harnessed the power of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
to learn color constancy models from large training sets,
∗ This work was done when Yuanming Hu was an intern at Microsoft
Research.

Input

Output (color cast removed)

Computational Color Constancy
ground truth

illumination estimation

estimation error

Patch

Ambiguous

Reflectance

yellow light

white wall

=

=

=
Informative

Illumination

×

white light

Input

×

both plausible,
but which one
is correct?

yellow wall

... lots of other combinations
white light

=

=

Example Image

yellow banana

×

yellow light

×

Reflectance is
probably yellow
white illum.

restricted possible reflectance
higher illum. est. confidence

white banana (does not exist)

Confidence map

illum. est. (noisy)

Robust Output

weighted illum. est.

Figure 1: The problem (top), the challenge (middle), and
our solution (bottom). Some images are from the Color
Checker Dataset [21].

composed of photographs and their associated labels for illumination color. Many of these networks operate on sampled image patches as input, and produce corresponding local estimates that are subsequently pooled into a global result.
A major challenge of this patch-based approach is that
there commonly exists ambiguity in local estimates, as illustrated in Figure 1 (middle). When inferring the illumination color in a patch, or equivalently the reﬂectance colors within the local scene area, it is often the case that the
patch contains little or no semantic context to help infer its

4085

