Deep Learning on Lie Groups for Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Zhiwu Huang† , Chengde Wan† , Thomas Probst† , Luc Van Gool†‡
†
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland ‡ VISICS, KU Leuven, Belgium
{zhiwu.huang, wanc, probstt, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In recent years, skeleton-based action recognition has
become a popular 3D classification problem. State-of-theart methods typically first represent each motion sequence
as a high-dimensional trajectory on a Lie group with an
additional dynamic time warping, and then shallowly learn
favorable Lie group features. In this paper we incorporate
the Lie group structure into a deep network architecture to
learn more appropriate Lie group features for 3D action
recognition. Within the network structure, we design rotation mapping layers to transform the input Lie group features into desirable ones, which are aligned better in the
temporal domain. To reduce the high feature dimensionality, the architecture is equipped with rotation pooling layers
for the elements on the Lie group. Furthermore, we propose
a logarithm mapping layer to map the resulting manifold
data into a tangent space that facilitates the application of
regular output layers for the final classification. Evaluations of the proposed network for standard 3D human action recognition datasets clearly demonstrate its superiority
over existing shallow Lie group feature learning methods as
well as most conventional deep learning methods.

1. Introduction
Due to the development of depth sensors, 3D human
activity analysis [27, 45, 23, 43, 41, 3, 42, 37, 44, 26,
35, 17] has attracted more interest than ever before. Recent manifold-based approaches are quite successful at 3D
human action recognition thanks to their view-invariant
manifold-based representations for skeletal data. Typical
examples include shape silhouettes in the Kendall’s shape
space [40, 3], linear dynamical systems on the Grassmann
manifold [39], histograms of oriented optical flow on a
hyper-sphere [11], and pairwise transformations of skeletal joints on a Lie group [41, 3, 42]. In this paper, we focus
on studying manifold-based approaches [41, 3, 42] to learn
more appropriate Lie group representations of skeletal action data, that have achieved state-of-the-art performances
for some 3D human action recognition benchmarks.

As studied in [41, 3, 42], Lie group feature learning
methods often suffer from speed variations (i.e., temporal
misalignment), which tend to deteriorate classification accuracy. To handle this issue, they typically employ dynamic
time warping (DTW), as originally used in speech processing [30]. Unfortunately, such process costs additional time,
and also results in a two-step system that typically performs
worse than an end-to-end learning scheme. Moreover, such
Lie group representations for action recognition tend to be
extremely high-dimensional, in part because the features are
extracted per skeletal segment and then stacked. As a result,
any computation on such nonlinear trajectories is expensive
and complicated. To address this problem, [41, 3, 42] attempt to first flatten the underlying manifold via tangent
approximation or rolling maps, and then exploit SVM or
PCA-like method to learn features in the resulting flattened
space. Although these methods achieve some success, they
merely adopt shallow linear learning schemes, yielding suboptimal solutions on the specific nonlinear manifolds.
Deep neural networks have shown their great power in
learning compact and discriminative representations for images and videos, thanks to their ability to perform nonlinear computations and the effectiveness of gradient descent
training with backpropagation. This has motivated us to
build a deep neural network architecture for representation
learning on Lie groups. In particular, inspired by the classical manifold learning theory [38, 36, 4, 12, 20, 19], we
equip the new network structure with rotation mapping layers, with which the input Lie group features are transformed
to new ones with better alignment. As a result, the effect of
speed variations can be appropriately mitigated. In order
to reduce the high dimensionality of the Lie group features,
we design special pooling layers to compose them in terms
of spatial and temporal levels, respectively. As the output
data reside on nonlinear manifolds, we also propose a Riemannian computing layer, whose outputs could be fed into
any regular output layers such as a softmax layer. In short,
our main contributions are:
• A novel neural network architecture is introduced to
deeply learn more desirable Lie group representations
for the problem of skeleton-based action recognition.

6099

