Acquiring axially-symmetric transparent objects using single-view transmission
imaging
Jaewon Kim

Ilya Reshetouski
Abhijeet Ghosh
Imperial College London

{jaewon.kim15,ghosh}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel, practical solution for high quality reconstruction of axially-symmetric transparent objects.
While a special case, such transparent objects are ubiquitous in the real world. Common examples of these are
glasses, tumblers, goblets, carafes, etc., that can have very
unique and visually appealing forms making their reconstruction interesting for vision and graphics applications.
Our acquisition setup involves imaging such objects from
a single viewpoint while illuminating them from directly
behind with a few patterns emitted from an LCD panel.
Our reconstruction step is then based on optimization of
the object’s geometry and its refractive index to minimize
the difference between observed and simulated transmission/refraction of rays passing through the object. We exploit the object’s axial symmetry as a strong shape prior
which allows us to achieve robust reconstruction from a single viewpoint using a simple, commodity acquisition setup.
We demonstrate high quality reconstruction of several common rotationally symmetric as well as more complex n-fold
symmetric transparent objects with our approach.

1. Introduction
Significant advances have been achieved in vision and
graphics in the area of 3D scanning of objects including
non-lambertian and specular surfaces. However, accurate
modeling and reconstruction of transparent objects has continued to be a challenging problem due to the transmissive
and refractive properties of such objects. Generally, the
problem involves the estimation of optical properties such
as index of refraction as well as shape estimation (multiple
surfaces) of a target object. Previous work in vision and
graphics has tried to tackle the more general problem of 3D
reconstruction of transparent objects, achieving results with
limited quality in practice with relatively simple optical setups [11], or requiring more complicated optical setups for
volumetric reconstruction with multiview acquisition [12]
or immersion in various types of liquids to simplify the im-

Figure 1: Examples of acquired axially-symmetric transparent
objects rendered lit with two frontal area light sources.

age formation model [20, 5].
In this work, we focus on high quality reconstruction for
the special case of axially-symmetric transparent objects.
We note that such transparent objects are ubiquitous in the
real world with common examples being glasses, goblets,
tumblers, carafes, etc. (see Fig. 1). Such everyday objects
can have very unique and visually appealing forms which
makes their reconstruction interesting for various vision and
graphics applications. We propose a practical approach towards such reconstruction using a very simple setup with
commodity components involving a camera and an LCD
panel and exploit the inherent (vertical) axial-symmetry of
the objects to acquire data from just a single viewpoint
for efficient acquisition. Our reconstruction method takes
an analysis-by-synthesis approach where we optimize the
shape and refractive index of the target object by comparing the acquired and simulated (using ray-tracing) transmission/refraction of patterns emitted by the LCD panel in the
background. We demonstrate high quality reconstruction
for two classes of axially-symmetric transparent objects those exhibiting complete rotational symmetry, and more
complex objects exhibiting n-fold axial-symmetry - using
our practical acquisition approach. Unlike works that tar-

3559

