Unsupervised Pixel–Level Domain Adaptation
with Generative Adversarial Networks
Konstantinos Bousmalis
Google Brain
London, UK

Nathan Silberman
Google Research
New York, NY

David Dohan∗
Google Brain
Mountain View, CA

konstantinos@google.com

nsilberman@google.com

ddohan@google.com

Dumitru Erhan
Google Brain
San Francisco, CA

Dilip Krishnan
Google Research
Cambridge, MA

dumitru@google.com

dilipkay@google.com

Abstract
Collecting well-annotated image datasets to train modern machine learning algorithms is prohibitively expensive
for many tasks. One appealing alternative is rendering synthetic data where ground-truth annotations are generated
automatically. Unfortunately, models trained purely on rendered images often fail to generalize to real images. To address this shortcoming, prior work introduced unsupervised
domain adaptation algorithms that attempt to map representations between the two domains or learn to extract features that are domain–invariant. In this work, we present
a new approach that learns, in an unsupervised manner, a
transformation in the pixel space from one domain to the
other. Our generative adversarial network (GAN)–based
model adapts source-domain images to appear as if drawn
from the target domain. Our approach not only produces
plausible samples, but also outperforms the state-of-the-art
on a number of unsupervised domain adaptation scenarios
by large margins. Finally, we demonstrate that the adaptation process generalizes to object classes unseen during
training.

1. Introduction
Large and well–annotated datasets such as ImageNet [9],
COCO [29] and Pascal VOC [12] are considered crucial
to advancing computer vision research. However, creating
such datasets is prohibitively expensive. One alternative is
the use of synthetic data for model training. It has been
a long-standing goal in computer vision to use game engines or renderers to produce virtually unlimited quantities
∗ Google Brain Residency Program: g.co/brainresidency.

(a) Image examples from the Linemod dataset.

(b) Examples generated by our model, trained on Linemod.
Figure 1. RGBD samples generated with our model vs real RGBD
samples from the Linemod dataset [22, 45]. In each subfigure the
top row is the RGB part of the image, and the bottom row is the
corresponding depth channel. Each column corresponds to a specific object in the dataset. See Sect. 4 for more details.

of labeled data. Indeed, certain areas of research, such as
deep reinforcement learning for robotics tasks, effectively
require that models be trained in synthetic domains as training in real–world environments can be excessively expensive [38, 42]. Consequently, there has been a renewed interest in training models in the synthetic domain and applying
them in real–world settings [8, 47, 38, 42, 25, 32, 35, 37].
Unfortunately, models naively trained on synthetic data do
not typically generalize to real images.
A solution to this problem is using unsupervised domain
13722

