Unified Embedding and Metric Learning for Zero-Exemplar Event Detection
Noureldien Hussein, Efstratios Gavves, Arnold W.M. Smeulders
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam
{nhussein,egavves,a.w.m.smeulders}@uva.nl

Abstract
Event detection in unconstrained videos is conceived
as a content-based video retrieval with two modalities:
textual and visual. Given a text describing a novel event,
the goal is to rank related videos accordingly. This task is
zero-exemplar, no video examples are given to the novel
event.
Related works train a bank of concept detectors on external
data sources. These detectors predict confidence scores for
test videos, which are ranked and retrieved accordingly. In
contrast, we learn a joint space in which the visual and
textual representations are embedded. The space casts a
novel event as a probability of pre-defined events. Also, it
learns to measure the distance between an event and its
related videos.
Our model is trained end-to-end on publicly available
EventNet. When applied to TRECVID Multimedia Event
Detection dataset, it outperforms the state-of-the-art by a
considerable margin.

1. Introduction
TRECVID Multimedia Event Detection (MED) [1, 2] is
a retrieval task for event videos, with the reputation of being
realistic. It comes in two flavors: few-exemplar and zeroexemplar, where the latter means that no video example is
known to the model. Although expecting a few examples
seems reasonable, in practice this implies that the user must
already have an index of any possible query, making it very
limited. In this paper, we focus on event video search with
zero exemplars.
Retrieving videos of never-seen events, such as “renovating home”, without any video exemplar poses several
challenges. One challenge is how to bridge the gap between the visual and the textual semantics [3, 4, 5]. One
approach [3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] is to learn a dictionary of concept detectors on external data source. Then, scores for test
videos are predicted using these detectors. Test videos are
then ranked and retrieved accordingly. The inherent weak-

Figure 1. We pose the problem of zero-exemplar event detection as
learning from a repository of pre-defined events. Given video exemplars of events “removing drywall” or “fit wall times”, one may
detect a novel event “renovate home” as a probability distribution
over the predefined events.

ness of this approach is that the presentation of a test video
is reduced to a limited vocabulary from the concept dictionary. Another challenge is how to overcome the domain
difference between training and test events. While Semantic Query Generation (SQG) [3, 8, 9, 11] mitigates this challenge by extracting keywords from the event query, it does
not address how relevant these keywords to the event itself.
For example, keyword “person” is not relevant to event “car
repair” as it is to “flash mob gathering”.
Our entry to zero-exemplar events is that they generally have strong semantic correlations [12, 13] with other
possibly seen events. For instance, the novel event “renovating home” is related to “fit wall tiles”, “remove drywall”, or even to “paint door”. Novel events can, therefore, be casted on a repository of prior events, for which
knowledge sources in various forms are available beforehand, such as the videos, as in EventNet [14], or articles,
as in WikiHow [15]. Not only do these sources provide
video examples of a large –but still limited– set of events,
but also they provide an association of text description of
events with their corresponding videos. A text article can
describe the event in words: what is it about, what are the
11096

