Point to Set Similarity Based Deep Feature Learning
for Person Re-identification
Sanping Zhou, Jinjun Wang, Jiayun Wang, Yihong Gong, Nanning Zheng
The Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotic, Xi’an Jiaotong University

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) remains a challenging
problem due to significant appearance changes caused by
variations in view angle, background clutter, illumination
condition and mutual occlusion. To address these issues,
conventional methods usually focus on proposing robust
feature representation or learning metric transformation
based on pairwise similarity, using Fisher-type criterion.
The recent development in deep learning based approaches address the two processes in a joint fashion and have
achieved promising progress. One of the key issues for deep
learning based person Re-ID is the selection of proper similarity comparison criteria, and the performance of learned
features using existing criterion based on pairwise similarity is still limited, because only Point to Point (P2P) distances are mostly considered. In this paper, we present a
novel person Re-ID method based on Point to Set similarity comparison. The Point to Set (P2S) metric can jointly
minimize the intra-class distance and maximize the interclass distance, while back-propagating the gradient to optimize parameters of the deep model. By utilizing our proposed P2S metric, the learned deep model can effectively
distinguish different persons by learning discriminative and
stable feature representations. Comprehensive experimental evaluations on 3DPeS, CUHK01, PRID2011 and Market1501 datasets demonstrate the advantages of our method
over the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Given one single shot or multiple shots of a pedestrian from one camera view, person re-identification (Re-ID)
aims to match the same person amongst a set of gallery candidates captured from the disjoint camera networks. It is
an important task to many surveillance applications such as
person association [25], multi-target tracking [39] and behavior analysis [14]. The problem is also very challenging, because the typical setup of video surveillance system
in unconstrained environments usually generates significant appearance changes due to the variations in view angel,

(a) low resolution

(b) complex background

(c) mutual occlusion

(d) angle variation

Figure 1. The challenges to person re-identification problem in
public space, where the query image in the probe set is denoted
in green box and the matched images in the gallery set are shown
in black box.

background clutter, illumination condition and mutual occlusion, as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, a discriminative
and stable feature representation should be learned to distinguish different individuals for person Re-ID, in which the
intra-class distance is smaller than the inter-class ones.
To address these challenges, extensive works have been
reported in the past few years, which could be roughly divided into two categories: 1) developing robust descriptor to handle the variations in persons’ appearance,
and 2) designing effective distance metric to measure the
similarity between persons’ images. For the first category, different cues are employed for discriminative and stable feature extraction, and representative descriptors include the Local Binary Pattern (LBP) [35], Ensemble of
Local Feature (ELF) [10] and Local Maximal Occurrence
(LOMO) [41]. For the second category, labeled images
are used to learn a distinctive distance metric, and popular
metric learning methods include the Locally Adaptive Decision Function (LADF) [19], Large Margin Nearest Neighbor (LMNN) [32], Information Theoretic Metric Learning
(ITML) [6], etc. Since both line of works regard feature extraction and metric learning processes as two disjoint steps,
their performances are limited.
Recently, the deep learning based methods have been

3741

