Hyper-Laplacian Regularized Unidirectional Low-rank Tensor Recovery for
Multispectral Image Denoising
Yi Chang, Luxin Yan*, Sheng Zhong
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{yichang, yanluxin, zhongsheng}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent low-rank based matrix/tensor recovery methods
have been widely explored in multispectral images (MSI)
denoising. These methods, however, ignore the difference
of the intrinsic structure correlation along spatial sparsity,
spectral correlation and non-local self-similarity mode. In
this paper, we go further by giving a detailed analysis about
the rank properties both in matrix and tensor cases, and
figure out the non-local self-similarity is the key ingredient,
while the low-rank assumption of others may not hold. This
motivates us to design a simple yet effective unidirectional
low-rank tensor recovery model that is capable of truthfully
capturing the intrinsic structure correlation with reduced
computational burden. However, the low-rank models suffer
from the ringing artifacts, due to the aggregation of overlapped patches/cubics. While previous methods resort to
spatial information, we offer a new perspective by utilizing the exclusively spectral information in MSIs to address
the issue. The analysis-based hyper-Laplacian prior is introduced to model the global spectral structures, so as to
indirectly alleviate the ringing artifacts in spatial domain.
The advantages of the proposed method over the existing
ones are multi-fold: more reasonably structure correlation
representability, less processing time, and less artifacts in
the overlapped regions. The proposed method is extensively
evaluated on several benchmarks, and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art MSI denoising methods.

1. Introduction
A MSI could provide abundant information with multiple specific frequencies across the electromagnetic spectrum, which facilitates the fine representation of a real
scene. Unfortunately, during the imaging procedure, the
MSI is usually contaminated by the noises, e.g., Gaussian
noise, making the MSI unsuitable for subsequent applications. Therefore, denoising has been an essential prepro-

cessing step for further MSI applications, such as classification [33], super-resolution [6], compressive sensing [31].
In MSI denoising, the non-local self-similarity which
has been widely used in single image processing, and the
additional high spectral correlation have been extensively
proven to be efficient prior knowledge [10, 11, 32]. The
low-rank tensor models [21, 34, 7] have been proposed to
exploit the two kinds of knowledge simultaneously by constructing a 3-order tensor, namely the spatial local sparsity (mode-1), non-local self-similarity (mode-2), and spectral high correlation (mode-3). Generally, most of existing low-rank tensor models utilize these knowledge by simply adding up the ranks (or its relaxations) along all tensor
modes [24, 16, 9, 26]. A major difference with the matrix case, however, is the fact that the different n-ranks of
a higher-order tensor are not necessarily the same [15]. It
is unreasonable for previous works to ignore the subspace
discrepancy among each mode.
The ISTReg was proposed very recently [26] by taking both fine-grained tensor sparsity insights of Tucker and
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) low-rank decompositions
into consideration to capture intrinsic structure correlation
among each mode. The intuition behind ISTReg is to add
more constraints into the model. However, this makes
the heavy computational burden issue more unacceptable,
which naturally exists in MSI due to its large volume. Our
starting point to capture intrinsic structure correlation is in
line with ISTReg [26], while we take a step from the opposite philosophy by distinguishing subspace discrepancy
among each mode. Specifically, we intend to utilize the key
structure correlation and discard the weaker correlation, so
as to obtain the better result in a reasonable time.
To this end, we firstly illustrate why low-rank tensor recovery model performs better than the low-rank matrix recovery model in multispectral images and then give a detailed analysis about the rank properties along each mode
of the constructed 3-order tensor via the high-order singular
value decomposition (HOSVD). We discover that low-rank
property of the non-local self-similarity is significantly su-

4260

