Factorized Variational Autoencoders for
Modeling Audience Reactions to Movies
Zhiwei Deng1 , Rajitha Navarathna2 , Peter Carr2 , Stephan Mandt2 , Yisong Yue3 ,
Iain Matthews2 , Greg Mori1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Disney Research 3 Caltech

Abstract

1. Introduction
The desire to uncover compact yet expressive latent representations from raw data is pervasive across scientific and
engineering disciplines. The benefits of having such representations are numerous, including de-noising, imputing
missing values, reducing label complexity for supervised
learning, and interpretable latent spaces for better insight
into the phenomena hidden within the data. However, for
complex domains, conventional approaches often fail to
learn a latent representation that is both semantically expressive and compact.
In this paper, we focus on learning such a representation for a large dataset of facial expressions extracted from
movie-watching audiences. Intuitively, we expect audience
members to have correlated reactions, since each movie has
been specifically crafted to elicit a desired response [34].
Thus, one can view audience analysis as a form of collaborative filtering, which has been popularized for modeling
recommender systems (e.g., the Netflix challenge). For instance, we can assume that there are underlying exemplar
facial expressions which form a basis to reconstruct the observed reactions of each audience member. The most com-

Xt = x1,t x2,t x3,t . . . xn,t
V
z
U

Factorized VAE

"

Decoder

!

Encoder

Matrix and tensor factorization methods are often used
for finding underlying low-dimensional patterns from noisy
data. In this paper, we study non-linear tensor factorization methods based on deep variational autoencoders. Our
approach is well-suited for settings where the relationship
between the latent representation to be learned and the raw
data representation is highly complex. We apply our approach to a large dataset of facial expressions of moviewatching audiences (over 16 million faces). Our experiments show that compared to conventional linear factorization methods, our method achieves better reconstruction of
the data, and further discovers interpretable latent factors.

Face landmarks

!
X̂t = x̂1,t

x̂2,t

x̂3,t

...

x̂n,t

"

Figure 1. Factorized VAE. Facial landmarks are detected on audience members for the duration of a movie. Tensor factorization
assumes a linear decomposition. We propose a non-linear version
which learns a variational autoencoder such that the latent space
factorizes linearly.

mon approaches for collaborative filtering are factorization
techniques [25], which we build upon in our work.
Conventional factorization approaches rely on the data
decomposing linearly. For complex processes such as timevarying facial expressions, such an assumption is not appropriate. The typical way to address this limitation is to engineer feature representations that lead to a linearly decomposable structure, which requires significant manual trialand-error and/or domain expertise.
In this paper, we formulate a new non-linear variant of
tensor factorization using variational autoencoders, which
we call factorized variational autoencoders (FVAE), to
learn a factorized non-linear embedding of the data. Our
approach enjoys several attractive properties, including:
• FVAEs inherit the flexibility of modern deep learning
to discover complex non-linear relationships between
a latent representation and the raw data.
• FVAEs inherit the generalization power of tensor factorization that exploits known assumptions of the data
(e.g., the signal factorizes across individuals and time).
• FVAEs enable compact and accurate modeling of complex data such as audience facial expressions that was
12577

