Video Captioning with Transferred Semantic Attributes∗
Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Houqiang Li, and Tao Mei
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

panyw.ustc@gmail.com, {tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatically generating natural language descriptions
of videos plays a fundamental challenge for computer vision community. Most recent progress in this problem has
been achieved through employing 2-D and/or 3-D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to encode video content
and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to decode a sentence. In this paper, we present Long Short-Term Memory
with Transferred Semantic Attributes (LSTM-TSA)—a novel
deep architecture that incorporates the transferred semantic
attributes learnt from images and videos into the CNN plus
RNN framework, by training them in an end-to-end manner. The design of LSTM-TSA is highly inspired by the facts
that 1) semantic attributes play a significant contribution to
captioning, and 2) images and videos carry complementary
semantics and thus can reinforce each other for captioning.
To boost video captioning, we propose a novel transfer unit to model the mutually correlated attributes learnt from
images and videos. Extensive experiments are conducted
on three public datasets, i.e., MSVD, M-VAD and MPIIMD. Our proposed LSTM-TSA achieves to-date the best
published performance in sentence generation on MSVD:
52.8% and 74.0% in terms of BLEU@4 and CIDEr-D. Superior results are also reported on M-VAD and MPII-MD
when compared to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Video captioning, which is known as describing videos
with natural language, has brought a profound challenge to
both computer vision and language processing communities. Intensive research interests have been paid for this emerging topic.
Existing approaches to video captioning have evolved
through two dimensions: template-based language model
[8, 20, 33] and sequence learning method [15, 29, 34, 37].
The former predefines a set of templates for sentence generation following specific grammar rules and aligns each part
∗ This work was performed when Yingwei Pan was visiting Microsoft Research as a research intern.

Input Video:

...

...

Attributes from Images:
young, girl, holding, child, little, floor, pair, it, woman, playing

Attributes from Videos:
person, doing, man, room, boy, cleaning, machine, his, someone, riding

Video Caption:
a boy is cleaning the floor

Figure 1. An example of video description generation. The input
is a short video clip and the attributes are learnt from images and
videos, respectively. The output is a sentence generated by our
LSTM-TSA architecture.

of sentence with video content. This category of model,
however, highly depends on the pre-defined templates and
thus the generated sentences are always with a constant syntactical structure. Sequence learning method, in contrast,
is to leverage sequence learning models to directly translate the video content into a sentence, which is mainly inspired from the recent advances by using Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) in machine translation [24]. The spirit behind is an encoder-decoder mechanism for translation.
More specifically, an encoder 2-D/3-D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) reads a video and produces a vector of
video representations, which in turn is fed into a decoder
RNN that generate a natural sentence. While encouraging
performances are reported, the CNNs plus RNNs-based sequence learning approaches translate directly from video
representations to language, leaving the high-level semantic cues in the video under explored. Moreover, high-level
semantic information, i.e., semantic attributes, has shown
effective in the vision to language tasks [31] (e.g., image
captioning and visual Q&A).
This paper proposes a novel deep architecture, named
Long Short-Term Memory with Transferred Semantic Attributes (LSTM-TSA), which takes advantages of incorporating semantic attributes into sequence learning for video
captioning. More importantly, take the given video in Figure 1 as an example, the semantic properties learnt from

6504

