A Combinatorial Solution to Non-Rigid 3D Shape-to-Image Matching
Florian Bernard1,2,3
1

Frank R. Schmidt3

Johan Thunberg1

Daniel Cremers3

Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
2
Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg, Luxembourg
3
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany
(b) data term (per-triangle)

(c) smoothness term
(neighbouring triangles)

3D image

(d) matched template

triangle neighbourhood

(a) template (3D surface mesh)
triangle Fi

τi 2 SE(3)
τi0 2 SE(3)

τi (Fi )
(high cost)

τi0 (Fi )
(low cost)

τi0 , τj0

per-triangle
rigid-body
transformations

τi , τj

low cost

high cost

Eij (τi , τj )

Ei (τi )

E(τ ) =

f
X
i=1

Ei (τi ) +

X

Eij (τi , τj )

(i,j)2E

Figure 1. 3D Shape-to-Image Matching. (a) Given a shape as a triangular mesh, we associate to each triangle Fi its rigid transformation
τi ∈ SE(3) such that the sum of data and smoothness terms is minimised. (b) The data term Ei (τi ) measures how well the transformed
triangle τi (Fi ) fits into the volumetric image. (c) The smoothness term Eij (τi , τj ) penalises the discrepancy between transformed triangles
τi (Fi ) and τj (Fj ). (d) Optimising E provides us with a shape-to-image matching.

Abstract
We propose a combinatorial solution for the problem of
non-rigidly matching a 3D shape to 3D image data. To
this end, we model the shape as a triangular mesh and allow each triangle of this mesh to be rigidly transformed to
achieve a suitable matching to the image. By penalising
the distance and the relative rotation between neighbouring triangles our matching compromises between image and
shape information. In this paper, we resolve two major
challenges: Firstly, we address the resulting large and NPhard combinatorial problem with a suitable graph-theoretic
approach. Secondly, we propose an efficient discretisation
of the unbounded 6-dimensional Lie group SE(3). To our
knowledge this is the first combinatorial formulation for
non-rigid 3D shape-to-image matching. In contrast to existing local (gradient descent) optimisation methods, we obtain solutions that do not require a good initialisation and
that are within a bound of the optimal solution. We evaluate the proposed method on the two problems of non-rigid
3D shape-to-shape and non-rigid 3D shape-to-image registration and demonstrate that it provides promising results.

1. Introduction
Matching a shape template to an image is a well studied problem in computer vision and image analysis. It gives
rise to a wide range of applications, including image segmentation and object detection. An early approach for the
detection of lines and parametrised curves in images is the
voting-based Hough transform [14], which was later generalised to the detection of arbitrary shapes [1].
Whilst the Hough transform considers rigid shapes, the
utilisation of shape information in image segmentation tasks
has also been addressed in the non-rigid case, including
methods based on active shape models [10], level sets [12],
convex shape spaces [13], multiphase graph cuts [58], or
statistical shape models [19, 63]. For the reconstruction
of the shape of an object from a single 2D image, shapefrom-template approaches aim to match a given 3D template to the image via a 3D-to-2D projection [50, 38, 46].
Several authors have considered combinatorial formulations
of the non-rigid shape-to-image matching problem for cer-

1000

