LCNN: Lookup-based Convolutional Neural Network
Hessam Bagherinezhad1,2
1

Mohammad Rastegari2,3

Ali Farhadi1,2,3

2
3
University of Washington
XNOR.AI
Allen Institute for AI
{hessam, mohammad, ali}@xnor.ai

Abstract
Porting state of the art deep learning algorithms to resource constrained compute platforms (e.g. VR, AR, wearables) is extremely challenging. We propose a fast, compact, and accurate model for convolutional neural networks
that enables efficient learning and inference. We introduce
LCNN, a lookup-based convolutional neural network that
encodes convolutions by few lookups to a dictionary that is
trained to cover the space of weights in CNNs. Training
LCNN involves jointly learning a dictionary and a small set
of linear combinations. The size of the dictionary naturally
traces a spectrum of trade-offs between efficiency and accuracy. Our experimental results on ImageNet challenge
show that LCNN can offer 3.2× speedup while achieving
55.1% top-1 accuracy using AlexNet architecture. Our
fastest LCNN offers 37.6× speed up over AlexNet while
maintaining 44.3% top-1 accuracy. LCNN not only offers
dramatic speed ups at inference, but it also enables efficient
training. In this paper, we show the benefits of LCNN in
few-shot learning and few-iteration learning, two crucial
aspects of on-device training of deep learning models.

1. Introduction
In recent years convolutional neural networks (CNN)
have played major roles in improving the state of the art
across a wide range of problems in computer vision, including image classification [25, 37, 39, 18], object detection [11, 10, 36], segmentation [34, 32], etc. These models are very expensive in terms of computation and memory. For example, AlexNet[25] has 61M parameters and
performs 1.5B high precision operations to classify a single
image. These numbers are even higher for deeper networks,
e.g.,VGG [37]. The computational burden of learning and
inference for these models is significantly higher than what
most compute platforms can afford.
Recent advancements in virtual reality (VR by Oculus)
[33], augmented reality (AR by HoloLens) [14], and smart
wearable devices increase the demand for getting our state

of the art deep learning algorithm on these portable compute
platforms. Porting deep learning methods to these platforms
is challenging mainly due to the gap between what these
platforms can offer and what our deep learning methods require. More efficient approaches to deep neural networks is
the key to this challenge.
Recent work on efficient deep learning have focused on
model compression and reducing the computational precision of operations in neural networks [3, 15, 35]. CNNs suffer from over-parametrization [7] and often encode highly
correlated parameters [22], resulting in inefficient computation and memory usage[7]. Our key insight is to leverage the correlation between the parameters and represent
the space of parameters by a compact set of weight vectors, called dictionary. In this paper, we introduce LCNN,
a lookup-based convolutional neural network that encodes
convolutions by few lookups to a dictionary that is trained
to cover the space of weights in CNNs. Training LCNN
involves jointly learning a dictionary and a small set of
linear combinations. The size of the dictionary naturally
traces a spectrum of trade-offs between efficiency and accuracy. Our experimental results using AlexNet on ImageNet
challenge show that LCNN can offer 3.2× speedup while
achieving 55.1% top-1 accuracy. Our fastest LCNN offers
37.6× speed up over CNN while maintaining 44.3% top-1
accuracy. In the ResNet-18, the most accurate LCNN offers
5× speedup with 62.2% accuracy and the fastest LCNN offers 29.2× speedup with 51.8% accuracy
In addition, LCNN enables efficient training; almost all
the work in efficient deep learning have focused on efficient
inference on resource constrained platforms [35]. Training on these platforms is even more challenging and requires addressing two major problems: i. few-shot learning: the settings of on-device training dictates that there
won’t be enough training examples for new categories. In
fact, most training needs to be done with very few training examples; ii. few-iteration learning: the constraints in
computation and power require the training to be light and
quick. This imposes hard constraints on the number of iterations in training.LCNN offers solutions for both of these
problems in deep on-device training.
17120

