Locality-Sensitive Deconvolution Networks with Gated Fusion
for RGB-D Indoor Semantic Segmentation
Yanhua Cheng1,2 , Rui Cai3 , Zhiwei Li3 , Xin Zhao1,2 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1

CRIPAC&NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Microsoft Research
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
RGB

Abstract
This paper focuses on indoor semantic segmentation using RGB-D data. Although the commonly used deconvolution networks (DeconvNet) have achieved impressive results
on this task, we find there is still room for improvements
in two aspects. One is about the boundary segmentation.
DeconvNet aggregates large context to predict the label of
each pixel, inherently limiting the segmentation precision of
object boundaries. The other is about RGB-D fusion. Recent state-of-the-art methods generally fuse RGB and depth
networks with equal-weight score fusion, regardless of the
varying contributions of the two modalities on delineating
different categories in different scenes. To address the two
problems, we first propose a locality-sensitive DeconvNet
(LS-DeconvNet) to refine the boundary segmentation over
each modality. LS-DeconvNet incorporates locally visual
and geometric cues from the raw RGB-D data into each
DeconvNet, which is able to learn to upsample the coarse
convolutional maps with large context whilst recovering
sharp object boundaries. Towards RGB-D fusion, we
introduce a gated fusion layer to effectively combine the
two LS-DeconvNets. This layer can learn to adjust the
contributions of RGB and depth over each pixel for highperformance object recognition. Experiments on the largescale SUN RGB-D dataset and the popular NYU-Depth v2
dataset show that our approach achieves new state-of-theart results for RGB-D indoor semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of indoor scenes is a fundamental problem in computer vision, which can beneﬁt many
intelligent applications such as domestic robots, SLAM,
content-based image retrieval, etc. However, it is a very
tough task due to challenges from large variations of scene
types, cluttered backgrounds, severe object occlusions and
varying illuminations. Thanks to recent consumer depth

Depth(HHA)

GT

DeconvNet

fridge

(a) Imprecise boundaries due to the large context when labeling each pixel (see the fridge)

box

(b) Misclassified objects due to the improper fusion of RGB and depth (see the box)

Figure 1. Limitations of DeconvNet on indoor scene segmentation.
Here a two-stream DeconvNet is used to represent RGB and depth,
followed by score fusion with equal-weight sum just like the FCN
model [19]. Note that the depth data in this paper is encoded to
three-channel HHA image as the method [11]. See our results in
Fig. 4 for comparison.

cameras, e.g. Kinect, we are able to capture high-quality
synchronized visual (RGB data) and geometrical (depth data) cues to depict one scene. It represents an opportunity to
improve the performance of indoor scene segmentation by
taking full advantage of the two complementary modalities.
Extensive studies have been carried out on indoor semantic segmentation. Graphical models with handcrafted RGB
features (e.g. SIFT, HOG, LBP, etc.) and depth features
(e.g. SPIN images, depth kernels, surface normals, etc.) are
used in many methods [23, 22, 10, 7, 15]. Instead of the
handcrafted features, patch-wise CNN models [5] and RCNN models [11] are proposed to learn RGB-D features
of the superpixels or region proposals. Recently, fully
convolutional networks (FCN) [19, 27] have signiﬁcantly
pushed forward the performance of semantic segmentation,
including both indoor and outdoor scenes. FCN adapts
the CNN model designed for classiﬁcation into an end-toend system for holistic scene segmentation. Through the
repeated max-pooling and downsampling at multiple layers,
FCN learns invariant features embedded with large context
for robust prediction of each pixel, yet producing a coarse
label map with low-resolution and imprecise boundaries.

3029

