Generating Holistic 3D Scene Abstractions for Text-based Image Retrieval
Ang Li Jin Sun Joe Yue-Hei Ng Ruichi Yu Vlad I. Morariu Larry S. Davis
Institution for Advanced Computer Studies
Univesrity of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
{angli,jinsun,yhng,richyu,morariu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Spatial relationships between objects provide important
information for text-based image retrieval. As users are
more likely to describe a scene from a real world perspective, using 3D spatial relationships rather than 2D relationships that assume a particular viewing direction, one of the
main challenges is to infer the 3D structure that bridges
images with users’ text descriptions. However, direct inference of 3D structure from images requires learning from
large scale annotated data. Since interactions between objects can be reduced to a limited set of atomic spatial relations in 3D, we study the possibility of inferring 3D structure from a text description rather than an image, applying
physical relation models to synthesize holistic 3D abstract
object layouts satisfying the spatial constraints present in
a textual description. We present a generic framework for
retrieving images from a textual description of a scene by
matching images with these generated abstract object layouts. Images are ranked by matching object detection outputs (bounding boxes) to 2D layout candidates (also represented by bounding boxes) which are obtained by projecting
the 3D scenes with sampled camera directions. We validate
our approach using public indoor scene datasets and show
that our method outperforms baselines built upon object occurrence histograms and learned 2D pairwise relations.

1. Introduction
Text-based image retrieval, dating back to the late 1970s,
has evolved from a keyword-based task to a more challenging task based on natural language descriptions (e.g., sentences and paragraphs) [10, 11, 22]. Queries in the form
of sentences rather than keywords refer to not only object
categorical information but also interations, such as spatial
relationships, between objects. Those relationships are usually described in the real (3D) world due to the nature of human language. Intuitively, they can be the core feature for
ranking images in many application scenarios, e.g., a user
searching for images that are relevant to a particular mental

image of a room layout. Not surprisingly, researchers have
recently increased their focus on understanding spatial relationships from text input and retrieving semantically consistent visual information [10, 16, 23, 32].
Matching images with user provided spatial relations is
challenging because humans naturally describe scenes in
3D while images are 2D projections of the world. Inferring 3D information from a single image is difficult. Most
existing approaches learn from annotated data to map language directly to a probability distribution of pairwise relationships between object locations [10, 16]. However, such
a distribution is non-convex and highly non-linear in the 2D
image space because the (unknown) camera view affects the
bounding box configurations. Consequently, the success of
2D learning based approaches naturally depends on the size
of annotated training data. Also, the learner overfits easily
since annotated spatial relations have a long-tailed distribution; many valid configurations happen rarely in the real
world (e.g., a desk on another desk). With pairwise relations, it is also hard to enforce the fact that all objects are
viewed from the same direction in an image. This argues
for a holistic model for object relationships that jointly optimizes object configurations. Motivated by this, we explore
an alternative model of spatial relations that generates 3D
configurations explicitly based on physics.
We explore an approach that uses physical models and
complex spatial relation semantics as part of an image retrieval system that generates 3D object layouts from text
(rather than from images) and performs image retrieval by
matching 2D projections of these layouts against objects detected in each database image. Our framework requires the
a priori definition of a fixed set of object and spatial relation categories. Spatial relation terms are extracted from
the dependency tree of the text. Objects are modeled using cuboids and spatial relations are modeled as inequality constraints on object locations and orientations. These
inequality constraints can become very complex, containing nonlinear transformations represented using first order
logic. Consequently, an interval arithmetic based 3D scene
solver is introduced to search for feasible 3D spatial layout

193

