The Amazing Mysteries of the Gutter:
Drawing Inferences Between Panels in Comic Book Narratives
Mohit Iyyer∗1 Varun Manjunatha∗1 Anupam Guha1 Yogarshi Vyas1
Jordan Boyd-Graber2 Hal Daumé III1 Larry Davis1
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

University of Colorado, Boulder

{miyyer,varunm,aguha,yogarshi,hal,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

jordan.boyd.graber@colorado.edu

Abstract
Visual narrative is often a combination of explicit information and judicious omissions, relying on the viewer to
supply missing details. In comics, most movements in time
and space are hidden in the “gutters” between panels. To
follow the story, readers logically connect panels together
by inferring unseen actions through a process called “closure”. While computers can now describe what is explicitly depicted in natural images, in this paper we examine
whether they can understand the closure-driven narratives
conveyed by stylized artwork and dialogue in comic book
panels. We construct a dataset, COMICS, that consists of
over 1.2 million panels (120 GB) paired with automatic
textbox transcriptions. An in-depth analysis of COMICS
demonstrates that neither text nor image alone can tell a
comic book story, so a computer must understand both
modalities to keep up with the plot. We introduce three
cloze-style tasks that ask models to predict narrative and
character-centric aspects of a panel given n preceding panels as context. Various deep neural architectures underperform human baselines on these tasks, suggesting that
COMICS contains fundamental challenges for both vision
and language.

1. Introduction
Comics are fragmented scenes forged into full-fledged
stories by the imagination of their readers. A comics creator
can condense anything from a centuries-long intergalactic
war to an ordinary family dinner into a single panel. But it
is what the creator hides from their pages that makes comics
truly interesting: the unspoken conversations and unseen
actions that lurk in the spaces (or gutters) between adjacent panels. For example, the dialogue in Figure 1 suggests
that between the second and third panels, Gilda commands
her snakes to chase after a frightened Michael in some
∗

Figure 1. Where did the snake in the last panel come from? Why
is it biting the man? Is the man in the second panel the same as
the man in the first panel? To answer these questions, readers form
a larger meaning out of the narration boxes, speech bubbles, and
artwork by applying closure across panels.

sort of strange cult initiation. Through a process called
closure [40], which involves (1) understanding individual
panels and (2) making connective inferences across panels,
readers form coherent storylines from seemingly disparate
panels such as these. In this paper, we study whether computers can do the same by collecting a dataset of comic
books (COMICS) and designing several tasks that require
closure to solve.
Section 2 describes how we create COMICS,1 which
contains ∼1.2 million panels drawn from almost 4,000
publicly-available comic books published during the
“Golden Age” of American comics (1938–1954). COMICS
is challenging in both style and content compared to natural
images (e.g., photographs), which are the focus of most existing datasets and methods [32, 56, 55]. Much like painters,
comic artists can render a single object or concept in multiple artistic styles to evoke different emotional responses
from the reader. For example, the lions in Figure 2 are
drawn with varying degrees of realism: the more cartoon1 Data, code, and annotations to be made available after blind review.

Authors contributed equally

17186

