Neural Scene De-rendering
Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL

Pushmeet Kohli
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We study the problem of holistic scene understanding. We
would like to obtain a compact, expressive, and interpretable
representation of scenes that encodes information such as
the number of objects and their categories, poses, positions,
etc. Such a representation would allow us to reason about
and even reconstruct or manipulate elements of the scene.
Previous works have used encoder-decoder based neural
architectures to learn image representations; however, representations obtained in this way are typically uninterpretable,
or only explain a single object in the scene.
In this work, we propose a new approach to learn an
interpretable distributed representation of scenes. Our approach employs a deterministic rendering function as the
decoder, mapping a naturally structured and disentangled
scene description, which we named scene XML, to an image.
By doing so, the encoder is forced to perform the inverse of
the rendering operation (a.k.a. de-rendering) to transform
an input image to the structured scene XML that the decoder
used to produce the image. We use a object proposal based
encoder that is trained by minimizing both the supervised
prediction and the unsupervised reconstruction errors. Experiments demonstrate that our approach works well on
scene de-rendering with two different graphics engines, and
our learned representation can be easily adapted for a wide
range of applications like image editing, inpainting, visual
analogy-making, and image captioning.

1. Introduction
What properties are desirable in an image representation
for visual understanding? We argue that the representation
needs to be compact, expressive, and interpretable. Compactness makes it possible to store and exploit large amounts
of data. Expressiveness allows it to capture the variations
in the number, category, appearance, and pose of objects in
an image. Lastly, an interpretable and disentangled representation enables us to reason about and even reconstruct or
manipulate elements of an image.
Image representations learned by neural networks are
often compact and expressive, but are hard to interpret. Recently, researchers studied how to obtain interpretable representations [4, 21, 35]. They mostly employed an encoding-

Figure 1: Our goal is to interpret an image in a holistic way. Assuming an image is rendered by a graphics engine on an indefinite
length input, we aim to recover the input so that the the exact image
can be reconstructed and manipulated. Here we show a simplified
version of the XML we use.

decoding framework, using neural nets for both inference
and approximate rendering. However, these methods typically assume each input image contains only a single, centered object in front of a clean background. Consequently,
they are not robust and powerful enough for practical applications, where we often see images with an indefinite number
of objects, heavy occlusions, and a cluttered background.
In contrast to neural decoders like the ones used in [8,
21], the deterministic rendering functions used in graphics
engines naturally take a structured and disentangled input
to generate images. From this perspective, if we assume a
given image is rendered by a generic graphics engine, we
can aim to recover the structured representation required by
renderer to reconstruct the exact image (a.k.a. de-rendering).
By learning an image representation this way, we achieve
interpretability for free, and we will also be able to apply the
representation to a range of applications like image editing.
This image de-rendering problem, however, is very challenging for multiple reasons. First, as we are no longer
assuming a localized object, and the number of objects in an
image is unknown, our representation should be extensible
to an arbitrary number of objects in different positions. This
cannot be achieved in a straightforward way with traditional
convolutional networks that learn image representations of
a fixed dimension. Previous works discussed the use of recurrent networks like LSTM [14] in these cases. However,
1699

