The Misty Three Point Algorithm for Relative Pose
Tobias Palmér, Kalle Åström
Center for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University

Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

{tobiasp,kalle}@maths.lth.se

jmf@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
There is a significant interest in scene reconstruction
from underwater images given its utility for oceanic research and for recreational image manipulation. In this paper we propose a novel algorithm for two view camera motion estimation for underwater imagery. Our method leverages the constraints provided by the attenuation properties
of water and its effects on the appearance of the color to
determine the depth difference of a point with respect to the
two observing views of the underwater cameras. Additionally, we propose an algorithm, leveraging the depth differences of three such observed points, to estimate the relative pose of the cameras. Given the unknown underwater
attenuation coefficients, our method estimates the relative
motion up to scale. The results are represented as a generalized camera. We evaluate our method on both real data
and simulated data.

Figure 1. Top: Real images with a few estimated corresponding
points (green) and outliers (red) found using the Misty Three Point
algorithm (MTP) proposed in this paper. Bottom: structure and
motion estimated using MTP for a sequence (in which the top row
images are represented by blue cameras).

1. Introduction
The recovery of 3D scene geometry from images has always been one of the core goals of computer vision and has
progressed significantly over the last decade [19, 1, 5, 9].
One essential building block of all these system is the ability to successfully estimate the two-view geometry between
two overlapping cameras under the assumption of a central perspective camera. This camera model though is only
valid for cameras taking photos through air. Hence, this
mode of reconstruction is not valid for cameras submerged
in water. However, 71% of the earth’s surface is covered by
oceans and with both the scientific interest in underwater
imagery and the now ubiquitous availability of underwater
cameras to users, for example through GoPro cameras, performing structure from motion in underwater environments
moves into the focus of research [18, 12]. In this paper we
target the successful estimation of two-view geometry for
underwater cameras, which due to their imaging conditions
do not comply with the traditionally used pinhole camera
model [18, 22]. In this paper we propose a novel method

to enable SFM under such circumstances. In particular we
propose a novel minimal solver to enable two-view geometry estimation and a method for relative point depth estimation.
Our proposed method leverages the observation that
when looking at photos for example of an under water shipwreck, one can get a sense of depth. The reason for this is
the easily observable depth dependent attenuation of light
under water, which is more significant than in air and weakens as well as distorts an object’s color [15, 16, 21].We
leverage this observation along with the 2D correspondences of the projections of the same 3D scene point into
two different images to deduce a novel constraint on the relative depth change of the point with respect to the two capturing cameras (see Section 2.3). Given the relative depth
changes we then propose a novel three point algorithm that
leverages these changes in order to infer the relative camera motion up to scale (see Section 3). In combination this
enables us to obtain the two view geometry under a gen-

2786

