Collaborative Deep Reinforcement Learning for Joint Object Search
Xiangyu Kong1∗
Bo Xin2
Yizhou Wang1
Gang Hua2
1
Nat’l Eng. Lab. for Video Technology, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University
{kong, Yizhou.Wang}@pku.edu.cn
2

Microsoft Research

{boxin, ganghua}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We examine the problem of joint top-down active search
of multiple objects under interaction, e.g., person riding a
bicycle, cups held by the table, etc.. Such objects under interaction often can provide contextual cues to each other
to facilitate more efficient search. By treating each detector as an agent, we present the first collaborative multiagent deep reinforcement learning algorithm to learn the
optimal policy for joint active object localization, which effectively exploits such beneficial contextual information. We
learn inter-agent communication through cross connections
with gates between the Q-networks, which is facilitated by
a novel multi-agent deep Q-learning algorithm with joint
exploitation sampling. We verify our proposed method on
multiple object detection benchmarks. Not only does our
model help to improve the performance of state-of-the-art
active localization models, it also reveals interesting codetection patterns that are intuitively interpretable.

1. Introduction
Given an image, the goal of detecting and localizing objects is to place a bounding box around the instances of a
pre-defined object class, such as cars, faces, person/people
[5, 29, 3, 1]. With the recent advancement [15, 25, 11] of
deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) on object classification, generic object detection is also attracting more
and more attention with fast increasing detection accuracy
on popular benchmarks [8, 22, 21, 17].
Recent detectors explore the idea of bottom-up object
region proposals [8], where a relatively small set of a few
thousand windows were pre-selected [28] and evaluated.
Acceleration were made by sharing computation and pooling over the feature maps from the CNN layers [7, 10].
These works were further accelerated by integrating the separate region proposal step and the classification step into
one network [22, 17] by using so-called “anchors” which
correspond to regular prototype grid in the image space.
However, the number of windows to be evaluated remains
∗ Work performed while interning at Microsoft Research.

(a) Single agent detection

(b) Joint agent detection

Figure 1. Joint agent detection compared with single agent detection [2]. The bounding box trajectories are indicated by gradual
color change. Blue is for person and red is for bicycle. Successful
detections are highlighted in bold green. Both objects were detected within 15 iterations by joint detection while single agent detection failed to locate the bicycle even after 200 iterations. (Only
the first 30 iterations were illustrated for visualization purpose).

several thousand. Therefore, the speed of such region-based
methods depends on a heavy use of fast GPUs. When computation power is limited, e.g. only CPUs were available,
these pipelines are inevitably slow.
Active search methods provide a promising complementary top-down scheme to reduce the number of windows to
be evaluated [19, 9, 2, 32, 18].When searching or localizing objects, biological vision systems are believed to have a
sequential process with changing retinal fixations that gradually accumulate evidence of certainty [14, 16]. It is therefore highly desirable, both biologically and computationally, to explore computational models that facilitate object
search in such top-down behavior.
Typically, these models learn policies to search for an object by sequentially translating and/or reshaping the bounding box detector. One can view such a search process as
an agent searching for the rewarding ground truth bounding boxes and exploit reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to learn a good policy. In general, these methods can
achieve reasonably good performance using only dozens of
steps (effectively the number of windows evaluated).
We examine the problem of joint active search of multiple objects under interaction. On one hand, it is interesting
to consider such a collaborative detection “game” played
11695

