PoseAgent: Budget-Constrained 6D Object Pose Estimation
via Reinforcement Learning
Alexander Krull1 , Eric Brachmann1 , Sebastian Nowozin2 ,
Frank Michel1 , Jamie Shotton2 , Carsten Rother1
1
TU Dresden, 2 Microsoft

Abstract
State-of-the-art computer vision algorithms often
achieve efficiency by making discrete choices about which
hypotheses to explore next. This allows allocation of
computational resources to promising candidates, however,
such decisions are non-differentiable. As a result, these
algorithms are hard to train in an end-to-end fashion.
In this work we propose to learn an efficient algorithm
for the task of 6D object pose estimation. Our system
optimizes the parameters of an existing state-of-the art pose
estimation system using reinforcement learning, where
the pose estimation system now becomes the stochastic
policy, parametrized by a CNN. Additionally, we present
an efficient training algorithm that dramatically reduces
computation time. We show empirically that our learned
pose estimation procedure makes better use of limited
resources and improves upon the state-of-the-art on a
challenging dataset. Our approach enables differentiable
end-to-end training of complex algorithmic pipelines and
learns to make optimal use of a given computational
budget.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in computer vision involve learning a function, usually learning to predict a desired output label given
an input image. Advances in deep learning have led to huge
progress in solving such tasks. In particular, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) work well when trained over large
training sets using gradient descent methods to minimize
the expected loss between the predictions and the ground
truth labels.
However, important computer vision systems take the
form of algorithms rather than being a simple differentiable
function: sliding window search, superpixel partioning, particle filters, and classification cascades are examples of algorithms realizing complex non-continuous functions.

The algorithmic approach is especially useful in situations where computational budget is limited: an algorithm
can dynamically assign its budget to solving different aspects of the problem, for example, to take shortcuts in order to spend computation on more promising solutions at
the expense of less promising ones. We would like to
learn the algorithm. Unfortunately, the hard decisions taken
in most algorithmic approaches are non-differentiable, and
this means that the structure and parameters of these efficient algorithms cannot be easily learned from data.
Reinforcement learning (RL) [22] offers a possible solution to learning algorithms. We view the algorithm as the
policy of an RL agent, i.e. a description of dynamic sequential behaviour. RL provides a framework to learn the parameters of such behaviour with the goal of maximizing an
expected reward, for example, the accuracy of the algorithm
output. We apply this perspective on an algorithmic computer vision method. In particular, we address the problem
of 6D object pose estimation and use RL to learn the parameters of a deep algorithmic pipeline to provide the best
possible accuracy given a limited computational budget.
Object pose estimation is the task of estimating from an
image the 3D translation (position) and 3D rotation (orientation) of a specific object relative to its environment. This
task is important in many applications such as robotics and
augmented reality where the efficient use of a limited computation budget is an important requirement. A particular
challenge are small, textureless and partially occluded objects in a cluttered environment (see Fig. 1).
State-of-the-art pose systems such as the system of
Krull et al. [12] generate a pool of pose hypotheses, then
score each hypothesis using a pre-trained CNN. The subset
of high-scoring hypotheses get refined and ultimately the
highest-scoring hypothesis is returned as the answer. Computationally the refinement step is the most expensive, and
there is a trade-off between the number of refinements allowed and the expected quality of the result.
Ideally, one would train such state-of-the-art system endto-end in order to learn how to use the optimal number

6702

