Deep representation learning for human motion prediction and classification
Judith Bütepage1 Michael J. Black2 Danica Kragic1 Hedvig Kjellström1
1
Department of Robotics, Perception, and Learning, CSC, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
2
Perceiving Systems Department, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
butepage@kth.se, black@tuebingen.mpg.de, dani@kth.se, hedvig@kth.se

Abstract
Generative models of 3D human motion are often restricted to a small number of activities and can therefore not
generalize well to novel movements or applications. In this
work we propose a deep learning framework for human motion capture data that learns a generic representation from
a large corpus of motion capture data and generalizes well
to new, unseen, motions. Using an encoding-decoding network that learns to predict future 3D poses from the most
recent past, we extract a feature representation of human
motion. Most work on deep learning for sequence prediction focuses on video and speech. Since skeletal data has
a different structure, we present and evaluate different network architectures that make different assumptions about
time dependencies and limb correlations. To quantify the
learned features, we use the output of different layers for
action classification and visualize the receptive fields of the
network units. Our method outperforms the recent state
of the art in skeletal motion prediction even though these
use action specific training data. Our results show that
deep feedforward networks, trained from a generic mocap
database, can successfully be used for feature extraction
from human motion data and that this representation can
be used as a foundation for classification and prediction.

1. Introduction
An expressive representation of human motion is needed
not only for action classification but also motion prediction and generation. A general representation of the skeletal pose and motion can serve different purposes in different fields. In computer vision, an adequate representation
of movements can facilitate tracking and recognition. In
robotics, this representation can be used to map human motion to the robot’s embodiment. The representation can also
build the foundation for inference of intention and interpretation of goal-directed actions. Thus, there is a need for a
sufficient and efficient representation that is generalizable
to novel movements and with a high transferability factor

Figure 1: The spike-triggered average pose [21] for different units in the middle layer of the hierarchical temporal
encoder. Each sequence covers a duration of 1600 ms.

to different applications. Furthermore, this representation
needs to encode both the correlations between joints and
limbs and the temporal structure of human motion. The aim
of this work is to develop and investigate learned representations of skeletal human motion data that can be used in a
variety of tasks and are not tuned towards specific motion
patterns.
Deep neural networks (DNN) have been found to automatically learn features that can generalize to novel tasks
depending on the structure of the network and the tasks at
hand [2]. The advantage of deep architectures over shallow functions has been attributed to the ability to uncover
sparse, distributed representations in a hierarchical manner
[4]. Assuming that high-dimensional observed data points
have been generated from a low-dimensional manifold, regularized autoencoders can be used to approximate the datagenerating density locally [1]. Additionally, convolutional
neural networks (CNN) combine local feature extraction,
weight sharing and pooling to extract invariant, increasingly
complex features [17].
In order to capture correlations in temporal data such
as video recordings, 3D CNNs have been proposed which
apply convolutions in both temporal and spatial directions

6158

