Growing a Brain: Fine-Tuning by Increasing Model Capacity
Yu-Xiong Wang
Deva Ramanan
Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{yuxiongw,dramanan,hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Target task labels

Target task

Abbey
C1-C2-C3-C4-C5

CNNs have made an undeniable impact on computer vision through the ability to learn high-capacity models with
large annotated training sets. One of their remarkable
properties is the ability to transfer knowledge from a large
source dataset to a (typically smaller) target dataset. This
is usually accomplished through fine-tuning a fixed-size network on new target data. Indeed, virtually every contemporary visual recognition system makes use of fine-tuning to
transfer knowledge from ImageNet. In this work, we analyze what components and parameters change during finetuning, and discover that increasing model capacity allows
for more natural model adaptation through fine-tuning. By
making an analogy to developmental learning, we demonstrate that “growing” a CNN with additional units, either by widening existing layers or deepening the overall
network, significantly outperforms classic fine-tuning approaches. But in order to properly grow a network, we show
that newly-added units must be appropriately normalized to
allow for a pace of learning that is consistent with existing units. We empirically validate our approach on several
benchmark datasets, producing state-of-the-art results.

1. Motivation
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have revolutionized visual understanding, through the ability to learn
“big models” (with hundreds of millions of parameters)
with “big data” (very large number of images). Importantly,
such data must be annotated with human-provided labels.
Producing such massively annotated training data for new
categories or tasks of interest is typically unrealistic. Fortunately, when trained on a large enough, diverse “base” set
of data (e.g., ImageNet), CNN features appear to transfer
across a broad range of tasks [32, 4, 56]. However, an open
question is how to best adapt a pre-trained CNN for novel
categories/tasks.
Fine-tuning: Fine-tuning is by far the dominant strategy
for transfer learning with neural networks [28, 4, 32, 53, 10,
12]. This approach was pioneered in [14] by transferring

FC6

FC7

FCa

FC8

Softmax
House

Deeper Developmental Transfer
Source task

Source task labels

Convolutional layers
C1-C2-C3-C4-C5

Fully-connected layers
FC6

FC7

FC8

Hen
Softmax
Goldfish

Representation module

Target task

Classifier module

Wider Developmental Transfer

Target task labels
Abbey

C1-C2-C3-C4-C5

FC6

FC7
FC7+

FC8

Softmax
House

Figure 1: Transfer and developmental learning of pretrained CNNs by increasing model capacity for the recognition of novel categories from few examples. The network
(e.g., AlexNet) is pre-trained on the source task (e.g., ImageNet classification) with abundant data (middle row). Different from the dominant paradigm of fine-tuning a fixedcapacity model, we grow this network when adapting it to a
novel target task (e.g., SUN-397 scene classification) in two
ways: (1) going deeper by adding more layers (top) and (2)
going wider by adding more channels per layer (bottom).
knowledge from a generative to a discriminative model, and
has since been generalized with great success [10, 57]. The
basic pipeline involves replacing the last “classifier” layer
of a pre-trained network with a new randomly initialized
layer for the target task of interest. The modified network
is then fine-tuned with additional passes of appropriately
tuned gradient descent on the target training set. Virtually every contemporary visual recognition system uses this
pipeline. Even though its use is widespread, fine-tuning is
still relatively poorly understood. For example, what fraction of the pre-trained weights actually change and how?
Developmental networks: To address this issue, we explore “developmental” neural networks that grow in model
capacity as new tasks as encountered. We demonstrate
that growing a network, by adding additional units, facilitates knowledge transfer to new tasks. We explore two approaches to adding units as shown in Figure 1: going deeper
(more layers) and wider (more channels per layer). Through
visualizations, we demonstrate that these additional units
12471

