Interspecies Knowledge Transfer for Facial Keypoint Detection
Maheen Rashid
University of California, Davis

Xiuye Gu∗
Zhejiang University

Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis

mhnrashid@ucdavis.edu

gxy0922@zju.edu.cn

yongjaelee@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
We present a method for localizing facial keypoints on
animals by transferring knowledge gained from human
faces. Instead of directly finetuning a network trained to
detect keypoints on human faces to animal faces (which is
sub-optimal since human and animal faces can look quite
different), we propose to first adapt the animal images to
the pre-trained human detection network by correcting for
the differences in animal and human face shape. We first
find the nearest human neighbors for each animal image using an unsupervised shape matching method. We use these
matches to train a thin plate spline warping network to warp
each animal face to look more human-like. The warping
network is then jointly finetuned with a pre-trained human
facial keypoint detection network using an animal dataset.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on both horse and
sheep facial keypoint detection, and significant improvement over simple finetuning, especially when training data
is scarce. Additionally, we present a new dataset with 3717
images with horse face and facial keypoint annotations.

1. Introduction
Facial keypoint detection is a necessary precondition for
face alignment and registration, and impacts facial expression analysis, facial tracking, as well as graphics methods
that manipulate or transform faces. While human facial keypoint detection is a mature area of research, despite its importance, animal facial keypoint detection is a relatively unexplored area. For example, veterinary research has shown
that horses [16, 11], mice [25], sheep [3], and cats [17] display facial expressions of pain – a facial keypoint detector
could be used to help automate such animal pain detection.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of facial keypoint detection for animals, with a focus on horses and sheep.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated impressive performance for human facial keypoint
detection [33, 47, 41, 54, 20, 61, 6, 56], which makes CNNs
∗ Work done while an intern at UC Davis.

Human Keypoint
Detection
Network

(a)

Warping Network

(b)

Human Keypoint
Detection
Network

Figure 1. Main idea. (a) Directly finetuning a human keypoint detector to horses can be suboptimal, since horses and humans have
very different shapes and appearances. (b) By warping a horse
to have a more human-like shape, the pre-trained human keypoint
detector can more easily adapt to the horse’s appearance.

an attractive choice for learning facial keypoints on animals.
Unfortunately, training a CNN from scratch typically requires large amounts of labeled data, which can be timeconsuming and expensive to collect. Furthermore, while a
CNN can be finetuned when there is not enough training
data for the target task, a pre-trained network’s extent of
learning is limited both by the amount of data available for
fine-tuning, as well as the relatedness of the two tasks. For
example, previous work demonstrate that a network trained
on man-made objects has limited ability to adapt to natural
objects [52], and additional pretraining data is only beneficial when related to the target task [18].
While there are large datasets with human facial keypoint annotations (e.g., AFLW has ∼26000 images [23]),
there are, unfortunately, no large datasets of animal facial
keypoints that could be used to train a CNN from scratch
(e.g., the sheep dataset from [51] has only ∼600 images).
At the same time, the structural differences between a human face and an animal face means that directly fine-tuning
a human keypoint detector to animals can lead to a suboptimal solution (as we demonstrate in Sec. 4).
In this paper, we address the problem of transferring
knowledge between two different types of data (human and
16894

