DeshadowNet: A Multi-context Embedding Deep Network for Shadow Removal
1

Liangqiong Qu1,2,3 Jiandong Tian1∗ Shengfeng He4 Yandong Tang1 Rynson W. H. Lau3
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; 3 City University of Hong Kong;
4
South China University of Technology
{quliangqiong, tianjd, ytang}@sia.cn, hesfe@scut.edu.cn, rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Shadow removal is a challenging task as it requires the
detection/annotation of shadows as well as semantic understanding of the scene. In this paper, we propose an automatic and end-to-end deep neural network (DeshadowNet)
to tackle these problems in a unified manner. DeshadowNet
is designed with a multi-context architecture, where the output shadow matte is predicted by embedding information
from three different perspectives. The first global network
extracts shadow features from a global view. Two levels
of features are derived from the global network and transferred to two parallel networks. While one extracts the appearance of the input image, the other one involves semantic understanding for final prediction. These two complementary networks generate multi-context features to obtain
the shadow matte with fine local details. To evaluate the
performance of the proposed method, we construct the first
large scale benchmark with 3088 image pairs. Extensive
experiments on two publicly available benchmarks and our
large-scale benchmark show that the proposed method performs favorably against several state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The presence of illumination changes in an image, shadows in particular, have been proved to be one of the main
challenging factors for a variety of computer vision tasks,
such as object detection and tracking [6, 24]. As such, shadow removal aims to produce a high-quality shadow-free image given a single shadow image. According to [3, 31, 21,
1], a shadow image Is can be considered as a pixel-wise
product of a shadow-free image Ins and a shadow matte
Sm (or shadow scale factors).
Is = Sm · Ins ,

(1)

where the shadow matte Sm represents the illumination attenuation effects caused by the shadow.
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Image

(b) Shadow matte

(c) GT

(d) Guo [15]

(e) Arbel [1]

(f) Yang [33]

(g) Gong [12]

(h) Ours

Figure 1: Comparison with existing shadow removal methods. Existing methods fail to correctly remove the shadow
cast on different semantic regions (i.e., horizontal ground
and vertical trunk).
With Eq. 1, the shadow removal process is transformed
to estimating a shadow matte for an input shadow image. Most existing methods follow this formulation to address the shadow removal problem [31, 21, 1, 15, 12, 19].
Notwithstanding the demonstrated success, these methods
share the following three limitations.
Lack of a fully-automatic and end-to-end pipeline.
Existing methods for shadow matte estimation require the
prior information of shadow location. It is either obtained
from shadow detection [15, 19] or user input [31, 1, 14, 12,
34]. However, shadow detection itself is a challenging task.
Conventional methods for shadow detection either lack robust shadow features [35, 20, 15], or can only be applied to
high-quality images [8, 30]. Due to the limited amount of
training data, recent deep learning based methods [26, 19]
are restricted to small network architectures.
Neglect high level semantic information. Existing
works mainly adopt low-level features (e.g., color ratios
[15, 12] or color statistics [31, 19]) to calculate the shadow
matte. However, the shadow matte is also closely related
to the semantic contents (e.g., geometry and material). As
shown in Fig. 1a to 1c, the shadow matte values on two semantic regions, the horizontal ground and vertical trunk, are
apparently distinct from each other since the light intensities
of these two semantic regions are different. Unfortunately,
exiting methods [1, 15, 12] do not consider this semantic

4067

