Variational Bayesian Multiple Instance Learning with Gaussian Processes
Manuel Haußmann1
Fred A. Hamprecht1
Melih Kandemir1,2∗
1
2
HCI/IWR, Heidelberg University
Özyeğin University
{manuel.haussmann, fred.hamprecht}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
melih.kandemir@ozyegin.edu.tr

Abstract
Gaussian Processes (GPs) are effective Bayesian predictors. We here show for the first time that instance labels
of a GP classifier can be inferred in the multiple instance
learning (MIL) setting using variational Bayes. We achieve
this via a new construction of the bag likelihood that assumes a large value if the instance predictions obey the MIL
constraints and a small value otherwise. This construction
lets us derive the update rules for the variational parameters analytically, assuring both scalable learning and fast
convergence. We observe this model to improve the state
of the art in instance label prediction from bag-level supervision in the 20 Newsgroups benchmark, as well as in
Barrett’s cancer tumor localization from histopathology tissue microarray images. Furthermore, we introduce a novel
pipeline for weakly supervised object detection naturally
complemented with our model, which improves the state of
the art on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 data sets. Last
but not least, the performance of our model can be further
boosted up using mixed supervision: a combination of weak
(bag) and strong (instance) labels.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a tremendous increase in our
ability to collect ever larger data sets automatically at ever
decreasing costs. This has further widened the gulf between
our data collection and labeling capacities. Weakly supervised learning has emerged as an active area of machine
learning to bridge this gap. It targets learning effective predictors from minimal annotator effort. Among the many
weakly supervised learning approaches, multiple instance
learning (MIL) [1] stands out as an excellent match to computer vision. MIL assumes that the training data is partitioned into groups of instances, called bags, and labels are
available only at the level of entire groups. A bag is given a
∗ The main part of this work has been done while the author was with
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing (HCI), Heidelberg University.

positive label if at least one of its instances contain the target
pattern, and a negative label if none of its instances contain
it. The difficulty of this setting arises from the fact that the
labels of individual instances in positive bags are not known
at training time. The MIL model, hence, needs to account
for this missing information. MIL has been shown to be
greatly beneficial in image categorization [3, 7, 27].
Gaussian Processes (GPs) [33] are commanding much
attention of the machine learning community due to their
high potential in supervised learning. They are able to fit
complex non-linear decision boundaries thanks to their inherent kernelization. The high expressive power of GPs can
also be understood from their proven equivalence to a multilayer perceptron with infinitely many hidden neurons [32].
The probabilistic nature of GPs allows them to handle uncertainty in a principled manner [10].
MIL is a supervised learning task with missing instance
labels. The uncertainty in these latent variables makes GP
modeling a natural fit. Even so, there has only been limited
work on GP-based approaches to MIL models to date. Kim
and Torre [23] were the first to use GPs in the MIL setting,
by applying the softmax approximation to a Bernoulli likelihood and performing inference using Laplace’s method.
This approach suffers from two limitations: i) it does not
scale to large data sets due to the inversion of one Hessian
matrix per bag in each iteration, ii) the learned posterior is
not accurate since both softmax and Laplace’s method are
not tight approximations of the true modeling assumptions.
Recent work by Kandemir et al. [21] alleviates these issues
by relaxing the MIL assumption (by allowing a fraction of
positive predictions in negative bags) and performing variational inference. Although this approach yields a very accurate bag-level predictor, it cannot predict instance labels
as the MIL assumption is violated during training.
We introduce the first adaptation of GPs to MIL that
affords variational inference and instance label prediction.
Furthermore, our construction allows learning the variational parameters by closed-form updates, resulting in fast
convergence. We achieve this tractability by a new baglevel likelihood formulation that ensures consistency be16570

