One-to-Many Network for Visually Pleasing Compression Artifacts Reduction
Jun Guo∗
Hongyang Chao∗
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University,
and SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute

Abstract
We consider the compression artifacts reduction problem, where a compressed image is transformed into an
artifact-free image. Recent approaches for this problem typically train a one-to-one mapping using a per-pixel L2 loss
between the outputs and the ground-truths. We point out
that these approaches used to produce overly smooth results, and PSNR doesn’t reflect their real performance. In
this paper, we propose a one-to-many network, which measures output quality using a perceptual loss, a naturalness
loss, and a JPEG loss. We also avoid grid-like artifacts
during deconvolution using a “shift-and-average” strategy.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate the dramatic visual improvement of our approach over the state of the arts.

1. Introduction
Compression Artifacts Reduction is a classical problem
in computer vision. This problem targets at estimating an
artifact-free image from a lossily compressed image. In this
age of information explosion, the number of images spreading on the Internet increases rapidly. Lossy compression
(e.g., JPEG [41], WebP [13], and HEVC-MSP [40]) is inevitably adopted for saving bandwidth and storage space. However, lossy compression in its nature leads to information
loss and undesired artifacts, which severely reduces the user
experience. Thus, how to recover visually pleasing artifactfree images has attracted more and more attention.
Given the fact that JPEG is the most extensively used
lossy compression scheme across the world, in the following, we focus on discussing JPEG compression artifacts
reduction. Various approaches have been proposed to suppress JPEG compression artifacts. Early works [37] manually developed filters to remove simple artifacts. Recently,
learning-based approaches are occupying the dominant position. [22, 5, 2, 28, 27, 36] proposed to reconstruct artifactfree images using sparse coding. These approaches can produce sharpened images but are usually accompanied with
∗ Corresponding Emails: Jun Guo (artanis.protoss@outlook.com), and
Hongyang Chao (isschhy@mail.sysu.edu.cn)

(a) Results of ARCNN

(b) Our results

Figure 1: Compression artifacts reduction examples. Compared with ARCNN, our results have much richer textures;
e.g., see the fur in Row 1 and the bushes in Row 2.
noisy edges and unnatural regions. To date, deep learning
has been proved to possess great capability for vision tasks.
In particular, ARCNN [8] and DDCN [15] have demonstrated the power of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) in eliminating JPEG compression artifacts. D3 [44]
casted sparse coding into a deep fully-connected network
and has also obtained impressive results. Nevertheless,
state-of-the-art deep learning approaches don’t produce satisfactory outcomes either. The recovered images used to be
overly smooth, containing significantly fewer textures when
compared to the (uncompressed) ground-truth images. See
Fig. 1a for examples (Ground-truths can be found in Fig. 5).
Taking an image as input, the JPEG encoder first divides it into non-overlapped coding blocks. After that, discrete cosine transform (DCT) is applied on each block, and
the resultant DCT coefficients are uniformly quantified according to the JPEG quantization table. For decoding, the
JPEG decoder performs inverse DCT on the quantified coefficients to obtain pixel values. It can be seen that information loss and compression artifacts are all due to quantiza-

3038

