CityPersons: A Diverse Dataset for Pedestrian Detection
Shanshan Zhang1,2 , Rodrigo Benenson2 , Bernt Schiele2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
shanshan.zhang@njust.edu.cn, firstname.lastname@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Convnets have enabled significant progress in pedestrian
detection recently, but there are still open questions regarding suitable architectures and training data. We revisit CNN
design and point out key adaptations, enabling plain FasterRCNN to obtain state-of-the-art results on the Caltech
dataset.
To achieve further improvement from more and better
data, we introduce CityPersons, a new set of person
annotations on top of the Cityscapes dataset. The diversity of CityPersons allows us for the first time to
train one single CNN model that generalizes well over multiple benchmarks. Moreover, with additional training with
CityPersons, we obtain top results using FasterRCNN
on Caltech, improving especially for more difficult cases
(heavy occlusion and small scale) and providing higher localization quality.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a popular topic in computer vision community, with wide applications in surveillance, driving assistance, mobile robotics, etc. During the last decade, several benchmarks have been created for this task
[7, 8, 12]. These benchmarks have enabled great progress
in this area [2].
While existing benchmarks have enabled progress, it is
unclear how well this progress translate in open world performance. We think it is time to give emphasis not only to
intra-dataset performance, but also across-datasets.
Lately, a wave of convolutional neural network (convnet) variants have taken the Caltech benchmark top ranks
[31, 3, 21, 4, 27]. Many of these are custom architectures
derived from the FasterRCNN [14, 13, 26] general object
detector. We show here that a properly adapted FasterRCNN can match the detection quality of such custom architectures. However since convnets are high capacity models, it is unclear if such model will benefit from more data.
To move forward the field of pedestrian detection, we

Figure 1: The diversity of the newly introduced CityPersons
annotations allows to train one convnet model that generalizes well over multiple benchmarks.
introduce “CityPersons”, a new set of annotations on top
of Cityscapes [5]. These are high quality annotations, that
provide a rich diverse dataset, and enable new experiments
both for training better models, and as new test benchmark.
In summary, our main contributions are:
1. We introduce CityPersons, a new set of high quality
bounding box annotations for pedestrian detection on the
Cityscapes dataset (train, validation, and test sets). The
train/val. annotations will be public, and an online benchmark will be setup.
2. We report new state-of-art results for FasterRCNN on
Caltech and KITTI dataset, thanks to properly adapting the
model for pedestrian detection and using CityPersons
pre-training. We show in particular improved results for
more difficult detection cases (small and occluded), and
overall higher localization precision.
3. Using CityPersons, we obtain the best reported acrossdataset generalization results for pedestrian detection.
4. We show preliminary results exploiting the additional
Cityscapes annotations. Using semantic labelling as addi13213

