Joint Registration and Representation Learning for Unconstrained Face
Identification
Munawar Hayat∗† , Salman H. Khan∗‡ , Naoufel Werghi†† , Roland Goecke†
†
University of Canberra, Australia, ‡ Data61 - CSIRO and ANU, Australia
††
Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
{munawar.hayat,roland.goecke}@canberra.edu.au, salman.khan@csiro.au, naoufel.werghi@kustar.ac.ae

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have resulted in
human-level performances on popular unconstrained face
datasets including Labeled Faces in the Wild and YouTube
Faces. To further advance research, IJB-A benchmark was
recently introduced with more challenges especially in the
form of extreme head poses. Registration of such faces is
quite demanding and often requires laborious procedures
like facial landmark localization. In this paper, we propose a Convolutional Neural Networks based data-driven
approach which learns to simultaneously register and represent faces. We validate the proposed scheme on template based unconstrained face identification. Here, a template contains multiple media in the form of images and
video frames. Unlike existing methods which synthesize
all template media information at feature level, we propose
to keep the template media intact. Instead, we represent
gallery templates by their trained one-vs-rest discriminative models and then employ a Bayesian strategy which optimally fuses decisions of all medias in a query template. We
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed scheme on IJB-A,
YouTube Celebrities and COX datasets where our approach
achieves significant relative performance boosts of 3.6%,
21.6% and 12.8% respectively.

1. Introduction
Owing to its wide range of potential applications, face
recognition has been rigorously researched in computer vision community. Challenges in face recognition are associated with commonly occurring nuisances of facial data
which include head pose rotations, illumination variations
and expression deformations. In its initial days, facial
data was systematically captured in controlled environments and algorithms were developed to individually tackle
each of these nuisances [24]. Such algorithms could achieve
∗ Equal contribution

impressive performance in constrained environments but
failed in real-life scenarios. To advance research in unconstrained face recognition, Labelled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
[15] and YouTube Faces (YTF) [39] datasets were released
in 2007 and 2011 respectively. At the time of their release,
the existing methods (developed using constrained data)
performed poorly on LFW and YTF. Since then, a large
focus of face recognition research has been on the development of algorithms which achieve superior performance
on LFW and YTF. With the recent advances in deep learning, the current state of the art algorithms [33, 27] can now
achieve human level performance on these datasets. Unconstrained face recognition is however still considered largely
unresolved [22]. This is mainly because both LFW and YTF
have a well-know frontal selection bias. Specifically, face
images in both of these datasets were automatically detected
using Viola and Jones [34], which frequently fails for nonfrontal faces. The state of the art on YTF and LFW therefore
performs poorly in the presence of large head rotations and
extreme head poses [22, 6].
In this paper, we aim to address face recognition across
extreme head rotations. Registration of such facial images is quite a challenging task and often requires sophisticated pre-processing steps such as landmark localization
and frontalization. We propose to automatically learn facial image registration along with feature encoding as part
of an end-to-end trainable Convolutional Neural Network.
The proposed network (Sec. 3) has two modules: a registration module to learn a set of transformation parameters,
and a representation module to learn meaningful feature encoding of input face images. The network is trained on 2.6
million images of 2622 subjects [27]. The proposed scheme
is then evaluated on IJB-A [22], YouTube Celebrities [20]
and COX [16] datasets for template based face identification. The IJB-A benchmark is specifically quite challenging
and contains face images and video frames across extreme
head poses and profile views (see Fig. 4). The proposed
method achieves a significant performance boost on all of
the evaluated datasets (Sec. 5).
12767

