Binary Constraint Preserving Graph Matching
Bo Jianga , Jin Tanga , Chris Dingb,a , Bin Luoa ,
a
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China
b
CSE Department, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn,ahhftang@gmail.com,chqding@uta.edu,luobin@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

tion which may lead to weak local optimum. Another kind
of methods aim to obtain a discrete binary solution for IQP
matching problem [12, 28, 1, 16]. For example, Leordeanu
et al. [12] proposed an integer projected matching method
(IPFP) which optimized the IQP problem directly in a discrete domain and can obtain a discrete binary solution for
the problem. Zhou et al. [28, 29] proposed an effective
graph matching method (FGM) which optimized the IQP
problem approximately using a convex-concave relaxation
technique [26] and returns a discrete binary solution for the
original problem.
In this paper, we show that the discrete binary constraint
in IQP matching problem can be exactly represented (or
encoded) by a ℓ2 -norm constraint. Comparing with discrete constraint, the ℓ2 -norm constraint is much easier to
implement computationally. To the best of our knowledge,
this particular observation has not been explored before, although ℓ2 -norm has been used as a self-amplification regularization term to aid the convergence of the solution to be
binary [21]. Based on this new observation, we propose a
new graph matching relaxation model, called Binary Constraint Preserving Graph Matching (BPGM), which aims
to incorporate the discrete mapping constraints via a ℓ2 norm constraint in graph matching relaxation. An effective
projection algorithm has been developed to solve BPGM
model. Moreover, based on BPGM, we propose a pathfollowing strategy to optimize IQP matching problem and
thus can obtain a desired discrete solution at convergence.
Experimental results on both synthetic and real-world image matching tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Graph matching is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and pattern recognition area. In general, it can be
formulated as an Integer Quadratic Programming (IQP)
problem. Since it is NP-hard, approximate relaxations are
required. In this paper, a new graph matching method has
been proposed. There are three main contributions of the
proposed method: (1) we propose a new graph matching relaxation model, called Binary Constraint Preserving Graph
Matching (BPGM), which aims to incorporate the discrete
binary mapping constraints more in graph matching relaxation. Our BPGM is motivated by a new observation that
the discrete binary constraints in IQP matching problem
can be represented (or encoded) exactly by a ℓ2 -norm constraint. (2) An effective projection algorithm has been derived to solve BPGM model. (3) Using BPGM, we propose
a path-following strategy to optimize IQP matching problem and thus obtain a desired discrete solution at convergence. Promising experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Many problems in computer vision and pattern recognition can be formulated by graph matching [23, 15, 14, 2,
20, 19]. Recent works [3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 23, 10] have formulated graph matching as an Integer Quadratic Programming
(IQP) problem. Since IQP is NP-hard, approximate relaxation methods are required to find approximate solutions for
the problem [9, 7, 24, 29, 27, 22].
Many relaxation methods generally aim to optimize the
IQP matching problem approximately in a continuous domain. These methods first define a new continuous problem by relaxing the discrete mapping constraint and aim to
find the global optimum for the relaxed continuous problem. Then, they use a post-discretization step to obtain the
final discrete mapping solution [3, 5, 6]. One limitation for
these methods is that the required post-discretization step is
generally independent of the matching objective optimiza-

2. Problem Formulation and Related Work
2.1. Problem formulation
Given two attributed relation graphs G(V, E) and
G′ (V ′ , E ′ ), each node vi ∈ V or edge eik ∈ E has an
attribute vector ai or rik and similarity to G′ . The aim of
graph matching problem is to determine the correct correspondence between V and V ′ . Here, we focus on equal-size
1
4402

