Deep Affordance-grounded Sensorimotor Object Recognition
Spyridon Thermos1,2
1

Georgios Th. Papadopoulos1

Petros Daras1

Gerasimos Potamianos2

Information Technologies Institute, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Greece
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Thessaly, Greece
{spthermo,papad,daras}@iti.gr

Abstract
It is well-established by cognitive neuroscience that human perception of objects constitutes a complex process,
where object appearance information is combined with evidence about the so-called object “affordances”, namely the
types of actions that humans typically perform when interacting with them. This fact has recently motivated the
“sensorimotor” approach to the challenging task of automatic object recognition, where both information sources
are fused to improve robustness. In this work, the aforementioned paradigm is adopted, surpassing current limitations of sensorimotor object recognition research. Specifically, the deep learning paradigm is introduced to the
problem for the first time, developing a number of novel
neuro-biologically and neuro-physiologically inspired architectures that utilize state-of-the-art neural networks for
fusing the available information sources in multiple ways.
The proposed methods are evaluated using a large RGB-D
corpus, which is specifically collected for the task of sensorimotor object recognition and is made publicly available.
Experimental results demonstrate the utility of affordance
information to object recognition, achieving an up to 29%
relative error reduction by its inclusion.

1. Introduction
Object recognition constitutes an open research challenge of broad interest in the field of computer vision. Due
to its impact in application fields such as office automation,
identification systems, security, robotics, and the industry,
several research groups have devoted intense efforts in it
(see for example the review in [2]). However, despite the
significant advances achieved in the last decades, satisfactory performance in real-world scenarios remains a challenge. One plausible reason is the sole use of static object
The work presented in this paper was supported by the European Commission under contract H2020-687772 MATHISIS

gpotam@ieee.org

appearance features [8, 18, 19]. Such cannot sufficiently
handle the object appearance variance, occlusions, deformations, and illumination variation.
Research findings in cognitive neuroscience establish
that object recognition by humans exploits previous experiences of active interaction with the objects of interest. In
particular, object perception is based on the fusion of sensory (object appearance) and motor (human-object interaction) information. Central role in this so-called “sensorimotor object recognition” theory has the notion of object
affordances. According to Gibson [10], “the affordances of
the environment are what it offers the animal”, implying the
complementarity between the animal and the environment.
Based on this theory, Minsky [22] argues on the significance
of classifying items according to what they can be used for,
i.e. what they afford. These theoretical foundations have
resulted to the so-called function-based reasoning in object
recognition, which can be viewed as an approach applicable
to environments in which objects are designed or used for
specific purposes [27]. Moreover, the work in [30] describes
three possible ways for extracting functional (affordance)
information for an object: a) “Function from shape”, where
the object shape provides some indication of its function;
b) “Function from motion”, where an observer attempts to
understand the object function by perceiving a task being
performed with it; and c) “Function from manipulation”,
where function information is extracted by manipulating the
object. The present work focuses on (b).
Concerning the neuro-physiological and the corresponding cognitive procedures that take place in the human brain
during sensorimotor object recognition, it is well established that there are two main streams that process the visual
information [32]: a) the dorsal, which projects to the posterior parietal cortex and is involved in the control of actions
(motor), and b) the ventral, which runs to the inferotemporal cortex and is involved in the identification of the objects (sensory). There is accumulated evidence that the two
streams interact at different information processing stages
[5]: a) computations along the two pathways proceed both

6167

