What Is the Space of Attenuation Coefficients in Underwater Computer Vision?
Derya Akkaynak1,2 , Tali Treibitz1 , Tom Shlesinger3 , Raz Tamir2,3 , Yossi Loya3 , and David Iluz4
1

2
University of Haifa
Inter-University Institute of Marine Sciences, Eilat
4
Tel Aviv University
Bar Ilan University
{derya.akkaynak, tomshlez, raztamir6, yosiloya, iluzda}@gmail.com, ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il
3

Abstract
Underwater image reconstruction methods require the
knowledge of wideband attenuation coefficients per color
channel. Current estimation methods for these coefficients
require specialized hardware or multiple images, and none
of them leverage the multitude of existing ocean optical
measurements as priors. Here, we aim to constrain the set
of physically-feasible wideband attenuation coefficients in
the ocean by utilizing water attenuation measured worldwide by oceanographers. We calculate the space of valid
wideband effective attenuation coefficients in the 3D RGB
domain and find that a bound manifold in 3-space sufficiently represents the variation from the clearest to murkiest waters. We validate our model using in situ experiments
in two different optical water bodies, the Red Sea and the
Mediterranean. Moreover, we show that contradictory to
the common image formation model, the coefficients depend
on the imaging range and object reflectance, and quantify
the errors resulting from ignoring these dependencies.

1. Introduction
The interaction between solar radiation and the upper
ocean fuels physical, chemical, and biological processes;
and as a result water attenuates light in a wavelengthdependent manner giving the ocean its color and other optical properties [13, 14]. Due to these wavelength-dependent
processes, underwater images suffer from reduced contrast
and color distortions. As the effect also depends on the distance of the objects, the image degradation is local and cannot be corrected by global operations. To correct the images, both the scene 3D structure and water properties need
to be known. While 3D reconstruction is receiving considerable attention, there is almost no research on the range of
water properties with respect to computer vision.
Ocean appearance is usually described using colortransmittance dyads like ‘turquoise and clear’ or ‘blue and
dark’; but depending on location, season, time of day, and
environmental conditions, the ocean color can also be gray,

Figure 1. Water types. [Left] Based on the attenuation coefficient β(λ) measurements from a global expedition between 194748 [25], 10 optical classes have come to be known as Jerlov Water Types [24]. Types I-III are oceanic waters that range from
very clear to slightly murky, and those suffixed with ‘C’ represent
coastal waters with increasing turbidity from 1 to 9. Gray lines
represent 280 randomly chosen observations from a database [50]
that contains more than 60,000 in situ measurements taken using
modern day equipment between 1989-2015. [Right] RGB simulation of the appearance of a perfect white surface viewed in 1-20m
depth in different water types. Note that the common notion that
water attenuates red colors faster than blue/green only holds for
oceanic water types. We use Jerlov water types to constrain the
space of attenuation coefficients in the RGB domain.

brown, black, or even red [6]. Transmittance describes
visibility which we might label as ranging from ‘crystal
clear’ to ‘murky’, and it is a function of the wavelengthdependent attenuation coefficient of the water body and the
distance light has to travel. The attenuation coefficient for
the global ocean shows significant spatial and temporal variation as it depends on the concentration of organic and inorganic substances in the water column. How and when
their concentrations change depends on complex interactions involving the season, weather, illumination, currents,
depth, bathymetry, and other factors [46]. This variation
has implications for underwater computer vision where the
attenuation information is used for visibility enhancement
14931

