Learning Deep Match Kernels for Image-Set Classification
Haoliang Sun1,2 , Xiantong Zhen2 , Yuanjie Zheng3 , Gongping Yang1 , Yilong Yin1,4* , and Shuo Li2
1

Shandong University, Jinan, China
The University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
3
School of Information Science and Engineering, Key Lab of Intelligent Computing & Information
Security in Universities of Shandong, Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Life
Sciences at Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China
4
Shandong University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, China
2

{haolsun.cn,zhenxt,zheng.vision,slishuo}@gmail.com, {ylyin,gpyang}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-set classification has recently generated great
popularity due to its widespread applications in computer
vision. The great challenges arise from effectively and efficiently measuring the similarity between image sets with
high inter-class ambiguity and huge intra-class variability.
In this paper, we propose deep match kernels (DMK) to
directly measure the similarity between image sets in the
match kernel framework. Specifically, we build deep local match kernels between images upon arc-cosine kernels,
which can faithfully characterize the similarity between images by mimicking deep neural networks; we introduce anchors to aggregate those deep local match kernels into a
global match kernel between image sets, which is learned
in a supervised way by kernel alignment and therefore more
discriminative. The DMK provides the first match kernel
framework for image-set classification, which removes specific assumptions usually required in previous approaches
and is computationally more efficient. We conduct extensive
experiments on four datasets for three diverse image-set
classification tasks. The DMK achieves high performance
and consistently surpasses state-of-the-art methods, showing its great effectiveness for image-set classification.

1. Introduction
Image-set classification has been one of the most important tasks in computer vision [15, 25, 33, 20, 19, 22, 36, 9,
34, 37, 52] due to its broad applications in various areas including multi-view visual recognition, video-based surveillance, dynamic scene recognition, etc. In contrast to the
*Corresponding author.

conventional tasks on one single image [3, 55], in image-set
classification, each sample is a set of images, which, therefore, is able to better describe objects in images since each
image contains certain more information of variations of
the objects. However, compared to classification on single
images, image sets exhibit huge intra-class variability and
large inter-class ambiguity, which poses great challenges to
faithfully measure the similarity between image sets for accurate classification [20].
Image-set classification has been extensively studied in
the previous work, which was mostly developed under specific assumptions on image distributions or geometrical
structures. In order to facilitate modeling image sets, some
specific assumptions, e.g., a single Gaussian [45], Gaussian
mixture models [1, 53], on the distribution of images in a
set, were made a priori in early work. The traditional metrics, e.g., Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, were chosen
to measure the similarity between distributions of images
in sets. However, these methods would not guarantee satisfactory performance when there is no significant statistical
relationship between training and test sets due to the huge
intra-class variability [31]. The symmetric positive definite
(SPD) matrices [52, 21, 28] have been extensively used to
represent image sets by computing the second-order statistic, e.g., the covariance matrix of images in the set. The
covariant matrix as a statistic measurement can be too general to handle the heavy inter-class ambiguity due to the lack
of local information in each individual image. Those SPDs
lie in a specific Riemannian manifold and therefore conventional approaches in the Euclidean space are not directly
applicable [52]. In addition, the SPD based representation
induces heavy computational cost when the dimensionality
of the SPD matrix is high [28]. Another important body of

3307

