Improving Facial Attribute Prediction using Semantic Segmentation
Mahdi M. Kalayeh

Boqing Gong

Mubarak Shah

Mahdi@eecs.ucf.edu

bgong@crcv.ucf.edu

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida

Abstract
Attributes are semantically meaningful characteristics
whose applicability widely crosses category boundaries.
They are particularly important in describing and recognizing concepts where no explicit training example is given,
e.g., zero-shot learning. Additionally, since attributes are
human describable, they can be used for efficient humancomputer interaction. In this paper, we propose to employ
semantic segmentation to improve facial attribute prediction. The core idea lies in the fact that many facial attributes
describe local properties. In other words, the probability of
an attribute to appear in a face image is far from being uniform in the spatial domain. We build our facial attribute
prediction model jointly with a deep semantic segmentation
network. This harnesses the localization cues learned by the
semantic segmentation to guide the attention of the attribute
prediction to the regions where different attributes naturally
show up. As a result of this approach, in addition to recognition, we are able to localize the attributes, despite merely
having access to image level labels (weak supervision) during training. We evaluate our proposed method on CelebA
and LFWA datasets and achieve superior results to the prior
arts. Furthermore, we show that in the reverse problem,
semantic face parsing improves when facial attributes are
available. That reaffirms the need to jointly model these
two interconnected tasks.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, state-of-the-art computer vision techniques
allow us to teach machines different classes of objects, actions, scenes, and even fine-grained categories. However,
to learn a certain notion, we usually need positive and negative examples from the concept of interest. This creates
a set of challenges as the examples of different concepts
are not equally easy to collect. Also, the number of learnable concepts is linearly capped by the cardinality of the
training data. Therefore, being able to robustly learn a set
of sharable concepts that go beyond rigid category bound-

aries is of tremendous importance. Visual attributes are one
particular type of the sharable concepts. They are human
describable and machine detectable. The fact that attributes
are generally not category-specific suggests that one can potentially describe an exponential number of categories with
various combinations of attributes. Naturally, attributes are
“additive” to the objects (e.g., horn for cow). It means that
an instance of an object may or may not take a certain attribute while in either case the category label is preserved
(e.g., a cow with or without horn is still a cow). Hence,
attributes are especially useful in problems that aim at modeling intra-category variations such as fine-grained classification.
Despite their additive character, attributes do not appear
in arbitrary regions of the objects (e.g., the horn, if appears,
would show up on a cow’s head). This notion is the basis
of our work. That is, in order to detect an attribute, instead
of the entire spatial domain, we should focus on the region
in which that attribute naturally shows up. We hypothesize that the attribute prediction can benefit from localization cues. However, attribute prediction benchmarks come
with holistic image level labels. In addition, sometimes it is
hard to define a spatial boundary for a given attribute. For
instance, it is not clear that according to which spatial region in a face one decides if a person is “attractive” or not.
To tackle this challenge, we transfer localization cues from
a relevant auxiliary task to the attribute prediction problem.
Using bounding box to show the boundary limits of an
object is a common practice in computer vision. However,
regions that different attributes occupy drastically change in
shape and form. For example, in a face image, one cannot
effectively put a bounding box around the region associated
to “hair”. In fact, the shape of the region can be used as
an indicative signal on the attribute. Therefore, we need an
auxiliary task that learns detailed localization information
without restricting the corresponding regions to be in certain pre-defined shapes.
Semantic segmentation has all the aforementioned characteristics. It is the problem of assigning class labels to every pixel in an image. As a result, a successful semantic
16942

