WSISA: Making Survival Prediction from Whole Slide Histopathological Images
Xinliang Zhu, Jiawen Yao, Feiyun Zhu, and Junzhou Huang∗
Univerisity of Texas at Arlington
Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Image-based precision medicine techniques can be used
to better treat cancer patients. However, the gigapixel resolution of Whole Slide Histopathological Images (WSIs)
makes traditional survival models computationally impossible. These models usually adopt manually labeled discriminative patches from region of interests (ROIs) and are
unable to directly learn discriminative patches from WSIs.
We argue that only a small set of patches cannot fully represent the patients’ survival status due to the heterogeneity of
tumor. Another challenge is that survival prediction usually
comes with insufficient training patient samples. In this paper, we propose an effective Whole Slide Histopathological
Images Survival Analysis framework (WSISA) to overcome
above challenges. To exploit survival-discriminative patterns from WSIs, we first extract hundreds of patches from
each WSI by adaptive sampling and then group these images into different clusters. Then we propose to train an aggregation model to make patient-level predictions based on
cluster-level Deep Convolutional Survival (DeepConvSurv)
prediction results. Different from existing state-of-the-arts
image-based survival models which extract features using
some patches from small regions of WSIs, the proposed
framework can efficiently exploit and utilize all discriminative patterns in WSIs to predict patients’ survival status. To
the best of our knowledge, this has not been shown before.
We apply our method to the survival predictions of glioma
and non-small-cell lung cancer using three datasets. Results demonstrate the proposed framework can significantly
improve the prediction performance compared with the existing state-of-the-arts survival methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, image-based precision medicine has become a
very active ﬁeld in healthcare research. Those image data
include pathological images, CT images, MRIs, etc. cap∗ Corresponding author: Dr. Junzhou Huang. Email: jzhuang@uta.edu.
This work was partially supported by NSF IIS-1423056, CMMI-1434401,
CNS-1405985 and the NSF CAREER grant IIS-1553687.

tured from patients. The long-term goal in this research is
to be able to improve the treatment quality of an individual
based on his or her image data. For instance, how a new
patient will survive in the context of known patients’ image
data. The employment of survival prediction would allow
clinicians to make early decisions on treatments which is
very crucial for patients’ healthcare.
One of the most challenging problems in image-based
precision medicine research is that a pathological image
is of high resolution (e.g. measuring 1 million by 1 million pixels), compared to one regular image from ImageNet
that usually measure less than 1000 pixels by 1000 pixels [18]. Currently, many approaches have been proposed to
incorporate with patients’ imaging data for survival analysis
and present more accurate predictions [25, 27, 28, 31, 33].
Due to the computation issue, the existing methods cannot
directly learn discriminative patterns from WSIs and predict patients’ survival status using hand-crafted features extracted from manually labeled small discriminative patches.
Apparently, the process to manually select representative
patches is very labor-intensive. Moreover, one patient usually has multiple WSIs from different parts of the tissue.
Because solid tumors may have a mixture of tissue architectures and structures, WSIs from the same patient actually are very heterogeneous. Therefore, only a small set
of patches from manual annotations cannot completely and
properly reﬂect the patient’s tumor morphology and has
a very high risk of losing survival-discriminative patterns.
Fig.1 presents an example, where both patient 1 and 2 have
stage IV tumor but patient 2 has worse clinical outcome than
patient 1 according to the clinical trial report. It shows that
even in the same tumor stage, patients with different survival status may have very distinct visual appearances. It
requires a framework that can consider large heterogeneity
patterns from WSIs.
In classifying cancer subtype with WSIs, one pioneering
work [8] was proposed to use a patch-level convolutional
neural network (CNN) and train a decision fusion model as
a two-level model for tumor classiﬁcation. However, different from tumor classiﬁcation, survival prediction is more
challenging because the following reasons. First, survival
17234

