3D Face Morphable Models “In-the-Wild”
James Booth1
Epameinondas Antonakos2,∗
George Trigeorgis1
Yannis Panagakis1
1

Imperial College London, UK

2

Stylianos Ploumpis1
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,3

Amazon, Berlin, Germany

3

University of Oulu, Finland

1 {james.booth,s.ploumpis,g.trigeorgis,i.panagakis,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

2 antonak@amazon.com

Abstract
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) are powerful statistical
models of 3D facial shape and texture, and among the stateof-the-art methods for reconstructing facial shape from single images. With the advent of new 3D sensors, many 3D facial datasets have been collected containing both neutral as
well as expressive faces. However, all datasets are captured
under controlled conditions. Thus, even though powerful
3D facial shape models can be learnt from such data, it is
difficult to build statistical texture models that are sufficient
to reconstruct faces captured in unconstrained conditions
(“in-the-wild”). In this paper, we propose the first, to the
best of our knowledge, “in-the-wild” 3DMM by combining
a powerful statistical model of facial shape, which describes
both identity and expression, with an “in-the-wild” texture
model. We show that the employment of such an “in-thewild” texture model greatly simplifies the fitting procedure,
because there is no need to optimise with regards to the illumination parameters. Furthermore, we propose a new fast
algorithm for fitting the 3DMM in arbitrary images. Finally, we have captured the first 3D facial database with
relatively unconstrained conditions and report quantitative
evaluations with state-of-the-art performance. Complementary qualitative reconstruction results are demonstrated on
standard “in-the-wild” facial databases.

1. Introduction
During the past few years, we have witnessed significant improvements in various face analysis tasks such as
face detection [19, 42] and 2D facial landmark localisation
on static images [40, 21, 6, 38, 43, 4, 5, 36]. This is primarily attributed to the fact that the community has made
a considerable effort to collect and annotate facial images
captured under unconstrained conditions [24, 45, 9, 32, 31]
(commonly referred to as “in-the-wild”) and to the discrim∗ Epameinondas Antonakos was with Imperial College London when
this work was done.

Figure 1. Our “in-the-wild” Morphable Model is capable of recovering accurate 3D facial shape for a wide variety of images.

inative methodologies that can capitalise on the availability
of such large amount of data. Nevertheless, discriminative
techniques cannot be applied for 3D facial shape estimation
“in-the-wild”, due to lack of ground-truth data.
3D facial shape estimation from single images has attracted the attention of many researchers the past twenty
years. The two main lines of research are (i) fitting a 3D
Morphable Model (3DMM) [11, 12] and (ii) applying Shape
from Shading (SfS) techniques [34, 35, 22]. The 3DMM fitting proposed in the work of Blanz and Vetter [11, 12] was
among the first model-based 3D facial recovery approaches.
The method requires the construction of a 3DMM which is a
statistical model of facial texture and shape in a space where
there are explicit correspondences. The first 3DMM was
built using 200 faces captured in well-controlled conditions
displaying only the neutral expression. That is the reason
why the method was only shown to work on real-world, but
not “in-the-wild”, images. State-of-the-art SfS techniques
capitalise on special multi-linear decompositions that find
an approximate spherical harmonic decomposition of the illumination. Furthermore, in order to benefit from the large
1 48

