Deep Video Deblurring for Hand-held Cameras
Shuochen Su
Univerity of British Columbia
Guillermo Sapiro
Duke University

Mauricio Delbracio
Universidad de la República
Wolfgang Heidrich
KAUST

Jue Wang
Adobe Research

Oliver Wang
Adobe Research

1. Introduction
Hand-held video capture devices are now commonplace.
As a result, video stabilization has become an essential step
in video capture pipelines, often performed automatically
at capture time (e.g., iPhone, Google Pixel), or as a service on sharing platforms (e.g., Youtube, Facebook). While
stabilization techniques have improved dramatically, the remaining motion blur is a major problem with all stabilization techniques. This is because the blur becomes obvious
when there is no motion to accompany it, yielding highly
visible “jumping” artifacts. In the end, the remaining camera shake motion blur limits the amount of stabilization that
can be applied before these artifacts become too apparent.
1 Datasets, pretrained models and source code are available at
https://www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/imager/tr/2017/DeepVideoDeblurring

proposed
input
proposed

Motion blur from camera shake is a major problem in
videos captured by hand-held devices. Unlike single-image
deblurring, video-based approaches can take advantage of
the abundant information that exists across neighboring
frames. As a result the best performing methods rely on
the alignment of nearby frames. However, aligning images
is a computationally expensive and fragile procedure, and
methods that aggregate information must therefore be able
to identify which regions have been accurately aligned and
which have not, a task that requires high level scene understanding. In this work, we introduce a deep learning solution to video deblurring, where a CNN is trained end-toend to learn how to accumulate information across frames.
To train this network, we collected a dataset of real videos
recorded with a high frame rate camera, which we use to
generate synthetic motion blur for supervision. We show
that the features learned from this dataset extend to deblurring motion blur that arises due to camera shake in a wide
range of videos, and compare the quality of results to a number of other baselines 1 .

input

Abstract

Figure 1: Blur in videos can be significantly attenuated by
learning how to aggregate information from nearby frames.
Top: crops of consecutive frames from a blurry video; Bottom: outputs from the proposed data-driven approach, in
this case using simple homography alignment.

The most successful video deblurring approaches leverage information from neighboring frames to sharpen blurry
ones, taking advantage of the fact that most hand-shake motion blur is both short and temporally uncorrelated. By borrowing “sharp” pixels from nearby frames, it is possible to
reconstruct a high quality output. Previous work has shown
significant improvement over traditional deconvolutionbased deblurring approaches, via patch-based synthesis that
relies on either lucky imaging [4] or weighted Fourier aggregation [6].
One of the main challenges associated with aggregating
information across multiple video frames is that the differently blurred frames must be aligned. This can either be
done, for example, by nearest neighbor patch lookup [4],
or optical flow [6]. However, warping-based alignment is
not robust around disocclusions and areas with low texture,
and often yields warping artifacts. In addition to the alignment computation cost, methods that rely on warping have
11279

