Spatio-Temporal Naive-Bayes Nearest-Neighbor (ST-NBNN)
for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Junwu Weng
Chaoqun Weng
Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
{WE0001WU, WENG0018}@e.ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Motivated by previous success of using non-parametric
methods to recognize objects, e.g., NBNN [2], we extend it to recognize actions using skeletons. Each 3D
action is presented by a sequence of 3D poses. Similar to NBNN, our proposed Spatio-Temporal-NBNN applies
stage-to-class distance to classify actions. However, STNBNN takes the spatio-temporal structure of 3D actions
into consideration and relaxes the Naive Bayes assumption of NBNN. Specifically, ST-NBNN adopts bilinear classifiers [19] to identify both key temporal stages as well as
spatial joints for action classification. Although only using
a linear classifier, experiments on three benchmark datasets
show that by combining the strength of both non-parametric
and parametric models, ST-NBNN can achieve competitive
performance compared with state-of-the-art results using
sophisticated models such as deep learning. Moreover, by
identifying key skeleton joints and temporal stages for each
action class, our ST-NBNN can capture the essential spatiotemporal patterns that play key roles of recognizing actions,
which is not always achievable by using end-to-end models.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the development of commodity depth cameras, skeleton-based action recognition has drawn considerable attention in the computer vision community recently.
To date, the leading 3D action classifiers are learningbased classifiers, in particular deep learning based methods
(e.g., [5, 24, 35, 21, 14, 13]), which have shown promising
results in benchmark datasets.
Despite the great progress of using learning-based methods for 3D action recognition, on the other hand, nonparametric classifiers, which make classification decision
directly on the data and require no learning/training of parameters, are not well explored for 3D action recognition.

Key Stage

Key Joint

Key Motion

Figure 1. An Illustration of Key Stage, Joints, and Motion for the
action of waving right hand action.

Interestingly, for image recognition, non-parametric methods, e.g., Naive-Bayes Nearest-Neighbor (NBNN) [2], have
shown an impressive performance of classifying images
of local visual primitives by using image-to-class distance.
Motivated by the previous success of NBNN, in this work,
we extend it to recognize actions.
Two observations motivate our exploration of using
NBNN for skeleton-based action recognition: (1) similar
to images that are composed by local visual primitives, actions are composed by spatio-temporal primitives too, e.g.,
each action instance is a collection of skeleton poses and
each pose is further a collection of spatial joints. We can
easily apply primitive-to-class distance to perform action
recognition, which can generalize according to NBNN. (2)
Compared with images and videos which are composed of
millions or billions of pixels, the skeleton is composed by
only tens of joints which is thus of much less complexity
than images and videos. We argue that instead of relying on
a sophisticated end-to-end model, a simple non-parametric
model may still obtain promising results for such a lightweight problem.
In this work, we propose Spatio-Temporal Naive-Bayes
Nearest-Neighbor (ST-NBNN), a new variation of NBNN,
to classify 3D actions. Each 3D action instance is represented by a collection of temporal stages composed by 3D

4171

