Modeling Relationships in Referential Expressions
with Compositional Modular Networks
Ronghang Hu1
1

Marcus Rohrbach1 Jacob Andreas1 Trevor Darrell1 Kate Saenko2
2
University of California, Berkeley
Boston University

{ronghang,rohrbach,jda,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu, saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
People often refer to entities in an image in terms of their
relationships with other entities. For example, the black cat
sitting under the table refers to both a black cat entity and
its relationship with another table entity. Understanding
these relationships is essential for interpreting and grounding such natural language expressions. Most prior work
focuses on either grounding entire referential expressions
holistically to one region, or localizing relationships based
on a fixed set of categories. In this paper we instead present
a modular deep architecture capable of analyzing referential expressions into their component parts, identifying entities and relationships mentioned in the input expression
and grounding them all in the scene. We call this approach
Compositional Modular Networks (CMNs): a novel architecture that learns linguistic analysis and visual inference
end-to-end. Our approach is built around two types of neural modules that inspect local regions and pairwise interactions between regions. We evaluate CMNs on multiple referential expression datasets, outperforming state-of-the-art
approaches on all tasks.

1. Introduction
Great progress has been made on object detection, the
task of localizing visual entities belonging to a pre-defined
set of categories [8, 23, 22, 6, 16]. But the more general
and challenging task of localizing entities based on arbitrary natural language expressions remains far from solved.
This task, sometimes known as grounding or referential expression comprehension, has been explored by recent work
in both computer vision and natural language processing
[19, 10, 24]. Given an image and a natural language expression referring to a visual entity, such as the young man
wearing green shirt and riding a black bicycle, these approaches localize the image region corresponding to the entity that the expression refers to with a bounding box.
Referential expressions often describe relationships be-

input image

candidate
regions

...
input expression
the woman holding a grey umbrella
expression parsing with attention

subj: the woman holding a grey umbrella
rel: the woman holding a grey umbrella
obj: the woman holding a grey umbrella

qsubj

qrel

qobj

localization
module

relationship
module

localization
module

subject
scores
(unary)

relationship
scores
(pairwise)

object
scores
(unary)

region pairs

(
(
(

,
,
,

...

)
)
)

output top region pair

final scores on region pairs

Figure 1. Given an image and an expression, we learn to parse the
expression into vector representation of subject qsubj , relationship
qrel and object qobj with attention, and align these textual components to image regions with two types of modules. The localization
module outputs scores over each individual region while the relationship module produces scores over region pairs. These outputs
are integrated into final scores over region pairs, producing the top
region pair as grounding result. (Best viewed in color.)

tween multiple entities in an image. In Figure 1, the expression the woman holding a grey umbrella describes a woman
entity that participates in a holding relationship with a grey
umbrella entity. Because there are multiple women in the
image, resolving this referential expression requires both
finding a bounding box that contains a person, and ensuring that this bounding box relates in the right way to other
objects in the scene. Previous work on grounding referential expressions either (1) treats referential expressions
holistically, thus failing to model explicit correspondence
between textual components and visual entities in the image [19, 10, 24, 32, 20], or else (2) relies on a fixed set of

1115

