UberNet: Training a Universal Convolutional Neural Network for Low-, Mid-,
and High-Level Vision using Diverse Datasets and Limited Memory
Iasonas Kokkinos
University College London & Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
i.kokkinos@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work we train in an end-to-end manner a convolutional neural network (CNN) that jointly handles low-,
mid-, and high-level vision tasks in a unified architecture.
Such a network can act like a ‘swiss knife’ for vision tasks;
we call it an “UberNet” to indicate its overarching nature.
The main contribution of this work consists in handling
challenges that emerge when scaling up to many tasks. We
introduce techniques that facilitate (i) training a deep architecture while relying on diverse training sets and (ii) training many (potentially unlimited) tasks with a limited memory budget.
This allows us to train in an end-to-end manner a unified
CNN architecture that jointly handles (a) boundary detection (b) normal estimation (c) saliency estimation (d) semantic segmentation (e) human part segmentation (f) semantic boundary detection, (g) region proposal generation
and object detection. We obtain competitive performance
while jointly addressing all tasks in 0.7 seconds on a GPU.
Our system will be made publicly available.

Input

Detection

Boundaries

Saliency

Semantic Boundaries & Segmentation

Normals

Human Parts

Figure 1: We train in an end-to-end manner a CNN that
jointly performs tasks spanning low-, mid- and high- level
vision; all results are obtained in 0.7 seconds per frame.

1. Introduction
Computer vision involves a host of tasks, such as boundary detection, semantic segmentation, surface estimation,
object detection, image classification, to name a few. While
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [32] have been
shown to be successful at effectively handling most vision
tasks, in the current literature most works focus on individual tasks and devote all of a CNN’s power to maximizing task-specific performance. In our understanding a joint
treatment of multiple problems can result not only in simpler and faster models, but will also be a catalyst for reaching out to other fields. One can expect that such all-in-one,
“swiss knife” architectures will become indispensable for
general AI, involving, for instance, robots that will be able
to recognize the scene they are in, identify objects, navigate
towards them, and manipulate them.
The problem of using a single network to solve multiple tasks has been recently pursued in the context of deep

learning for computer vision. In [50] a CNN is used for joint
localization, detection and classification, [17] propose a network that jointly solves surface normal estimation, depth estimation and semantic segmentation, while [20] train a system for joint detection, pose estimation and region proposal
generation. More recently [41] study the effects of sharing information across networks trained for complementary
tasks, [6] propose the introduction of inter-task connections
that improves performance through task synergy and [47]
propose an architecture for a host of face-related tasks.
Inspired by these works, in Sec. 2 we introduce a CNN
architecture that jointly handles multiple tasks by using a
shared trunk which feeds into many task-specific branches.
Our contribution consists in introducing techniques that enable training to scale up to a large number of tasks.
Our first contribution enables us to train a CNN from
diverse datasets that contain annotations for distinct tasks.

6129

