Level Playing Field for Million Scale Face Recognition
Aaron Nech
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
{necha, kemelmi}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Face recognition has the perception of a solved problem,
however when tested at the million-scale exhibits dramatic
variation in accuracies across the different algorithms [11].
Are the algorithms very different? Is access to good/big
training data their secret weapon? Where should face
recognition improve? To address those questions, we created a benchmark, MF2, that requires all algorithms to be
trained on same data, and tested at the million scale. MF2
is a public large-scale set with 672K identities and 4.7M
photos created with the goal to level playing field for large
scale face recognition. We contrast our results with findings
from the other two large-scale benchmarks MegaFace Challenge and MS-Celebs-1M where groups were allowed to
train on any private/public/big/small set. Some key discoveries: 1) algorithms, trained on MF2, were able to achieve
state of the art and comparable results to algorithms trained
on massive private sets, 2) some outperformed themselves
once trained on MF2, 3) invariance to aging suffers from
low accuracies as in MegaFace, identifying the need for
larger age variations possibly within identities or adjustment of algorithms in future testings1

1. Introduction
All that glisters is not gold
Often have you heard that told.
William Shakespeare

According to Google Scholar, in just the year 2016, 938
face recognition algorithms were published, 34 patents were
filed, and dozens of face recognition startups were established. Given such colossal resources, let’s say one wishes
to create an application that uses the best face recognition
algorithm out there, how would they know which algorithm
is better to implement or buy?
1 Benchmark is updated frequently and available at http://
megaface.cs.washington.edu.

Two prominent problems in face recognition are verification and identification. Verification is the problem of verifying if two images of faces are the same person, while identification is the problem of determining the identity of a face
image. Public benchmarks help rank algorithms and indeed
on smaller test sets, e.g., Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
[9], YouTube Faces Database (YFD) [30], and IJB-A [14],
computers have reached phenomenal accuracies in both verification and identification. Recent large-scale benchmarks
[11, 8], however, consistently indicate these problems are
not solved on a global scale (where millions, even billions
of identities are to be distinguished). Moreover, there is a
dramatic difference in accuracy across the algorithms.
High variation in accuracy across algorithms raises an interesting question. Is it really that some particular algorithm
outperforming others or access to big/good training data is
the key to success? That’s what we aim to investigate in
this paper. The idea is the following: let’s create a training
set which can be used by everyone (publicly available), require groups to train only on that data and evaluate at scale
(unlike [11, 8] which allow to train on any data, including
private sets). This should potentially level the playing field
and benchmark the actual algorithms rather than the data
they use. Creating a large public training set is a challenge
though.
The ImageNet competition [24] showed that neural networks [15] approaches dominate, and tend to perform better
as 1) deeper networks are developed and 2) more data is provided to accurately tune network weights. It is important,
therefore, for a benchmark to provide big enough data for
algorithms to be successful. Private companies have access
to millions of labeled identities, however these can not be
made public. [21, 8, 31] are among the biggest public sets
(Table 1). One interesting direction would be to combine
those into a single training set. Instead we chose to create
a new set from Flickr photos due to: 1) most public sets
(training and testing) are photos of celebrities; to remove
dataset bias we chose to use mostly non-celebs for training,
2) based on the success of FaceNet [25], in [11], we aimed
for large number of identities (to span the diversity in hu-

7044

