Fully-adaptive Feature Sharing in Multi-Task Networks with Applications in
Person Attribute Classification
Yongxi Lu
UC San Diego

Abhishek Kumar
IBM Research

Shuangfei Zhai
Binghamton Univeristy, SUNY

yol070@ucsd.edu

abhishk@us.ibm.com

szhai2@binghamton.edu

Yu Cheng
IBM Research

Tara Javidi
UC San Diego

Rogerio Feris
IBM Research

chengyu@us.ibm.com

tjavidi@eng.ucsd.edu

rsferis@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Multi-task learning aims to improve generalization performance of multiple prediction tasks by appropriately
sharing relevant information across them. In the context
of deep neural networks, this idea is often realized by handdesigned network architectures with layers that are shared
across tasks and branches that encode task-specific features. However, the space of possible multi-task deep architectures is combinatorially large and often the final architecture is arrived at by manual exploration of this space,
which can be both error-prone and tedious. We propose an
automatic approach for designing compact multi-task deep
learning architectures. Our approach starts with a thin
multi-layer network and dynamically widens it in a greedy
manner during training. By doing so iteratively, it creates a
tree-like deep architecture, on which similar tasks reside in
the same branch until at the top layers. Evaluation on person attributes classification tasks involving facial and clothing attributes suggests that the models produced by the proposed method are fast, compact and can closely match or
exceed the state-of-the-art accuracy from strong baselines
by much more expensive models.

1. Introduction
Humans possess a natural yet remarkable ability of
seamlessly transferring and sharing knowledge across multiple related domains while doing inference for a given
task. Effective mechanisms for sharing relevant information across multiple prediction tasks (referred as multi-task
learning) are also arguably crucial for making significant
advances towards machine intelligence. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach for multi-task learning in the context of deep neural networks for computer vision tasks. We
particularly aim for two desirable characteristics in the proposed approach: (i) automatic learning of multi-task archi-

tectures based on branching, (ii) selective sharing among
tasks with automated learning of whom to share with. In addition, we want our multi-task models to have low memory
footprint and low latency during prediction (forward pass
through the network).
A natural approach for enabling sharing across multiple
tasks is to share model parameters (partially or fully) across
the corresponding layers of the task-specific deep neural
networks. Most of the multi-task deep architectures share
the bottom layers till some layer l after which the sharing is blocked, resulting in task-specific sub-networks or
branches beyond it [28, 17, 13]. This is motivated by the
observation made by several earlier works that bottom layers capture low level detailed features, which can be shared
across multiple tasks, whereas top layers capture features at
a higher level of abstraction that are more task specific. It
can be further extended to a more general tree-like architecture, e.g., a smaller group of tasks can share parameters
even after the first break-point at layer l and breakup at a
later layer. However, the space of such possible branching architectures is combinatorially large and current approaches largely make a decision based on limited manual
exploration of this space, often biased by designer’s perception of the relationship among different tasks [25]. Finding
a data-driven approach to replace the manual exploration
is an important and interesting academic question that has
only been sparsely explored.
The proposed approach operates in a greedy top-down
manner, making branching and task-grouping decisions at
each layer of the network using a novel criterion that promotes the creation of separate branches for unrelated tasks
(or groups of tasks) while penalizing for the model complexity. To address the issue of scalability to multiple tasks,
the proposed approach starts with a thin network and dynamically grows it during the training phase by creating
new branches based on the aforementioned criterion. We

5334

