Simultaneous Visual Data Completion and Denoising based on Tensor Rank and
Total Variation Minimization and its Primal-dual Splitting Algorithm
Tatsuya Yokota
Hidekata Hontani
Nagoya Institute of Technology
Gokiso, Showa, Nagoya, 466-8555, Japan
{t.yokota, hontani}@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract
Tensor completion has attracted attention because of its
promising ability and generality. However, there are few
studies on noisy scenarios which directly solve an optimization problem consisting of a “noise inequality constraint”.
In this paper, we propose a new tensor completion and
denoising model including tensor total variation and tensor nuclear norm minimization with a range of values and
noise inequalities. Furthermore, we developed its solution
algorithm based on a primal-dual splitting method, which
is computationally efficient as compared to tensor decomposition based non-convex optimization. Lastly, extensive
experiments demonstrated the advantages of the proposed
method for visual data retrieval such as for color images,
movies, and 3D-volumetric data.

1. Introduction
Completion is a technique of filling missing elements of
incomplete data using the values of reference (available)
elements and the structural assumptions (priors) of data.
When the reference and missing elements are independent,
e.g., white noise, completion is impossible. However, most
real-world data have a few redundant properties that can
be used for completion, such as symmetry, repetition, and
sparsity. For example, the frequency-domain of natural images is typically considerably sparse, and this property leads
to an efficient compression ratio in a JPEG encoder [31].
Moreover, data obtained using multi-spectral imaging or
microphone arrays can frequently be represented by linear
combinations of a few patterns, which allows for efficient
data analysis, such as low-rank matrix/tensor decompositions [25, 12]. Structural assumptions must be used in completion to obtain good performance, and assumptions about
the structure of data affect the results of completion.
In recent years, low-rank priors have gained importance
in matrix and tensor completion problems [6, 23] and sig-

nal separation [21, 4]. A promising application of low-rank
based completion is a recommender system, which automatically recommends appropriate products for customers
based on purchase history. As there is no noise in this type
of data, standard noiseless matrix and tensor completion
frameworks can be applied [3, 7, 24, 18, 8, 23, 20]. In this
case, nuclear norm minimization is regarded as the standard
approach because strict rank minimization is NP-hard [11],
and a nuclear norm relaxes the NP-hard problem to a convex
optimization problem [26].
Visual data retrieval is another application of low-rank
based completion. However, it typically requires matrix and tensor completion frameworks in a noisy scenario
[17, 5, 15], and using only low-rank priors may not be sufficient. In this study, we address the challenging problem
of simultaneous matrix and tensor completion and denoising. Low-rank based matrix completion in a noisy scenario,
which minimizes a matrix nuclear norm under a noise inequality constraint, has been discussed in [5]. However, this
algorithm involves solving convex optimization problems
multiple times to tune a hyperparameter. The following two
critical issues exist: (1) Solving an optimization problem,
which includes a noise inequality constraint, using convex
optimization only once. (2) Developing a robust model of
matrix/tensor completion in a noisy scenario.
To resolve issue (1), in this study, we propose a primaldual splitting (PDS) algorithm [9] for problems consisting
of proximable functions and constraints. For this purpose,
we derive that the proximal mapping of a noise inequality constraint, which is not trivial, can be obtained using
analytical calculation. Furthermore, to improve the robustness against noise (issue (2)), we introduce total variation
(TV) regularization for a tensor while considering tensor
nuclear norm minimization. The proposed flexible model
can include low-rank exact/inexact matrix/tensor completion with/without TV regularization. In practice, there are
several types of visual data such as low-rank oriented, lowTV oriented, and intermediate. As the proposed model can
adjust the weights of low-rank and low-TV priors, various
13732

