Video2Shop: Exact Matching Clothes in Videos to Online Shopping Images
Zhi-Qi Cheng1 , Xiao Wu1 , Yang Liu2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2
1
Southwest Jiaotong University, 2 Alibaba Group
{zhiqicheng,huaxiansheng}@gmail.com; wuxiaohk@swjtu.edu.cn; panjun.ly@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In recent years, both online retail and video hosting service have been exponentially grown. In this paper, a novel
deep neural network, called AsymNet, is proposed to explore a new cross-domain task, Video2Shop, targeting for
matching clothes appeared in videos to the exactly same
items in online shops. For the image side, well-established
methods are used to detect and extract features for clothing patches with arbitrary sizes. For the video side, deep
visual features are extracted from detected object regions in each frame, and further fed into a Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) framework for sequence modeling, which
captures the temporal dynamics in videos. To conduct exact matching between videos and online shopping images,
LSTM hidden states for videos and image features extracted
from static images are jointly modeled, under the similarity
network with reconfigurable deep tree structure. Moreover,
an approximate training method is proposed to achieve the
efficiency when training. Extensive experiments conducted
on a large cross-domain dataset have demonstrated the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed AsymNet, which
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the exponential growth of e-commerce, online
clothing shopping becomes more and more popular, which
takes up a significant portion of the retail. Driven by the
huge profit potential, clothing item retrieval has been received a great deal of attention in multimedia and computer vision communities. Meanwhile, online video streaming
service becomes increasingly popular. When watching idol
drama or TV shows, such as Korean TV drama My Love
From the Star, where beautiful girls wear fashion clothes,
the viewers, especially the females, are more easily attracted by those beautiful clothes and stimulated to buy the identical ones shown in the video. In this paper, we consider a new scenario of such online clothing shopping, called
Video2Shop: finding the clothes appeared in videos to the
identical items in online shops.

Although the street-to-shop clothing matching has been
explored previously [9, 10, 16, 25, 29], which searches the
online clothing by street fashion photos, finding clothes appeared in videos to the exactly same items in online shops has not been well studied yet. The diverse appearance
of clothes, cluttered background, viewpoint change, occlusion, different light condition and motion blur in videos,
make Video2Shop a challenging task. More specifically, the
clothing items appeared in videos and online shopping websites demonstrate significant visual discrepancy. On one
hand, the clothes in the videos are usually captured from
different viewpoints (from front, side or back), which lead
to great varieties in visual appearance. The complex scenes
and common motion blur in videos make the situation even
worse. On the other hand, the online clothing images are
not always with clean background, since the clothes are often worn by fashion models in outdoor scenes to show the
real wearing effect. The cluttered background imposes difficulties for clothing localization and analysis. These problems make the Vidoe2Shop task more challenging than the
street-to-shop search.
The architecture of the proposed deep neural network,
AsymNet, is illustrated in Fig. 1. When users watch videos
through web pages or set-top box devices, the system will
retrieve the exactly matched clothing items from online
shops and return them to the users. Clothing detector is
first deployed for both video side and image side, to extract a set of proposals (clothing patches) to identify the
potential clothing regions, eliminating the impact of background regions and leading to more accurate clothing localization. For videos, clothing tracker is then conducted to
generate clothing trajectories from extracted clothing patches, which contain the same clothing items appeared in continuous frames. Intuitively, the clothing patches with inconsistent viewpoints can be preserved. Due to the promising performance and stability, Faster-RCNN [22] and Kernelized Correlation Filters (KCF) tracker [8] are adopted
in this paper as the clothing detector and clothing tracker,
respectively. Deep visual features are generated for shopping images and clothing trajectories in videos, which are
achieved with image feature network (IFN) and video fea-

4048

