Additive Component Analysis
Calvin Murdock
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Fernando De la Torre
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

cmurdock@cs.cmu.edu

ftorre@cs.cmu.edu

࢞௜

Abstract
Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the most
versatile tools for unsupervised learning with applications
ranging from dimensionality reduction to exploratory data
analysis and visualization. While much effort has been devoted to encouraging meaningful representations through
regularization (e.g. non-negativity or sparsity), underlying
linearity assumptions can limit their effectiveness. To address this issue, we propose Additive Component Analysis
(ACA), a novel nonlinear extension of PCA. Inspired by
multivariate nonparametric regression with additive models, ACA fits a smooth manifold to data by learning an explicit mapping from a low-dimensional latent space to the
input space, which trivially enables applications like denoising. Furthermore, ACA can be used as a drop-in replacement in many algorithms that use linear component analysis
methods as a subroutine via the local tangent space of the
learned manifold. Unlike many other nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques, ACA can be efficiently applied to
large datasets since it does not require computing pairwise
similarities or storing training data during testing. Multiple ACA layers can also be composed and learned jointly
with essentially the same procedure for improved representational power, demonstrating the encouraging potential of
nonparametric deep learning. We evaluate ACA on a variety of datasets, showing improved robustness, reconstruction performance, and interpretability.

1. Introduction
Identifying the underlying structure of data is one of the
most important tasks in machine learning. As technological advancements facilitate the construction of datasets with
increasing size and dimensionality, data analysis is becoming more challenging due to computational constraints and
the curse of dimensionality. In the ﬁeld of computer vision
especially, data often consist of thousands if not millions
of features, resulting in drastically increased training data
requirements. However, real-world data often concentrate

ࢌଵ

ࢌଶ

࢝௜ ࢞
ෝ௜

ࢍ௜ଵ ൎ ࢌଵ ሺ‫ݓ‬௜ଵ ሻ
ࢍଵ

ࢍ௜ଵ
࢞௜ ൌ ࢍ௜ଵ ൅ ࢍ௜ଶ 
ෝ௜ ൌ ࢌଵ ሺ‫ݓ‬௜ଵ ሻ ൅ ࢌଶ ሺ‫ݓ‬௜ଶ ሻ
࢞

‫ݓ‬ଵ

(a) Additive Component Analysis (ACA)
࢞௜

࢝௜
ෝ௜
࢞
࢈ଵ

࢈ଶ

࢞௜ ൌ ࢍ௜ଵ ൅ ࢍ௜ଶ 
ෝ௜ ൌ ‫ݓ‬௜ଵ ࢈ଵ ൅ ‫ݓ‬௜ଶ ࢈ଶ
࢞

ࢍ௜ଵ ൎ ‫ݓ‬௜ଵ ࢈ଵ
ࢍଵ

ࢍ௜ଵ

‫ݓ‬ଵ

(b) Principal Component Analysis (PCA)

Figure 1: An overview of ACA (a) in comparison to PCA (b) on
the task of ﬁtting a two-dimensional surface to three-dimensional
data. Both methods minimize the sum of squared distances between the data and their orthogonal projections. However, while
PCA learns a linear subspace spanned by basis vectors bj , ACA
learns a nonlinear manifold deﬁned by the summation of points
along smooth curves f j , resulting in reduced reconstruction error.
The key to our approach is the decomposition of each data point
xi into a sum of target components g ij , which allows the basis
functions to be learned through simple, univariate regression.

near manifolds with lower intrinsic dimensionality [27]. For
example, while the typical image resolution of digital photographs is large, the space of natural images occupies an
extremely small volume in comparison to that of all possible pixel instantiations.
Because the geometric nature of data is typically unknown, a variety of properties have been proposed for encouraging the extraction of meaningful low-dimensional
representations. Component analysis methods are founded
on the implicit assumption that useful representations are
those that can accurately reconstruct input data. However,
to enable effective generalization and interpretability, modeling assumptions or regularization often must be employed.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) ﬁts a low dimensional subspace to data by ﬁnding directions of maximal

2491

