Revisiting Metric Learning for SPD Matrix based Visual Representation
Luping Zhou, Lei Wang
University of Wollongong, Australia

Jianjia Zhang
CSIRO, Australia

Yinghuan Shi, Yang Gao
Nanjing University, China

lupingz,leiw@uow.edu.au

seuzjj@gmail.com

syh,gaoy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of many visual recognition tasks largely depends on a good similarity measure, and distance metric
learning plays an important role in this regard. Meanwhile, Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrix is receiving increased attention for feature representation in multiple computer vision applications. However, distance metric learning on SPD matrices has not been sufficiently researched. A few existing works approached this by learning
either d2 × p or d × k transformation matrix for d × d SPD
matrices. Different from these methods, this paper proposes
a new member to the family of distance metric learning for
SPD matrices. It learns only d parameters to adjust the
eigenvalues of the SPD matrices through an efficient optimisation scheme. Also, it is shown that the proposed method
can be interpreted as learning a sample-specific transformation matrix, instead of the fixed transformation matrix
learned for all the samples in the existing works. The optimised d parameters can be used to “massage” the SPD
matrices for better discrimination while still keeping them
in the original space. From this perspective, the proposed
method complements, rather than competes with, the existing linear-transformation-based methods, as the latter can
always be applied to the output of the former to perform
distance metric learning in further. The proposed method
has been tested on multiple SPD-based visual representation data sets used in the literature, and the results demonstrate its interesting properties and attractive performance.

1. Introduction
SPD matrix based visual representation (SPD-Rep) has
been used in a spectrum of visual recognition tasks, as
it benefits from the advantages of considering high order
statistics of the imaging signals. The most common form
of SPD-Rep is covariance matrix, widely employed in applications such as texture classification [14], face recognition [13], action recognition [31, 10], pedestrian detection [16, 12], and image set classification [7, 11], etc., as
either region descriptor or generic feature representation.

In addition to covariance matrix, other forms of SPD-Rep
have also been seen in the recent literature. For example, the
work in [22] uses a SPD kernel matrix as generic visual representation to model the nonlinear relationship of features,
achieving the state-of-the-art performance in some action
recognition tasks. The resulting matrix of Gaussian distribution has been exploited in [24] to capture the probabilistic
model of object variations for image set classification. In
medical image analysis, SPD matrices have long been used
for diffusion tensor data [1], and correlation matrix and inverse covariance matrix have been employed to model the
interaction of brain regional imaging signals [8, 25].
This newly surging category of visual representation
casts new challenges to many traditional recognition methods since SPD matrices reside on a specific Riemannian
manifold instead of a flat vector space. To cater for this
geometric structure, various methods have been proposed
to improve the similarity comparison of SPD matrices. The
typical ones include the affine-invariant Riemannian metric
(AIRM) [4], Log Euclidean metric [1, 20, 23], Cholesky
distance [3], Power Euclidean distance [3], Stein divergence [15], etc. On the other hand, distance metric learning
is important in providing good metrics critical to the success
of many visual recognition tasks, and has been an intensively researched problem [29]. The classic metric learning
methods become inadequate for SPD-Rep, since they are
usually defined on vector-formed data and Euclidean geometric structure. Despite its importance, the distance metric learning tailored for SPD-Rep has not been sufficiently
researched. A few pioneering works have utilised the Log
Euclidean metric to adapt classic distance metric learning
methods to the domain of SPD matrices. For example,
in [19], each d × d SPD matrix takes a logarithm operation and is then vectorised as the input to the classic ITML
(Information-Theoretic Metric Learning) [2] algorithm for
metric learning. This leads to the learning of a d2 ×d2 1 Mahalanobis matrix, which quickly becomes intractable with
the increase of d. As an improvement, another distance metric learning work in [9] learns a d × k (k ≤ d) transformad×(d+1)

1 or learning a
×
2
the symmetry of SPD matrices.

13241

d×(d+1)
Mahalanobis matrix considering
2

