Product Split Trees
Artem Babenko
Yandex,
National Research University
Higher School of Economics

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
(Skoltech)
lempitsky@skoltech.ru

artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a new kind of spatial partition trees for efficient nearest-neighbor search. Our approach first identifies a set of useful data splitting directions, and then learns a codebook that can be used to encode such directions. We use the product-quantization idea
in order to make the effective codebook large, the evaluation of scalar products between the query and the encoded
splitting direction very fast, and the encoding itself compact. As a result, the proposed data srtucture (Product
Split tree) achieves compact clustering of data points, while
keeping the traversal very efficient. In the nearest-neighbor
search experiments on high-dimensional data, product split
trees achieved state-of-the-art performance, demonstrating
better speed-accuracy tradeoff than other spatial partition
trees.

1. Introduction
Spatial partition trees are popular data structures for
approximate nearest neighbor search in high-dimensional
spaces. Currently partition trees provide the state-of-the-art
performance for medium-scale settings when the database
points can be held within the main memory but the linear
scan over them is slow. Partition trees proceed by hierarchically splitting the search space into a large number of
regions corresponding to tree leaves, whereas each such region contains one or few database points. At the search
stage, a query is propagated down the tree, a limited number of leaves are visited in the depth-first order, and only
distances to points from these leaves are evaluated. In practice, this approach is much faster that the exhaustive linear
scan while providing high accuracy given constrained time
budget.
State-of-the-art partition trees typically use binary space
splitting by a hyperplane hw, xi = b in each internal node.
Here, w is the hyperplane normal, which we refer to as splitting direction and b is the threshold. When searching a given

query q at each internal node the sign of the expression
hw, qi − b

(1)

determines the subtree that should be visited first.
The practical performance of a partition tree mostly depends on two factors. The first factor is the quality of splitting directions that define the space partition. Typically, the
tree construction algorithms seek to use directions w with
high variance of data projections Varhw, xi. The partition
x
regions produced with high-variance directions are more
compact, hence the probability that the depth-first search
will manage to move from the query’ leaf to its nearest
neighbor leaf in a small amount of steps is higher. The second factor is propagation efficiency, which depends on the
complexity of evaluation of (1) in each internal node. The
existing state-of-the-art approaches propose different tradeoffs between these two factors.
Probably, the most well-known partition trees are KDtrees[7], which use axis-aligned hyperplanes i.e. ||w||0 = 1.
Typically, the hyperplane orthogonal to the axis with the
highest data variance is used. The propagation down a KDtree is very efficient as evaluating (1) requires only one comparison operation in each internal node. However, the quality of splitting directions within a KD-tree is inferior as only
d possible directions w are considered in each node during tree construction. Being dependent on the original data
coordinate basis these directions might be suboptimal in a
sense that data variance along all of them in some nodes can
be small.
In contrast, another approach, called PCA-tree[20], produces superior space partition by splitting along the main
principal direction learnt from the subset of points belonging to a particular node. Trinary projection tree (TPtree)[21] considers a restricted set of splitting directions
that is more reach than within KD-tree and less reach
than within PCA-tree. Overall, PCA-tree and TP-tree produce separating hyperplanes more adapted to the particular
dataset compared to KD-trees, which results in more compact partition regions. On the other hand, the evaluation
16214

