Dense Captioning with Joint Inference and Visual Context
Linjie Yang

Kevin Tang
Snap Inc.

{linjie.yang, kevin.tang, jianchao.yang}@snap.com

Abstract
Dense captioning is a newly emerging computer vision
topic for understanding images with dense language descriptions. The goal is to densely detect visual concepts
(e.g., objects, object parts, and interactions between them)
from images, labeling each with a short descriptive phrase.
We identify two key challenges of dense captioning that need
to be properly addressed when tackling the problem. First,
dense visual concept annotations in each image are associated with highly overlapping target regions, making accurate localization of each visual concept challenging. Second, the large amount of visual concepts makes it hard to
recognize each of them by appearance alone. We propose
a new model pipeline based on two novel ideas, joint inference and context fusion, to alleviate these two challenges.
We design our model architecture in a methodical manner
and thoroughly evaluate the variations in architecture. Our
final model, compact and efficient, achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy on Visual Genome [23] for dense captioning with
a relative gain of 73% compared to the previous best algorithm. Qualitative experiments also reveal the semantic
capabilities of our model in dense captioning.

Li-Jia Li∗
Google Inc.

Jianchao Yang

lijiali@cs.stanford.edu

<start> à woman à playing à frisbee

Without context: a desktop computer
With context: a modern building

(a)

(b)

man wearing a man in a a black helmet on
a blue shirt red shirt a baseball player
the umpire
is wearing a
helmet

a crowd of people
watching the game
a tree

a catcher’s
mask

spectators
in the
stands

blue shirt on
umpire

baseball
in the air

the catcher’s
shin guards
umpire
wearing blue
shirt

catcher wearing
a blue shirt

the man is
wearing
black shoes
white lines on
the field
a baseball
player

black and
white shoe

a baseball game

(c)

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has recently witnessed
the success of deep neural networks for image captioning, in which a sentence is generated to describe a given
image. Challenging as it seems, a list of pioneering approaches [8] [10] [41] [43] have achieved remarkable success on datasets such as Flicker30k [44] and MS COCO [5].
For evaluation, metrics in natural language processing are
employed to measure the similarity between ground truth
captions and predictions, such as BLEU [35], Meteor [2],
and CIDEr [40]. However, the holistic image descriptions
from these datasets are either limited to the salient objects of
the images, or tend to broadly depict the entire visual scene.
A picture is worth a thousand words, and these holistic image descriptions are far from a complete visual understand∗ This work was done when Li-Jia Li was with Snap Inc..

Figure 1: Illustration of our approach for dense captioning.
(a) For a region proposal, the bounding box can adapt and
improve with the caption word by word. In this example,
the bounding box is guided by the caption to include the
frisbee, even though the initial position was ambiguous. (b)
The object in the red box is hard to recognize as a building
without the context of the whole image. (c) An example
image overlaid with the most confident region descriptions
by our model.
ing of the image. Furthermore, giving one description for
an entire image can sometimes be quite subjective, making
the evaluation of captioning often ambiguous.
Recently, Johnson et al. [20] propose to use a dense description of image regions as a better interpretation of the
visual content, known as dense captioning. Human anno12193

