Network Sketching: Exploiting Binary Structure in Deep CNNs
Yiwen Guo1 , Anbang Yao1 , Hao Zhao2,1 , Yurong Chen1
1
Intel Labs China, 2 Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{yiwen.guo,anbang.yao,hao.zhao,yurong.chen}@intel.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with deep architectures have substantially advanced the state-of-the-art in
computer vision tasks. However, deep networks are typically resource-intensive and thus difficult to be deployed on
mobile devices. Recently, CNNs with binary weights have
shown compelling efficiency to the community, whereas the
accuracy of such models is usually unsatisfactory in practice. In this paper, we introduce network sketching as a
novel technique of pursuing binary-weight CNNs, targeting
at more faithful inference and better trade-off for practical
applications. Our basic idea is to exploit binary structure directly in pre-trained filter banks and produce binaryweight models via tensor expansion. The whole process can
be treated as a coarse-to-fine model approximation, akin
to the pencil drawing steps of outlining and shading. To
further speedup the generated models, namely the sketches,
we also propose an associative implementation of binary
tensor convolutions. Experimental results demonstrate that
a proper sketch of AlexNet (or ResNet) outperforms the
existing binary-weight models by large margins on the ImageNet large scale classification task, while the committed
memory for network parameters only exceeds a little.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been accepted as the core of many computer
vision solutions. Deep models trained on a massive amount
of data have delivered impressive accuracy on a variety of
tasks, including but not limited to semantic segmentation,
face recognition, object detection and recognition.
In spite of the successes, mobile devices cannot take
much advantage of these models, mainly due to their inadequacy of computational resources. As is known to all,
camera based games are dazzling to be operated with object
recognition and detection techniques, hence it is eagerly
anticipated to deploy advanced CNNs (e.g., AlexNet [15],
VGG-Net [25] and ResNet [10]) on tablets and smartphones. Nevertheless, as the winner of ILSVRC-2012 com-

Figure 1. Sketching a network model by exploiting binary structure within pre-trained filter banks, after which the full-precision
model can be converted to an efficient one with binary (in black
and light grey) connections.

petition, AlexNet comes along with nearly 61 million realvalued parameters and 1.5 billion floating-point operations
(FLOPs) to classify a image, making it resource-intensive
in different aspects. Running it for real-time applications
would require considerable high CPU/GPU workloads and
memory footprints, which is prohibitive on typical mobile
devices. The similar situation occurs on the deeper networks like VGG-Net and ResNet.
Recently, CNNs with binary weights are designed to
resolve this problem. By forcing the connection weights to
only two possible values (normally +1 and −1), researchers
attempt to eliminate the required floating-point multiplications (FMULs) for network inference, as they are considered to be the most expensive operations. In addition, since
the real-valued weights are converted to be binary, these
networks would commit much less space for storing their
parameters, which leads to a great saving in the memory
footprints and thus energy costs [8]. Several methods have
been proposed to train such networks [1, 2, 22]. However,
the reported accuracy of obtained models is unsatisfactory
on large dataset (e.g., ImageNet) [22]. Even worse, since
straightforwardly widen the networks does not guarantee
any increase in accuracy [14], it is also unclear how we can
make a trade-off between the model precision and expected
accuracy with these methods.

5955

