Optical Flow Requires Multiple Strategies (but only one network)
Tal Schuster1 Lior Wolf1,2 David Gadot1
1 The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel
2 Facebook AI Research

talschuster@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il, dedigadot@gmail.com

Abstract
(a)

We show that the matching problem that underlies optical flow requires multiple strategies, depending on the
amount of image motion and other factors. We then study
the implications of this observation on training a deep neural network for representing image patches in the context of
descriptor based optical flow. We propose a metric learning
method, which selects suitable negative samples based on
the nature of the true match. This type of training produces
a network that displays multiple strategies depending on the
input and leads to state of the art results on the KITTI 2012
and KITTI 2015 optical flow benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In many AI challenges, including perception and planning, one specific problem requires multiple strategies. In
the computer vision literature, this topic has gained little
attention. Since a single model is typically trained, the conventional view is that of a unified, albeit complex, solution that captures all scenarios. Our work shows that careful consideration of the multifaceted nature of optical flow
leads to a clear improvement in performing this task.
In optical flow, one can roughly separate between the
small- and the large-displacement scenarios, and train
model to apply different strategies to these different cases.
The small displacement scenarios are characterized by relatively small appearance changes and require patch descriptors that can capture minute differences in appearance. The
large displacement scenarios, on the other hand, require
much more invariance in the matching process.
State of the art methods in optical flow employ metric
learning in order to learn the patch descriptors. We focus
on the process of selecting negative samples during training
and suggest two modifications. First, rather than selecting
all negative samples close to the ground truth, we propose
an interleaving learning method that selects negative samples at a distance that match the amount of displacement
that the true match (the positive sample) undergoes, as is il-

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of strategies for selecting negative samples.
(a) The first frame, in which some locations are marked. (b) In the
baseline method [13], negative samples are sampled close to the
ground truth, regardless of the properties of the true match. Green
are the true matches and Red are the negative samples. (c) In the
proposed method, the negative samples are sampled based on the
displacement of the positive samples. Best viewed in color.

lustrated in Fig. 1. Second, we suggest gradually increasing
the difficulty of the negative samples during training.
In the implementation of the second component,
scheduling samples by difficulty, we combine two methods well known in the literature. The curriculum learning
method [6] selects samples, stratified by difficulty, using a
predefined order. The method of self-paced learning [24]
identifies a set of easy samples by their loss, and learns using only those samples. The amount of samples defined as
easy is increased over time. The Self-Paced-CurriculumInterleaving method we propose here combines in the selection process both the difficulty of a sample and its loss.
However, in difference from the self-paced method, no samples are excluded during training. Instead, we control the
level of the difficulty of instances used for training by selecting negative samples of appropriate distances.
The pipeline employed for computing optical flow is

4950

