Pixelwise Instance Segmentation with a Dynamically Instantiated Network
Anurag Arnab and Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford
{anurag.arnab, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Semantic segmentation and object detection research
have recently achieved rapid progress. However, the former
task has no notion of different instances of the same object,
and the latter operates at a coarse, bounding-box level. We
propose an Instance Segmentation system that produces a
segmentation map where each pixel is assigned an object
class and instance identity label. Most approaches adapt
object detectors to produce segments instead of boxes. In
contrast, our method is based on an initial semantic segmentation module, which feeds into an instance subnetwork.
This subnetwork uses the initial category-level segmentation, along with cues from the output of an object detector,
within an end-to-end CRF to predict instances. This part
of our model is dynamically instantiated to produce a variable number of instances per image. Our end-to-end approach requires no post-processing and considers the image holistically, instead of processing independent proposals. Therefore, unlike some related work, a pixel cannot belong to multiple instances. Furthermore, far more precise
segmentations are achieved, as shown by our substantial
improvements at high AP r thresholds.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation and object detection are wellstudied scene understanding problems, and have recently
witnessed great progress due to deep learning [21, 12, 6].
However, semantic segmentation – which labels every pixel
in an image with its object class – has no notion of different
instances of an object (Fig. 1). Object detection does localise different object instances, but does so at a very coarse,
bounding-box level. Instance segmentation localises objects at a pixel level, as shown in Fig. 1, and can be thought
of being at the intersection of these two scene understanding
tasks. Unlike the former, it knows about different instances
of the same object, and unlike the latter, it operates at a pixel
level. Accurate recognition and localisation of objects enables many applications, such as autonomous driving [8],
image-editing [46] and robotics [16].
Many recent approaches to instance segmentation are
based on object detection pipelines where objects are first

localised with bounding boxes. Thereafter, each bounding
box is refined into a segmentation [18, 19, 27, 32, 26]. Another related approach [11, 49] is to use segment-based region proposals [9, 35, 36] instead of box-based proposals.
However, these methods do not consider the entire image,
but rather independent proposals. As a result, occlusions
between different objects are not handled. Furthermore,
many of these methods cannot easily produce segmentation
maps of the image, as shown in Fig. 1, since they process
numerous proposals independently. There are typically far
more proposals than actual objects in the image, and these
proposals can overlap and be assigned different class labels.
Finally, as these methods are based on an initial detection
step, they cannot recover from false detections.
Our proposed method is inspired by the fact that instance
segmentation can be viewed as a more complex form of semantic segmentation, since we are not only required to label the object class of each pixel, but also its instance identity. We produce a pixelwise segmentation of the image,
where each pixel is assigned both a semantic class and instance label. Our end-to-end trained network, which outputs a variable number of instances per input image, begins with an initial semantic segmentation module. The
following, dynamic part of the network, then uses information from an object detector and a Conditional Random
Field (CRF) model to distinguish different instances. This
approach is robust to false-positive detections, as well as
poorly localised bounding boxes which do not cover the
entire object, in contrast to detection-based methods to instance segmentation. Moreover, as it considers the entire
image when making predictions, it attempts to resolve occlusions between different objects and can produce segmentation maps as in Fig. 1 without any post-processing.
Furthermore, we note that the Average Precision (AP)
metric [13] used in evaluating object detection systems, and
its AP r variant [18] used for instance segmentation, considers individual, potentially overlapping, object predictions in
isolation, as opposed to the entire image. To evaluate methods such as ours, which produce complete segmentation
maps and reason about occlusions, we also evaluate using
the “Matching Intersection over Union” metric.
Our system, which is based on an initial semantic segmentation subnetwork, produces sharp and accurate in1441

