Unsupervised Visual-Linguistic Reference Resolution in Instructional Videos
De-An Huang1 , Joseph J. Lim2 , Li Fei-Fei1 , and Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Stanford University, 2 University of Southern California
dahuang@cs.stanford.edu, limjj@usc.edu, {feifeili,jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised method for reference resolution in instructional videos, where the goal is to temporally link an entity (e.g., “dressing”) to the action (e.g.,
“mix yogurt”) that produced it. The key challenge is
the inevitable visual-linguistic ambiguities arising from the
changes in both visual appearance and referring expression
of an entity in the video. This challenge is amplified by
the fact that we aim to resolve references with no supervision. We address these challenges by learning a joint visuallinguistic model, where linguistic cues can help resolve visual ambiguities and vice versa. We verify our approach
by learning our model unsupervisedly using more than two
thousand unstructured cooking videos from YouTube, and
show that our visual-linguistic model can substantially improve upon state-of-the-art linguistic only model on reference resolution in instructional videos.

1. Introduction
The number of videos uploaded to the web is growing
exponentially. In this work, we are particularly interested in
the narrated instructional videos. We as humans often acquire various types of knowledge by watching them – from
how to hold a knife to cut a tomato, to the recipe of cooking
a tomato soup. In order to build a machine with the same
capability, it is necessary to understand entities (e.g. knife)
and actions (e.g. cut) in these videos.
From a learning point of view, data from instructional
videos pose a very interesting challenge. They are noisy,
containing unstructured and misaligned caption uploaded
by users or generated automatically by speech recognition.
Even worse, the key challenge arises from inevitable ambiguities presented in videos. For example, in Figure 1(a),
“oil” mixed with “salt” is later referred as a “mixture” – a
linguistic ambiguity due to a referring expression. An onion
in Figure 1(b) looks very different from its original appearance before being cut – a visual ambiguity due to a state
change. Lastly, “yogurt” is later referred to “dressing” and
its appearance changes completely as shown in Figure 1(c)

Resolved by visual similarity
Use the mixture

Stir oil and salt

(a) Linguistic Ambiguity
Cut the onion

Resolved by linguistic similarity
Put the onion into

(b) Visual Ambiguity

✁✂✄ ☎✆✝✞✟✠

✡✞✠ ☛☞✝☞✠✌✍✎☞

Resolved by our joint modeling
Add the dressing

(c) Visual-Linguistic Ambiguity
Figure 1. Our goal is to resolve references in videos – temporally
linking an entity to the action that produced it. (a), (b), and (c) illustrate challenges resulting from different types of ambiguities in
instructional videos and how they are resolved. Our model utilizes
linguistic and visual cues to resolve them. An arrow pointing to an
action outcome indicates the origin of the entity.

– both linguistic and visual ambiguities.
In this paper, we address how to resolve such ambiguities. This task is known as reference resolution: the linking
of expressions to contextually given entities [50]. In other
words, our goal is to extract all actions and entities from a
given video, and resolve references between them. This is
equivalent to temporally link each entity (e.g. “ice”) to the
action (e.g. “freeze water”) that produced it. For example,
“mixture” in Figure 1(a) refers to the outcome of the action “stir oil and salt”, and “dressing” in Figure 1(c) is the
outcome of the action “mix yogurt with black pepper”.
There have been various attempts to address reference
and coreference resolution in both language understand-

2183

