Fine-tuning Convolutional Neural Networks for Biomedical Image Analysis:
Actively and Incrementally∗
Zongwei Zhou1 , Jae Shin1 , Lei Zhang1 , Suryakanth Gurudu2 , Michael Gotway2 , and Jianming Liang1
1

Arizona State University

{zongweiz,sejong,lei.zhang.10,jianming.liang}@asu.edu
2

Mayo Clinic

{gurudu.suryakanth,gotway.michael}@mayo.edu

Abstract
Intense interest in applying convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in biomedical image analysis is wide spread,
but its success is impeded by the lack of large annotated
datasets in biomedical imaging. Annotating biomedical images is not only tedious and time consuming, but also demanding of costly, specialty-oriented knowledge and skills, which are not easily accessible. To dramatically reduce
annotation cost, this paper presents a novel method called
AIFT (active, incremental fine-tuning) to naturally integrate
active learning and transfer learning into a single framework. AIFT starts directly with a pre-trained CNN to seek
“worthy” samples from the unannotated for annotation,
and the (fine-tuned) CNN is further fine-tuned continuously
by incorporating newly annotated samples in each iteration
to enhance the CNN’s performance incrementally. We have
evaluated our method in three different biomedical imaging
applications, demonstrating that the cost of annotation can
be cut by at least half. This performance is attributed to the
several advantages derived from the advanced active and
incremental capability of our AIFT method.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [14] have
brought about a revolution in computer vision thanks
to large annotated datasets, such as ImageNet [6] and
Places [27]. As evidenced by an IEEE TMI special issue [8]
and two forthcoming books [28, 17], intense interest in applying CNNs in biomedical image analysis is wide spread,
∗ This research has been supported partially by NIH under Award Num-

ber R01HL128785, by ASU and Mayo Clinic through a Seed Grant and
an Innovation Grant. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of NIH.

but its success is impeded by the lack of such large annotated datasets in biomedical imaging. Annotating biomedical
images is not only tedious and time consuming, but also demanding of costly, specialty-oriented knowledge and skills, which are not easily accessible. Therefore, we seek to
answer this critical question: How to dramatically reduce
the cost of annotation when applying CNNs in biomedical
imaging. In doing so, we present a novel method called
AIFT (active, incremental fine-tuning) to naturally integrate
active learning and transfer learning into a single framework. Our AIFT method starts directly with a pre-trained
CNN to seek “salient” samples from the unannotated for
annotation, and the (fine-tuned) CNN is continuously finetuned by incrementally enlarging the training dataset with
newly annotated samples. We have evaluated our method
in three different applications including colonoscopy frame
classification, polyp detection, and pulmonary embolism
(PE) detection, demonstrating that the cost of annotation
can be cut by at least half.
This outstanding performance is attributed to a simple
yet powerful observation: To boost the performance of CNNs in biomedical imaging, multiple patches are usually generated automatically for each candidate through data
augmentation; these patches generated from the same candidate share the same label, and are naturally expected to
have similar predictions by the current CNN before they are
expanded into the training dataset. As a result, their entropy
and diversity provide a useful indicator to the “power” of a
candidate in elevating the performance of the current CNN.
However, automatic data augmentation inevitably generates
“hard” samples for some candidates, injecting noisy labels; therefore, to significantly enhance the robustness of our
method, we compute entropy and diversity by selecting only a portion of the patches of each candidate according to
the predictions by the current CNN.
17340

