Robust Interpolation of Correspondences for Large Displacement Optical Flow
Yinlin Hu1

Yunsong Li1

Rui Song1,2,∗

huyinlin@gmail.com

ysli@mail.xidian.edu.cn

rsong@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
The interpolation of correspondences (EpicFlow) was
widely used for optical flow estimation in most-recent
works. It has the advantage of edge-preserving and efficiency. However, it is vulnerable to input matching noise,
which is inevitable in modern matching techniques. In
this paper, we present a Robust Interpolation method of
Correspondences (called RicFlow) to overcome the weakness. First, the scene is over-segmented into superpixels
to revitalize an early idea of piecewise flow model. Then,
each model is estimated robustly from its support neighbors
based on a graph constructed on superpixels. We propose a
propagation mechanism among the pieces in the estimation
of models. The propagation of models is significantly more
efficient than the independent estimation of each model, yet
retains the accuracy. Extensive experiments on three public datasets demonstrate that RicFlow is more robust than
EpicFlow, and it outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation is one of the most fundamental
problems in computer vision. The applications include motion segmentation [28], video saliency detection [32], action
recognition [38], driver assistance [15, 25], etc. While there
exists abundant literature of this topic, obtaining the reliable
optical flow between frames is still an open problem, especially in the case of large displacements, which is common
in real-world videos.
Since the optical flow problem is inherently ill-posed,
typically energy optimization is involved in solving it.
Many effective approaches [7, 6, 41, 35] have been proposed based on the pioneering work by Horn and Schunck
[18] who cast the optical flow problem into an energy minimization framework. Although these approaches perform
well in the case of small displacements, they often fail to
estimate large displacements. The main reason is the failure of accurate initialization for the energy minimization to
∗ Corresponding author. 1 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service
Networks, Xidian University, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Infrared System
Detection and Imaging Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

(a) Images

(b) Matching result of CPM [20]

(c) CPM+Epic [31]

(d) CPM+Ric

(e) Error map of CPM+Epic

(f) Error map of CPM+Ric

Figure 1. Demonstration of the robustness of the proposed Ric
method. Given the same noisy matches (CPM [20]), the flow interpolated from Ric is more tolerant of matching noise compared
to that interpolated from Epic [31] (see the flat regions above the
shoulder of the character). (e) and (f) are the error map of (c) and
(d) respectively. Matching correspondences are shown as small
colored patches as in [20], and the visualization of the error map
follows [25] (the darker, the better).

avoid local minima.
Recently, a method called EpicFlow [31] that interpolates a sparse set of matches in a dense manner to initiate the
optical flow estimation has shown great advantages over the
traditional coarse-to-fine minimization scheme, especially
in the case of occlusions, motion boundaries and large displacements. However, the flow result is vulnerable to input
matching noise, which is inevitable, though the great advances have been made in the research of matching techniques [39, 20, 3, 21] (see Figure 1(b)).
In this paper, we propose a robust interpolation method
of correspondences, which is more tolerant of matching
noise. After over-segmenting the scenes into superpixels [1]
and assuming the flow in each superpixel meets a piecewise
affine model, we use RANSAC-like techniques (Random
Sample Consensus) to estimate the model of each super-

481

