Stereo-Based 3D Reconstruction of Dynamic Fluid Surfaces by Global
Optimization
Yiming Qian
University of Alberta

Minglun Gong
Memorial University of Newfoundland

Yee-Hong Yang
University of Alberta

yqian3@ualberta.ca

gong@cs.mun.ca

yang@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract
3D reconstruction of dynamic fluid surfaces is an open
and challenging problem in computer vision. Unlike previous approaches that reconstruct each surface point independently and often return noisy depth maps, we propose
a novel global optimization-based approach that recovers
both depths and normals of all 3D points simultaneously.
Using the traditional refraction stereo setup, we capture the
wavy appearance of a pre-generated random pattern, and
then estimate the correspondences between the captured images and the known background by tracking the pattern.
Assuming that the light is refracted only once through the
fluid interface, we minimize an objective function that incorporates both the cross-view normal consistency constraint
and the single-view normal consistency constraints. The key
idea is that the normals required for light refraction based
on Snell’s law from one view should agree with not only
the ones from the second view, but also the ones estimated
from local 3D geometry. Moreover, an effective reconstruction error metric is designed for estimating the refractive
index of the fluid. We report experimental results on both
synthetic and real data demonstrating that the proposed approach is accurate and shows superiority over the conventional stereo-based method.

1. Introduction
The problem of 3D reconstruction of dynamic fluid surfaces has attracted much attention from many areas, including computer vision [19], oceanology [14] and computer
graphics [8]. Effective solutions can benefit many applications, e.g. physics-based fluid simulation [10] and fluid
imaging [2]. The problem is challenging for several reasons. First, similar to glass and crystal, most fluids are
transparent and do not have their own colors. They acquire
their colors from surrounding backgrounds. Hence, traditional color-based stereo matching cannot work for such
view-dependent surfaces. Second, tracing the light path in-

volved in fluid surface reconstruction is non-trivial because
of the non-linearity inherent in refraction. Even worse is
that light refraction depends not only on the 3D shape but
also on the medium’s property, i.e. refractive index, which is
usually unknown. Third, compared to static transparent objects, accurately reconstructing wavy fluid surfaces is even
harder because real time capture is required.
In computer vision, the problem is usually solved via
shape from refraction. Typically, a known background is
placed beneath the fluid surface and 3D reconstruction is
performed by analyzing pixel-point correspondences. That
is, for each pixel, the corresponding location of the light
source in the background is acquired. However, shape
from pixel-point correspondence is known to have ambiguities: the 3D surface point can lie at any position along
the camera ray that goes through the pixel. Recent methods resolve the ambiguities along two directions. Some
methods [29, 31, 34], instead of using pixel-point correspondences, acquire ray-ray correspondences, i.e. the incident ray emitted from the background and the exit ray going to the camera, using special devices (e.g. Bokode [31],
light field probes [29]). Alternatively, a number of methods
[7, 19] propose to employ stereo/multiple cameras to capture the fluid surface, which basically utilize a cross-view
normal consistency constraint: the normals computed using the pixel-point correspondences acquired from different
views should be consistent. Nevertheless, for the above two
groups, a common limitation is that they result in reliable
normals only but noisy depths. The final 3D points of the
fluid surface are then obtained by normal integration. To get
the boundary condition for integration, they either assume
that the surface is flat at the boundary [7, 31] or estimate the
boundary using the noisy depths [19, 29].
To cope with the above limitations, we propose a global
optimization-based approach to reconstruct a dynamic, homogeneous and transparent fluid surface, from which specular reflection is assumed to be negligible. Our approach is
based on pixel-point correspondences. By assuming light is
redirected only once through the fluid surface, we first use
two perspective cameras to capture the distortion of a ran11269

