3D Bounding Box Estimation Using Deep Learning and Geometry
Arsalan Mousavian∗
George Mason University

Dragomir Anguelov
Zoox, Inc.

John Flynn
Zoox, Inc.

amousavi@gmu.edu

drago@zoox.com

john.flynn@zoox.com

Jana Košecká
George Mason University
kosecka@gmu.edu

Abstract
We present a method for 3D object detection and pose
estimation from a single image. In contrast to current techniques that only regress the 3D orientation of an object, our
method first regresses relatively stable 3D object properties
using a deep convolutional neural network and then combines these estimates with geometric constraints provided
by a 2D object bounding box to produce a complete 3D
bounding box. The first network output estimates the 3D
object orientation using a novel hybrid discrete-continuous
loss, which significantly outperforms the L2 loss. The second output regresses the 3D object dimensions, which have
relatively little variance compared to alternatives and can
often be predicted for many object types. These estimates,
combined with the geometric constraints on translation imposed by the 2D bounding box, enable us to recover a stable
and accurate 3D object pose. We evaluate our method on
the challenging KITTI object detection benchmark [2] both
on the official metric of 3D orientation estimation and also
on the accuracy of the obtained 3D bounding boxes. Although conceptually simple, our method outperforms more
complex and computationally expensive approaches that
leverage semantic segmentation, instance level segmentation and flat ground priors [4] and sub-category detection [23][24]. Our discrete-continuous loss also produces
state of the art results for 3D viewpoint estimation on the
Pascal 3D+ dataset[26].

1. Introduction
The problem of 3D object detection is of particular importance in robotic applications that require decision making or interactions with objects in the real world. 3D object detection recovers both the 6 DoF pose and the dimen∗ Work done as an intern at Zoox, Inc.

Figure 1. Our method takes the 2D detection bounding box and
estimates a 3D bounding box.

sions of an object from an image. While recently developed
2D detection algorithms are capable of handling large variations in viewpoint and clutter, accurate 3D object detection
largely remains an open problem despite some promising
recent work. The existing efforts to integrate pose estimation with state-of-the-art object detectors focus mostly on
viewpoint estimation. They exploit the observation that the
appearance of objects changes as a function of viewpoint
and that discretization of viewpoints (parametrized by azimuth and elevation) gives rise to sub-categories which can
be trained discriminatively [23]. In more restrictive driving
scenarios alternatives to full 3D pose estimation explore exhaustive sampling and scoring of all hypotheses [4] using a
variety of contextual and semantic cues.
In this work, we propose a method that estimates the
pose (R, T ) ∈ SE(3) and the dimensions of an object’s
3D bounding box from a 2D bounding box and the surrounding image pixels. Our simple and efficient method
is suitable for many real world applications including selfdriving vehicles. The main contribution of our approach is
in the choice of the regression parameters and the associated
objective functions for the problem. We first regress the
orientation and object dimensions before combining these
estimates with geometric constraints to produce a final 3D
pose. This is in contrast to previous techniques that attempt
17074

