Linking Image and Text with 2-Way Nets
Aviv Eisenschtat1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Linking two data sources is a basic building block in
numerous computer vision problems. Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) achieves this by utilizing a linear optimizer in order to maximize the correlation between the two
views. Recent work makes use of non-linear models, including deep learning techniques, that optimize the CCA loss in
some feature space. In this paper, we introduce a novel,
bi-directional neural network architecture for the task of
matching vectors from two data sources. Our approach
employs two tied neural network channels that project the
two views into a common, maximally correlated space using the Euclidean loss. We show a direct link between the
correlation-based loss and Euclidean loss, enabling the use
of Euclidean loss for correlation maximization. To overcome common Euclidean regression optimization problems,
we modify well-known techniques to our problem, including
batch normalization and dropout. We show state of the art
results on a number of computer vision matching tasks including MNIST image matching and sentence-image matching on the Flickr8k, Flickr30k and COCO datasets.

ization was added [29], kernels were introduced [2, 30, 4],
versions for more than two sources were developed [41] etc.
Recently, with the advent of deep learning methods, deep
versions were created and showed promise.
The current deep CCA methods optimize the CCA loss
on top of a deep neural network architecture. In this work,
an alternative is presented in which a network is built to
map one source X to another source Y and back. This architecture, which bears similarities to the encoder-decoder
framework [11], employs the Euclidean loss.
The Euclidean loss is hard to optimize for, when compared to classification losses such as the cross entropy loss.
We, therefore, introduce a number of contributions that are
critical to the success of our methods. These include: (i) a
mid-way loss term that helps support the training of the hidden layers; (ii) a decorrelation regularization term that links
the problem back to CCA; (iii) modified batch normalization layers; (iv) a regularization of the scale parameter that
ensures that the variance does not diminish from one layer
to the next; (v) a tied dropout method; and (vi) a method for
dealing with high-dimensional data.
Taken together, we are able to present a general and robust method. In an extensive set of experiments, we present
clear advantages over both the classical and recent methods.

1. Introduction
Computer vision emerged from its roots in image processing when researchers began to seek an understanding
of the scene behind the image. Linking visual data X with
an external data source Y is, therefore, the defining task
of computer vision. When applying machine learning tools
to solve such tasks, we often consider the outside source
Y to be univariate. A more general scenario is the one in
which Y is also multidimensional. Examples of such view
to view linking include matching a video and concurrent audio, matching an image with its textual description, matching images from two fixed views, etc.
The classical method of matching vectors between two
different domains is Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA).
The algorithm has been generalized in many ways: regular-

2. Previous work
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [14] is a statistical method for computing a linear projection for two views
into a common space which maximizes their correlation.
CCA plays a crucial role in many computer vision applications including multiview analysis [1], multimodal human
behavior analysis [39], action recognition [16], and linking
text with images [18]. There are a large number of CCA
variants including: regularized CCA [44], Nonparametric
canonical correlation analysis (NCCA) [31], and Kernel
canonical correlation analysis (KCCA) [2, 30, 4], a method
for producing non-linear, non-parametric projections using
the kernel trick. Recently, randomized non-linear component analysis (RCCA) [32] emerged as a low-rank approxi14601

