ShapeOdds: Variational Bayesian Learning of Generative Shape Models
Shireen Elhabian and Ross Whitaker
Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
{shireen,whitaker}@sci.utah.edu

Abstract
Shape models provide a compact parameterization of a
class of shapes, and have been shown to be important to
a variety of vision problems, including object detection,
tracking, and image segmentation. Learning generative
shape models from grid-structured representations, aka silhouettes, is usually hindered by (1) data likelihoods with
intractable marginals and posteriors, (2) high-dimensional
shape spaces with limited training samples (and the associated risk of overfitting), and (3) estimation of hyperparameters relating to model complexity that often entails computationally expensive grid searches. In this paper, we propose a Bayesian treatment that relies on direct probabilistic formulation for learning generative shape models in the
silhouettes space. We propose a variational approach for
learning a latent variable model in which we make use of,
and extend, recent works on variational bounds of logisticGaussian integrals to circumvent intractable marginals and
posteriors. Spatial coherency and sparsity priors are also
incorporated to lend stability to the optimization problem
by regularizing the solution space while avoiding overfitting
in this high-dimensional, low-sample-size scenario. We deploy a type-II maximum likelihood estimate of the model hyperparameters to avoid grid searches. We demonstrate that
the proposed model generates realistic samples, generalizes
to unseen examples, and is able to handle missing regions
and/or background clutter, while comparing favorably with
recent, neural-network-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Shape modeling deals with learning statistical properties of a shape population. This is typically accomplished by estimating a probability distribution from a set
of i.i.d. training samples drawn from the true, unknown distribution, treating individual data points as samples in a
high-dimensional shape space. Shape models are an enabling technology for a variety of vision and imaging applications, such as feature localization [1–3], object recognition [4, 5], pose estimation [6, 7], object detection [8–10],
image segmentation [11–15], tracking [16–18], object reconstruction [19, 20], animation [21–23], and shape synthe-

sis [24]. Image segmentation, for instance, often benefits
from incorporating expectations of particular classes of objects (e.g., birds, animals, faces), in the form of shape priors
to guide/constrain the segmentation process [25].
This paper addresses the problem of learning generative
shape models from grid-structured representations in which
data points in the shape space are represented as binary
functions defined over a discrete image domain, i.e., silhouettes. There is a rich history of work on learning shape
statistics from silhouettes in which the main distinction is
capturing local (i.e., low-level) versus global (i.e., highlevel) correlations. Local structure interactions between
pixels typically capture generic properties, e.g., smoothness
and continuity (often via Markov random fields – MRFs,
e.g., [26–29]). Here we focus on global models designed
to capture complex high-level shape structure (e.g., facial
parts, horse legs, vehicle wheels), which may also be complemented by low-level spatial priors. Learning global
shape models in the silhouettes space is challenging because
the binary variables entail non-Gaussian data likelihoods,
which often lead to intractable marginals and posteriors.
High-dimensional shape space with limited training samples further increases the tendency to overfit. Additionally,
the hyperparameters associated with model complexity often result in computationally expensive discrete searches.
Here we rely on a generative model, where a silhouette
is a realization of a spatially coherent field of Bernoulli random variables – characterized by a parameter map – defined on the image domain. This probabilistic representation of shape yields globally optimal solutions for certain problems, e.g., segmentation and tracking, due to the
convexity of the parameter maps space [30]. Learning a
probability distribution over the silhouettes space amounts
to estimating the parameter map of a silhouette. Because
the shape space is a unit hypercube, such a learning task
does not benefit from a vector space structure. LogOdds, as
an alternative to probabilities, places parameter maps in a
vector space where addition and scalar multiplications have
probabilistic interpretations [31]. Consequently, most existing approaches have resorted to modeling shape variability indirectly on a space of some predefined implicit function, including signed distance maps (SDMs) and Gaussian

2231

