Improving Pairwise Ranking for Multi-label Image Classification
Yuncheng Li
University of Rochester

Yale Song
Yahoo Research

Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester

yli@cs.rochester.edu

yalesong@yahoo-inc.com

jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Input

Abstract

Prediction

Learning to rank has recently emerged as an attractive
technique to train deep convolutional neural networks for
various computer vision tasks. Pairwise ranking, in particular, has been successful in multi-label image classification,
achieving state-of-the-art results on various benchmarks.
However, most existing approaches use the hinge loss to
train their models, which is non-smooth and thus is difficult
to optimize especially with deep networks. Furthermore,
they employ simple heuristics, such as top-k or thresholding,
to determine which labels to include in the output from a
ranked list of labels, which limits their use in the real-world
setting. In this work, we propose two techniques to improve
pairwise ranking based multi-label image classification: (1)
we propose a novel loss function for pairwise ranking, which
is smooth everywhere and thus is easier to optimize; and
(2) we incorporate a label decision module into the model,
estimating the optimal confidence thresholds for each visual
concept. We provide theoretical analyses of our loss function
in the Bayes consistency and risk minimization framework,
and show its benefit over existing pairwise ranking formulations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
three large-scale datasets, VOC2007, NUS-WIDE and MSCOCO, achieving the best reported results in the literature.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classification is arguably one of the
most important problems in computer vision, where the
goal is to identify all existing visual concepts in a given
image [3]. It has numerous real-world applications including
text-based image retrieval [6], ads re-targeting [14], crossdomain image recommendation [35], to name a few. Due to
its importance, the problem has been studied extensively, not
only in the context of image classification, but from multiple
disciplines and in a variety of contexts.
One popular approach is called problem transformation [21], where the multi-label problem is transformed into
multiple binary label problems. Several recent approaches
exploit some distinctive properties of the problem, such as

Output

Ranked List

Pairwise
Ranking

Decision
(cat, 0.99)
(flower, 0.82)
(vase, 0.68)
(window, 0.52) Per-class
(ladder, 0.21) Threshold
…

(horse, 0.02)
(person, 0.01)

Estimation

cat
flower
vase

CC Image courtesy of ReflectedSerendipity on Flickr.

Figure 1: Ranking-based multi-label classification employs
a two-step process: label prediction that produces a ranked
list of label confidence scores, and label decision that determines which labels to include in the output. We propose a
new pairwise ranking loss function and a per-class threshold estimation method in a unified framework, improving
existing ranking-based approaches in a principled manner.
label dependency [1, 25], label sparsity [10, 12, 27], and
label noise [33, 39]. Motivated by the success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13, 23], other recent
approaches combine representation learning and multi-label
learning into an end-to-end trainable system [29].
Recently, Weston et al. [32] proposed an idea to apply
pairwise ranking to the image classification problem. Their
main idea is that, while what we care the most about is
correctly identifying positive labels, it is equally important
for the classifier to make “sensible” mistakes. Specifically,
even when a classifier fails to identify positive labels, it
should at least assign higher ranks to the positive labels than
to most of the negative labels. Extending this idea, Gong et
al. [9] applied the pairwise ranking approach to train a CNN
and reported the state-of-the-art result on the NUS-WIDE
multi-label image annotation task [7].
While the pairwise ranking approach in Weston et al. [32]
and Gong et al. [9] provides flexibility to train a variety of
learning machines, with good empirical performance on
real-world problems, we argue that it has two important
drawbacks when applied to multi-label classification. First,
as we show in Section 3, the hinge loss function used in
Weston et al. [32] and Gong et al. [9] is non-smooth and
13617

