Image Deblurring via Extreme Channels Prior
Yanyang Yan1,2 , Wenqi Ren1,3 , Yuanfang Guo1 , Rui Wang1 , and Xiaochun Cao1,2,∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, School of Cyber Security
3
Tianjin University, School of Computer Science and Technology

Abstract
Camera motion introduces motion blur, affecting many
computer vision tasks. Dark Channel Prior (DCP) helps the
blind deblurring on scenes including natural, face, text, and
low-illumination images. However, it has limitations and is
less likely to support the kernel estimation while bright pixels dominate the input image. We observe that the bright
pixels in the clear images are not likely to be bright after the
blur process. Based on this observation, we first illustrate
this phenomenon mathematically and define it as the Bright
Channel Prior (BCP). Then, we propose a technique for deblurring such images which elevates the performance of existing motion deblurring algorithms. The proposed method
takes advantage of both Bright and Dark Channel Prior.
This joint prior is named as extreme channels prior and
is crucial for achieving efficient restorations by leveraging
both the bright and dark information. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method is more
robust and performs favorably against the state-of-the-art
image deblurring methods on both synthesized and natural
images.

1. Introduction
Blind image deblurring attracts considerable research attention in computer vision community. With the assumption
that the blur is uniform and spatially invariant, the mathematical formulation of the blurry image can be modeled as,
b = l ⊗ k + n,

same b. Therefore, additional information or constraints are
required to solve this problem.
In general, most existing methods take advantage of the
prior knowledge of the statistics of natural images. Such as
heavy-tailed gradient distributions [5, 13], normalized sparsity prior [12], L0-regularized gradient [25], patch recurrence prior [15], and a combination of the intensity and gradient prior [16]. Recently, Pan et al. [17] present an valid
blind image deblurring method based on the dark channel
prior [6]. This algorithm enforces the sparsity of the dark
channel of latent images for kernel estimation and generates better results compared to other approaches. However,
larger degrees of bright pixels or noise can significantly affect the performances of this algorithm since the dark channel prior do not hold under this circumstances.
In this paper, we propose a blind image deblurring algorithm based on a novel natural image prior named Bright
Channel Prior (BCP). Inspired by the work in [17], we observe that the bright channel pixels (pixels with the largest
channel value within the local patch) are no longer bright
after the blurring process. We prove this empirical observation mathematically and exploit this property to recover
the intermediate image for kernel estimation. Therefore, we
propose to maximize the bright channel of the clear image
by exploiting an L0 -regularization term of inverse BCP. Optimizing the L0 -regularized term is challenging. In the proposed algorithm, we solve the non-convex L0-minimization
problem by employing the half-quadratic splitting method
[24].
The core contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel natural image prior named Extreme Channels Prior (ECP) by taking the advantages
of both DCP and BCP.

(1)

where b, l, k and n are blurry observation, latent image, blur
kernel and noise, respectively. Also, ⊗ denotes the convolution operator. Blind image deblurring aims to recover the
blur kernel k and the corresponding latent image l from a
blurry input image b, which is a highly ill-posed problem,
because many different pairs l and k can give rise to the

• We prove that the values of bright channel pixels decrease after blurring process and validate our theories
by comparing the intensities of bright channel pixels
of 5,000 natural images and the corresponding blurry
ones.
• We exploit the bright channel prior to help kernel esti-

∗ Corresponding author.

14003

