Multi-way Multi-level Kernel Modeling for Neuroimaging Classification
Lifang He1∗, Chun-Ta Lu2 , Hao Ding3 , Shen Wang2 , Linlin Shen1†, Philip S. Yu2,4 , Ann B. Ragin5
1
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
{lifanghescut, haoding.tourist}@gmail.com, llshen@szu.edu.cn
{clu29, swang224, psyu}@uic.edu, ann-ragin@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Owing to prominence as a diagnostic tool for probing the
neural correlates of cognition, neuroimaging tensor data
has been the focus of intense investigation. Although many
supervised tensor learning approaches have been proposed,
they either cannot capture the nonlinear relationships of
tensor data or cannot preserve the complex multi-way structural information. In this paper, we propose a Multi-way
Multi-level Kernel (MMK) model that can extract discriminative, nonlinear and structural preserving representations
of tensor data. Specifically, we introduce a kernelized
CP tensor factorization technique, which is equivalent to
performing the low-rank tensor factorization in a possibly
much higher dimensional space that is implicitly defined by
the kernel function. We further employ a multi-way nonlinear feature mapping to derive the dual structural preserving
kernels, which are used in conjunction with kernel machines
(e.g., SVM). Extensive experiments on real-world neuroimages demonstrate that the proposed MMK method can effectively boost the classification performance on diverse brain
disorders (i.e., Alzheimer’s disease, ADHD, and HIV).

1. Introduction
In many neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders,
brain involvement, including irreversible loss of brain tissue and deterioration in cognitive function [14], has deleterious consequences for judgment and function. For brain
disease diagnosis and detection of early anomalies, recent
years have witnessed an intensive development in noninvasive neuroimaging techniques, e.g., functional Magnetic
∗ This work was done while the first author was at the University of
Illinois at Chicago.
† Corresponding author.

Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and structural Diffusion Tensor
Imaging (DTI). A neruoimaging sample is naturally a thirdorder tensor consisting of 3D voxels, and each voxel contains an intensity value that is proportional to the strength
of the signal emitted by the corresponding location in the
brain volume [4]. Since the 3D images are often specified in
high-dimensional space (exponential to the dimensionality
of each mode in the tensor), traditional vector-based methods prone to overfitting, especially for small sample size
problems [5, 35]. How to extract compact and discriminative representations from the original tensor data has drawn
significant attention in the study of neuroimaging analysis.
In the literature, several supervised tensor learning algorithms have been proposed. Early approaches which
can preserve tensor structures are based upon linear models [8, 9, 12, 37], while the neuroimaging data is usually
not linearly separable. Recently, several tensor-based kernel methods have been developed [25, 28, 29, 36]. Most of
them focus on learning kernel via vector/matrix unfolding
along each mode of the tensor data. However, the multiway structural information such as the spatial arrangement
of voxels will be lost in the unfolding procedures.
In order to capture the underlying patterns in tensor data,
tensor factorization methods have been widely used [4, 17,
19]. However, most of the existing works either focus on
the unsupervised exploratory analysis or to deal with linear
tensor-based models. Recently, [13] employed the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) factorization to foster the use
of kernel methods for supervised tensor learning. Although
the CP factorization provides a good approximation to the
original tensor data, it only concerned with multilinear formulas. Thus, the nonlinear relationships in the tensor object
can hardly be modeled.
In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-way Multi-level
Kernel (MMK) model to learn discriminative, nonlinear and

356

