GMS: Grid-based Motion Statistics for
Fast, Ultra-robust Feature Correspondence
JiaWang Bian*

Wen-Yan Lin*

Yasuyuki Matsushita

Singapore University of Technology and Design

Advanced Digital Sciences Center

Osaka University

Sai-Kit Yeung

Tan-Dat Nguyen

Ming-Ming Cheng

Singapore University of Technology and Design

Institute of Infocomm Research

Nankai University

* denotes joint first author

Abstract
Incorporating smoothness constraints into feature
matching is known to enable ultra-robust matching. However, such formulations are both complex and slow, making
them unsuitable for video applications. This paper proposes
GMS (Grid-based Motion Statistics), a simple means of encapsulating motion smoothness as the statistical likelihood
of a certain number of matches in a region. GMS enables
translation of high match numbers into high match quality. This provides a real-time, ultra-robust correspondence
system. Evaluation on videos, with low textures, blurs and
wide-baselines show GMS consistently out-performs other
real-time matchers and can achieve parity with more sophisticated, much slower techniques.

1. Introduction
Feature matching is the basic input of many computer
vision algorithms. Thus its speed, accuracy and robustness
are of vital importance. Currently, there is a wide performance gap between slow (but robust) feature matchers and
the much faster (but often unstable) real-time solutions.
The central problem lies in the coherence constraints
(neighboring pixels share similar motion) utilized in the
more powerful feature correspondence techniques. Coherence is a powerful constraint but sparse features lack well
defined neighbors. This causes coherence based feature correspondence [16, 42] to be both expensive to compute and
complex to implement. This paper proposes GMS (Gridbased Motion Statistics), a means of encapsulating motion
smoothness as a statistical likelihood of having a certain
number of feature matches between a region pair. We show
GMS can rapidly and reliably differentiate true and false
matches, enabling high quality correspondence in Fig. 1.
Our paper draws inspiration from BF [16]. BF empha-

SIFT

OURS

Figure 1. The highly respected SIFT [22] descriptor has difficulty
on this scene because the dog’s fur movement adds noise to local
descriptors. Although we use weaker ORB descriptors, our GMS
solution can leverage feature numbers to improve quality while
maintaining real-time performance.

sized that the apparent lack of feature matches is not due
to too few correct matches but in the difficulty of reliably
separating the true and false matches. BF demonstrated the
feasibility of achieving such a separation by using a coherence measure computed with a complex minimization. In
practice, BF works very well (albeit slowly). However, it
is primarily motivated by observations and intuitions. The
lack of theoretical clarity makes improvements difficult as
researchers must rely on empirical tests on image data influenced by many fluctuating variables.
We suggest the complex smoothness constraints used
in BF and other similar techniques [30, 19, 42] can be reduced to a simple statement: Motion smoothness induces
correspondence clusters that are highly unlikely to occur at
random. Thus true and false matches can be differentiated

4181

