Deep Co-occurrence Feature Learning for Visual Object Recognition
Ya-Fang Shih∗1,2 , Yang-Ming Yeh∗1,3 , Yen-Yu Lin1 ,
Ming-Fang Weng4 , Yi-Chang Lu3 , and Yung-Yu Chuang2
1

2

Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
Department of Computer Science & Information Engineering, National Taiwan University
3
Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University
4
Smart Network System Institute, Institute for Information Industry

Abstract
This paper addresses three issues in integrating partbased representations into convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) for object recognition. First, most part-based models rely on a few pre-specified object parts. However, the
optimal object parts for recognition often vary from category to category. Second, acquiring training data with
part-level annotation is labor-intensive. Third, modeling
spatial relationships between parts in CNNs often involves
an exhaustive search of part templates over multiple network streams. We tackle the three issues by introducing a
new network layer, called co-occurrence layer. It can extend a convolutional layer to encode the co-occurrence between the visual parts detected by the numerous neurons,
instead of a few pre-specified parts. To this end, the feature
maps serve as both filters and images, and mutual correlation filtering is conducted between them. The co-occurrence
layer is end-to-end trainable. The resultant co-occurrence
features are rotation- and translation-invariant, and are robust to object deformation. By applying this new layer
to the VGG-16 and ResNet-152, we achieve the recognition rates of 83.6% and 85.8% on the Caltech-UCSD bird
benchmark, respectively. The source code is available at
https://github.com/yafangshih/Deep-COOC.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition aims to identify finer-level categories in images, e.g. different bird species [33], dog
breeds [19], and aircraft types [25]. In addition to the difficulties inherent in generic object recognition such as large
intra-class variations and a large number of categories to be
∗ indicates equal contribution.

i
offset(i,j)
j

max

(i,j)

convolutional
layer

feature maps

co-occurrence
vector

Figure 1. The proposed co-occurrence layer. An image passing a
convolutional layer is represented by a set of feature maps. Mutual
convolution is conducted between these feature maps. A vector
recording the co-occurrence of visual parts is generated.

identified, fine-grained recognition is even more challenging due to subtle inter-class differences. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated the effectiveness in
joint visual feature extraction and nonlinear classifier learning. Recent CNN-based approaches to fine-grained recognition, e.g. [23, 29, 40], have been shown to significantly
outperform the conventional approaches [1, 14] that work
with engineered features. Despite the encouraging progress,
fine-grained recognition still remains challenging, and better solutions are in demand.
Part-based models, e.g. [6, 7], recognize objects by considering the appearances of individual object parts as well
as their spatial relationships. They are robust to intraclass variations caused by different poses, object deformations, partial occlusions, and so on. Recent studies [13, 41]
showed that integrating part-based models into convolutional neural networks leads to remarkable performance
gains in both generic and fine-grained object recognition.
Unfortunately, there exist a few issues hindering the advances of part-based models. First, most part-based models rely on a fixed number of pre-specified object parts.
However, the optimal parts for recognition typically vary
from category to category, and are generally unknown in ad14123

