Multi-Scale Continuous CRFs as Sequential Deep Networks
for Monocular Depth Estimation
Dan Xu1 , Elisa Ricci4,5 , Wanli Ouyang2,3 , Xiaogang Wang2 , Nicu Sebe1
1
University of Trento, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
The University of Sydney, 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 5 University of Perugia
{dan.xu, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, eliricci@fbk.eu, {wlouyang, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of depth estimation
from a single still image. Inspired by recent works on multiscale convolutional neural networks (CNN), we propose
a deep model which fuses complementary information derived from multiple CNN side outputs. Different from previous methods, the integration is obtained by means of continuous Conditional Random Fields (CRFs). In particular, we
propose two different variations, one based on a cascade of
multiple CRFs, the other on a unified graphical model. By
designing a novel CNN implementation of mean-field updates for continuous CRFs, we show that both proposed
models can be regarded as sequential deep networks and
that training can be performed end-to-end. Through extensive experimental evaluation we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach and establish new state of
the art results on publicly available datasets.

1. Introduction
While estimating the depth of a scene from a single image is a natural ability for humans, devising computational
models for accurately predicting depth information from
RGB data is a challenging task. Many attempts have been
made to address this problem in the past. In particular, recent works have achieved remarkable performance thanks
to powerful deep learning models [8, 9, 20, 24]. Assuming
the availability of a large training set of RGB-depth pairs,
monocular depth prediction is casted as a pixel-level regression problem and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architectures are typically employed.
In the last few years significant effort have been made
in the research community to improve the performance of
CNN models for pixel-level prediction tasks (e.g. semantic segmentation, contour detection). Previous works have
shown that, for depth estimation as well as for other pixellevel classification/regression problems, more accurate es-









Figure 1. (a) Original RGB image. (b) Ground truth. Depth
map obtained by considering a pre-trained CNN (e.g. VGG
Convolution-Deconvolution [23]) and fusing multi-layer representations (c) with the approach in [33] and (d) with the proposed
multi-scale CRF.

timates can be obtained by combining information from
multiple scales [8, 33, 6]. This can be achieved in different ways, e.g. fusing feature maps corresponding to different network layers or designing an architecture with multiple inputs corresponding to images at different resolutions.
Other works have demonstrated that, by adding a Conditional Random Field (CRF) in cascade to a convolutional
neural architecture, the performance can be greatly enhanced and the CRF can be fully integrated within the deep
model enabling end-to-end training with back-propagation
[36]. However, these works mainly focus on pixel-level
prediction problems in the discrete domain (e.g. semantic
segmentation). While complementary, so far these strategies have been only considered in isolation and no previous
works have exploited multi-scale information within a CRF
inference framework.
In this paper we argue that, benefiting from the flexibility
and the representational power of graphical models, we can
4321
5354

