Riemannian Nonlinear Mixed Effects Models: Analyzing Longitudinal
Deformations in Neuroimaging
Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Nagesh Adluru†
Heemanshu Suri†
§
†
Baba C. Vemuri
Sterling C. Johnson
Vikas Singh†
†
§
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Florida
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/˜hwkim/projects/riem-mem

Abstract
Statistical machine learning models that operate on
manifold-valued data are being extensively studied in vision, motivated by applications in activity recognition, feature tracking and medical imaging. While non-parametric
methods have been relatively well studied in the literature,
efficient formulations for parametric models (which may offer benefits in small sample size regimes) have only emerged
recently. So far, manifold-valued regression models (such as
geodesic regression) are restricted to the analysis of crosssectional data, i.e., the so-called “fixed effects” in statistics.
But in most “longitudinal analysis” (e.g., when a participant provides multiple measurements, over time) the application of fixed effects models is problematic. In an effort to
answer this need, this paper generalizes non-linear mixed
effects model to the regime where the response variable is
manifold-valued, i.e., f : Rd → M. We derive the underlying model and estimation schemes and demonstrate the
immediate benefits such a model can provide — both for
group level and individual level analysis — on longitudinal
brain imaging data. The direct consequence of our results
is that longitudinal analysis of manifold-valued measurements (especially, the symmetric positive definite manifold)
can be conducted in a computationally tractable manner.

1. Introduction
A multitude of applications across computer vision and
statistical machine learning involve operations on objects
that are “structured”; for instance, probability densities,
special classes of matrices/tensors, trees and graphs. It is
generally accepted in the literature that treating these objects in their vectorized forms within off the shelf machine
learning models may, more often than not, lead to unsatisfactory results, since the basic conditions of Euclidean geometry including distances and angles may not be satisfied.
Defining machine learning models on such data requires

care because it involves performing calculations while respecting the constraints inherent to the space where our
samples come from [1]. This is challenging when the geometry of the space is not very well understood.
Fortunately, in certain cases, the canonical representations of the structured objects of interest lead to spaces that
are relatively better characterized. For instance, when the
space is a Riemannian manifold, the differential geometry
provides a suitable Riemannian metric which serves as a
building block for inference models. Within the last ten
or so years, numerous authors have reported how respecting the geometry/structure of the data in tasks as simple as
summarizing the observed variability in the empirical distribution [2] yields good empirical performance. There is
a rapidly increasing body of work showing how manifoldbased formulations yield powerful algorithms for problems
including affine motion tracking [3, 4], human detection [5],
modeling spatial distribution of earthquakes [6], classification tasks [7], robot localization [8], registration [9], and
numerous settings in medical imaging [10, 11, 12].
Symmetric positive definite matrices (SPD) are a good
representative example of structured data that lie on a Riemannian manifold. In computer vision, SPD matrices are
often encountered due to covariance matrices which serve
as feature descriptors in tracking [4] as well as for texture
analysis and classification [5]. Diffusion tensor magnetic
resonance imaging, a type of neuroimaging modality, yields
an SPD matrix at each image voxel as the local diffusion
tensor. But even aside from the SPD manifold, probability
densities, shape spaces, and certain warping functions are
other examples of Riemannian manifolds which commonly
manifest themselves in vision applications [12, 13, 14, 15].
The need for metrics, estimators, hypothesis tests and other
tools for inference tasks has led to much interest in Riemannian analogs of classical vision and machine learning
methods. Consequently, we now have manifold versions of
nearest neighbor queries, dimensionality reduction, dictionary learning, sparse coding, kernel methods, boosting, averaging and regression. These developments were recently
12540

