Budget-Aware Deep Semantic Video Segmentation
Behrooz Mahasseni, Sinisa Todorovic and Alan Fern
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR
behrooz.mahasseni@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we study a poorly understood trade-off between accuracy and runtime costs for deep semantic video
segmentation. While recent work has demonstrated advantages of learning to speed-up deep activity detection, it is
not clear if similar advantages will hold for our very different segmentation loss function, which is defined over individual pixels across the frames. In deep video segmentation, the most time consuming step represents the application of a CNN to every frame for assigning class labels to every pixel, typically taking 6-9 times of the video
footage. This motivates our new budget-aware framework
that learns to optimally select a small subset of frames
for pixelwise labeling by a CNN, and then efficiently interpolates the obtained segmentations to yet unprocessed
frames. This interpolation may use either a simple opticalflow guided mapping of pixel labels, or another significantly less complex and thus faster CNN. We formalize the
frame selection as a Markov Decision Process, and specify a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to model a
policy for selecting the frames. For training the LSTM, we
develop a policy-gradient reinforcement-learning approach
for approximating the gradient of our non-decomposable
and non-differentiable objective. Evaluation on two benchmark video datasets show that our new framework is able to
significantly reduce computation time, and maintain competitive video segmentation accuracy under varying budgets.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of semantic video segmentation, where the goal is to assign a correct class label
to every pixel in a video. Recently deep networks have
achieved state-of-the-art results for semantic video segmentation [32, 35, 23, 48, 10], where typically a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) is applied to directly label each
pixel of each frame. In this way, they significantly improve on the the processing time of more traditional ap-

{sinisa,alan.fern}@oregonstate.edu

proaches (e.g., energy minimization), as the latter requires
time for graphical-model inference and pre-processing time
for feature extraction. However, despite the feed-forward
architecture of CNNs, and their parallelizable computation
on GPUs, runtimes are still far from real time. For example, it takes 6-9 times the video length to execute the approach of [2] on benchmark datasets. Unfortunately, this
rules out the practical use of these approaches for applications with tighter runtime constraints. In some situations
hardware solutions can help meet the constraints. However,
it is equally important to develop a better understanding of
how to achieve maximal accuracy given constraints on the
compute time and resources.
In this paper, we address the above problem by introducing a framework for budget-aware deep semantic video
segmentation. Our approach is applicable to any available
semantic segmentation network, which is treated as a black
box. Given a semantic segmentation network and a time
budget, our approach attempts to maximize accuracy within
the budget. The main idea is based on the observation that
videos typically show smooth motions, and hence pixel labels of a frame can be efficiently and accurately interpolated from neighboring segmentations. This motivates intelligently selecting frames to be processed by a deep segmentation network and then using fast interpolation networks to
assign pixel values to unselected frames. When the interpolation network is significantly faster than the segmentation
network there can be significant computational savings.
The problem of budget aware inference is receiving increasing attention as state-of-the-art accuracies approach
the needs of many applications. Recently, this problem
has been studied for activity detection in video [47], where
the goal is to efficiently identify activities using deep networks while avoiding the need to process all video frames.
In that work, a recurrent “attention model” was learned
which aimed to select a small subset of the video frames for
processing, while maintaining high accuracy. The results
showed that high accuracies could be maintained while only
processing approximately 2% of the video frames. While
this result suggest that intelligent frame selection is a viable

1029

