On the Global Geometry of Sphere-Constrained Sparse Blind Deconvolution
Yuqian Zhang† , Yenson Lau† , Han-wen Kuo† , Sky Cheung♦ , Abhay Pasupathy♦ , John Wright†∗
† Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, USA
♦ Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, USA
{yz2409, yl3027, hk2673, scc2134, apn2108, jw2966}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Blind deconvolution is the problem of recovering a convolutional kernel a0 and an activation signal x0 from their
convolution y = a0 ⊛ x0 . This problem is ill-posed without further constraints or priors. This paper studies the
situation where the nonzero entries in the activation signal are sparsely and randomly populated. We normalize
the convolution kernel to have unit Frobenius norm and
cast the sparse blind deconvolution problem as a nonconvex
optimization problem over the sphere. With this spherical
constraint, every spurious local minimum turns out to be
close to some signed shift truncation of the ground truth,
under certain hypotheses. This benign property motivates
an effective two stage algorithm that recovers the ground
truth from the partial information offered by a suboptimal
local minimum. This geometry-inspired algorithm recovers
the ground truth for certain microscopy problems, also exhibits promising performance in the more challenging image
deblurring problem. Our insights into the global geometry
and the two stage algorithm extend to the convolutional dictionary learning problem, where a superposition of multiple
convolution signals is observed.

1. Introduction
Blind deconvolution aims to recover two unknown signals: a kernel a0 and some underlying signal x0 from their
convolution y = a0 ⊛ x0 . Blind deconvolution is ill-posed
in general: there are infinitely many pairs of signals rendering the same convolution. To render the problem well-posed,
one may exploit prior knowledge about the structure of a0
and x0 . For example, the underlying signal x0 is sparse in
many realistic applications:
Microscopy data analysis: In the crystal lattice of
nanoscale materials, there exist randomly and sparsely distributed “defects”, whose locations and signatures encode
∗ The authors gratefully acknowledge support from NSF 1343282, NSF
CCF 1527809, and NSF IIS 1546411

crucial information about the electronic structure of the material. Accurate recovery of such information can facilitate
investigation of the detailed structure of materials [4].
Neural spike sorting: Neurons communicate by firing
brief voltage spikes, whose characteristics reflect important
features of the neuron. These spikes occur randomly and
sparsely in time. Neurophysiologists are interested in assigning stereotyped spikes to putative cells, as well as in
knowing their respective spike times [7, 14].
Image deblurring: Motion blur can be modeled as the
convolution of a latent sharp image and a kernel capturing
the motion of the camera, usually assumed to be invariant
across the image [8]. The inverse process of recovering the
original sharp image from a blurry image has been widely
studied [6, 12]. Many well-performing approaches leverage the observation that sharp natural images typically have
(approximately) sparse gradients [3, 13, 18].
All of these applications lead to instances of the sparse
blind deconvolution (SBD) problem. The dominant algorithmic approach to SBD involves nonconvex optimization1 .
Nonconvex formulations for deconvolution can be derived
via several probabilistic formalisms (ML/MAP, VB, ect.),
or simply from heuristics. For example, in image deblurring, the kernel a can be modeled as residing on a simplex
[9, 11, 13, 16]. This is natural from a modeling prospective2 ,
but problematic for optimization: natural formulations of
deconvolution over the simplex admit trivial global minimizers (corresponding to spiky convolutional kernels a = δ)
[2, 18], which provide no information about the ground truth.
Practical remedies for this problem include exploiting additional data priors [9, 16, 24] or careful initialization via edge
restoration or multi-scale refinement [11, 25], to avoid the
trivial spiky global minima.
In contrast, motivated by a careful comparison of MAP
1 In signal processing, a number of elegant convex relaxations of the
problem have been developed [1, 5, 15]. However, these approaches typically require stronger prior information (subspace constraint rather than
sparsity) or exhibit suboptimal scalings.
2 Since entries of a roughly represent the fraction of the camera exposure
time at a given location.

14894

