Cognitive Mapping and Planning for Visual Navigation
Saurabh Gupta1,2 James Davidson2 Sergey Levine1,2 Rahul Sukthankar2 Jitendra Malik1,2
1
UC Berkeley 2 Google
Multiscale belief
about the world in
egocentric
coordinate frame

1

{sgupta, svlevine, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu, 2 {jcdavidson, sukthankar}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a neural architecture for navigation in novel
environments. Our proposed architecture learns to map
from first-person views and plans a sequence of actions
towards goals in the environment. The Cognitive Mapper
and Planner (CMP) is based on two key ideas: a) a unified
joint architecture for mapping and planning, such that the
mapping is driven by the needs of the planner, and b) a
spatial memory with the ability to plan given an incomplete
set of observations about the world. CMP constructs a topdown belief map of the world and applies a differentiable
neural net planner to produce the next action at each time
step. The accumulated belief of the world enables the agent
to track visited regions of the environment. Our experiments
demonstrate that CMP outperforms both reactive strategies
and standard memory-based architectures and performs
well in novel environments. Furthermore, we show that
CMP can also achieve semantically specified goals, such
as “go to a chair”.

1. Introduction
As humans, when we navigate through novel environments, we draw on our previous experience in similar conditions. We reason about free-space, obstacles and the topology of the environment, guided by common sense rules and
heuristics for navigation. For example, to go from one room
to another, I must first exit the initial room; to go to a room
at the other end of the building, getting into a hallway is
more likely to succeed than entering a conference room; a
kitchen is more likely to be situated in open areas of the
building than in the middle of cubicles. The goal of this paper is to design a learning framework for acquiring such expertise, and demonstrate this for the problem of robot navigation in novel environments.
However, classic approaches to navigation rarely make
use of such common sense patterns. Classical SLAM based
Work done when S. Gupta was an intern at Google.
Project website with videos, appendix: https://sites.google.com/view/
cognitive-mapping-and-planning/.

Goal
Multiscale belief of the
world in egocentric
coordinate frame

90o
Egomotion

Differentiable
Mapper

Differentiable
Hierarchical
Planner

90o

Action

Update multiscale belief
of the world in egocentric
coordinate frame

90o
Egomotion

Differentiable
Mapper

Differentiable
Hierarchical
Planner

90o

Action

Figure 1: Overall network architecture: Our learned navigation network
consists of mapping and planning modules. The mapper writes into a latent
spatial memory that corresponds to an egocentric map of the environment,
while the planner uses this memory alongside the goal to output navigational actions. The map is not supervised explicitly, but rather emerges
naturally from the learning process.

approaches [14, 57] first build a 3D map using LIDAR,
depth, or structure from motion, and then plan paths in
this map. These maps are built purely geometrically, and
nothing is known until it has been explicitly observed, even
when there are obvious patterns. This becomes a problem
for goal directed navigation. Humans can often guess, for
example, where they will find a chair or that a hallway will
probably lead to another hallway but a classical robot agent
can at best only do uninformed exploration. The separation
between mapping and planning also makes the overall system unnecessarily fragile. For example, the mapper might
fail on texture-less regions in a corridor, leading to failure
of the whole system, but precise geometry may not even be
necessary if the robot just has to keep traveling straight.
Inspired by this reasoning, recently there has been an
increasing interest in more end-to-end learning-based approaches that go directly from pixels to actions [45, 48, 64]
without going through explicit model or state estimation
steps. These methods thus enjoy the power of being able
to learn behaviors from experience. However, it is necessary to carefully design architectures that can capture the
structure of the task at hand. For instance Zhu et al. [64]
use reactive memory-less vanilla feed forward architectures

2616

