AdaScan: Adaptive Scan Pooling in Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
for Human Action Recognition in Videos
Amlan Kar1,∗

Nishant Rai1,∗
Karan Sikka2
Gaurav Sharma1
1
2
IIT Kanpur†
SRI International & UCSD‡

Abstract
We propose a novel method for temporally pooling
frames in a video for the task of human action recognition. The method is motivated by the observation that there
are only a small number of frames which, together, contain sufficient information to discriminate an action class
present in a video, from the rest. The proposed method
learns to pool such discriminative and informative frames,
while discarding a majority of the non-informative frames
in a single temporal scan of the video. Our algorithm does
so by continuously predicting the discriminative importance
of each video frame and subsequently pooling them in a
deep learning framework. We show the effectiveness of our
proposed pooling method on standard benchmarks where
it consistently improves on baseline pooling methods, with
both RGB and optical flow based Convolutional networks.
Further, in combination with complementary video representations, we show results that are competitive with respect
to the state-of-the-art results on two challenging and publicly available benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Rapid increase in the number of digital cameras, notably
in cellphones, and cheap internet with high data speeds, has
resulted in a massive increase in the number of videos uploaded onto the internet [3]. Most of such videos, e.g. on
social networking websites, have humans as their central
subjects. Automatically predicting the semantic content of
videos, e.g. the action the human is performing, thus, becomes highly relevant for searching and indexing in this fast
growing database. In order to perform action recognition in
such videos, algorithms are required that are both easy and
fast to train and, at the same time, are robust to noise, given
the real world nature of such videos.
A popular framework for performing human action
recognition in videos is using a temporal pooling opera∗ Amlan Kar and Nishant Rai contributed equally to this work.
† {amlan,

Hammer throw (internet)

0.01

0.98

0.97
24

8

0.99

0.98
68

0.99
36

0.02
84

52

0.01
92

100

Figure 1: (Top) Illustration of proposed AdaScan . It
first extracts deep features for each frame in a video and
then passes them to the proposed Adaptive Pooling module, which recursively pools them while taking into account
their discriminative importances—which are predicted inside the network. The final pooled vector is then used
for classification. (Bottom) Predicted discriminative importance for a video that was downloaded from the internet1 and
ran through AdaScan trained on UCF101. The numbers
and bars on the bottom indicate the predicted importance
∈ [0, 1] and the timeline gives the relative frame position in
percentile (see Section 4.4).
tion to ‘squash’ the information from different frames in
a video into a summary vector.
Mean and max pooling, i.e. taking the average or the coordinatewise max of
the (features of the) frames, are popular choices, both
with classic ‘shallow’ as well as recent ‘deep’ methods

nishantr, grv}@cse.iitk.ac.in

‡ Karan Sikka is with SRI International, part of the work was done when

he was with UCSD. karan.sikka@sri.com

1 Video downloaded from https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=KnHUAc20WEU and cropped from 3–18 seconds

13376

