Flexible Spatio-Temporal Networks for Video Prediction
Chaochao Lu 1,2
Michael Hirsch 2
Bernhard Schölkopf 2
1
2
University of Cambridge
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
{clu, mhirsch, bs}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
We describe a modular framework for video frame prediction. We refer to it as a Flexible Spatio-Temporal Network (FSTN) as it allows the extrapolation of a video sequence as well as the estimation of synthetic frames lying in between observed frames and thus the generation
of slow-motion videos. By devising a customized objective function comprising decoding, encoding, and adversarial losses, we are able to mitigate the common problem of
blurry predictions, managing to retain high frequency information even for relatively distant future predictions. We
propose and analyse different training strategies to optimize
our model. Extensive experiments on several challenging
public datasets demonstrate both the versatility and validity of our model.

1. Introduction
Videos contain rich spatial and temporal structure and
capture non-trivial dependencies between objects and contextual information along with scene characteristics like
depth, occlusion, and illumination. Accurate modelling
of videos ultimately requires high-level understanding of
3D spatio-temporal information, which resembles humans’
ability to understand their surrounding physical world. One
fundamental problem in video modelling is to predict future
frames involving the construction of an internal representation that models, to some degree, both video content and
dynamics. Even for short-term future frames, video prediction has remained a challenging problem until now, owing to the complexity and ambiguity inherent in video data.
Video prediction is thus still in its infancy, in particular the
long-term prediction of video sequences.
There are a number of recent works that predict unseen
future video frames [20, 19, 25, 16]. Predicting future images from a video sequence requires the learning of an internal representation that captures spatio-temporal correlations
and models the image evolution accurately. This might include information about how objects move, deform or behave, about occlusion and object boundaries, scene depth

and so on. Video prediction is a promising research direction that will spawn a wealth of stimulating applications
[1, 14, 17, 13, 30, 29, 27, 5, 7, 28, 10, 23, 18].
Key to the success of previous methods is the use of
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) autoencoder networks
which are able to capture spatio-temporal long-range dependencies. Although these works have shown encouraging
results for short-time prediction, a common shortcoming is
the increasing amount of blur for predictions more than a
single frame ahead.
In the present work we propose a new computational
model for video prediction that does not suffer from this
nuisance. It also allows for the prediction of an entire image sequence rather than just a single frame ahead. Furthermore, it is not only able to extrapolate in time but is
equally suited for temporal interpolation between subsequent frames. Our network can be trained end-to-end on
full frame images. Once trained, it is able to make predictions in almost real-time.
In particular, we describe two new network modules, for
extrapolation and interpolation, each of which predicts a
single video frame. These modules can be concatenated to
enable the prediction of an entire video sequence with arbitrary many frames. Since each module is fully differentiable
they allow for end-to-end training even when combined. Inspired by recent work of Pătrăucean et al. [19], each of
the modules comprises a spatio-temporal video autoencoder
consisting of a convolutional image encoder-decoder with a
nested memory module composed of convolutional LSTM
(ConvLSTM) cells. The ConvLSTM features a modified
Spatial Transformer Network (STN) layer [9] to capture
temporal changes and motion across time by optical flow
estimation and prediction.
Our approach also integrates a recently proposed type
of loss functions named deep perceptual similarity metric
(DeePSiM) [4] that has been shown to better reflect the
perceptual similarity of images. It measures distances between image features extracted by deep neural networks and
employs the adversarial network of Goodfellow et al. [6].
In our context, the extrapolation and interpolation modules
take the role of the generative network, while a discrimina16523

