Contour-Constrained Superpixels for Image and Video Processing
Se-Ho Lee
Korea University

Won-Dong Jang
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

seholee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

wdjang@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel contour-constrained superpixel (CCS) algorithm
is proposed in this work. We initialize superpixels and regions in a regular grid and then refine the superpixel label of each region hierarchically from block to pixel levels.
To make superpixel boundaries compatible with object contours, we propose the notion of contour pattern matching
and formulate an objective function including the contour
constraint. Furthermore, we extend the CCS algorithm to
generate temporal superpixels for video processing. We initialize superpixel labels in each frame by transferring those
in the previous frame and refine the labels to make superpixels temporally consistent as well as compatible with object contours. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm provides better performance than the
state-of-the-art superpixel methods.

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation is a preprocessing task to partition an input image into smaller meaningful regions. In
comparison with the pixel representation of an image, the
superpixel representation can reduce the number of image primitives or units greatly. Recently, superpixel methods have been widely used in many computer vision algorithms, including image segmentation [15], video object
segmentation [9], semantic segmentation [12], saliency detection [21], and stereo matching [31].
Many superpixel methods have been proposed [1, 8, 10,
11, 13, 16, 18, 24, 34, 35], which achieve superpixel partitioning by optimizing objective functions in general. Since
each superpixel is employed as a minimal unit in applications, it should belong to a single object without overlapping with multiple objects. In other words, superpixels
should adhere to image contours. Thus, a few superpixel
methods [8, 18, 35] use contour information in their objective functions. On the other hand, several advanced contour
detection techniques, based on deep learning, have been
proposed recently [28,33], which can detect object contours
faithfully with relatively low complexity. In this work, we

attempt to exploit learning-based contour information explicitly to achieve accurate superpixel segmentation.
Also, temporal superpixel (or supervoxel) methods for
video processing have been proposed [1, 5, 20, 25]. If a
superpixel method is applied to each frame in a video sequence independently, it will lead to flickering artifacts.
Therefore, a temporal superpixel method should consider
temporal correlation to label the same regions consistently
in consecutive frames while making superpixel boundaries
compatible with object contours.
We propose a novel superpixel algorithm, referred to as
contour-constrained superpixel (CCS). We initialize superpixels and regions in a regular grid and then refine the superpixel label of each region hierarchically from block to
pixel levels. At each level, we use a cost function to explicitly enforce the contour constraint that two neighboring regions should belong to different superpixels if there
is an object contour between them. To this end, we propose the notion of contour pattern matching. Moreover,
we extend the proposed CCS algorithm to generate temporal superpixels. We initialize superpixel labels in each
frame by transferring those in the previous frame using optical flows. Then, we perform the temporal superpixel labeling to make superpixels temporally consistent, as well
as compatible with object contours. Experimental results
show that the proposed algorithm outperforms the conventional superpixel [1,8,10,11,13,16,24,34] and temporal superpixel [1, 5, 20, 30] methods and can be applied to object
segmentation [9] and saliency detection [14, 32] effectively.
To summarize, this paper has three main contributions.
∙ Introduction of the contour constraint to compel superpixel boundaries to be compatible with object contours, by adopting the contour pattern matching.
∙ Extension of the proposed CCS algorithm for video
processing, which yields temporally consistent and
spatially accurate superpixels.
∙ Remarkable performance achievement on superpixel
and temporal superpixel datasets and improvement of
many computer vision algorithms by applying the proposed CCS.

2443

