Semantic Amodal Segmentation
Yan Zhu1,2 , Yuandong Tian1 , Dimitris Metaxas2 , and Piotr Dollár1
1

2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University

Abstract
Common visual recognition tasks such as classification,
object detection, and semantic segmentation are rapidly
reaching maturity, and given the recent rate of progress, it is
not unreasonable to conjecture that techniques for many of
these problems will approach human levels of performance
in the next few years. In this paper we look to the future:
what is the next frontier in visual recognition?
We offer one possible answer to this question. We propose a detailed image annotation that captures information
beyond the visible pixels and requires complex reasoning
about full scene structure. Specifically, we create an amodal
segmentation of each image: the full extent of each region is
marked, not just the visible pixels. Annotators outline and
name all salient regions in the image and specify a partial
depth order. The result is a rich scene structure, including
visible and occluded portions of each region, figure-ground
edge information, semantic labels, and object overlap.
We create two datasets for semantic amodal segmentation. First, we label 500 images in the BSDS dataset with
multiple annotators per image, allowing us to study the
statistics of human annotations. We show that the proposed
full scene annotation is surprisingly consistent between annotators, including for regions and edges. Second, we annotate 5000 images from COCO. This larger dataset allows
us to explore a number of algorithmic ideas for amodal segmentation and depth ordering. We introduce novel metrics
for these tasks, and along with our strong baselines, define
concrete new challenges for the community.

1. Introduction
In recent years, visual recognition tasks such as image
classification [22, 16], object detection [10, 35, 13, 33],
edge detection [2, 8, 44], and semantic segmentation [36,
30, 26] have witnessed dramatic progress. This has been
driven by the availability of large scale image datasets [9, 5,
24] coupled with a renaissance in deep learning techniques
with massive model capacity [22, 39, 40, 16]. Given the
pace of recent advances, one may conjecture that techniques

fox, D=1

fox, D=2

fox, D=3

tree, D=4

Figure 1: Example of Semantic Amodal Segmentation. Given
an image (top-left), annotators segment each region (top-right)
and specify a partial depth order (middle-left). From this, visible edges can be obtained (middle-right) along with figure-ground
assignment for each edge (not shown). All regions are annotated
amodally: the full extent of each region is marked, not just the
visible pixels. Four annotated regions along with their semantic
label and depth order are shown (bottom); note that both visible
and occluded portions of each region are annotated.
for many of these tasks will rapidly approach human levels
of performance. Indeed, preliminary evidence exists this is
already the case for ImageNet classification [20].
In this work we ask: what are the next set of challenges
in visual recognition? What capabilities do we expect future
visual recognition systems to possess?
We take our inspiration from the study of the human visual system. A remarkable property of human perception is
the ease with which our visual system interpolates information not directly visible in an image [29]. A particularly
prominent example of this, and one on which we focus,
is amodal perception: the phenomenon of perceiving the
11464

