A Matrix Splitting Method for Composite Function Minimization
Ganzhao Yuan1,2 , Wei-Shi Zheng2,3 , Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education, China
2

yuanganzhao@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Composite function minimization captures a wide spectrum of applications in both computer vision and machine learning. It includes bound constrained optimization and cardinality regularized optimization as special cases. This paper proposes and analyzes a new Matrix Splitting Method (MSM) for minimizing composite functions. It
can be viewed as a generalization of the classical GaussSeidel method and the Successive Over-Relaxation method
for solving linear systems in the literature. Incorporating
a new Gaussian elimination procedure, the matrix splitting
method achieves state-of-the-art performance. For convex
problems, we establish the global convergence, convergence
rate, and iteration complexity of MSM, while for non-convex
problems, we prove its global convergence. Finally, we validate the performance of our matrix splitting method on two
particular applications: nonnegative matrix factorization
and cardinality regularized sparse coding. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms existing composite function minimization techniques in term of both efficiency and efficacy.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on the following composite function minimization problem:
min f (x) , q(x) + h(x); q(x) = 12 xT Ax + xT b
x

(1)

where x ∈ Rn , b ∈ Rn , A ∈ Rn×n is a positive semidefinite matrix,
Pn h(x) is a piecewise separable function (i.e.
h(x) = i=1 h(xi )) but not necessarily convex. Typical
examples of h(x) include the bound constrained function
and the ℓ0 and ℓ1 norm functions.
The optimization in (1) is flexible enough to model a
variety of applications of interest in both computer vision
and machine learning, including compressive sensing [7],
nonnegative matrix factorization [16, 18, 9], sparse coding

[17, 1, 2, 29], support vector machine [11], logistic regression [38], subspace clustering [8], to name a few. Although
we only focus on the quadratic function q(·), our method
can be extended to handle general composite functions as
well, by considering a typical Newton approximation of the
objective [35, 40].
The most popular method for solving (1) is perhaps the
proximal gradient method [25, 3]. It considers a fixedpoint proximal iterative procedure xk+1 = proxγh (xk −
γ▽q(xk )) based on the current gradient ▽q(xk ). Here the
proximal operator proxh̃ (a) = arg minx 12 kx−ak22 + h̃(x)
can often be evaluated analytically, γ = 1/L is the step
size with L being the local (or global) Lipschitz constant. It is guaranteed to decrease the objective at a rate of
O(L/k), where k is the iteration number. The accelerated proximal gradient method can further boost the rate to
O(L/k 2 ). Tighter estimates of the local Lipschitz constant
leads to better convergence rate, but it scarifies additional
computation overhead to compute L. Our method is also a
fixed-point iterative method, but it does not rely on a sparse
eigenvalue solver or line search backtracking to compute
such a Lipschitz constant, and it can exploit the specified
structure of the quadratic Hessian matrix A.
The proposed method is essentially a generalization of
the classical Gauss-Seidel (GS) method and Successive
Over-Relaxation (SOR) method [6, 31]. In numerical linear algebra, the Gauss-Seidel method, also known as the
successive displacement method, is a fast iterative method
for solving a linear system of equations. It works by solving a sequence of triangular matrix equations. The method
of SOR is a variant of the GS method and it often leads to
faster convergence. Similar iterative methods for solving
linear systems include the Jacobi method and symmetric
SOR. Our proposed method can solve versatile composite
function minimization problems, while inheriting the efficiency of modern linear algebra techniques.
Our method is closely related to coordinate gradient descent and its variants such as randomized coordinate descent [11, 28], cyclic coordinate descent [32], block coor-

4875

