Mining Object Parts from CNNs via Active Question-Answering
Quanshi Zhang, Ruiming Cao, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [17, 16] have
been trained to achieve near human-level performance on
object detection. However, CNN methods still face two issues in real-world applications. First, many visual tasks require detailed interpretations of object structures for hierarchical understanding of objects (e.g. part localization and
parsing). This is beyond the detection of object bounding
boxes. Second, weakly-supervised learning is also a difficult problem for CNNs. Unlike data-rich applications (e.g.
pedestrian/vehicle detection), many tasks require modeling
certain object parts on the fly. For example, people may
hope to use only a few examples to quickly teach a robot
how to grasp a certain type of object parts for an occasional
task.

...

Given a convolutional neural network (CNN) that is pretrained for object classification, this paper proposes to use
active question-answering to semanticize neural patterns in
conv-layers of the CNN and mine part concepts. For each
part concept, we mine neural patterns in the pre-trained
CNN, which are related to the target part, and use these
patterns to construct an And-Or graph (AOG) to represent a four-layer semantic hierarchy of the part. As an interpretable model, the AOG associates different CNN units
with different explicit object parts. We use an active humancomputer communication to incrementally grow such an
AOG on the pre-trained CNN as follows. We allow the
computer to actively identify objects, whose neural patterns
cannot be explained by the current AOG. Then, the computer asks human about the unexplained objects, and uses
the answers to automatically discover certain CNN patterns
corresponding to the missing knowledge. We incrementally
grow the AOG to encode new knowledge discovered during
the active-learning process. In experiments, our method exhibits high learning efficiency. Our method uses about 1/6–
1/3 of the part annotations for training, but achieves similar or better part-localization performance than fast-RCNN
methods.

Add a new
sub-AOG

Pre-trained CNN
Actively ask users
to label the part

Model
fitness

unknown known known
Figure 1. Semanticizing knowledge in a pre-trained CNN via active question-answering (QA). We mine latent patterns from the
CNN to explain certain object parts, and organize such patterns into a semantic hierarchy. Our method automatically identifies
objects whose parts cannot be explained by part templates in the
current AOG, asks about the objects, and uses the answers to mine
patterns from these objects. The mined patterns represent new part
templates, and are organized as new branches in the AOG.

In this study, we propose a new strategy to model a certain object part using a few part annotations, i.e. using an
active question-answering (QA) process to mine latent patterns that are related to the part from a pre-trained CNN.
We use an And-Or graph (AOG) as an interpretable model
to associate these patterns with the target part.
We develop our method based on the following three
ideas: 1) When a CNN is pre-trained using objects of a category with object-box annotations, most appearance knowledge of the target category may have been encoded in convlayers of the CNN. 2) Our task is to mine latent patterns
from complex neural activations in the conv-layers. Each
pattern individually acts as a detector of a certain region of
an object. We use the mined regional patterns to construct
an AOG to represent the target part. 3) Because the AOG
represents the part’s neural patterns with clear semantic hierarchy, we can start an active QA to incrementally grow
new AOG branches to encode new part templates, so as to
enrich the knowledge in the AOG.
More specifically, during the active QA, the computer
discovers objects whose neural activations cannot be explained by the current AOG and asks human users for su1346

