Automatic Discovery, Association Estimation and Learning of
Semantic Attributes for a Thousand Categories
Ziad Al-Halah
Rainer Stiefelhagen
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
{ziad.al-halah, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu

Abstract
Attribute-based recognition models, due to their impressive performance and their ability to generalize well on novel
categories, have been widely adopted for many computer
vision applications. However, usually both the attribute
vocabulary and the class-attribute associations have to be
provided manually by domain experts or large number of
annotators. This is very costly and not necessarily optimal
regarding recognition performance, and most importantly,
it limits the applicability of attribute-based models to large
scale data sets. To tackle this problem, we propose an endto-end unsupervised attribute learning approach. We utilize
online text corpora to automatically discover a salient and
discriminative vocabulary that correlates well with the human concept of semantic attributes. Moreover, we propose a
deep convolutional model to optimize class-attribute associations with a linguistic prior that accounts for noise and
missing data in text. In a thorough evaluation on ImageNet,
we demonstrate that our model is able to efficiently discover
and learn semantic attributes at a large scale. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that our model outperforms the state-ofthe-art in zero-shot learning on three data sets: ImageNet,
Animals with Attributes and aPascal/aYahoo. Finally, we
enable attribute-based learning on ImageNet and will share
the attributes and associations for future research.

1. Introduction
Semantic attributes, being both machine detectable and
human understandable, lend themselves to various applications in vision and language domain [40]. By creating an
intermediate layer of semantics that cross the boundaries of
object categories, they also show impressive performance
in transfer learning [25] and domain adaptation [12]. However, attribute annotations for object categories are usually
obtained manually by tens of annotators [16, 26] or domain
experts [47]. Moreover, the attribute vocabulary itself requires careful engineering. It should be shared across the categories but at the same time be discriminative, interpretable
and visually detectable.

Shape
Family
Habitat

Figure 1: An encyclopedia article describing an object category.
Many discriminative attributes regarding shape, family and habitat
of the object can be identified already in the first few lines of the
article. We propose a model that utilizes such a knowledge source
to automatically discover and learn visual semantic attributes at a
large scale.

This is clearly a major obstacle for attribute-based approaches to scale to large number of classes. The cost associated in providing such annotations is prohibitive which
limits the available attribute data sets either in the number of
classes, attributes or images. Additionally, this non-trivial
and expensive work is needed again when moving across
data sets or expanding the current set with new categories.
We aim in this work to circumvent this need for human
intervention. Our goal is to automatically mine attributes
vocabulary and find their associations to objects in a large
scale setting. We achieve this by utilizing the large text
corpora available in the web. Online encyclopedias represent
a rich source of information which encode the collective
human knowledge over various concepts and categories. It
is an active and comprehensive knowledge source that keeps
growing at impressive rates [1]. Fig. 1 shows a snippet
of an article describing the animal category Wombat. One
can easily observe that numerous distinctive attributes for
this category about its shape, taxonomy and habitat already
appear in the introduction of the article.
Recently, This valuable and massive source of knowledge
attracted a lot of interest in the vision community. One can
identify two main perspectives in that direction. The first,
1614

