Enhancing Video Summarization via Vision-Language Embedding
Bryan A. Plummer‡∗
Matthew Brown†
‡
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
{bplumme2,slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses video summarization, or the problem of distilling a raw video into a shorter form while still
capturing the original story. We show that visual representations supervised by freeform language make a good
fit for this application by extending a recent submodular
summarization approach [9] with representativeness and
interestingness objectives computed on features from a joint
vision-language embedding space. We perform an evaluation on two diverse datasets, UT Egocentric [18] and
TV Episodes [45], and show that our new objectives give
improved summarization ability compared to standard visual features alone. Our experiments also show that the
vision-language embedding need not be trained on domainspecific data, but can be learned from standard still image
vision-language datasets and transferred to video. A further
benefit of our model is the ability to guide a summary using
freeform text input at test time, allowing user customization.

1. Introduction
People today are producing and uploading video content at ever increasing rates. To appeal to potential viewers, videos should be well edited, containing only significant highlights while still conveying the overall story. This
is especially important for video from wearable cameras,
which can consist of hours of monotonous raw footage. Automatic video summarization techniques [36] can facilitate
more rapid video search [40, 42] and ease the burden of editing a long video by hand [35]. Consequently, many methods for computing video summaries have been proposed by
researchers [1, 5, 6, 8, 15, 20, 25, 30, 42, 48, 47].
Summarizing video typically involves a tradeoff between
including segments that are interesting in their own right
and those that are representative for the story as a whole.
Some events may be interesting in isolation, but if they
are repeated too frequently the summary may become re∗ Major part of work done while an intern at Google

Svetlana Lazebnik‡
†
Google Research
mtbr@google.com

dundant or unrepresentative. Gygli et al. [9], whose work
we build upon, proposed an optimization approach for balancing the criteria of interestingness and representativeness.
Prior work has defined these criteria in abstract mathematical terms (e.g., using notions of sparsity, graph connectedness, or statistical significance) [2, 17, 49] or tried to learn
them using implicit or explicit supervision [30, 35, 43, 47].
Generally, it is agreed that bringing in explicit semantic
understanding, or the ability to associate video shots with
high-level categories or concepts, is helpful for enabling
meaningful summaries. A number of approaches have focused on learning limited vocabularies of concepts (often in
a weakly supervised manner) from large databases of images and/or video collected from the web [1, 14, 15, 41].
When rich supervision in the form of freeform language
(titles, on-screen text, or closed captioning) is available,
it becomes possible to use more sophisticated joint visionlanguage models to capture a wider range of concepts and to
extract a more meaningful video summary [33]. Joint modeling of visual content and text is becoming increasingly
common for video summarization and retrieval, typically to
help identify whether a given shot is relevant to the overall
story of a video or a particular user query [23, 32, 34, 42].
Recently, we have seen a proliferation of powerful
vision-language models based on state-of-the-art feedforward and recurrent neural networks. Such models have been
used for cross-modal retrieval [16, 19, 26, 29, 27, 37, 39],
image caption generation [12, 13, 27, 38, 44], and visual
storytelling [11, 50]. Motivated by these successful applications, we experiment with a joint image-text embedding
as a representation for video summarization. Such an embedding is given by functions trained to project image and
text features, which may initially have different dimensionalities, into a common latent space in which proximity between samples reflects their semantic similarity. We use the
two-branch neural network of Wang et al. [39] to learn a
nonlinear embedding using paired images and text (or video
and specially produced annotations). Then, at test time, we
use the embedding to compute the similarity between two
video segments without requiring any language inputs. As
we can see from Figure 1, even an embedding trained on

5781

