Identifying First-person Camera Wearers in Third-person Videos
Chenyou Fan1 , Jangwon Lee1 , Mingze Xu1 , Krishna Kumar Singh2 , Yong Jae Lee2 ,
David J. Crandall1 and Michael S. Ryoo1
1
Indiana University Bloomington
2
University of California, Davis
{fan6,mryoo}@indiana.edu

Abstract
We consider scenarios in which we wish to perform joint
scene understanding, object tracking, activity recognition,
and other tasks in environments in which multiple people
are wearing body-worn cameras while a third-person static
camera also captures the scene. To do this, we need to establish person-level correspondences across first- and thirdperson videos, which is challenging because the camera
wearer is not visible from his/her own egocentric video,
preventing the use of direct feature matching. In this paper, we propose a new semi-Siamese Convolutional Neural Network architecture to address this novel challenge.
We formulate the problem as learning a joint embedding
space for first- and third-person videos that considers both
spatial- and motion-domain cues. A new triplet loss function is designed to minimize the distance between correct
first- and third-person matches while maximizing the distance between incorrect ones. This end-to-end approach
performs significantly better than several baselines, in part
by learning the first- and third-person features optimized for
matching jointly with the distance measure itself.

1. Introduction
Wearable cameras are becoming mainstream: GoPro
and other first-person cameras are used by consumers to
record extreme sports and other activities, for example,
while body-worn cameras are now standard equipment for
many police and military personnel [8]. These cameras capture unique perspectives that complement video data from
traditional third-person cameras. For instance, in a complex and highly dynamic environment like a busy city street
or a battlefield, third-person cameras give a global view of
the high-level appearance and events in a scene, while firstperson cameras capture ground-level evidence about objects
and people at a much finer level of granularity. The combination of video from these highly complementary views
could be used to perform a variety of vision tasks – scene

1st-person video

3rd-person video
Static
camera
Synced

Wearable
cameras

?

?

1st-person view

?

Problem: whose camera is this video from?

Figure 1. One or more people wear first-person cameras in a scene
that is also recorded by a third-person camera. We wish to identify
which person in the third-person view (left) was wearing the camera that captured a first-person video (right). This is challenging
because the camera fields of view are very different and the camera
wearer almost never appears in their own first-person view.

understanding, object tracking, activity recognition, etc. –
with greater fidelity and detail than either could alone.
In these scenarios, multiple people may be in a scene
at any given time, with people regularly entering and exiting the view of the third-person camera. Some subset of
these people may be wearing first-person cameras, each of
which is also capturing part of the scene but from a highly
dynamic point of view that changes as the wearer moves.
Thus at any moment in time, some (possibly empty) subset of people appear in any given camera’s view, and each
person appears in some (possibly empty) subset of the firstand third-person cameras (and that person themselves may
be wearing one of the first-person cameras). Compared to
static cameras, first-person video data is significantly more
challenging because of camera motion, poor scene composition, challenging illumination, etc.
Jointly solving computer vision problems across multiple first- and third-person cameras requires the crucial first
step of establishing correspondences between the people
and the cameras, including (1) identifying the same person

5125

