Robust Energy Minimization for BRDF-Invariant Shape from Light Fields
Zhengqin Li

Zexiang Xu
Ravi Ramamoorthi
Manmohan Chandraker
University of California, San Diego
{zhl378, zex014, ravir, mkchandraker}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Highly effective optimization frameworks have been developed for traditional multiview stereo relying on Lambertian photoconsistency. However, they do not account for
complex material properties. On the other hand, recent
works have explored PDE invariants for shape recovery
with complex BRDFs, but they have not been incorporated
into robust numerical optimization frameworks. We present
a variational energy minimization framework for robust recovery of shape in multiview stereo with complex, unknown
BRDFs. While our formulation is general, we demonstrate
its efficacy on shape recovery using a single light field image, where the microlens array may be considered as a realization of a purely translational multiview stereo setup. Our
formulation automatically balances contributions from texture gradients, traditional Lambertian photoconsistency, an
appropriate BRDF-invariant PDE and a smoothness prior.
Unlike prior works, our energy function inherently handles spatially-varying BRDFs and albedos. Extensive experiments with synthetic and real data show that our optimization framework consistently achieves errors lower than
Lambertian baselines and further, is more robust than prior
BRDF-invariant reconstruction methods.

(a) Input Image

(b) Our Method

(c) Only Gradient

(d) Wang et al. [22]

(e) Tao et al. [18]

(f) Tao et al. [19]

Figure 1. We present a robust energy minimization framework
for shape recovery from light fields in the presence of unknown
spatially varying BRDF. Given an input image (a), our method
produces an accurate depth map (b) by a judicious combination of
energies from texture gradients, Lambertian photoconsistency and
a physically-based BRDF-invariant. Ignoring the BRDF-invariant
leads to incorrect reconstruction in the specular regions (c). The
key advantage of our framework is robust optimization compared
to prior methods for BRDF-invariant reconstruction (d,e). A Lambertian method is shown for reference (f), which is clearly unsuitable for such glossy surfaces.

1. Introduction
Motion of the camera with respect to the scene is an important cue for shape recovery from images. It forms the basis for multiview stereo, which has seen great success in recent years [7, 8, 9, 10]. Traditional approaches to multiview
stereo rely on the notion of Lambertian photoconsistency,
which assumes the image intensities for the projection of
the same 3D point across various views remains unchanged.
However, image formation depends on a bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) that encodes the ratio of exitant to incident light energies and thereby, depends
on the viewing direction. For instance, consider the motion
of a glossy highlight on the surface of a shiny object, as the
observer moves relative to it. Lambertian photoconsistency
amounts to assuming a Lambertian BRDF, which is a con-

stant function with respect to camera motion.
In recent years, theories on differential stereo have been
proposed that show information about the surface may be
recovered even with complex, unknown BRDF by exploiting cues from the motion of the object [5] or camera [3, 4].
These theories rely on the linearity of differentiation to isolate the effects of geometry and reflectance, which necessitate robust measurement devices and computational frameworks for applicability in the presence of noise and large
motions. The availability of consumer light field cameras
provides a practical realization for differential motion of
the camera, since the microlens array may be interpreted
as a camera undergoing small planar translations. This observation has been used by Wang et al. [22] to propose a
15571

