Using Locally Corresponding CAD Models for
Dense 3D Reconstructions from a Single Image
Chen Kong

Chen-Hsuan Lin
Carnegie Mellon University

Simon Lucey

{chenk, chenhsul, slucey}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We investigate the problem of estimating the dense 3D
shape of an object, given a set of 2D landmarks and silhouette in a single image. An obvious prior to employ in such
a problem is a dictionary of dense CAD models. Employing
a sufficiently large enough dictionary of CAD models, however, is in general computationally infeasible. A common
strategy in dictionary learning to encourage generalization
is to allow for linear combinations of dictionary elements.
This too, however, is problematic as most CAD models cannot be readily placed in global dense correspondence. In
this paper, we propose a two-step strategy. First, we employ
orthogonal matching pursuit to rapidly choose the “closest” single CAD model in our dictionary to the projected
image. Second, we employ a novel graph embedding based
on local dense correspondence to allow for sparse linear
combinations of CAD models. We validate our framework
experimentally in both synthetic and real world scenario
and demonstrate the superiority of our approach to both 3D
mesh reconstruction and volumetric representation.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D geometry of objects from 2D
images is a fundamental task in computer vision. With
the remarkable success in Structure from Motion (SfM),
which is now capable of reconstructing entire cities using large-scale photo collections [1] and real-time visual
SLAM on embedded and mobile devices [14], the computer vision community is starting to explore the possibility
of constructing a 3D model of an object from a single image [17, 20, 11, 21, 18]. Since estimating 3D geometry from
a single view is an inherently ill-posed problem, all of these
approaches need to employ some sort of 3D prior. An increasingly popular type of 3D prior are CAD models due to:
(i) their ubiquity online (e.g. 3D warehouse), and (ii) their
dense level of detail.
A 3D CAD model is made up of verticies and edges. Un-

C

B

D

A

E

H
F

G

Figure 1. A toy example of our proposed local dense correspondence graph. The node represents an CAD model shown besides it
and the edge (solid) denotes dense correspondence. The graph is
not fully connected (shown in dashed lines) since global dense correspondence do not exist. However, in some subgraphs, all nodes
are connected by a center, e.g. F connects to all nodes in subgraph
{A, B, C, D, E, F}. This indicates that a dictionary with CAD
models as elements can be established in such subgraphs using
local dense correspondence, which is at the heart of our paper.

fortunately, most CAD models, even those coming from the
same object category, (e.g. chair, table, etc.), do not have
verticies in correspondence or even typically share the same
edge topology. This can be somewhat alleviated through
the manual annotation of common 3D landmarks, but even
this can be cumbersome due to the inherent lack of global
correspondences for certain object categories. For example, as shown in Figure 1, the table C and G share the same
coarse landmarks (i.e. shape skeleton) but differ substantially on their finer details such that no meaningful dense
correspondence can be established. Figure 1 shows eight
tables from A to H and the solid lines depict which pairs
of CAD models that can be brought into dense correspon14857

