Image Splicing Detection via Camera Response Function Analysis
Can Chen
University of Delaware
Newark, DE, USA

Scott McCloskey
Honeywell ACS Labs
Golden Valley, MN, USA

canchen@udel.edu

scott.mccloskey@honeywell.com

Jingyi Yu
University of Delaware, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai, CHN
yu@eecis.udel.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in image manipulation tools have made
image forgery detection increasingly more challenging. An
important component in such tools is the ability to fake blur
to hide splicing and copy-move operations. In this paper, we
present a new technique based on the analysis of the camera response functions (CRF) for efﬁcient and robust splicing and copy-move forgery detection and localization. We
ﬁrst analyze how non-linear CRFs affect edges in terms of
the intensity-gradient bivariate histograms. We show distinguishable shape differences between real and forged blurs
near edges after a splicing operation. Based on our analysis, we introduce a deep-learning framework to detect and
localize forged edges. In particular, we show the problem
can be transformed to a handwriting recognition problem
and resolved by using a convolutional neural network. We
generate a large dataset of forged images produced by splicing followed by retouching and comprehensive experiments
show our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art
techniques in accuracy and robustness.

1. Introduction
Forensic algorithm development seeks to improve robustness and expand upon a limited set of cues used to detect media forgery. However, with the advance of image
manipulation tools, assessing the integrity of open-source
visual media is increasingly difﬁcult. A particularly challenging example is faked motion and/or defocus blurs that
are consistent with a plausible scene geometry. Forged blurs
can signiﬁcantly increase photorealism and has shown great
success in visual special effects. Since blurs are commonly
viewed as a low-pass ﬁlter, detecting forged blurs has been
particularly challenging and most existing forensic tools

CRF(Blur(edge))
Irradiance
Step Edge

Authentic Blur
Edge

Optical Blur

Blur(CRF(edge))
Irradiance
Step Edge

Sharp Edge

Manuel Blur

Forgery Blur
Edge

Figure 1. The two paths to a blurred edge. The top row shows
the sequence for authentic images, where optical blur happens in
the optics before the CRF is applied. The lower row shows the
sequence for artiﬁcially blurry images, where a sharp edge passes
through the CRF and is then blurred in image manipulation software, e.g. PhotoShop.

lack the scalability and automation needed to provide reliable assessments.
In this paper, we present a novel forensic based on the
Camera Response Function (CRF), which enables a more
reliable detection of a wider range of manipulation processes. We speciﬁcally target splicing manipulations, where
contents are extracted from one image and then copied into
a new image. These usually involve a segmentation operation to delimit the content in the original image, the use of
which leads to harsh boundaries between it and the background. Because existing forensic methods for splicing detection use properties of different image regions for detection, they are prone to false positives when parts of an authentic image have spatially-varying properties. Methods
which measure blur consistency between different parts of
the image, for instance, are prone to false positives when
the different regions are at different depths (and thus have
different optical defocus), move separately (and thus have
different motion blur), or where there are signiﬁcant differ15087

