Training object class detectors with click supervision
Dim P. Papadopoulos1

Jasper R. R. Uijlings2

dim.papadopoulos@ed.ac.uk
1

Frank Keller1

jrru@google.com

keller@inf.ed.ac.uk
2

University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Training object class detectors typically requires a large
set of images with objects annotated by bounding boxes.
However, manually drawing bounding boxes is very time
consuming. In this paper we greatly reduce annotation
time by proposing center-click annotations: we ask annotators to click on the center of an imaginary bounding box
which tightly encloses the object instance. We then incorporate these clicks into existing Multiple Instance Learning techniques for weakly supervised object localization, to
jointly localize object bounding boxes over all training images. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2007 and
MS COCO show that: (1) our scheme delivers high-quality
detectors, performing substantially better than those produced by weakly supervised techniques, with a modest extra annotation effort; (2) these detectors in fact perform in a
range close to those trained from manually drawn bounding
boxes; (3) as the center-click task is very fast, our scheme
reduces total annotation time by 9× to 18×.

1. Introduction
How can we train high-quality computer vision models
with minimal human annotation effort? Obtaining training data is especially costly for object class detection, the
task of detecting all instances of a given object class in an
image. Typically, detectors are trained under full supervision, which requires manually drawing tight object bounding boxes in a large number of training images. This takes
time: annotating the popular ILSVRC dataset [52] required
about 35s per bounding box, using a crowd-sourcing technique optimized for efficient bounding box annotation [66]
(more details in Sec. 2).
Object detectors can also be trained under weak supervision using only image-level labels. While this is substantially cheaper, the resulting detectors typically deliver only
about half the accuracy of their fully supervised counterparts [6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 29, 54, 61, 62, 63, 75]. In this paper,
we aim to minimize human annotation effort while producing high-quality detectors. To this end we propose annotating objects by clicking on their center.

Vittorio Ferrari1,2
vferrari@inf.ed.ac.uk

Google Research

Clicking on an object can be seen as the humancomputer-interaction equivalent of pointing to an object.
Pointing is a natural way for humans to communicate that
emerges early during cognitive development [69]. Human
pointing behavior is well-understood in human-computer
interaction, and can be modeled mathematically [65]. For
the purpose of image annotation, clicking on an object
is therefore a natural choice. Clicking offers several advantages over other ways to annotate bounding boxes:
(1) is substantially faster than drawing bounding boxes [66],
(2) requires little instructions or annotator training compared to drawing [66] or verifying bounding boxes [46,
53, 66], because it is a task that comes natural to humans,
(3) can be performed using a simple annotation interface
(unlike bounding box drawing [66]), and requires no specialized hardware (unlike eye-tracking [45]). Note that the
scheme we propose does not require a human-in-the-loop
setup [12, 46, 47, 72, 24]: clicks can be acquired separately,
independently of the detector training framework used.
Given an image known to contain a certain object class,
we ask annotators to click on the center of an imaginary
bounding box enclosing the object (center-click annotations). These clicks provide reliable anchor points for the
full bounding box, as they provide an estimate of its center. Moreover, we can also ask two different annotators to
provide center-clicks on the same object. As their errors
are independent, we can obtain a more accurate estimate of
the object center by averaging their click positions. Interestingly, given the two clicks, we can even estimate the size
of the object, by exploiting a correlation between the object
size and the distance of the click to the true center (error).
As the errors are independent, the distance between the two
clicks increases with object size. This enables to estimate
size based on the distance between the clicks. As a novel
component of our crowd-sourcing protocol, we introduce a
stage to train the annotators based on synthetic polygons.
This enables generating an arbitrarily large set of training
questions without using any manually drawn bounding box.
Moreover, we derive models of the annotator error directly
from this polygon stage, and use them later to estimate object size in real images.
16374

