Synthesizing Dynamic Patterns by Spatial-Temporal Generative ConvNet
Jianwen Xie, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA
jianwen@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Video sequences contain rich dynamic patterns, such as
dynamic texture patterns that exhibit stationarity in the temporal domain, and action patterns that are non-stationary in
either spatial or temporal domain. We show that a spatialtemporal generative ConvNet can be used to model and synthesize dynamic patterns. The model defines a probability
distribution on the video sequence, and the log probability
is defined by a spatial-temporal ConvNet that consists of
multiple layers of spatial-temporal filters to capture spatialtemporal patterns of different scales. The model can be
learned from the training video sequences by an “analysis
by synthesis” learning algorithm that iterates the following two steps. Step 1 synthesizes video sequences from the
currently learned model. Step 2 then updates the model parameters based on the difference between the synthesized
video sequences and the observed training sequences. We
show that the learning algorithm can synthesize realistic
dynamic patterns.

1. Introduction
There are a wide variety of dynamic patterns in video
sequences, including dynamic textures [2] or textured motions [24] that exhibit statistical stationarity or stochastic
repetitiveness in the temporal dimension, and action patterns
that are non-stationary in either spatial or temporal domain.
Synthesizing and analyzing such dynamic patterns has been
an interesting problem. In this paper, we focus on the task
of synthesizing dynamic patterns using a generative version
of the convolutional neural network (ConvNet or CNN).
The ConvNet [14, 12] has proven to be an immensely
successful discriminative learning machine. The convolution
operation in the ConvNet is particularly suited for signals
such as images, videos and sounds that exhibit translation invariance either in the spatial domain or the temporal domain
or both. Recently, researchers have become increasingly
interested in the generative aspects of ConvNet, for the purpose of visualizing the knowledge learned by the ConvNet,
or synthesizing realistic signals, or developing generative

models that can be used for unsupervised learning.
In terms of synthesis, various approaches based on the
ConvNet have been proposed to synthesize realistic static
images [3, 7, 1, 13, 16]. However, there has not been much
work in the literature on synthesizing dynamic patterns based
on the ConvNet, and this is the focus of the present paper.
Specifically, we propose to synthesize dynamic patterns
by generalizing the generative ConvNet model recently proposed by [29]. The generative ConvNet can be derived from
the discriminative ConvNet. It is a random field model or an
energy-based model [15, 20] that is in the form of exponential tilting of a reference distribution such as the Gaussian
white noise distribution or the uniform distribution. The
exponential tilting is parametrized by a ConvNet that involves multiple layers of linear filters and rectified linear
units (ReLU) [12], which seek to capture features or patterns
at different scales.
The generative ConvNet can be sampled by the Langevin
dynamics. The model can be learned by the stochastic gradient algorithm [31]. It is an “analysis by synthesis” scheme
that seeks to match the synthesized signals generated by the
Langevin dynamics to the observed training signals. Specifically, the learning algorithm iterates the following two steps
after initializing the parameters and the synthesized signals.
Step 1 updates the synthesized signals by the Langevin dynamics that samples from the currently learned model. Step
2 then updates the parameters based on the difference between the synthesized data and the observed data in order
to shift the density of the model from the synthesized data
towards the observed data. It is shown by [29] that the learning algorithm can synthesize realistic spatial image patterns
such as textures and objects.
In this article, we generalize the spatial generative ConvNet by adding the temporal dimension, so that the resulting
ConvNet consists of multiple layers of spatial-temporal filters that seek to capture spatial-temporal patterns at various
scales. We show that the learning algorithm for training the
spatial-temporal generative ConvNet can synthesize realistic
dynamic patterns. We also show that it is possible to learn
the model from incomplete video sequences with either occluded pixels or missing frames, so that model learning and
17093

