Deep Learning of Human Visual Sensitivity in Image Quality Assessment
Framework
Jongyoo Kim
Sanghoon Lee∗
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei Universiy, Seoul, Korea
{jongky, slee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Since human observers are the ultimate receivers of digital images, image quality metrics should be designed from
a human-oriented perspective. Conventionally, a number
of full-reference image quality assessment (FR-IQA) methods adopted various computational models of the human
visual system (HVS) from psychological vision science research. In this paper, we propose a novel convolutional neural networks (CNN) based FR-IQA model, named Deep Image Quality Assessment (DeepQA), where the behavior of
the HVS is learned from the underlying data distribution of
IQA databases. Different from previous studies, our model
seeks the optimal visual weight based on understanding of
database information itself without any prior knowledge of
the HVS. Through the experiments, we show that the predicted visual sensitivity maps agree with the human subjective opinions. In addition, DeepQA achieves the state-ofthe-art prediction accuracy among FR-IQA models.

(a)

1. Introduction
Predicting perceptual quality is the main goal of image
quality assessment (IQA), which is applied in the wide field
of image processing such as process evaluation, image and
video encoding, and monitoring. Since human observers are
the ultimate receivers of digital images and videos, quality
metrics should be designed from a human-oriented perspective. Therefore, a great deal of effort has been made to develop IQA methods based on the analysis of the properties
and mechanism of the human visual system (HVS).
When a distorted image is perceived by HVS, some error
signals are emphasized and some others are masked. Figs.
1(a) and (b) show a distorted image by JPEG and its objective error map. The distortions around the houses and on the
∗ Corresponding author. (E-mail: slee@yonsei.ac.kr)

This work was supported by the ICT R&D program of MSIP/IITP.
[2017-0-00289, Development of a method for regulating human-factor parameters for reducing VR-induced sickness]

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of predicted sensitivity maps: (a) is a distorted
image; (b) is an objective error map; (c) is a predicted perceptual
error map. Darker regions in (b) indicate more pixel-wise distorted
pixels, and those in (c) indicate perceptually more distorted ones.

sky regions are easily observable. However, those on textural regions (e.g. rocks) are less noticeable though there are
a lot of pixel-wise distortions as shown in Fig. 1(b). Therefore, simple pixel-wise metrics such as peak signal-to-noise
ratio (PSNR) and mean squared error (MSE) do not correlate well with perceived quality. To conduct reliable IQA,
it is necessary to understand the human visual sensitivity
which explains the perceptual impact of artifacts according
to a spatial characteristic of pixels.
Based on these observations, many full-reference image
quality assessment (FR-IQA) methods have adopted various computational models of the HVS from psychological

1676

