Fully Convolutional Instance-aware Semantic Segmentation
Yi Li1,2∗
Haozhi Qi2∗
1
Tsinghua University

Jifeng Dai2
Xiangyang Ji1
2
Microsoft Research Asia

Yichen Wei2

{liyi14,xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {v-haoq,jifdai,yichenw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present the first fully convolutional end-to-end solution for instance-aware semantic segmentation task. It inherits all the merits of FCNs for semantic segmentation [29]
and instance mask proposal [5]. It detects and segments
the object instances jointly and simultanoulsy. By the introduction of position-senstive inside/outside score maps,
the underlying convolutional representation is fully shared
between the two sub-tasks, as well as between all regions
of interest. The proposed network is highly integrated and
achieves state-of-the-art performance in both accuracy and
efficiency. It wins the COCO 2016 segmentation competition by a large margin. Code would be released at https:
//github.com/daijifeng001/TA-FCN .

1. Introduction
Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [29] have recently
dominated the field of semantic image segmentation. An
FCN takes an input image of arbitrary size, applies a series
of convolutional layers, and produces per-pixel likelihood
score maps for all semantic categories, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Thanks to the simplicity, efficiency, and the local weight sharing property of convolution, FCNs provide
an accurate, fast, and end-to-end solution for semantic segmentation.
However, conventional FCNs do not work for the
instance-aware semantic segmentation task, which requires
the detection and segmentation of individual object instances. The limitation is inherent. Because convolution
is translation invariant, the same image pixel receives the
same responses (thus classification scores) irrespective to
its relative position in the context. However, instance-aware
semantic segmentation needs to operate on region level, and
the same pixel can have different semantics in different regions. This behavior cannot be modeled by a single FCN on
the whole image. The problem is exemplified in Figure 2.
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done when Yi Li and Haozhi Qi are
interns at Microsoft Research.

Certain translation-variant property is required to solve
the problem. In a prevalent family of instance-aware semantic segmentation approaches [7, 16, 8], it is achieved
by adopting different types of sub-networks in three stages:
1) an FCN is applied on the whole image to generate intermediate and shared feature maps; 2) from the shared
feature maps, a pooling layer warps each region of interest (ROI) into fixed-size per-ROI feature maps [17, 12]; 3)
one or more fully-connected (fc) layer(s) in the last network
convert the per-ROI feature maps to per-ROI masks. Note
that the translation-variant property is introduced in the fc
layer(s) in the last step.
Such methods have several drawbacks. First, the ROI
pooling step losses spatial details due to feature warping and
resizing, which however, is necessary to obtain a fixed-size
representation (e.g., 14 × 14 in [8]) for fc layers. Such distortion and fixed-size representation degrades the segmentation accuracy, especially for large objects. Second, the fc
layers over-parametrize the task, without using regularization of local weight sharing. For example, the last fc layer
has high dimensional 784-way output to estimate a 28 × 28
mask. Last, the per-ROI network computation in the last
step is not shared among ROIs. As observed empirically, a
considerably complex sub-network in the last step is necessary to obtain good accuracy [36, 9]. It is therefore slow for
a large number of ROIs (typically hundreds or thousands of
region proposals). For example, in the MNC method [8],
which won the 1st place in COCO segmentation challenge
2015 [25], 10 layers in the ResNet-101 model [18] are kept
in the per-ROI sub-network. The approach takes 1.4 seconds per image, where more than 80% of the time is spent
on the last per-ROI step. These drawbacks motivate us to
ask the question that, can we exploit the merits of FCNs for
end-to-end instance-aware semantic segmentation?
Recently, a fully convolutional approach has been proposed for instance mask proposal generation [5]. It extends the translation invariant score maps in conventional
FCNs to position-sensitive score maps, which are somewhat translation-variant. This is illustrated in Figure 1(b).
The approach is only used for mask proposal generation
and presents several drawbacks. It is blind to semantic cat-

2359

