One-Shot Video Object Segmentation
S. Caelles1, * K.-K. Maninis1,∗

J. Pont-Tuset1 L. Leal-Taixé2
1
ETH Zürich 2 TU München

D. Cremers2

L. Van Gool1

Figure 1. Example result of our technique: The segmentation of the first frame (red) is used to learn the model of the specific object to
track, which is segmented in the rest of the frames independently (green). One every 20 frames shown of 90 in total.

Abstract
This paper tackles the task of semi-supervised video object segmentation, i.e., the separation of an object from the
background in a video, given the mask of the first frame.
We present One-Shot Video Object Segmentation (OSVOS),
based on a fully-convolutional neural network architecture
that is able to successively transfer generic semantic information, learned on ImageNet, to the task of foreground segmentation, and finally to learning the appearance of a single annotated object of the test sequence (hence one-shot).
Although all frames are processed independently, the results are temporally coherent and stable. We perform experiments on two annotated video segmentation databases,
which show that OSVOS is fast and improves the state of the
art by a significant margin (79.8% vs 68.0%).

1. Introduction
From Pre-Trained Networks...
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are revolutionizing many fields of computer vision. For instance, they
have dramatically boosted the performance for problems
like image classification [24, 47, 19] and object detection [15, 14, 26]. Image segmentation has also been taken
over by CNNs recently [29, 23, 51, 3, 4], with deep architectures pre-trained on the weakly related task of image classification on ImageNet [44]. One of the major downsides of
deep network approaches is their hunger for training data.
Yet, with various pre-trained network architectures one may
ask how much training data do we really need for the specific problem at hand? This paper investigates segmenting
an object along an entire video, when we only have one single labeled training example, e.g. the first frame.
* First two authors contributed equally

...to One-Shot Video Object Segmentation
This paper presents One-Shot Video Object Segmentation (OSVOS), a CNN architecture to tackle the problem
of semi-supervised video object segmentation, that is, the
classification of all pixels of a video sequence into background and foreground, given the manual annotation of one
(or more) of its frames. Figure 1 shows an example result
of OSVOS, where the input is the segmentation of the first
frame (in red), and the output is the mask of the object in
the 90 frames of the sequence (in green).
The first contribution of the paper is to adapt the CNN to
a particular object instance given a single annotated image
(hence one-shot). To do so, we adapt a CNN pre-trained on
image recognition [44] to video object segmentation. This
is achieved by training it on a set of videos with manually
segmented objects. Finally, it is fine-tuned at test time on a
specific object that is manually segmented in a single frame.
Figure 2 shows the overview of the method. Our proposal
tallies with the observation that leveraging these different
levels of information to perform object segmentation would
stand to reason: from generic semantic information of a
large amount of categories, passing through the knowledge
of the usual shapes of objects, down to the specific properties of a particular object we are interested in segmenting.
The second contribution of this paper is that OSVOS processes each frame of a video independently, obtaining temporal consistency as a by-product rather than as the result of
an explicitly imposed, expensive constraint. In other words,
we cast video object segmentation as a per-frame segmentation problem given the model of the object from one (or
various) manually-segmented frames. This stands in contrast to the dominant approach where temporal consistency
plays the central role, assuming that objects do not change
too much between one frame and the next. Such methods adapt their single-frame models smoothly throughout
1221

