Attend in groups: a weakly-supervised deep learning framework for learning
from web data
Bohan Zhuang∗, Lingqiao Liu∗, Yao Li, Chunhua Shen†, Ian Reid
The University of Adelaide, Australia; and Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

Abstract
Large-scale datasets have driven the rapid development
of deep neural networks for visual recognition. However, annotating a massive dataset is expensive and timeconsuming. Web images and their labels are, in comparison, much easier to obtain, but direct training on such
automatically harvested images can lead to unsatisfactory
performance, because the noisy labels of Web images adversely affect the learned recognition models. To address
this drawback we propose an end-to-end weakly-supervised
deep learning framework which is robust to the label noise
in Web images. The proposed framework relies on two unified strategies – random grouping and attention – to effectively reduce the negative impact of noisy web image annotations. Specifically, random grouping stacks multiple
images into a single training instance and thus increases
the labeling accuracy at the instance level. Attention, on
the other hand, suppresses the noisy signals from both incorrectly labeled images and less discriminative image regions. By conducting intensive experiments on two challenging datasets, including a newly collected fine-grained
dataset with Web images of different car models, 1 , the superior performance of the proposed methods over competitive
baselines is clearly demonstrated.

1. Introduction
Recent development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has led to great success in a variety of tasks
including image classification [17, 19, 38], object detection [15, 22, 33], semantic segmentation [20, 23] and others.
This success is largely driven by the availability of largescale well-annotated image datasets, e.g. ImageNet [36],
MS COCO [21] and PASCAL VOC [13]. However, annotating a massive number of images is extremely laborintensive and costly. To reduce the annotating labor cost, an
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† C. Shen is the corresponding author.
1 The dataset and code are available at https://bitbucket.org/
jingruixiaozhuang/cvpr2017_code_dataset/

alternative approach is to obtain the image annotations directly from the image search engine from the Internet, e.g.
Google image search or Bing images.
Web-scale image search engine mostly uses keywords as
queries and the connection between keywords and images
is established by the co-occurrence between the Web image
and its surrounding text. Thus, the annotations of Web images returned by a search engine will be inevitably noisy
since the query keywords may not be consistent with the
visual content of target images. For example, using “black
swan” as a query keyword, the retrieved images may contain “white swan,” “swan painting” and some other different
categories. These noisy labels can be misleading if we use
them to train a classifier to learn the corresponding visual
concept.
To overcome this drawback, we propose a deep learning framework designed to be more robust to the labeling
noise and thus better able to leverage Web images for training. There are two key strategies in our framework: random
grouping and attention. As will be shown later, these two
strategies seamlessly work together to reduce the negative
impact of label noise.
Specifically, the random grouping strategy randomly
samples a few images and merges them into a single training
instance. The idea is that although the probability of sampling an incorrectly labeled Web image is high, the probability of sampling an incorrectly labeled group is low because as long as one image in the group is correctly labeled,
the label of the group is deemed correct (bag label as in
multi-instance learning). In the proposed approach, each
image is represented by the extracted contextual features
depicting the visual patterns of local image regions. After the random grouping, a training instance is represented
as the union of convolutional feature maps extracted from
each image in the group. If there are any incorrectly labeled
images in the group, the unified feature maps of an instance
will contain a substantial amount of local features which
are irrelevant to the group-level class annotation. To avoid
the distraction of those local features, we apply the second
strategy of our framework, the attention mechanism, to encourage the network not to focus on the irrelevant features.
11878

