A Dual Ascent Framework for Lagrangean Decomposition of Combinatorial
Problems

1

Paul Swoboda1 , Jan Kuske2 , Bogdan Savchynskyy3
IST Austria, 2 Universität Heidelberg, 3 TU Dresden
pswoboda@ist.ac.at

Abstract
We propose a general dual ascent framework for Lagrangean decomposition of combinatorial problems. Although methods of this type have shown their efficiency for a
number of problems, so far there was no general algorithm
applicable to multiple problem types. In this work, we propose such a general algorithm. It depends on several parameters, which can be used to optimize its performance in each
particular setting. We demonstrate efficacy of our method on
graph matching and multicut problems, where it outperforms
state-of-the-art solvers including those based on subgradient
optimization and off-the-shelf linear programming solvers.

can be used for optimization of the corresponding convex
relaxation.
In the area of conditional random fields, however, it
is well-known [41] that message passing or dual (blockcoordinate) ascent algorithms (like e.g. TRW-S [48]) significantly outperform (sub)gradient-based methods. Similar observations were made much earlier in [59] for a constrained
shortest path problem.
Although dual ascent algorithms were proposed for a
number of combinatorial problems (see the related work
overview below), there is no general framework, which
would (i) give a generalized view on the properties of such
algorithms and more importantly (ii) provide tools to easily construct such algorithms for new problems. Our work
provides such a framework.

1. Introduction
Computer vision and machine learning give rise to a number of powerful computational models. It is typical that
inference in these models reduces to non-trivial combinatorial optimization problems. For some of the models, such
as conditional random fields (CRF), powerful specialized
solvers like [48, 49, 12, 52] were developed. In general, however, one has to resort to off-the-shelf integer linear program
(ILP) solvers like CPLEX [2] or Gurobi [36]. Although
these solvers have made a tremendous progress in the past
decade, the size of the problems they can tackle still remains
a limiting factor for many potential applications, as the running time scales super-linearly in the problem size. The goal
of this work is to partially fill this gap between practical
requirements and existing computational methods.
It is an old observation that many important optimization
ILPs can be efficiently decomposed into easily solvable combinatorial sub-problems [32]. The convex relaxation, which
consists of these sub-problems coupled by linear constraints
is known as Lagrangean or dual decomposition [31, 50]. Although this technique can be efficiently used in various scenarios to find approximate solutions of combinatorial problems, it has a major drawback: In the most general setting
only slow (sub)gradient-based techniques [51, 57, 50, 42, 61]

Related Work Dual ascent algorithms optimize a dual
problem and guarantee monotonous improvement (nondeterioration) of the dual objective. The most famous examples in computer vision are block-coordinate ascent (known
also as message passing) algorithms like TRW-S [48] or
MPLP [28] for maximum a posteriori inference in conditional random fields [41].
To the best of our knowledge the first dual ascent algorithm addressing integer linear programs belongs to Bilde
and Krarup [11] (the corresponding technical report in Danish appeared 1967). In that work an uncapacitated facility
location problem was addressed. A similar problem (simple plant location) was addressed with an algorithm of the
same class in [30]. In 1980 Fisher and Hochbaum [22]
constructed a dual ascent-based algorithm for a problem of
database location in computer networks, which was used to
optimize the topology of Arpanet [1], predecessor of Internet.
The generalized linear assignment problem was addressed
by the same type of algorithms in [23]. The Authors considered a Lagrangean decomposition of this problem into
multiple knapsack problems, which were solved in each iteration of the method. An improved version of this algorithm
was proposed in [34]. Efficient dual ascent based solvers
were also proposed for the min-cost flow in [25], for the set
11596

