Person Search with Natural Language Description
Shuang Li1
1

Tong Xiao1

Hongsheng Li1∗

Bolei Zhou2

2

Dayu Yue3

Xiaogang Wang1∗

3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong Massachuate Institute of Technology SenseTime Group Limited

{sli,xiaotong,hsli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, bolei@mit.edu, yuedayu@sensetime.com

Query Description

Abstract
Searching persons in large-scale image databases with
the query of natural language description has important applications in video surveillance. Existing methods mainly focused on searching persons with image-based
or attribute-based queries, which have major limitations
for a practical usage. In this paper, we study the problem of person search with natural language description.
Given the textual description of a person, the algorithm
of the person search is required to rank all the samples in
the person database then retrieve the most relevant sample corresponding to the queried description. Since there
is no person dataset or benchmark with textual description available, we collect a large-scale person description
dataset with detailed natural language annotations and person samples from various sources, termed as CUHK Person
Description Dataset (CUHK-PEDES). A wide range of possible models and baselines have been evaluated and compared on the person search benchmark. An Recurrent Neural Network with Gated Neural Attention mechanism (GNARNN) is proposed to establish the state-of-the art performance on person search.

1. Introduction
Searching person in a database with free-form natural
language description is a challenging problem in computer
vision. It has wide applications in video surveillance and activity analysis. Nowadays urban areas are usually equipped
with thousands of surveillance cameras which generate gigabytes of video data every second. To search possible
criminal suspects from such large-scale videos manually
might take tens of days or even months to complete. Thus
automatic person search is in urgent need. Based on modalities of the queries, existing person search methods can be
mainly categorized into the ones with image-based queries
and attribute-based queries. However, both modalities have
major limitations and might not be suitable for practical usages. Facing such limitations, we propose to study the problem of searching persons with natural language descrip∗ Corresponding authors

Retrieval Results

The woman is wearing a long,
bright orange gown with a white
belt at her waist. She has her hair
pulled back into a bun or ponytail.

Person Image Database

Figure 1. Given the natural language description of a person,
our person search system searches through a large-scale person
database then retrieve the most relevant person samples.

tions. Figure 1 illustrates one example of the person search.
Person search with image-based queries is known as person re-identification in computer vision [44, 24, 39]. Given
a query image, the algorithms obtain affinities between the
query and those in the image database. The most similar
persons can be retrieved from the database according to the
affinity values. However, such a problem setting has major limitations in practice, as it requires at least one photo
of the queried person being given. In many criminal cases,
there might be only verbal description of the suspects’ appearance available.
Person search could also be done through attribute-based
queries. A set of pre-defined semantic attributes are used to
describe persons’ appearances. Classifiers are then trained
on each of the attributes. Given a query, similar persons in
the database can be retrieved as the ones with similar attributes [36, 35]. However, the attributes have many practical limitations as well. On the one hand, attributes have limited capability of describing persons’ appearance. For instance, the PETA dataset [4] defined 61 binary and 4 multi-

1970

