General models for rational cameras and the case of two-slit projections
Matthew Trager1,2
1

Bernd Sturmfels3

John Canny3

École Normale Supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University

2 Inria

Martial Hebert4
3 UC Berkeley

Jean Ponce1,2

4 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The rational camera model recently introduced in [18]
provides a general methodology for studying abstract nonlinear imaging systems and their multi-view geometry. This
paper builds on this framework to study “physical realizations” of rational cameras. More precisely, we give an explicit account of the mapping between between physical visual rays and image points (missing in the original description), which allows us to give simple analytical expressions
for direct and inverse projections. We also consider “primitive” camera models, that are orbits under the action of
various projective transformations, and lead to a general
notion of intrinsic parameters. The methodology is general, but it is illustrated concretely by an in-depth study of
two-slit cameras, that we model using pairs of linear projections. This simple analytical form allows us to describe
models for the corresponding primitive cameras, to introduce intrinsic parameters with a clear geometric meaning,
and to define an epipolar tensor characterizing two-view
correspondences. In turn, this leads to new algorithms for
structure from motion and self-calibration.

1. Introduction
The past 20 years have witnessed steady progress in the
construction of effective geometric and analytical models of
more and more general imaging systems, going far beyond
classical pinhole perspective (e.g., [1, 2, 5, 6, 12, 13, 16,
18, 19, 21, 25, 26]). In particular, it is now recognized that
the essential part of any imaging system is the mapping between scene points and the corresponding light rays. The
mapping between the rays and the points where they intersect the retina plays an auxiliary role in the image formation process. For pinhole cameras, for example, all retinal
planes are geometrically equivalent since the corresponding
image patterns are related to each other by projective transforms. Much of the recent work on general camera models thus focuses primarily on the link between scene points
and the line congruences [9, 14] formed by the corresponding rays, in a purely projective setting [1, 2]. The rational

Figure 1. A general camera associates a scene point x with a visual
ray l, then maps the ray l to its intersection y with some retinal
plane π, and finally uses a projective coordinate system on π to
express y as a point u in P2 .

camera model of Ponce, Sturmfels and Trager [18] is a recent instance of this approach, and provides a unified algebraic framework for studying a very large class of imaging
systems and the corresponding multi-view geometry. It is,
however, abstract, in the sense that the mapping between
visual rays and image points is left unspecified. This paper provides a concrete embedding of this model, by making the mapping from visual rays to a retinal plane explicit,
and thus identifying physical instances of rational cameras.
The imaging devices we consider are in fact the composition of three maps: the first two are purely geometric, and
map scene points onto visual rays, then rays onto the points
where they intersect a retinal plane. The last map is analytical: given a coordinate system on the retina, it maps image
points onto their corresponding coordinates (see Figure 1).
In particular, by introducing the notion of “primitive” camera model as the orbit of a camera under the action of projective, affine, similarity, and euclidean transformations, we
can generalize many classical attributes of pinhole projections, such as intrinsic coordinates and calibration matrices. Our methodology applies to arbitrary (rational) cameras, but it is illustrated concretely by an in-depth study of
two-slit cameras [2, 6, 12, 26], which we describe using a
pair of linear 2×4 projection matrices. This simple form allows us to describe models for the corresponding primitive
cameras, to introduce intrinsic parameters with a clear geometric meaning, and to define an epipolar tensor characterizing two-view correspondences. In turn, this leads to new
algorithms for structure from motion and self-calibration.

1935

