Non-local Color Image Denoising with Convolutional Neural Networks
Stamatios Lefkimmiatis
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow, Russia
s.lefkimmiatis@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We propose a novel deep network architecture for
grayscale and color image denoising that is based on a
non-local image model. Our motivation for the overall design of the proposed network stems from variational methods that exploit the inherent non-local self-similarity property of natural images. We build on this concept and introduce deep networks that perform non-local processing and
at the same time they significantly benefit from discriminative learning. Experiments on the Berkeley segmentation
dataset, comparing several state-of-the-art methods, show
that the proposed non-local models achieve the best reported denoising performance both for grayscale and color
images for all the tested noise levels. It is also worth noting
that this increase in performance comes at no extra cost on
the capacity of the network compared to existing alternative
deep network architectures. In addition, we highlight a direct link of the proposed non-local models to convolutional
neural networks. This connection is of significant importance since it allows our models to take full advantage of
the latest advances on GPU computing in deep learning and
makes them amenable to efficient implementations through
their inherent parallelism.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have been successfully applied in
various computer vision tasks, including image classification [16, 20] and object detection [11, 29], and have dramatically improved the performance of these systems, setting
the new state-of-the-art. Recently, very promising results
have also been reported for image processing applications
such as image restoration [5, 39], super-resolution [18] and
optical flow [1].
The significant boost in performance achieved by deep
networks can be mainly attributed to their advanced modeling capabilities, thanks to their deep structure and the
presence of non-linearities that are combined with discriminative learning on large training datasets. However, most
of the current deep learning methods developed for im-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Image denoising with the proposed deep non-local image
model. (a) Noisy image corrupted with additive Gaussian noise
(σ = 25) ; PSNR = 20.16 dB. (b) Denoised image using the
5-stage feed-forward network described in Sec. 3.3 ; PSNR =
29.53 dB.

age restoration tasks are based on general network architectures that do not fully exploit problem-specific knowledge. It is thus reasonable to expect that incorporating such
information could lead to further improvements in performance. Only very recently, Schmidt and Roth [34] and
Chen and Pock [6] introduced deep networks whose architecture is specifically tailored to certain image restoration
problems. However, even in these cases, the resulting models are local ones and do not take into account the inherent
non-local self-similarity property of natural images. On the
other hand, conventional methods that have exploited this
property have been shown to gain significant improvements
compared to standard local approaches. A notable example is the Block Matching and 3D Collaborative Filtering
(BM3D) method [7] which is a very efficient and highly
engineered approach that held the state-of-the-art record in
image denoising for almost a decade.
In this work, motivated by the recent advances in deep
learning and relying on the rich body of algorithmic ideas
13587

