Accurate Single Stage Detector Using Recurrent Rolling Convolution
Jimmy Ren Xiaohao Chen Jianbo Liu Wenxiu Sun Jiahao Pang Qiong Yan Yu-Wing Tai Li Xu
SenseTime Group Limited
{rensijie, chenxiaohao, liujianbo, sunwenxiu, pangjiahao, yanqiong, yuwing, xuli}@sensetime.com
Abstract
Most of the recent successful methods in accurate object detection and localization used some variants of RCNN style two stage Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
where plausible regions were proposed in the first stage then
followed by a second stage for decision refinement. Despite
the simplicity of training and the efficiency in deployment,
the single stage detection methods have not been as competitive when evaluated in benchmarks consider mAP for
high IoU thresholds. In this paper, we proposed a novel
single stage end-to-end trainable object detection network
to overcome this limitation. We achieved this by introducing Recurrent Rolling Convolution (RRC) architecture
over multi-scale feature maps to construct object classifiers
and bounding box regressors which are “deep in context”.
We evaluated our method in the challenging KITTI dataset
which measures methods under IoU threshold of 0.7. We
showed that with RRC, a single reduced VGG-16 based
model already significantly outperformed all the previously
published results. At the time this paper was written our
models ranked the first in KITTI car detection (the hard
level), the first in cyclist detection and the second in pedestrian detection. These results were not reached by the previous single stage methods. The code is publicly available.1

1. Introduction
In many real-world applications, robustly detecting objects with high localization accuracy, namely to predict the
bounding box location with high Intersection over Union
(IoU) to the groundtruth, is crucial to the quality of service. For instance, in vision based robotic arm applications,
the process of generating robust and accurate operations in
picking up an object are highly dependent on the object localization accuracy. In advanced driver assistance systems
(ADAS), accurately localizing cars and pedestrians is also
1 https://github.com/xiaohaoChen/rrc_detection

Figure 1. Left column: Previous single stage detector failed to generate bounding boxes of high IoU to the groundtruth bounding box
(green) for small and occluded objects; Right column: With the
proposed RRC, we can get high quality bounding boxes.

closely related to the safety of the autonomous actions.
Recent progress in object detection was heavily driven
by the successful application of feed-forward deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Among many variants of
the CNN based approaches, they can be roughly divded into
two streams. The first is the R-CNN style [9] two stage
methods. In these methods, plausible regions were proposed in the first stage then followed by a second stage for
decision refinement. The other type of methods aimed to
eliminate the region proposal stage and directly train a single stage end-to-end detector. The single stage detectors
are usually easier to train and more computationally efficient in production [12]. However, such advantage is largely
overwritten when the models are evaluated in benchmarks
consider mAP for high IoU thresholds (e.g. KITTI car [6])
since the two stage methods are usually advantageous in
performance. We will later show that this weakness of the
single stage methods is not attribute to the inability in recognizing objects in complex scenes but the failure in generating high quality bounding boxes. Two examples are illustrated in the left column of figure 1.

5420

