Deeply Aggregated Alternating Minimization for Image Restoration
Youngjung Kim1∗, Hyungjoo Jung1∗ , Dongbo Min2 , and Kwanghoon Sohn1†
1

Yonsei University

2

Chungnam National University

Abstract
Regularization-based image restoration has remained an
active research topic in image processing and computer vision. It often leverages a guidance signal captured in different fields as an additional cue. In this work, we present a
general framework for image restoration, called deeply aggregated alternating minimization (DeepAM). We propose
to train deep neural network to advance two of the steps in
the conventional AM algorithm: proximal mapping and βcontinuation. Both steps are learned from a large dataset
in an end-to-end manner. The proposed framework enables
the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to operate as a
regularizer in the AM algorithm. We show that our learned
regularizer via deep aggregation outperforms the recent
data-driven approaches as well as the nonlocal-based methods. The flexibility and effectiveness of our framework are
demonstrated in several restoration tasks, including single
image denoising, RGB-NIR restoration, and depth superresolution.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a process of reconstructing a clean
image from a degraded observation. The observed data is
assumed to be related to the ideal image through a forward
imaging model that accounts for noise, blurring, and sampling. However, a simple modeling only with the observed
data is insufficient for an effective restoration, and thus a
priori constraint about the solution is commonly used. To
this end, the image restoration is usually formulated as an
energy minimization problem with an explicit regularization function (or regularizer). Recent work on joint restoration leverages a guidance signal, captured from different devices, as an additional cue to regularize the restoration process. These approaches have been successfully applied to
various applications including joint upsampling [11], crossfield noise reduction [32], dehazing [31], and intrinsic im∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr.

age decomposition [8].
The regularization-based image restoration involves the
minimization of non-convex and non-smooth energy functionals for yielding high-quality restored results. Solving
such functionals typically requires a huge amount of iterations, and thus an efficient optimization is preferable where
the runtime is crucial. One of the most popular optimization methods is the alternating minimization (AM) algorithm [34] that introduces auxiliary variables. The energy
functional is decomposed into a series of subproblems that
is relatively simple to optimize, and the minimum with respect to each of the variables is then computed. For the image restoration, the AM algorithm has been widely adopted
with various regularization functions, e.g., total variation
[34], L0 norm [36], and Lp norm (hyper-Laplacian) [16].
It is worth noting that these functions are all handcrafted
models. The hyper-Laplacian of image gradients [16] reflects the statistical property of natural images relatively
well, but the restoration quality of gradient-based regularization methods using the handcrafted model is far from
that of the state-of-the-art approaches [9, 30]. In general,
it is non-trivial to design an optimal regularization function
for a specific image restoration problem.
Over the past few years, several attempts have been
made to overcome the limitation of handcrafted regularizer by learning the image restoration model from a largescale training data [9, 30, 38]. In this work, we propose
a novel method for image restoration that effectively uses
a data-driven approach in the energy minimization framework, called deeply aggregated alternating minimization
(DeepAM). Contrary to existing data-driven approaches
that just produce the restoration results from the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), we design the CNNs to implicitly learn the regularizer of the AM algorithm. Since
the CNNs are fully integrated into the AM procedure, the
whole networks can be learned simultaneously in an end-toend manner. We show that our simple model learned from
the deep aggregation achieves better results than the recent
data-driven approaches [9,17,30] as well as the state-of-theart nonlocal-based methods [10, 12].
16419

