Snapshot Hyperspectral Light Field Imaging
Zhiwei Xiong1 Lizhi Wang2 Huiqun Li1 Dong Liu1 Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
This paper presents the first snapshot hyperspectral light
field imager in practice. Specifically, we design a novel hybrid camera system to obtain two complementary measurements that sample the angular and spectral dimensions respectively. To recover the full 5D hyperspectral light field
from severely undersampled measurements, we then propose an efficient computational reconstruction algorithm
by exploiting the large correlations across the angular and
spectral dimensions through self-learned dictionaries. Simulation on an elaborate hyperspectral light field dataset validates the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Hardware experimental results demonstrate that, for the first
time to our knowledge, a 5D hyperspectral light field containing 9 × 9 angular views and 27 spectral bands can be
acquired in a single shot.

1. Introduction
Computational imaging has seen a tremendous progress
in the past decades, owing to the rapid advancement of optical instruments and the explosive growth of computing
power. The ultimate goal of computational imaging is to
simultaneously resolve the 7 dimensions of the plenoptic
function, i.e., 3D in space (2D planar + 1D depth), 1D in
time, 1D in spectrum, and 2D in angle [33]. The dimensions
that are beyond traditional digital imaging, i.e., depth, spectrum, and angle, have been extensively explored in literature
under the scope of depth/3D imaging, multi/hyper-spectral
imaging, and light field imaging, respectively [4, 34, 8, 12].
Moreover, commercial depth cameras (e.g., Kinect) and
light field cameras (e.g., Lytro) are readily available for
daily use, which provides new opportunities for solving difficult computer vision tasks and also enables new applications [11, 22, 17].
The trend of computational imaging is to integrate higher
plenoptic dimensions together, while maintaining the respective resolution as much as possible. Following this
trend, current research frontiers extend to depth from light
field [13, 30], light field super-resolution [31, 35], hyper-

Figure 1. Schematic of snapshot hyperspectral light field imager.

spectral video acquisition [20, 28], hyperspectral 3D imaging [14, 29], and so on. Thanks to the large correlations
across different plenoptic dimensions, it is possible to recover high-dimensional light information from severely undersampled measurements. Still, elaborate hardware systems and computational reconstruction algorithms are indispensable to guarantee a decent performance.
In this paper, we explore a new direction in computational imaging, i.e., snapshot hyperspectral light field imaging, which is an essential step towards encompassing all dimensions of the plenoptic function. Previously, the acquisition of a hyperspectral light field needs to be conducted
in a scanning manner, either using a spectrometer mounted
on a gantry to scan in the angular and spectral dimensions
sequentially [32], or using a micro-lens-array together with
tunable filters to scan in the spectral dimension alone [16].
However, the above scanning approaches are not applicable
in time-critical scenarios, such as scenes with dynamic objects or varying illumination. How to acquire a hyperspectral light field without sacrificing the temporal resolution
remains a key challenge.
To this end, we design a novel hybrid camera system as
shown in Figure 1, which consists of an off-the-shelf light
field camera (Lytro) and a coded aperture snapshot spectral imager (CASSI). The two branches are co-located via a
beam splitter and calibrated in spatial, angular, and spectral
dimensions. The incident light from the scene is equally divided by the beam splitter and then captured by Lytro and
13270

