Inverse Compositional Spatial Transformer Networks
Chen-Hsuan Lin
Simon Lucey
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
chenhsul@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we establish a theoretical connection between the classical Lucas & Kanade (LK) algorithm and
the emerging topic of Spatial Transformer Networks (STNs).
STNs are of interest to the vision and learning communities due to their natural ability to combine alignment and
classification within the same theoretical framework. Inspired by the Inverse Compositional (IC) variant of the LK
algorithm, we present Inverse Compositional Spatial Transformer Networks (IC-STNs). We demonstrate that IC-STNs
can achieve better performance than conventional STNs
with less model capacity; in particular, we show superior
performance in pure image alignment tasks as well as joint
alignment/classification problems on real-world problems.

1. Introduction
Recent rapid advances in deep learning are allowing
for the learning of complex functions through convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which have achieved stateof-the-art performances in a plethora of computer vision
tasks [9, 17, 4]. Most networks learn to tolerate spatial variations through: (a) spatial pooling layers and/or (b) data
augmentation techniques [16]; however, these approaches
come with several drawbacks. Data augmentation (i.e. the
synthetic generation of new training samples through geometric distortion according to a known noise model) is
probably the oldest and best known strategy for increasing
spatial tolerance within a visual learning system. This is
problematic as it can often require an exponential increase
in the number of training samples and thus the capacity of
the model to be learned. Spatial pooling operations can partially alleviate this problem as they naturally encode spatial
invariance within the network architecture and uses subsampling to reduce the capacity of the model. However,
they have an intrinsic limited range of tolerance to geometric variation they can provide; furthermore, such pooling operations destroy spatial details within the images that
could be crucial to the performance of subsequent tasks.

slucey@cs.cmu.edu

Instead of designing a network to solely give tolerance to
spatial variation, another option is to have the network solve
for some of the geometric misalignment in the input images [12, 6]. Such a strategy only makes sense, however, if
it has lower capacity and computational cost as well as better performance than traditional spatially invariant CNNs.
Spatial Transformer Networks (STNs) [7] are one of the
first notable attempts to integrate low capacity and computationally efficient strategies for resolving - instead of tolerating - misalignment with classical CNNs. Jaderberg et
al. presented a novel strategy for integrating image warping
within a neural network and showed that such operations are
(sub-)differentiable, allowing for the application of canonical backpropagation to an image warping framework.
The problem of learning a low-capacity relationship between image appearance and geometric distortion is not new
in computer vision. Over three and a half decades ago, Lucas & Kanade (LK) [14] proposed the seminal algorithm for
gradient descent image alignment. The LK algorithm can be
interpreted as a feed forward network of multiple alignment
modules; specifically, each alignment module contains a
low-capacity predictor (typically linear) for predicting geometric distortion from relative image appearance, followed
by an image resampling/warp operation. The LK algorithm
differs fundamentally, however, to STNs in their application: image/object alignment instead of classification.
Putting applications to one side, the LK and STN frameworks share quite similar characteristics however with a
criticial exception. In an STN with multiple feed-forward
alignment modules, the output image of the previous alignment module is directly fed into the next. As we will
demonstate in this paper, this is problematic as it can create unwanted boundary effects as the number of geometric prediction layers increase. The LK algorithm does not
suffer from such problems; instead, it feeds the warp parameters through the network (instead of the warped image) such that each subsequent alignment module in the
network resamples the original input source image. Furthermore, the Inverse Compositional (IC) variant of the LK
algorithm [2] has demonstrated to achieve equivalently ef12568

