Global Context-Aware Attention LSTM Networks for 3D Action Recognition
Jun Liu† , Gang Wang‡ , Ping Hu† , Ling-Yu Duan§ , Alex C. Kot†
†
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
§
National Engineering Lab for Video Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{jliu029, wanggang, phu005, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, lingyu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Second LSTM Layer

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a very important research
problem due to its relevance to a wide range of applications.
With the advent of depth sensors, such as Microsoft Kinect,
Asus Xtion, and Intel RealSense, action recognition using
3D skeleton sequences has attracted a lot of research attention, and lots of advanced approaches have been proposed
[33, 14, 1, 72].
Human actions can be represented by a combination of
the movements of skeletal joints in 3D space [67, 11]. However, it does not mean all skeletal joints are informative for
action analysis. For example, the movements of the hand
joints are very informative for the action clapping, while the
foot joints’ movements are not. Different action sequences

Iteration #1

Iteration #2

Refine
Informativeness Gate

Global Context
Memory
First LSTM Layer

Initialize

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have shown
superior performance in 3D human action recognition due
to their power in modeling the dynamics and dependencies
in sequential data. Since not all joints are informative for
action analysis and the irrelevant joints often bring a lot
of noise, we need to pay more attention to the informative ones. However, original LSTM does not have strong
attention capability. Hence we propose a new class of LSTM network, Global Context-Aware Attention LSTM (GCALSTM), for 3D action recognition, which is able to selectively focus on the informative joints in the action sequence
with the assistance of global contextual information. In order to achieve a reliable attention representation for the
action sequence, we further propose a recurrent attention
mechanism for our GCA-LSTM network, in which the attention performance is improved iteratively. Experiments show
that our end-to-end network can reliably focus on the most
informative joints in each frame of the skeleton sequence.
Moreover, our network yields state-of-the-art performance
on three challenging datasets for 3D action recognition.

Softmax
Classifier

Figure 1. 3D action recognition using the Global Context-Aware
Attention LSTM network. The first LSTM layer encodes the
skeleton sequence and generates an initial global context memory
for this sequence. The second layer performs attention over the
inputs with the assistance of global context memory, and further
generates an attention representation for the sequence. The attention representation is then used back to refine the global context. Multiple attention iterations are carried out to refine the global
context progressively. Finally, the refined global contextual information is used for classification.

often have different informative joints, and in the same sequence, the informativeness degree of a joint may also vary
over the frames. Therefore, it is beneficial to selectively focus on the informative joints in each frame, and try to ignore
the features of the irrelevant ones, since the latter contribute
very little for action recognition, and even bring in noise
that can corrupt the performance of action recognition [20].
This selectively focusing mechanism is also called as attention, which has been demonstrated to be very effective
in various areas, such as speech recognition [7], machine

1647

