AMVH: Asymmetric Multi-Valued Hashing
Cheng Da1, 2 , Shibiao Xu1 , Kun Ding1, 2 , Gaofeng Meng1 , Shiming Xiang1, 2 , Chunhong Pan1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Email:{cheng.da,shibiao.xu,kding,gfmeng,smxiang,chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Most existing hashing methods resort to binary codes
for similarity search, owing to the high efficiency of computation and storage. However, binary codes lack enough
capability in similarity preservation, resulting in less desirable performance. To address this issue, we propose an
asymmetric multi-valued hashing method supported by two
different non-binary embeddings. (1) A real-valued embedding is used for representing the newly-coming query. (2) A
multi-integer-embedding is employed for compressing the
whole database, which is modeled by binary sparse representation with fixed sparsity. With these two non-binary
embeddings, the similarities between data points can be preserved precisely. To perform meaningful asymmetric similarity computation for efficient semantic search, these embeddings are jointly learnt by preserving the label-based
similarity. Technically, this results in a mixed integer programming problem, which is efficiently solved by alternative optimization. Extensive experiments on three multilabel datasets demonstrate that our approach not only outperforms the existing binary hashing methods in search accuracy, but also retains their query and storage efficiency.

1. Introduction
Recently, most of the massive data is represented in highdimensional space for use [16, 32]. Measuring the similarity of these data points with high computational efficiency is
a fundamental task in real-world applications. Technically,
several recent works [3, 17, 29, 39] have shown that hashing methods can compress high-dimensional data points into compact binary codes and can simultaneously preserve
the similarity and structural information of the original data.
Thus, hashing yields a mechanism for high computational
efficiency and acceptable accuracy.
In the literature, many hashing methods have been proposed [2, 7, 8, 13, 19, 22, 33, 34, 36], which can be roughly divided into two categories: data-independent and datadependent hashing methods. Locality Sensitive Hashing

(LSH) [7] is a representative of the first class that uses random projection as hash function. However, the major drawback of LSH and its variants [18, 31] is that many hash bits
are required to guarantee good performance. In parallel, recent efforts mainly focus on designing data-dependent hashing methods that learn compact binary codes by exploiting
the data distribution [9, 23, 24]. These methods are categorized into unsupervised [9, 15, 22, 40], semi-supervised [38,
41] and supervised methods [14, 21, 24, 27, 34].
According to the different encoding strategies of query
and database, hashing methods can also be grouped into symmetric and asymmetric ones. Most of the existing
hashing methods are symmetric, in which the binary codes
are derived from the same hash function, and the Hamming distances between them are computed for retrieval. In
comparison to symmetric hashing, some pioneering works [6, 11, 26] have theoretically proven that asymmetric hashing can attain superior accuracy with shorter codes by using
two different hash functions for query and database. For example, Gordo et al. [11] claimed that compressing the query
into the binary codes is not a strict requirement and presented two general asymmetric distances, which are applicable
to many hashing methods. The key insight is that query is
real-valued and database is still binary, so that the more precise information of the query is capable of facilitating better
similarity search. Since the hash functions for both query
and database are derived from the same real-valued embedding function, this method does not fully take the advantage
of the asymmetry. Neyshabur et al. [26] went a step further
by proposing an asymmetric binary hashing method using two distinct binary hash functions, but the binary constraints
still limit the effectiveness.
In addition, two-step hashing [20, 21] has attracted broad
research interests due to its simplicity, flexibility and effectiveness. It decomposes the hashing learning problem into
two steps: a binary code inference step and a hash function learning step based on the learned codes. As mentioned in [5], different encoding strategies can be adopted
for database and query in two-step hashing, thereby it is essentially an asymmetric hashing method. Subsequently, dis-

736

