Kernel Pooling for Convolutional Neural Networks
Yin Cui1,2∗ Feng Zhou3 Jiang Wang4 Xiao Liu3 Yuanqing Lin3 Serge Belongie1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Cornell Tech
3
Baidu Research 4 Google Research
{ycui, sjb}@cs.cornell.edu
wangjiangb@gmail.com

www.f-zhou.com

{liuxiao12,linyuanqing}@baidu.com

original feature vector

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with Bilinear
Pooling, initially in their full form and later using compact
representations, have yielded impressive performance gains
on a wide range of visual tasks, including fine-grained visual categorization, visual question answering, face recognition, and description of texture and style. The key to their
success lies in the spatially invariant modeling of pairwise
(2nd order) feature interactions. In this work, we propose
a general pooling framework that captures higher order interactions of features in the form of kernels. We demonstrate how to approximate kernels such as Gaussian RBF
up to a given order using compact explicit feature maps in
a parameter-free manner. Combined with CNNs, the composition of the kernel can be learned from data in an endto-end fashion via error back-propagation. The proposed
kernel pooling scheme is evaluated in terms of both kernel
approximation error and visual recognition accuracy. Experimental evaluations demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on commonly used fine-grained recognition datasets.

differentiable compact explicit
feature map approximation

Legend
element-wise
multiplication
Count Sketch
Fast Fourier
Transform

const.

1st order

2nd order

3rd order

pth order

Inverse Fast
Fourier
Transform

Figure 1. The proposed Kernel Pooling method. For a feature vector (i.e., the activation at a spatial location on the feature map, in
the case of a CNN), we use Count Sketch [6] to generate a compact
explicit feature map up to pth order. After applying kernel pooling, the inner product between two features can capture high order
feature interactions as in Eqn. 1. This makes the subsequent linear classifier highly discriminative. The proposed kernel pooling
scheme is end-to-end trainable and the composition of the kernel
can be learned through the update of coefficients {αi }pi=0 . The
vanilla compact bilinear pooling [11, 10] only use the 2nd order
information as the feature vector.

1. Introduction
The idea of interactions between features has been used
extensively as a higher order representation in learning tasks
recently [24, 34, 3, 23]. The motivation behind is to make
the subsequent linear classifier operates on higher dimensional feature map so that it becomes more discriminative.
There are two ways in general to create higher order interactions. The most commonly used one is to implicitly map
the feature via the kernel trick, like in the case of kernel
SVM [41]. The disadvantages are twofold. The storage
needed and the evaluation time are both proportional to the
number of training data, which makes it inefficient on large
datasets. In addition, the construction of the kernel makes it
∗ Part of this work was done during the internship at Baidu Research.

hard to use stochastic learning methods, including Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) in the training of CNNs. The
other way is to explicitly map the feature vector into high
dimensional space with products of features (monomials).
The drawback of this method is obvious. If we want up to
pth order interactions on a d dimensional feature vector, the
dimension of the explicit feature map will be O(dp ), which
makes it impractical to use in real world applications. A
common way to address these issues is to compactly approximate either kernel functions [37, 44] or feature maps
[17, 31, 2].
Before the remarkable success of using Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) on visual data [20, 38, 39, 15],
low-level hand-crafted features (e.g., SIFT [25], HOG [8],
12921

