Combining Bottom-Up, Top-Down, and Smoothness Cues for
Weakly Supervised Image Segmentation
Anirban Roy and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
royani@oregonstate.edu, sinisa@eecs.oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of weakly supervised
semantic image segmentation. Our goal is to label every
pixel in a new image, given only image-level object labels
associated with training images. Our problem statement
differs from common semantic segmentation, where pixelwise annotations are typically assumed available in training.
We specify a novel deep architecture which fuses three distinct computation processes toward semantic segmentation –
namely, (i) the bottom-up computation of neural activations
in a CNN for the image-level prediction of object classes;
(ii) the top-down estimation of conditional likelihoods of
the CNN’s activations given the predicted objects, resulting in probabilistic attention maps per object class; and
(iii) the lateral attention-message passing from neighboring
neurons at the same CNN layer. The fusion of (i)-(iii) is
realized via a conditional random field as recurrent network
aimed at generating a smooth and boundary-preserving segmentation. Unlike existing work, we formulate a unified
end-to-end learning of all components of our deep architecture. Evaluation on the benchmark PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset demonstrates that we outperform reasonable weakly
supervised baselines and state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of semantic image segmentation under weak supervision. Given an image, our goal
is to assign an object class label to every pixel. Knowledge
about the objects is learned from training images with only
image-level class labels, i.e., image tags. Our problem differs from fully supervised semantic segmentation, commonly
addressed in previous work, where pixel-wise ground-truth
annotations of object classes are available in training.
Semantic image segmentation is challenging as objects
in the image may appear in various poses, under partial
occlusion, and against cluttered background. This is a long-

standing problem, addressed by a large number of successful
approaches under the assumption of having access to groundtruth pixel labels in training [22, 14, 27, 11, 3, 7, 12]. Due
to this assumption, it is difficult to extend previous work
to a wide range of other domains that do not provide pixelwise annotations, or provide an insufficient amount of such
supervision for robust learning.
Toward relaxing the level of supervision required in training, recently, weakly supervised convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been proposed for semantic image segmentation [24, 25, 28, 26, 45, 29, 18, 41, 4, 30, 36]. These
approaches use only image tags in training. Most of them
perform segmentation within the multi-instance learning
(MIL) framework, which ensures that pixel labeling is consistent with predicting image tags, since the latter prediction
can be readily used for specifying loss against the available
image-level ground truth, and in this way train the CNN.
Inspired by the success of these approaches, we also start
off with a CNN aimed at two tasks: pixel labeling and predicting image classes – where image classification results on
training data are used for an end-to-end MIL-based learning.
Specifically, we use the DeepLab net [7] for pixel labeling, and another fully-connected layer for predicting image
classes. We then extend this framework so as to fuse topdown, bottom-up, and smoothness visual cues toward more
accurate semantic segmentation, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Our
extensions are aimed at addressing the following two issues
that we have observed in segmentation results of related
work [24, 25, 28, 26, 45, 29, 18]: (1) Poor localization of
objects; and (2) Limited preservation of object boundaries
and smoothness over the true spatial extents of objects.
To generate boundary preserving segmentation, we pass
the pixel labels predicted by our CNN, along with raw pixels
of the image, to a fully-connected conditional random field
(CRF). Specifically, following [46], we implement the CRF
as a recurrent neural network (RNN), and call this network
CRF-RNN. Our CRF-RNN refines the initial CNN’s prediction such that the pixel labels better fit image edges present
in input image. Importantly, our CRF-based refinement of
13529

