Polyhedral Conic Classifiers for Visual Object Detection and Classification
Hakan Cevikalp
Eskisehir Osmangazi University
Meselik Kampusu, 26480, Eskisehir, Turkey

Bill Triggs
Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann
B.P. 53, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France

hakan.cevikalp@gmail.com

bill.triggs@imag.fr

Abstract
We propose a family of quasi-linear discriminants that
outperform current large-margin methods in sliding window visual object detection and open set recognition tasks.
In these tasks the classification problems are both numerically imbalanced – positive (object class) training and test
windows are much rarer than negative (non-class) ones –
and geometrically asymmetric – the positive samples typically form compact, visually-coherent groups while negatives are much more diverse, including anything at all that
is not a well-centred sample from the target class. It is
difficult to cover such negative classes using training samples, and doubly so in ‘open set’ applications where runtime negatives may stem from classes that were not seen at
all during training. So there is a need for discriminants
whose decision regions focus on tightly circumscribing the
positive class, while still taking account of negatives in
zones where the two classes overlap. This paper introduces
a family of quasi-linear “polyhedral conic” discriminants
whose positive regions are distorted L1 balls. The methods have properties and run-time complexities comparable
to linear Support Vector Machines (SVMs), and they can be
trained from either binary or positive-only samples using
constrained quadratic programs related to SVMs. Our experiments show that they significantly outperform both linear SVMs and existing one-class discriminants on a wide
range of object detection, open set recognition and conventional closed-set classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Conventional machine learning classifiers such as largemargin discriminants [6, 9, 4] are intended for “closed set”
scenarios [29] in which the class labels are mutually exclusive and exhaustive and every class seen at test time is
known during training. These methods try to attribute each
test sample to a class even when it has little resemblance to
the training samples of any known one – a semantics that is
fragile because it ignores the possibility that outliers (sam-

ples with no meaningful class) and novel classes (ones not
foreseen during training) may occur at test time. In contrast, “open set” methods [29] try to handle these issues by
rejecting test samples that do not appear to belong to any of
the known training classes. To do this they need to estimate
some kind of inlier or validation region for each target class
in addition to the conventional inter-class decision boundaries.
Visual object detection should also benefit from discriminants that tightly constrain the positive class. In
sliding-window detection, the discrimination problem is
highly asymmetric because the positive samples (windows
that correctly frame instances of the target class) form a
variable-but-coherent appearance class, whereas the negatives (anything at all that is not a well framed object
instance) are much more diverse. Moreover the data is
highly imbalanced in that there are many more negative
(non-object) training and test windows than positive (object) ones. For both reasons it is useful for the discriminant
to focus on tightly bounding the positive class whereas conventional discriminants such as Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) treat the two classes as though they were equal,
interchangeable alternatives. Owing to the many ways in
which a window can fail to be a positive most of the SVM
support vectors turn out to be ‘hard negatives’ and with existing feature sets it is not unusual to find that these completely surround the positives in feature space (c.f . the scatter plots of projected class densities in [15, 28]).
In both applications there is a need for reliable, scalable,
asymmetric discriminants that focus on modeling the positive class as a compact, coherent set surrounded by a disparate sea of negatives. The pitfalls of not doing so are
illustrated in Fig. 1. This is for a recognition problem in
which unforeseen classes occur at run time, but object detectors face similar issues with unforeseen kinds of hard
negatives. This paper introduces a new family of quasilinear discriminants that achieve these goals by using polyhedral decision boundaries based on linear sections through
L1 cones. By supplying tighter bounds on the positive class,
this geometry systematically outperforms half-space based
1261

