Spatio-Temporal Vector of Locally Max Pooled Features
for Action Recognition in Videos

1

Ionut Cosmin Duta1
Bogdan Ionescu2
Kiyoharu Aizawa3
Nicu Sebe1
2
3
University of Trento, Italy University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania University of Tokyo, Japan
{ionutcosmin.duta, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, bionescu@imag.pub.ro, aizawa@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We introduce Spatio-Temporal Vector of Locally Max
Pooled Features (ST-VLMPF), a super vector-based encoding method specifically designed for local deep features encoding. The proposed method addresses an important problem of video understanding: how to build a video representation that incorporates the CNN features over the entire video.
Feature assignment is carried out at two levels, by using the
similarity and spatio-temporal information. For each assignment we build a specific encoding, focused on the nature of
deep features, with the goal to capture the highest feature responses from the highest neuron activation of the network.
Our ST-VLMPF clearly provides a more reliable video representation than some of the most widely used and powerful encoding approaches (Improved Fisher Vectors and Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors), while maintaining
a low computational complexity. We conduct experiments
on three action recognition datasets: HMDB51, UCF50 and
UCF101. Our pipeline obtains state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is still a very challenging and high
computationally demanding task in computer vision, receiving a sustained attention from the research community due
to its huge pool of potential applications. Its pipeline can be
broken down into three main steps: feature extraction, encoding and classification. While for the classification part, the
existing techniques are more mature, for feature extraction
and encoding there is still a significant room for improvement. There are two main directions for feature extraction:
hand-crafted and learned features (deep features). For handcrafted category the most popular descriptors are represented
by Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [5, 20], Histogram of Optical Flow (HOF) [20] and Motion Boundary
Histograms (MBH) [6]. These descriptors are extracted from
a video using different approaches to establish the region of
extraction, such as at interest points [19], using a dense sampling [42, 47], along motion trajectories [38, 43, 45]. Re-

Video
Volume

x1
x2
䐂
xn
Features

Positions
Feature
Extraction

p1
p2
䐂
pn

Similarity
Max-Pooling
over Features
Assig. 1

Assig. 2

m1=[0100䐃00]
m2=[0000䐃01]
䐂
mn=[1000䐃00]
Memberships

Spatio-temporal
Sum-Pooling
over Member.
Spatio-temporal
Max-Pooling
over Features

VLMPF
Encoding

ST-VLMPF
Encoding
ST
Encoding

Figure 1: The ST-VLMPF framework for deep features encoding.

cently, the features learned with a deep neural network represent a breakthrough in research, obtaining impressive results
[3, 17, 25, 33, 34, 39, 40, 49, 52].
The feature encoding is one of the crucial steps for the
system performance. Super vector-based encoding methods
represent one of the most powerful solutions to build the final representation that servers as an input for a classifier. Improved Fisher Vectors (iFV) [29] and Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors (VLAD) [15] proved their superiority
over other encoding methods in many works and are presented as state-of-the-art approaches for the encoding step
[22, 27, 41, 42, 45]. One of the shortcomings for current standard encodings is the lack of considering the spatio-temporal
information, which is crucially important, especially when
dealing with videos. These encoding approaches are built
around hand-crafted features. However, a new trend is using
deep features, as they obtain promising results over the traditional hand-crafted features. Many recent works apply these
encoding methods also on deep features. Nevertheless, there
is not yet a mature pipeline established for using these new
features as their nature and behavior are implicitly different
from the hand-designed category.
Deep features are learned throughout a deep neural network, providing high discriminative power on the upper layers of the network, with high level information such as objects, while hand-crafted features are manually designed and
usually contain low-level information such as edges. Deep
features are characterized also by their high sparsity. For instance, in [34, 49] the feature maps extracted from the upper
layers of the networks (which are often used in the works
as features), can contain a sparsity level of more than 90%,

3097

