SphereFace: Deep Hypersphere Embedding for Face Recognition
Weiyang Liu1 Yandong Wen2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology

Zhiding Yu2 Ming Li3 Bhiksha Raj2 Le Song1
2
Carnegie Mellon University 3 Sun Yat-Sen University

wyliu@gatech.edu, {yandongw,yzhiding}@andrew.cmu.edu, lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Training
Set

Abstract

Testing
Set

This paper addresses deep face recognition (FR) problem under open-set protocol, where ideal face features are
expected to have smaller maximal intra-class distance than
minimal inter-class distance under a suitably chosen metric space. However, few existing algorithms can effectively
achieve this criterion. To this end, we propose the angular
softmax (A-Softmax) loss that enables convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to learn angularly discriminative features.
Geometrically, A-Softmax loss can be viewed as imposing
discriminative constraints on a hypersphere manifold, which
intrinsically matches the prior that faces also lie on a manifold. Moreover, the size of angular margin can be quantitatively adjusted by a parameter m. We further derive specific
m to approximate the ideal feature criterion. Extensive analysis and experiments on Labeled Face in the Wild (LFW),
Youtube Faces (YTF) and MegaFace Challenge 1 show the
superiority of A-Softmax loss in FR tasks.

...

...
Identities appear in training set

Identities DO NOT appear in training set

Face
Identification

Training Set
Label
Predictor

IDi

Feature
Extractor

Training
Set

...

... Testing
Gallery

... Feature
Compare Distance

.. .. ...

.. ..

Features

Face
Verification

Training Set
..

IDi
Label
Predictor

Compare label
IDj

...Training

Feature
Extractor

Feature

Compare Distance

.. Feature

Equivalent
Task

Set

Classification Problem

Metric Learning Problem

Learn separable
features

Learn large-margin
features

Closed-set Face Recognition

Open-set Face Recognition

Figure 1: Comparison of open-set and closed-set face recognition.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in face recognition (FR).
Owing to advanced network architectures [13, 23, 29, 4] and
discriminative learning approaches [25, 22, 34], deep CNNs
have boosted the FR performance to an unprecedent level.
Typically, face recognition can be categorized as face identiﬁcation and face veriﬁcation [8, 11]. The former classiﬁes a
face to a speciﬁc identity, while the latter determines whether
a pair of faces belongs to the same identity.
In terms of testing protocol, face recognition can be evaluated under closed-set or open-set settings, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. For closed-set protocol, all testing identities are
predeﬁned in training set. It is natural to classify testing
face images to the given identities. In this scenario, face
veriﬁcation is equivalent to performing identiﬁcation for a
pair of faces respectively (see left side of Fig. 1). Therefore, closed-set FR can be well addressed as a classiﬁcation
problem, where features are expected to be separable. For
open-set protocol, the testing identities are usually disjoint

...

from the training set, which makes FR more challenging
yet close to practice. Since it is impossible to classify faces
to known identities in training set, we need to map faces
to a discriminative feature space. In this scenario, face identiﬁcation can be viewed as performing face veriﬁcation
between the probe face and every identity in the gallery (see
right side of Fig. 1). Open-set FR is essentially a metric
learning problem, where the key is to learn discriminative
large-margin features.
Desired features for open-set FR are expected to satisfy
the criterion that the maximal intra-class distance is smaller
than the minimal inter-class distance under a certain metric
space. This criterion is necessary if we want to achieve
perfect accuracy using nearest neighbor. However, learning
features with this criterion is generally difﬁcult because of
the intrinsically large intra-class variation and high interclass similarity [21] that faces exhibit.
Few CNN-based approaches are able to effectively formulate the aforementioned criterion in loss functions. Pi-

212

