Learning Discriminative and Transformation Covariant
Local Feature Detectors
Xu Zhang1 , Felix X. Yu2 , Svebor Karaman1 , Shih-Fu Chang1
1
Columbia University, 2 Google Research
{xu.zhang, svebor.karaman, sc250}@columbia.edu, felixyu@google.com

Abstract
Robust covariant local feature detectors are important
for detecting local features that are (1) discriminative of the
image content and (2) can be repeatably detected at consistent locations when the image undergoes diverse transformations. Such detectors are critical for applications such
as image search and scene reconstruction. Many learningbased local feature detectors address one of these two problems while overlooking the other. In this work, we propose
a novel learning-based method to simultaneously address
both issues. Specifically, we extend the covariant constraint
proposed by Lenc and Vedaldi [8] by defining the concepts
of “standard patch” and “canonical feature” and leverage these to train a novel robust covariant detector. We
show that the introduction of these concepts greatly simplifies the learning stage of the covariant detector, and also
makes the detector much more robust. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms previous handcrafted and learning-based detectors by large margins in
terms of repeatability.

1. Introduction
Local feature detectors play a critical role in computer
vision applications such as image registration [29], image
matching [2] and image retrieval [26]. Traditionally, local
feature detectors were carefully hand-crafted to deal with
scale and viewpoint changes [9, 16]. More recently, machine learning based detectors [8, 24, 25] have been proposed to deal with challenging issues such as temporal
variations in webcam sequences [24]. Even though machine learning based methods have achieved great success
in many computer vision problems such as object recognition, the research of learning-based local feature detectors
is still quite preliminary.
Given an image, a local feature detector outputs a set of
features1 , i.e., a set of points or a set of ellipses in the image.
1 Note that a feature is different from a feature descriptor. The latter is
a vector describing a local patch of an image.

A good local feature detector should satisfy two important
properties: (1) it can discover local discriminative information in the image, and (2) it can repeatably detect consistent
patterns when the scene undergoes diverse transformations.
The second property means that given an image that has undergone a geometric transformation, a good detector should
output the feature same as the ones generated from the untransformed image, subject to the same geometric transformation as the one applied to the image. Such property is
called the covariant constraint of the local feature detector
and has been studied in [8].
Most of the learning-based detectors only focus on one
of the two properties mentioned above. Some feature detectors are learned using manually labeled data or the output of off-the-shelf detectors as discriminative training features [6, 24, 21, 5]. However, the covariant constraint is
difficult to embed in such a training pipeline, and this often
leads to inability in handling transformations that are not
presented in the training data. Other feature detectors are
designed to primarily focus on the covariant constraint [8],
but does not place equal emphasis on extraction of discriminative local content - a key property of “good” local features.
In this work, we propose a novel learning-based method
to solve both issues. Specifically, we extend the covariant
constraint proposed by Lenc and Vedaldi [8] by defining
the concepts of “standard patch” and “canonical feature”.
The standard patches define discriminative patches and the
standard position and shape of the canonical feature (e.g.
a unit circle) inside the standard patch. We will show such
explicit concepts make the learning process more robust and
less sensitive to the initialization setting. Furthermore, we
theoretically prove that the covariant constraint for all the
patches sampled from images is equivalent to the covariant
constraint for all standard patches. We show that this greatly
simplifies the learning stage.
The learning framework in both our work and [8] is to
train a transformation predictor instead of a predictor for the
existence of the local feature. Thus, the covariant constraint
of the local feature detector becomes the covariant con-

6818

