Network Dissection:
Quantifying Interpretability of Deep Visual Representations
David Bau∗, Bolei Zhou∗, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba
CSAIL, MIT
{davidbau, bzhou, khosla, oliva, torralba}@csail.mit.edu
Abstract
We propose a general framework called Network Dissection for quantifying the interpretability of latent representations of CNNs by evaluating the alignment between individual hidden units and a set of semantic concepts. Given any
CNN model, the proposed method draws on a broad data
set of visual concepts to score the semantics of hidden units
at each intermediate convolutional layer. The units with
semantics are given labels across a range of objects, parts,
scenes, textures, materials, and colors. We use the proposed
method to test the hypothesis that interpretability of units
is equivalent to random linear combinations of units, then
we apply our method to compare the latent representations
of various networks when trained to solve different supervised and self-supervised training tasks. We further analyze
the effect of training iterations, compare networks trained
with different initializations, examine the impact of network
depth and width, and measure the effect of dropout and batch
normalization on the interpretability of deep visual representations. We demonstrate that the proposed method can shed
light on characteristics of CNN models and training methods
that go beyond measurements of their discriminative power.

1. Introduction
Observations of hidden units in large deep neural networks have revealed that human-interpretable concepts sometimes emerge as individual latent variables within those networks: for example, object detector units emerge within networks trained to recognize places [40]; part detectors emerge
in object classifiers [11]; and object detectors emerge in generative video networks [32] (Fig. 1). This internal structure
has appeared in situations where the networks are not constrained to decompose problems in any interpretable way.
The emergence of interpretable structure suggests that
deep networks may be learning disentangled representations
spontaneously. While it is commonly understood that a network can learn an efficient encoding that makes economical
use of hidden variables to distinguish its states, the appear-

lamps in places net

wheels in object net

people in video net

Figure 1. Unit 13 in [40] (classifying places) detects table lamps.
Unit 246 in [11] (classifying objects) detects bicycle wheels. A
unit in [32] (self-supervised for generating videos) detects people.

ance of a disentangled representation is not well-understood.
A disentangled representation aligns its variables with a
meaningful factorization of the underlying problem structure,
and encouraging disentangled representations is a significant
area of research [5]. If the internal representation of a deep
network is partly disentangled, one possible path for understanding its mechanisms is to detect disentangled structure,
and simply read out the separated factors.
However, this proposal raises questions which we address
in this paper:
• What is a disentangled representation, and how can its
factors be quantified and detected?
• Do interpretable hidden units reflect a special alignment
of feature space, or are interpretations a chimera?
• What conditions in state-of-the-art training lead to representations with greater or lesser entanglement?
To examine these issues, we propose a general analytic
framework, network dissection, for interpreting deep visual
representations and quantifying their interpretability. Using Broden, a broadly and densely labeled data set, our
framework identifies hidden units’ semantics for any given
CNN, then aligns them with human-interpretable concepts.
We evaluate our method on various CNNs (AlexNet, VGG,
GoogLeNet, ResNet) trained on object and scene recognition,
and show that emergent interpretability is an axis-aligned
property of a representation that can be destroyed by rotation
without affecting discriminative power. We further examine
how interpretability is affected by training data sets, training
techniques like dropout [28] and batch normalization [13],
and supervision by different primary tasks.
∗ indicates equal contribution
Source code and data available at http://netdissect.csail.mit.edu

16541

