Fast 3D Reconstruction of Faces with Glasses
Fabio Maninchedda1
Martin R. Oswald1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Microsoft

Abstract
We present a method for the fast 3D face reconstruction
of people wearing glasses. Our method explicitly and robustly models the case in which a face to be reconstructed
is partially occluded by glasses. We propose a simple and
generic model for glasses that copes with a wide variety
of different shapes, colors and styles, without the need for
any database or learning. Our algorithm is simple, fast and
requires only small amounts of both memory and runtime
resources, allowing for a fast interactive 3D reconstruction
on commodity mobile phones. The thorough evaluation of
our approach on synthetic and real data demonstrates superior reconstruction results due to the explicit modeling of
glasses.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we target the mobile 3D reconstruction of
human faces that are possibly covered with glasses. Fig. 1
provides an overview of our method. The instant creation
of 3D face reconstructions has a number of applications enjoying growing demands, such as the creation of 3D selfies
that can be immediately viewed or printed in 3D, the creation of 3D avatars for augmented or virtual reality applications, content creation for games or movies, or 3D face
authentication.
Challenges of Mobile Face Reconstruction. In contrast to
many other 3D reconstruction methods, which often rely on
a controlled image acquisition setup, in mobile face reconstruction we are confronted with a large number of additional difficulties like significant variations in lighting conditions, higher amounts of noise due to low cost sensors,
motion blur, rolling shutter distortions, image artifacts due
to dirty lenses, non-rigid deformations of the face during
scanning, and finally also fewer computing resources.
Importance of Modeling Eyeglasses. Surprisingly, only
few works in the face reconstruction literature address the
topic of face reconstruction in the presence of glasses even
though a large number of people wear them because they
require a visual aid. Modeling glasses explicitly is beneficial for many applications. An important example is face

Figure 1: Result obtained using our approach. From left
to right: Input image, result mesh, textured result with reconstruction of the glasses. Our approach first segments the
eyeglasses to allow for a plausible reconstruction of the face
while ignoring the depth values measured on the glasses.

authentication. In [46] Sharif et al. have shown that an attacker wearing eyeglasses can easily fool a state-of-the-art
2D authentication system into believing that he is another
individual. Such a simple attack would not work for 3D face
authentication systems because they heavily rely on the 3D
shape, but this study highlights two important facts. First,
the expressiveness and generality of pure 2D approaches is
limited. Second, glasses that cover significant portions of
the face can have a big impact on authentication systems
and hence deserve to be modeled separately. This is certainly also true for 3D face authentication. In this paper we
try to fill this gap and propose a robust multi-view 3D reconstruction approach for faces and eyeglasses which has
interactive processing times on current commodity mobile
devices.

1.1. Related Work
Our method takes advantage of several computer vision
methods like image segmentation, generic 3D reconstruction, and statistical shape models. In a 3D setting there are
only few works that address the segmentation and modeling of eyeglasses, but there are a number 2D approaches for
which we also give a brief overview.
Eyeglass Detection and Segmentation. In [54], eyeglasses
can be detected, localized as well as removed from a single
input image. In [6], Fourier descriptors are used describe
the boundary of the lenses and a genetic algorithm is used to

6599

