Physically-Based Rendering for Indoor Scene Understanding
Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Yinda Zhang†∗ Shuran Song†∗ Ersin Yumer‡ Manolis Savva†
Joon-Young Lee‡ Hailin Jin‡ Thomas Funkhouser†
†

‡

Princeton University

Adobe Research

Abstract
Indoor scene understanding is central to applications
such as robot navigation and human companion assistance.
Over the last years, data-driven deep neural networks have
outperformed many traditional approaches thanks to their
representation learning capabilities. One of the bottlenecks
in training for better representations is the amount of available per-pixel ground truth data that is required for core
scene understanding tasks such as semantic segmentation,
normal prediction, and object boundary detection. To address this problem, a number of works proposed using synthetic data. However, a systematic study of how such synthetic data is generated is missing. In this work, we introduce a large-scale synthetic dataset with 500K physicallybased rendered images from 45K realistic 3D indoor scenes.
We study the effects of rendering methods and scene lighting
on training for three computer vision tasks: surface normal
prediction, semantic segmentation, and object boundary detection. This study provides insights into the best practices
for training with synthetic data (more realistic rendering is
worth it) and shows that pretraining with our new synthetic
dataset can improve results beyond the current state of the
art on all three tasks.

1. Introduction
Indoor scene understanding is crucial to many applications including but not limited to robotic agent path planning, assistive human companions, and monitoring systems.
One of the most promising approaches to tackle these issues is using a data-driven method, where the representation is learned from large amount of data. However, real
world data is very limited for most of these tasks, such as
the widely used indoor RGBD dataset for normal prediction introduced by Silberman et al. [21], which contains
merely 1449 images. Such datasets are not trivial to collect due to various requirements such as depth sensing tech∗ indicates equal contributions.

Real Photo

Sensor Normal

Sync Color Image

Sync Normal

Annotated Seg. Annotated Boundary

Sync Seg.

Sync Boundary

Figure 1. Real data (top) vs. synthetic data (bottom). For the real
data, note the noise in normal map and the diminishing accuracy
at object boundaries in the semantic labels.

nology [21, 23] and excessive human effort for semantic
segmentation [14, 8]. Moreover, current datasets lack pixel
level accuracy due to sensor noise or labeling error (Fig. 1).
This has recently led to utilizing synthetic data in the
form of 2D render pairs (RGB image and per-pixel label
map) from digital 3D models [2, 6, 11, 30, 24, 17]. However, there are two major problems that have not been addressed: (1) studies of how indoor scene context affect
training have not been possible due to the lack of large
scene datasets, so training is performed mostly on repositories with independent 3D objects [4]; and (2) systematic
studies have not been done on how such data should be rendered; unrealistic rendering methods often are used in the
interest of efficiency.
To address these problems, we introduce a large scale
(500K images) synthetic dataset that is created from 45K
3D houses designed by humans [20]. Using such realistic indoor 3D environments enable us to create 2D images
for training in realistic context settings where support constructs (e.g. such as walls, ceilings, windows) as well as
light sources exist together with common household objects. Since we have access to the source 3D models, we
can generate dense per-pixel training data for all tasks, virtually with no cost.
Complete control over the 3D scenes enables us to systematically manipulate both outdoor and indoor lighting,

5287

