A-Lamp: Adaptive Layout-Aware Multi-Patch Deep Convolutional Neural
Network for Photo Aesthetic Assessment
Shuang Ma⋆ , Jing Liu† and Chang Wen Chen⋆
Computer Science and Engineering, SUNY at Buffalo
†
Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University
⋆

{shuangma,chencw}@buffalo.edu , jliu tju@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) have recently been shown to generate promising results for aesthetics assessment. However, the performance of these deep
CNN methods is often compromised by the constraint that
the neural network only takes the fixed-size input. To accommodate this requirement, input images need to be transformed via cropping, warping, or padding, which often alter
image composition, reduce image resolution, or cause image distortion. Thus the aesthetics of the original images
is impaired because of potential loss of fine grained details
and holistic image layout. However, such fine grained details and holistic image layout is critical for evaluating an
image’s aesthetics. In this paper, we present an Adaptive
Layout-Aware Multi-Patch Convolutional Neural Network
(A-Lamp CNN) architecture for photo aesthetic assessment.
This novel scheme is able to accept arbitrary sized images,
and learn from both fined grained details and holistic image layout simultaneously. To enable training on these hybrid inputs, we extend the method by developing a dedicated
double-subnet neural network structure, i.e. a Multi-Patch
subnet and a Layout-Aware subnet. We further construct an
aggregation layer to effectively combine the hybrid features
from these two subnets. Extensive experiments on the largescale aesthetics assessment benchmark (AVA) demonstrate
significant performance improvement over the state-of-theart in photo aesthetic assessment.

1. Introduction
Automatic image aesthetics assessment is challenging.
Among the early efforts [5, 15], various hand-craft aesthetics features [25, 2, 40, 6, 38, 4] have been manually designed to approximate the photographic and psychological
aesthetics rules. However, to design effective aesthetics features manually is still a challenging task because even the
very experienced photographers use very abstract terms to

Figure 1. Conventional CNN methods (a) transform images via
cropping, warping and padding. The proposed A-Lamp CNN (b)
takes multiple patches and attributes graphs as inputs to represent
fine grained details and the overall layout.

describe high quality photos. Other approaches leveraged
more generic features[29, 34, 38] to predict photo aesthetics. However, these generic features may not be suitable for
assessing photo aesthetics, as they are designed to capture
the general characteristics of the natural images instead of
describing the aesthetics of the images.
Because of the limitations of these feature-based approaches, many researchers have recently turned to use
deep learning strategy to extract effective aesthetics features
[23, 21, 28, 39, 14]. These deep CNN methods have indeed
shown promising results. However, the performance is often compromised by the constraint that the neural network
only takes the fixed-size input. To accommodate this requirement, input images will need to be obtained via cropping, warping, or padding. As we can see from Figure 1,
these additional operations often alter image composition,
reduce image resolution, or cause extra image distortion,
and thus impair the aesthetics of the original images because of potential loss of fine grained details and holistic
image layout. However, such fine-grained details and overall image layout are critical for the task of image quality
assessment. He[9] and Mai[28] tried to address the limitai4535

