PoseTrack: Joint Multi-Person Pose Estimation and Tracking
Umar Iqbal1 , Anton Milan2 , and Juergen Gall1
1
Computer Vision Group, University of Bonn, Germany
2
Australian Centre for Visual Technologies, University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
In this work, we introduce the challenging problem of
joint multi-person pose estimation and tracking of an unknown number of persons in unconstrained videos. Existing
methods for multi-person pose estimation in images cannot
be applied directly to this problem, since it also requires to
solve the problem of person association over time in addition to the pose estimation for each person. We therefore
propose a novel method that jointly models multi-person
pose estimation and tracking in a single formulation. To
this end, we represent body joint detections in a video by a
spatio-temporal graph and solve an integer linear program
to partition the graph into sub-graphs that correspond to
plausible body pose trajectories for each person. The proposed approach implicitly handles occlusion and truncation of persons. Since the problem has not been addressed
quantitatively in the literature, we introduce a challenging “Multi-Person PoseTrack” dataset, and also propose a
completely unconstrained evaluation protocol that does not
make any assumptions about the scale, size, location or the
number of persons. Finally, we evaluate the proposed approach and several baseline methods on our new dataset.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has long been motivated for its
applications in understanding human interactions, activity
recognition, video surveillance and sports video analytics.
The field of human pose estimation in images has progressed remarkably over the past few years. The methods
have advanced from pose estimation of single pre-localized
persons [30, 6, 40, 14, 16, 27, 5, 32] to the more challenging and realistic case of multiple, potentially overlapping
and truncated persons [12, 8, 30, 16, 17]. Many applications, such as mentioned before, however, aim to analyze
human body motion over time. While there exists a notable
number of works that track the pose of a single person in a
video [28, 9, 44, 33, 46, 20, 29, 7, 13, 18], multi-person human pose estimation in unconstrained videos has not been
addressed in the literature.

Figure 1: Example frames and annotations from the proposed
Multi-Person PoseTrack dataset.

In this work, we address the problem of tracking the
poses of multiple persons in an unconstrained setting. This
means that we have to deal with large pose and scale variations, fast motions, and a varying number of persons and
visible body parts due to occlusion or truncation. In contrast
to previous works, we aim to solve the association of each
person across the video and the pose estimation together.
To this end, we build upon the recent methods for multiperson pose estimation in images [30, 16, 17] that build a
spatial graph based on joint proposals to estimate the pose
of multiple persons in an image. In particular, we cast the
problem as an optimization of a densely connected spatiotemporal graph connecting body joint candidates spatially
as well as temporally. The optimization problem is formulated as a constrained Integer Linear Program (ILP) whose
feasible solution partitions the graph into valid body pose
trajectories for any unknown number of persons. In this
way, we can handle occlusion, truncation, and temporal association within a single formulation.
Since there exists no dataset that provides annotations
to quantitatively evaluate joint multi-person pose estimation and tracking, we also propose a new challenging MultiPerson PoseTrack dataset as a second contribution of the
paper. The dataset provides detailed and dense annotations
for multiple persons in each video, as shown in Fig. 1, and
introduces new challenges to the field of pose estimation in
videos. In order to evaluate the pose estimation and tracking
accuracy, we introduce a new protocol that also deals with
occluded body joints. We quantify the proposed method
in detail on the proposed dataset, and also report results
for several baseline methods. The source code, pre-trained
models and the dataset are publicly available.1
1 http://pages.iai.uni-bonn.de/iqbal_umar/
PoseTrack/

12011

