KillingFusion: Non-rigid 3D Reconstruction without Correspondences
Miroslava Slavcheva 1,2
1

Maximilian Baust 1

Technische Universität München

Daniel Cremers 1
2

We introduce a geometry-driven approach for real-time
3D reconstruction of deforming surfaces from a single
RGB-D stream without any templates or shape priors. To
this end, we tackle the problem of non-rigid registration by
level set evolution without explicit correspondence search.
Given a pair of signed distance fields (SDFs) representing
the shapes of interest, we estimate a dense deformation field
that aligns them. It is defined as a displacement vector field
of the same resolution as the SDFs and is determined iteratively via variational minimization. To ensure it generates
plausible shapes, we propose a novel regularizer that imposes local rigidity by requiring the deformation to be a
smooth and approximately Killing vector field, i.e. generating nearly isometric motions. Moreover, we enforce that the
level set property of unity gradient magnitude is preserved
over iterations. As a result, KillingFusion reliably reconstructs objects that are undergoing topological changes and
fast inter-frame motion. In addition to incrementally building a model from scratch, our system can also deform complete surfaces. We demonstrate these capabilities on several
public datasets and introduce our own sequences that permit both qualitative and quantitative comparison to related
approaches.

1. Introduction
The growing markets of virtual and augmented reality,
combined with the wide availability of inexpensive RGBD sensors, are perpetually increasing the demand for various applications capable of capturing the user environment
in real time. While many excellent solutions for the reconstruction of static scenes exist [5, 12, 23, 31, 33, 34, 43, 54],
the more common real-life scenario - where objects move
and interact non-rigidly - is still posing a challenge.
The difficulty stems from the high number of unknown
parameters and the inherent ambiguity of the problem, since
various deformations can yield the same shape. These issues can be alleviated through additional constraints, thus
solutions for multi-view surface tracking [4, 8, 9, 10, 18,
22, 50] and template-based approaches [1, 28, 57] have been

Siemens Corporate Technology
Partial Scans

Abstract

Slobodan Ilic 1,2

Warped Live Frames

Canonical Pose
Reconstruction

Figure 1. Non-rigid reconstruction from a single noisy Kinect
depth stream: KillingFusion builds a complete model under large
deformations, rapid inter-frame motion and topology changes.

developed. DynamicFusion [32] is the pioneering work that
addresses the general case of incrementally building a 3D
model from a single Kinect stream in real time, which is
also the objective of our work. VolumeDeform [20] tackles
the same problem, combining depth-based correspondences
with SIFT features to increase robustness to drift. While
both systems demonstrate results of impressive visual quality, they may suffer under larger inter-frame motion due to
the underlying mesh-based correspondence estimation.
Many recent works on deformable 3D reconstruction use
a signed distance field (SDF) to accumulate the recovered
geometry [10, 20, 32], benefiting from its ability to smooth
out errors in the cumulative model [7]. However, they intermittently revert back to a mesh representation in order to determine correspondences for non-rigid alignment [20, 32],
thereby losing accuracy, computational speed and the capability to conveniently capture topological changes. On the
other hand, an SDF inherently tackles situations when surfaces are merging or splitting, e.g. a man puts hands on his
hips or takes his hat off (Fig. 1, 2), a dog bites its tail, etc.
In this paper we propose a non-rigid reconstruction
pipeline where the deformation field, the data explanation
and regularization are operating on a single shape representation: the SDF. We formulate the problem of interest
as building a 3D model in its canonical pose by estimating
a 3D deformation field from each new depth frame to the
global model and subsequently fusing its data. To this end,
we incrementally evolve the projective SDF of the current
frame towards the target SDF following a variational framework. The main energy component is a data term which

1386

