Expert Gate: Lifelong Learning with a Network of Experts
Rahaf Aljundi

Punarjay Chakravarty

Tinne Tuytelaars

{rahaf.aljundi, Punarjay.Chakravarty, Tinne.Tuytelaars}@esat.kuleuven.be

KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, IMEC, Belgium

Abstract

Tk

Expert k

Soft max

...
Input

The Gate

In the age of deep learning and big data, we face a situation where we train ever more complicated models with
ever increasing amounts of data. We have different models for different tasks trained on different datasets, each of
which is an expert on its own domain, but not on others. In
a typical setting, each new task comes with its own dataset.
Learning a new task, say scene classification based on a preexisting object recognition network trained on ImageNet,
requires adapting the model to the new set of classes and
fine-tuning it with the new data. The newly trained network
performs well on the new task, but has a degraded performance on the old ones. This is called catastrophic forgetting [12], and is a major problem facing life long learning
techniques [32, 33, 31], where new tasks and datasets are
added in a sequential manner.
Ideally, a system should be able to operate on different
tasks and domains and give the best performance on each
of them. For example, an image classification system that

...

Expert 2

1. Introduction

Expert 1

In this paper we introduce a model of lifelong learning,
based on a Network of Experts. New tasks / experts are
learned and added to the model sequentially, building on
what was learned before. To ensure scalability of this process, data from previous tasks cannot be stored and hence is
not available when learning a new task. A critical issue in
such context, not addressed in the literature so far, relates
to the decision which expert to deploy at test time. We introduce a set of gating autoencoders that learn a representation for the task at hand, and, at test time, automatically
forward the test sample to the relevant expert. This also
brings memory efficiency as only one expert network has to
be loaded into memory at any given time. Further, the autoencoders inherently capture the relatedness of one task to
another, based on which the most relevant prior model to be
used for training a new expert, with fine-tuning or learningwithout-forgetting, can be selected. We evaluate our method
on image classification and video prediction problems.

T2

T1

Features Extraction

Figure 1. The architecture of our Expert Gate system.

is able to operate on generic as well as fine-grained classes,
and in addition performs action and scene classification. If
all previous training data were available, a direct solution
would be to jointly train a model on all the different tasks
or domains. Each time a new task arrives along with its
own training data, new layers/neurons are added, if needed,
and the model is retrained on all the tasks. Such a solution has three main drawbacks. The first is the risk of the
negative inductive bias when the tasks are not related or
simply adversarial. Second, a shared model might fail to
capture specialist information for particular tasks as joint
training will encourage a hidden representation beneficial
for all tasks. Third, each time a new task is to be learned,
the whole network needs to be re-trained. Apart from the
above drawbacks, the biggest constraint with joint training
is that of keeping all the data from the previous tasks. This
is a difficult requirement to be met, especially in the era of
big data. For example, ILSVRC [30] has 1000 classes, with
over a million images, amounting to 200 GB of data. Yet
the AlexNet model trained on the same dataset, is only 200
MB, a difference in size of three orders of magnitude. With
increasing amounts of data collected, it becomes less and
less feasible to store all the training data, and more practical to just store the models learned from the data.
Without storing the data, one can consider strategies like
using the previous model to generate virtual samples (i.e.
13366

