Cross-Modality Binary Code Learning via Fusion Similarity Hashing
Hong Liu† , Rongrong Ji†∗, Yongjian Wu‡ , Feiyue Huang‡ , and Baochang Zhang♮
†
Xiamen University, ‡ Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, ♮ Beihang University
lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com
garyhuang@tencent.com, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

targets to find a low-dimensional Hamming space to efficiently preserve the cross-modality similarity.

Binary code learning has recently been emerging topic in
large-scale cross-modality retrieval. It aims to map features
from multiple modalities into a common Hamming space,
where the cross-modality similarity can be approximated efficiently via Hamming distance. To this end, most existing
works learn binary codes directly from data instances in
multiple modalities, which preserve both intra- and intermodal similarities respectively. Few methods consider to
preserve the ”fusion similarity” among multi-modal instances instead, which can explicitly capture their heterogeneous correlation in cross-modality retrieval. In this paper, we propose a hashing scheme, termed Fusion Similarity Hashing (FSH), which explicitly embeds the graphbased fusion similarity across modalities into a common
Hamming space. Inspired by the ”fusion by diffusion”, our
core idea is to construct an undirected asymmetric graph
to model the fusion similarity among different modalities,
upon which a graph hashing scheme with alternating optimization is introduced to learn binary codes that embeds
such fusion similarity. Quantitative evaluations on three
widely used benchmarks, i.e., UCI Handwritten Digit, MIRFlickr25K and NUS-WIDE, demonstrate that the proposed
FSH approach can achieve superior performance over the
state-of-the-art methods.

Both unsupervised and supervised hashing schemes have
been recently studied in cross-modality retrieval. For unsupervised hashing, both Cross-view hashing (CVH) [12]
and Inter-Media Hashing (IMH) [23] are extended from
Spectral Hashing [27] to fit the scenario of cross-modality
retrieval. In [21], Predictable Dual-View Hashing (PDH)
was proposed to learn two linear hash functions via a selftaught learning algorithm. Collective Matrix Factorization
Hashing (CMFH) [5] aims to finding consistent hash codes
from different views by collective matrix factorization. In
[33], Latent Semantic Sparse Hashing (LSSH) was proposed to learn latent features from images and texts jointly
with sparse coding, upon which hash codes are learned.
Differently, supervised hashing embeds the label supervision into the Hamming space to improve the retrieval
performance, for instance Co-Regularized Hashing (CRH)
[31], Heterogeneous Translated Hashing (HTH) [26], Supervised Multi-Modal Hashing (SMH) [30], Quantized Correlation Hashing (QCH) [28], Semantics-Preserving Hashing (SePH)[14], and Supervised Matrix Factorization Hashing (SMFH) [15]. Although supervised hashing typically
achieves superior performance, it is very labor intensive to
obtain large-scale labels in many real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Cross-modality visual search has been an emerging topic
in computer vision communities recently [2, 20, 4, 24]. In
a typical setting, instances in one modality, e.g., text documents, are retrieved given a query from another modality,
e.g., image, and vice versa [29]. Ideally, the most similar instances to the query should occupy the top positions in the
ranking list. Due to its low storage cost and fast retrieval
speed, binary code learning, a.k.a., hashing, has attracted
much attention recently in cross-modality retrieval, which
∗ Corresponding author.

In this paper, we focus on unsupervised hashing for
cross-modality retrieval. To learn discriminative binary
codes, it is essential to preserve the intra- and inter-modal
similarities jointly in the common Hamming space produced. To this end, many existing cross-modality hashing,
i.e., Cross-view Hashing, Inter-Media Hashing, and Linear Cross-Modal Hashing [34] preserve both similarities in
a separated manner, typically under a co-training setting
that minimizes the intra- and inter- modal loss iteratively
and respectively. However, most of them handle the problem of such two similarities preserving separately to learn
the corresponding hash codes with a co-training algorithm.
More importantly, such methods neglect to preserve the fusion similarity among multi-modalities data. We argue that
such fusion similarity are more important for measuring the

7380

