Collaborative Summarization of Topic-Related Videos
Rameswar Panda and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
Department of ECE, UC Riverside
rpand002@ucr.edu, amitrc@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
Large collections of videos are grouped into clusters
by a topic keyword, such as “Eiffel Tower” or “Surfing”,
with many important visual concepts repeating across them.
Such a topically close set of videos have mutual influence on
each other, which could be used to summarize one of them
by exploiting information from others in the set. We build on
this intuition to develop a novel approach to extract a summary that simultaneously captures both important particularities arising in the given video, as well as, generalities
identified from the set of videos. The topic-related videos
provide visual context to identify the important parts of the
video being summarized. We achieve this by developing a
collaborative sparse optimization method which can be efficiently solved by a half-quadratic minimization algorithm.
Our work builds upon the idea of collaborative techniques
from information retrieval and natural language processing, which typically use the attributes of other similar objects to predict the attribute of a given object. Experiments
on two challenging and diverse datasets well demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the recent explosion of “big (video) data” over the
Internet, it is becoming increasingly important to automatically extract brief yet informative video summaries in order
to enable a more efficient and engaging viewing experience.
As a result, video summarization, that automates this process, has attracted intense attention in the recent years.
Much progress has been made in developing a variety
of ways to summarize videos, by exploring different design
criteria (representativeness [25, 11, 66, 8, 49, 6], interestingness [13, 31, 41], importance [17, 60]) in an unsupervised manner, or developing supervised algorithms [27, 18,
15, 40, 50]. However, with the notable exception of [6],
one common assumption of existing methods is that videos
are independent of each other, and hence the summarization
tasks are conducted separately by neglecting relationships
that possibly reside across the videos.
Let us consider the video in Fig. 1a. The video is rep-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Consider three videos of the topic “Eiffel Tower”. Each
row shows six uniformly sampled shots represented by the middle frame, from the corresponding video. It is clear that all these
videos have mutual influence on each other since many visual concepts tend to appear repeatedly across them. We therefore hypothesize that such topically close videos can provide more knowledge
and useful clues to extract summary from a given video. We build
on this intuition to propose a summarization algorithm that exploits topic-related visual context from video (b) & (c) to automatically extract an informative summary from a given video (a).

resented by six uniformly sampled shots. Now consider the
videos in Fig. 1b and 1c along with the video in Fig. 1a.
Are these videos independent of each other or something
common exists across them? The answer is clear: all of
these videos belong to the same topic “Eiffel Tower”. As a
result, the summaries of these videos will have significant
common information with each other. Thus, the context of
additional topic-related videos can be beneficial by providing more knowledge and additional clues for extracting a
more informative and compact summary from a specified
video. We build on this intuition, presenting a new perspective to summarize a video by exploiting the neighborhood
knowledge from a set of topic-related videos.
In this paper, we propose a Collaborative Video Summarization (CVS) approach that exploits visual context from
a set of topic-related videos to extract an informative summary of a given video. Our work builds upon the idea of
collaborative techniques [2, 28, 61] from information retrieval (IR) and natural language processing (NLP), which
typically use the attributes of other similar objects to predict
the attribute of a given object. We achieve this by finding a
sparse set of representative and diverse shots that simulta17083

