Missing Modalities Imputation via Cascaded Residual Autoencoder
Luan Tran, Xiaoming Liu, Jiayu Zhou
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824

Rong Jin
Alibaba Group Holding Limited
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

{tranluan, liuxm, jiayuz}@msu.edu

jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Affordable sensors lead to an increasing interest in acquiring and modeling data with multiple modalities. Learning from multiple modalities has shown to significantly improve performance in object recognition. However, in practice it is common that the sensing equipment experiences
unforeseeable malfunction or configuration issues, leading to corrupted data with missing modalities. Most existing multi-modal learning algorithms could not handle
missing modalities, and would discard either all modalities with missing values or all corrupted data. To leverage
the valuable information in the corrupted data, we propose
to impute the missing data by leveraging the relatedness
among different modalities. Specifically, we propose a novel
Cascaded Residual Autoencoder (CRA) to impute missing
modalities. By stacking residual autoencoders, CRA grows
iteratively to model the residual between the current prediction and original data. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of CRA on both the data imputation and the object recognition task on imputed data.

1. Introduction
The soaring advances in sensor technologies have greatly
reduced the cost of producing sensors for different purposes, which allows researchers to collect data with multiple modalities. The multi-modal data describes one sample or datum point from different perspectives, and these
perspectives provide complementary information about the
datum point [13], but are also closely related because they
describe the same sample. Researchers have conducted extensive research on how to combine the useful information from different modalities to better achieve applicationspecific goals [6, 10, 12, 17–19, 21, 25]. Especially, combining information from multiple modalities is shown to be
very effective in various computer vision tasks, such as object detection from aerial videos [19], where we may obtain
multiple sensing information, including RGB, LiDAR, multispectral imaging, hyperspectral imaging, GPS, etc.

Figure 1: Learning with missing modalities. Given a large collection of sensor data from multiple modalities, data imputation may
take advantage of all available data to learn multi-object classifiers
despite the missing modalities (white area). In contrast, the existing approaches may have to remove some modalities and/or training samples so that all remaining training samples are observed in
all remaining modalities (dashed box).

Most prior work on information fusion of multi-modal
data assumes that all modalities are available for every training data point [10, 21]. This assumption can greatly limit
applications of multi-modal analysis because in practice
data collection process may likely generate data points with
missing modalities. E.g., unforeseeable sensor malfunction
may fail to retrieve sensing information. Moreover, configuration issues in sensing equipment may lead to incompatible data. Thus, when jointly analyzing data from different agencies, sample coverage may not be entirely the
same and some corresponding modalities may be incompatible. We call samples with missing modalities as corrupted
samples. Such corrupted samples can impose significant
challenges to apply multi-modal analysis: we may need to
choose from (i) remove corrupted samples from training or
(ii) remove the modalities with corrupted samples. We illustrate the problem of missing modalities in Fig. 1. Both
options, unfortunately, would eliminate potentially useful
information we have collected. Moreover, the multi-modal
analysis would fail when a significant portion of training
data is corrupted.
The missing modality problem is a special type of missing data problem. Traditionally, by assuming that the missing values of a data matrix are random (i.e., missing-at11405

