Multi-scale FCN with Cascaded Instance Aware Segmentation for Arbitrary
Oriented Word Spotting In The Wild
Dafang He1 , Xiao Yang2 , Chen Liang1 , Zihan Zhou1 , Alex G Ororbia1 , Daniel Kifer2 , and C.Lee Giles1
1

Information Science and Technology, The Penn State University
2
Computer Science and Technology, The Penn State University

Abstract
Scene text detection has attracted great attention these
years. Text potentially exist in a wide variety of images
or videos and play an important role in understanding the
scene. In this paper, we present a novel text detection algorithm which is composed of two cascaded steps: (1) a multiscale fully convolutional neural network (FCN) is proposed
to extract text block regions; (2) a novel instance (word
or line) aware segmentation is designed to further remove
false positives and obtain word instances. The proposed
algorithm can accurately localize word or text line in arbitrary orientations, including curved text lines which cannot be handled in a lot of other frameworks. Our algorithm achieved state-of-the-art performance in ICDAR 2013
(IC13), ICDAR 2015 (IC15) and CUTE80 and Street View
Text (SVT) benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Reading text from scene images could contribute to
many applications such as image, video indexing and reading systems for visually impaired people. Thus it has received an increasing attention these years. However, reading arbitrary oriented text lines from scene images is still
difficult and only partially solved. As mentioned in [41],
reading multi-oriented text lines is a much harder problem
than only considering horizontal text lines and the ability to
read multi-oriented or even curved text [28] is important in
many scenarios. However, there is still a gap between the
need in practice and the performance of existing algorithms
for multi-oriented text detection. This can be seen in the
results in ICDAR 2015 competition [1].
Previous works in scene text detection could be mainly
classified into two categories: (1) sliding window-based detection methods [5, 18, 33], (2) region proposal-based detection methods [25, 7, 13, 14, 10]. In early stages, sliding
window-based methods received more attention. They typi-

cally have high computational cost because windows in different scales are used to slide in an exhaustive manner. Region proposal-based methods received more attention these
years because of the fast computation in proposal generation and the high recall of the proposals.
Convolutional neural network, which is proven to be effective in extracting high level features from images, has
also been incorporated in scene text detection [18, 17, 14,
41, 31, 10]. The ability of CNN in extracting high level
feature representations greatly improve the accuracy. Several works, which combined region proposal and convolutional neural network, have achieved good performances
in localizing text in horizontal or near horizontal orientations [14, 10]. They typically follow the same scheme as
generating a set of proposals, and then classify each proposal to get potential individual characters. Then a bottomup grouping algorithm is applied to group characters into
text lines. However, such scheme has intrinsic problems:
(1) It assumes individual characters could be identified.
(2) Only horizontal lines could be detected. This is because when considering multi-oriented text lines, traditional
grouping algorithms will easily find incorrect lines.
Recently, several works have made great breakthroughs
in scene text detection. In [40], Zhang et al. proposed to use
FCN in scene text detection and achieved a breakthrough in
multi-oriented scene text detection. Tian [31] adapted the
idea of using CNN to generate proposals as originally presented in [8] for object detection. However, it cannot handle curved text lines and text lines that are close to vertical
orientation since they used heuristic proposal linking mechanism.
In this paper, we present an algorithm which adopts the
idea of using FCN in scene text detection. The algorithm
runs in a cascaded fashion which can handle truly arbitrary
oriented text. We have two cascaded levels. In the whole
image level, we use a multi-scale FCN in extracting representative features and removing most negative regions to
13519

