Are You Smarter Than A Sixth Grader?
Textbook Question Answering for Multimodal Machine Comprehension
Aniruddha Kembhavi† Minjoon Seo§∗ Dustin Schwenk† Jonghyun Choi†
Ali Farhadi†§ Hannaneh Hajishirzi§
†
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, § University of Washington
†

{anik,dustins,jonghyunc,alif}@allenai.org, § {minjoon,hannaneh}@washington.edu

Multi-modal Machine Comprehension (M3C)

Textbook Question Answering (TQA)
1076 lessons from middle school curricula

Content + QA

Content + QA

Training
Set

Testing
Set

No content overlap

Life
Science

Earth
Science

Physical
Science

78,338 sentences
3,455 images
26,260 questions

Lessons in TQA

Cell Structures
Introduction

Cell Membrane Structure

Instructional Diagrams
The image below shows the
Prokaryotic cell. A prokaryote is a
single-celled organism that lacks
a membrane-bound nucleus
(karyon), mitochondria, or any
other membrane-bound
organelle. In the prokaryotes, all
the intracellular water-soluble
components (proteins, DNA and
metabolites) are located together
in the cytoplasm enclosed by the
cell membrane, rather than in
separate cellular compartments.

Cytoplasm

In some ways, a cell resembles a plastic bag full of Jell-O. Its
basic structure is a cell membrane filled with cytoplasm. The
cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell is like Jell-O containing mixed
fruit. It also contains a nucleus and other organelles.

Organelles

Cell Membrane
The cell membrane is like the bag holding the Jell-O. It
encloses the cytoplasm of the cell. It forms a barrier
between the cytoplasm and the environment outside the
cell. The function of the cell membrane is to protect and
support the cell. It also controls what enters or leaves the
cell. It allows only certain substances to pass through. It
keeps other substances inside or outside the cell.

Lesson Summary
!
!
!

The cell membrane consists of two layers of phospholipids.
The cytoplasm consists of watery cytosol and cell structures.
Eukaryotic cells contain a nucleus and other organelles

rigid layer that surrounds the cell membrane
of a plant cell or fungal cell and that supports
and protects the cell

Cytoskeleton

structure in a cell consisting of filaments and
tubules that crisscross the cytoplasm and
help maintain the cells shape

Central
Vacuole

large storage sac found in the cells of plants

What is the outer surrounding part of the Nucleus?
a. Nuclear Membrane
b. Golgi Body
c. Cell Membrane
d. Nucleolus

Which component forms a barrier between the cytoplasm
and the environment outside the cell?
a. J

This diagram shows the anatomy
of an Animal cell. Animal Cells
have an outer boundary known
as the plasma membrane. The
nucleus and the organelles of the
cell are bound by this membrane.
The cell organelles have a vast
range of functions to perform like
hormone and enzyme production
to providing energy for the cells.
They are of various sizes and have
irregular shapes. Most of the cells
size range between 1 and 100
micrometers and are visible only
with help of microscope.

Vocabulary
Cell Wall

Questions

b. L
c. X
d. U

Which statement about the cell membrane is false?
a. It encloses the cytoplasm
b. It protects and supports the cell
c. It keeps all external substances out of the cell
d. none of the above

Figure 1. An overview of the Multi-modal Machine Comprehension (M3 C) paradigm, statistics of the proposed Textbook Question Answering (TQA) dataset and an illustration of a lesson in it. TQA can be downloaded at http://textbookqa.org .

Abstract
We introduce the task of Multi-Modal Machine Comprehension (M3 C), which aims at answering multimodal
questions given a context of text, diagrams and images.
We present the Textbook Question Answering (TQA) dataset
that includes 1,076 lessons and 26,260 multi-modal questions, taken from middle school science curricula. Our
analysis shows that a significant portion of questions require complex parsing of the text and the diagrams and reasoning, indicating that our dataset is more complex compared to previous machine comprehension and visual question answering datasets. We extend state-of-the-art methods for textual machine comprehension and visual question
answering to the TQA dataset. Our experiments show that
∗ The majority of the work was done while the author was interning at
the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence

these models do not perform well on TQA. The presented
dataset opens new challenges for research in question answering and reasoning across multiple modalities.

1. Introduction
Question answering (QA) has been a major research focus of the natural language processing (NLP) community
for several years and more recently has also gained significant popularity within the computer vision community.
There have been several QA paradigms in NLP, which
can be categorized by the knowledge used to answer questions. This knowledge can range from structured and confined knowledge bases (e.g., Freebase [4, 3]) to unstructured
and unbounded natural language form (e.g., documents on
the web [24]). A middle ground between these approaches
has been the popular paradigm of Machine Comprehension
14999

