Object Detection in Videos with Tubelet Proposal Networks
Kai Kang1,2 Hongsheng Li2,⋆ Tong Xiao1,2 Wanli Ouyang2,5 Junjie Yan3 Xihui Liu4 Xiaogang Wang2,⋆
1

2

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 SenseTime Group Limited 4 Tsinghua University 5 The University of Sydney

{kkang,hsli,xiaotong,wlouyang,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
yanjunjie@sensetime.com
xh-liu13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection in videos has drawn increasing attention recently with the introduction of the large-scale ImageNet VID dataset. Different from object detection in
static images, temporal information in videos is vital for
object detection. To fully utilize temporal information,
state-of-the-art methods [15, 14] are based on spatiotemporal tubelets, which are essentially sequences of associated bounding boxes across time. However, the existing
methods have major limitations in generating tubelets in
terms of quality and efficiency. Motion-based [14] methods are able to obtain dense tubelets efficiently, but the
lengths are generally only several frames, which is not
optimal for incorporating long-term temporal information.
Appearance-based [15] methods, usually involving generic
object tracking, could generate long tubelets, but are usually computationally expensive. In this work, we propose
a framework for object detection in videos, which consists
of a novel tubelet proposal network to efficiently generate
spatiotemporal proposals, and a Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) network that incorporates temporal information from tubelet proposals for achieving high object detection accuracy in videos. Experiments on the large-scale
ImageNet VID dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework for object detection in videos.

1. Introduction
The performance of object detection has been significantly improved recently with the emergence of deep neural networks. Novel neural network structures, such as
GoogLeNet [29], VGG [27] and ResNet [8], were proposed to improve the learning capability on large-scale
computer vision datasets for various computer vision tasks,
such as object detection [5, 24, 23, 21], semantic segmentation [20, 2, 16], tracking [31, 1, 33], scene understanding
[25, 26, 19], person search [18, 32], etc. State-of-the-art
⋆ Corresponding authors

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Proposals methods for video object detection. (a) original frames. (b) static proposals have no temporal association,
which is hard to incorporate temporal information for proposal
classification. (c) bounding box regression methods would focus
on the dominant object, lose proposal diversity and may also cause
recall drop since all proposals tend to aggregate on the dominant
objects. (d) the ideal proposals should have temporal association
and have the same motion patterns with the objects while keeping
their diversity.

object detection frameworks for static images are based on
these networks and consist of three main stages [6]. Bounding box proposals are first generated from the input image
based on how likely each location contains an object of interest. The appearance features are then extracted from each
box proposal to classify them as one of the object classes.
Such bounding boxes and their associated class scores are
refined by post-processing techniques (e.g., Non-Maximal
Suppression) to obtain the final detection results. Multiple
frameworks, such as Fast R-CNN [5] and Faster R-CNN
[24], followed this research direction and eventually formulated the object detection problem as training end-to-end
deep neural networks.
Although great success has been achieved in detecting
objects on static images, video object detection remains
a challenging problem. Several factors contribute to the
difficulty of this problem, which include the drastic appearance and scale changes of the same object over time,
object-to-object occlusions, motion blur, and the mismatch
1727

