Why You Should Forget Luminance Conversion and Do Something Better
Rang M. H. Nguyen
National University of Singapore

Michael S. Brown
York University

nguyenho@comp.nus.edu.sg

mbrown@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
One of the most frequently applied low-level operations
in computer vision is the conversion of an RGB camera image into its luminance representation. This is also one of the
most incorrectly applied operations. Even our most trusted
softwares, Matlab and OpenCV, do not perform luminance
conversion correctly. In this paper, we examine the main
factors that make proper RGB to luminance conversion difficult, in particular: 1) incorrect white-balance, 2) incorrect
gamma/tone-curve correction, and 3) incorrect equations.
Our analysis shows errors up to 50% for various colors are
not uncommon. As a result, we argue that for most computer vision problems there is no need to attempt luminance
conversion; instead, there are better alternatives depending
on the task.

sRGB image

Error due to wrong
white-balancing (2500oK)

Ground truth luminance

Error due to wrong
tone-curve

Error due to wrong
equations (YIQ-Luma)

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

Figure 1. This figure shows examples of errors that arise due to
improper luminance conversion. The ground truth luminance for
this experiment is captured from a hyperspectral camera.

1. Introduction and Motivation
One of the most frequently applied operations in computer vision and image processing is the conversion of an
RGB image into a single-channel luminance representation.
Luminance is a photometric measurement that quantifies
how the human eye perceives radiant energy emitting from
a scene. As such, RGB to luminance conversion is used as a
way to convert an RGB image into its perceived brightness
representation. Luminance is generally represented by the
variable, Y , which comes from the CIE 1931 XYZ color
space definition for which Y is defined as the luminosity
function of a standard human observer under well-lit conditions. Luminance is routinely used in a variety of vision
tasks, from image enhancement [22, 27, 29] to feature detection [2, 20], to physical measurements [10, 11, 26].
There are a number of commonly used methods to convert an RGB image to Y . For example, the widely used
YIQ and YUV color spaces use the weighted average Y =
0.299R + 0.587G + 0.114B, while more recent methods
adopt a weighted average of Y = 0.2126R + 0.7152G +
0.0722B. In some cases, a simple RGB average of Y =
(R + G + B)/3 is used. Clearly, these all cannot be correct.
In addition, there are other factors at play in this conver-

sion, including the color space’s assumed white-point and
nonlinear mappings (e.g. gamma correction). Radiometric calibration methods [7, 16, 18, 19] have long known
that cameras use proprietary nonlinear mappings (i.e. tonecurves) that do not conform to sRGB standards. Recent
work in [3, 15, 17, 31, 14] has shown that these tone-curves
can be setting-specific. Fig. 1 shows examples of errors
caused by different factors in the color space conversion
from sRGB to luminance. Interestingly, however, computer
visions algorithms still work in the face of these errors. If
our algorithms work with incorrect luminance conversion,
why then are we even bothering to attempt luminance conversion?
Contribution This work offers two contributions. First,
we systematically examine the challenges in obtaining true
scene luminance values from a camera RGB image. Specifically, we discuss the assumptions often overlooked in the
definition of standard color spaces and onboard camera
photo-finishing that are challenging to undo when performing luminance conversion. We also discuss the use of incorrect equations - e.g YIQ or HSV - that are erroneously
interpreted as luminance. Our findings reveal it is not un16750

