Superpixel-based Tracking-by-Segmentation using Markov Chains
Donghun Yeo† Jeany Son Bohyung Han Joon Hee Han
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
†

donghun.yeo@stradvision.com

{† hanulbog, jeany, bhhan, joonhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a simple but effective tracking-by-segmentation algorithm using Absorbing Markov Chain (AMC) on
superpixel segmentation, where target state is estimated by
a combination of bottom-up and top-down approaches, and
target segmentation is propagated to subsequent frames in
a recursive manner. Our algorithm constructs a graph for
AMC using the superpixels identified in two consecutive
frames, where background superpixels in the previous frame
correspond to absorbing vertices while all other superpixels create transient ones. The weight of each edge depends
on the similarity of scores in the end superpixels, which are
learned by support vector regression. Once graph construction is completed, target segmentation is estimated using the
absorption time of each superpixel. The proposed tracking algorithm achieves substantially improved performance
compared to the state-of-the-art segmentation-based tracking techniques in multiple challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a traditional topic in computer vision,
but remains as a challenging task since target appearances
involve significant variations and high-level scene understanding is often required to handle exceptions. Trackingby-detection [14, 2, 4, 20, 16, 42] is one of the common
strategies to deal with these challenges. However, they
typically depend on bounding boxes for target representations, and often suffer from drifting problem when a target
involves substantial non-rigid or articulated motions. Recently, segmentation-based tracking algorithms have been
investigated actively [3, 13, 6, 10, 34], but most of them
rely only on pixel-level information that is not sufficient to
model semantic structure of target, or utilize external segmentation algorithms such as Grabcut [33]. Compared to
the information from bounding boxes or pixels, mid-level
cues such as superpixels may be effective to model both
feature- and semantic-level information of target.
Superpixels have been used for various computer vision
tasks, e.g., object segmentation and recognition [31, 12, 28,

8, 32], background subtraction [24], and multi-target tracking [26, 29] due to its effectiveness in representation based
on mid-level cues. In addition, the use of superpixels greatly
reduces the complexity of sophisticated image processing
and computer vision tasks since the number of superpixels
is much smaller than the number of pixels obviously.
Visual tracking techniques often employ superpixels.
Segmentation-based tracking algorithms relying on superpixels have been proposed to handle non-rigid and deformable targets [36, 37, 18, 40]. Wang et al. [36] uses superpixels for discriminative appearance modeling by meanshift clustering, and they incorporate particle filtering to
find the optimal target state. Instead of representing each
object with a single holistic model, dynamic Bayesian network tracking [37] adopts a superpixel-based constellation
model to deal with non-rigid deformations. However, since
both methods categorize each superpixel into foreground
or background independently based on low-level features,
semantic relations between superpixels are not considered
properly for segmentation. To overcome the limitation induced from the flat representations, Hong et al. [18] proposed a tracking method based on a hierarchical appearance representation using multiple quantization levels such
as pixel, superpixel and bounding box. Xiao et al. [40] also
presented a dynamic multi-level appearance modeling technique for tracking, which maintains an adaptive clustered
decision tree using the information obtained from three different levels—pixel, superpixel, and bounding box. Recently, a tracking-by-segmentation algorithm that combines
the information from pixels with bounding boxes has been
proposed [34]. Note that [34, 18] require an external segmentation technique such as Grabcut [33].
We propose a novel tracking-by-segmentation framework using Absorbing Markov Chain (AMC) on superpixel
segmentation, where the estimated target segmentation is
propagated to subsequent frames in a recursive manner. To
obtain target segmentation in the current frame, we first construct a graph for AMC using the superpixels in the previous
and current frames, where a vertex corresponds to a superpixel and the weight of each edge is given by the scores
learned from Support Vector Regression (SVR). Once the
graph is constructed, target segmentation is obtained from

1812

