Scene Graph Generation by Iterative Message Passing
Danfei Xu1 Yuke Zhu1 Christopher B. Choy2 Li Fei-Fei1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
{danfei, yukez, chrischoy, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Today’s state-of-the-art perceptual models [15, 32] have
mostly tackled detecting and recognizing individual objects
in isolation. However, understanding a visual scene often
goes beyond recognizing individual objects. Take a look
at the two images in Fig. 1. Even a perfect object detector would struggle to perceive the subtle difference between
a man feeding a horse and a man standing by a horse. The
rich semantic relationships between these objects have been
largely untapped by these models. As indicated by a series
of previous works [26, 34, 41], one crucial step towards a
deeper understanding of visual scenes is building a structured representation that captures objects and their semantic
relationships. Such representation not only offers contextual cues for fundamental recognition tasks [27, 29, 38, 39]
but also provide values in a larger variety of high-level visual tasks [18, 44, 40].
The recent success of deep learning-based recognition
models [15, 21, 36] has surged interest in examining the detailed structures of a visual scene, especially in the form of

object
detection

horse

...
scene graph
generation

Understanding a visual scene goes beyond recognizing
individual objects in isolation. Relationships between objects also constitute rich semantic information about the
scene. In this work, we explicitly model the objects and
their relationships using scene graphs, a visually-grounded
graphical structure of an image. We propose a novel endto-end model that generates such structured scene representation from an input image. The model solves the scene
graph inference problem using standard RNNs and learns
to iteratively improves its predictions via message passing.
Our joint inference model can take advantage of contextual cues to make better predictions on objects and their
relationships. The experiments show that our model significantly outperforms previous methods on generating scene
graphs using Visual Genome dataset and inferring support
relations with NYU Depth v2 dataset.

man

wearing

man

glasses

feeding

holding

horse

eat from
bucket

Figure 1. Object detectors perceive a scene by attending to individual objects. As a result, even a perfect detector would produce
similar outputs on two semantically distinct images (first row). We
propose a scene graph generation model that takes an image as input, and generates a visually-grounded scene graph (second row,
right) that captures the objects in the image (blue nodes) and their
pairwise relationships (red nodes).

object relationships [5, 20, 26, 33]. Scene graph, proposed
by Johnson et al. [18], offers a platform to explicitly model
objects and their relationships. In short, a scene graph is
a visually-grounded graph over the object instances in an
image, where the edges depict their pairwise relationships
(see example in Fig. 1). The value of scene graph representation has been proven in a wide range of visual tasks, such
as semantic image retrieval [18], 3D scene synthesis [4],
and visual question answering [37]. Anderson et al. recently proposed SPICE [1] as an enhanced automated caption evaluation metric defined over scene graphs. However,
these models that use scene graphs either rely on groundtruth annotations [18], synthetic images [37], or extract a
scene graph from text domain [1, 4]. To truly take advantage of such rich structure, it is crucial to devise a model
that automatically generates scene graphs from images.
In this work, we address the problem of scene graph generation, where the goal is to generate a visually-grounded
scene graph from an image. In a generated scene graph,
an object instance is characterized by a bounding box with
an object category label, and a relationship is characterized
by a directed edge between two bounding boxes (i.e., ob15410

