BigHand2.2M Benchmark: Hand Pose Dataset and State of the Art Analysis
Shanxin Yuan1∗
1

Qi Ye1∗

Imperial College London

Björn Stenger2
2

Rakuten Institute of Technology

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a large-scale hand pose
dataset, collected using a novel capture method. Existing
datasets are either generated synthetically or captured using depth sensors: synthetic datasets exhibit a certain level
of appearance difference from real depth images, and real
datasets are limited in quantity and coverage, mainly due
to the difficulty to annotate them. We propose a tracking system with six 6D magnetic sensors and inverse kinematics to automatically obtain 21-joints hand pose annotations of depth maps captured with minimal restriction on
the range of motion. The capture protocol aims to fully
cover the natural hand pose space. As shown in embedding plots, the new dataset exhibits a significantly wider and
denser range of hand poses compared to existing benchmarks. Current state-of-the-art methods are evaluated on
the dataset, and we demonstrate significant improvements
in cross-benchmark performance. We also show significant
improvements in egocentric hand pose estimation with a
CNN trained on the new dataset.

1. Introduction
There has been significant progress in the area of hand
pose estimation in the recent past and a number of systems have been proposed [5, 8, 11, 14, 15, 18, 24, 30, 7,
1, 4, 33, 6]. However, as noted in [12], existing benchmarks
[18, 26, 28, 31, 34] are restricted in terms of number of annotated images, annotation accuracy, articulation coverage,
and variation in hand shape and viewpoint.
The current state of the art for hand pose estimation employs deep neural networks to estimate hand pose from input data [31, 13, 14, 40, 2, 38]. It has been shown that these
methods scale well with the size of the training dataset. The
availability of a large-scale, accurately annotated dataset
is therefore a key factor for advancing the field. Manual annotation has been the bottleneck for creating largescale benchmarks [18, 25]. This method is not only laborintensive, but can also result in inaccurate position labels.
∗ indicates equal contribution

Tae-Kyun Kim1

Siddhant Jain3
3

IIT Jodhpur

Semi-automatic capture methods have been devised where
3D joint locations are inferred from manually annotated
2D joint locations [12]. Alternatives, which are still timeconsuming, combine tracking a hand model and manual refinement, if necessary iterating these steps [26, 28, 31]. Additional sensors can aid automatic capture significantly, but
care must be taken not to restrict the range of motion, and to
minimise the depth appearance difference from bare hands,
for example when using a data-glove [36]. More recently,
less intrusive magnetic sensors have been employed for finger tip annotation in the HandNet dataset [34].
In this paper, we introduce our million-scale BigHand2.2M dataset that makes a significant advancement in
terms of completeness of hand data variation and annotation quality, see Figure 1 and Table 1. We detail the capture
set-up and methodology that enables efficient hand pose annotation with high accuracy. This enables us to capture the
range of hand motions that can be adopted without external
forces. Our dataset contains 2.2 million depth maps with
accurately annotated joint locations. The data is captured
by attaching six magnetic sensors on the hand, five on each
finger nail and one on the back of the palm, where each
sensor provides accurate 6D measurements. Locations of
all joints are obtained by applying inverse kinematics on a
hand model with 31 degrees of freedom (dof) with kinematic constraints. The BigHand2.2M dataset also contains
290K frames of egocentric hand poses, which is 130 times
more than previous egocentric hand pose datasets (Table 2).
Training a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) on the
data shows significantly improved results. The recent study
by Supancic et al. [27] on cross-benchmark testing showed
that approximately 40% of poses are estimated with an error larger than 50mm. This is due to a different capture setup, hand shape variation, and annotation schemes. Training a CNN using the BigHand2.2M dataset, we demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on existing benchmarks, 1520mm average errors.

2. Existing benchmarks
Existing benchmarks for evaluation and comparison are
significantly limited in scale (from a few hundred to tens

4866

