Can Walking and Measuring along Chord Bunches Better Describe Leaf Shapes?
Bin Wang1, Yongsheng Gao1, Changming Sun2, Michael Blumenstein3, John La Salle4
1School of Engineering, Griffith University, Australia
2CSIRO Data61, PO Box 76, Epping, NSW 1710, Australia
3FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
4Atlas of Living Australia, CSIRO National Research Collections Australia

bin.wang@griffith.edu.au, yongsheng.gao@griffith.edu.au, changming.sun@csiro.au,
michael.blumenstein@uts.edu.au, john.lasalle@csiro.au

Abstract
Effectively describing and recognizing leaf shapes under
arbitrary deformations, particularly from a large database,
remains an unsolved problem. In this research, we
attempted a new strategy of describing shape by walking
along a bunch of chords that pass through the shape to
measure the regions trespassed. A novel chord bunch walks
(CBW) descriptor is developed through the chord walking
that effectively integrates the shape image function over the
walked chord to reflect the contour features and the inner
properties of the shape. For each contour point, the chord
bunch groups multiple pairs of chord walks to build a
hierarchical framework for a coarse-to-fine description.
The proposed CBW descriptor is invariant to rotation,
scaling, translation, and mirror transforms. Instead of
using the expensive optimal correspondence based
matching, an improved Hausdorff distance encoded
correspondence information is proposed for efficient yet
effective shape matching. In experimental studies, the
proposed method obtained substantially higher accuracies
with low computational cost over the benchmarks, which
indicates the research potential along this direction.

efficient demands of various real time applications.
Developing a method to address all the above issues may
be unrealistic. For example, part-based algorithm is much
effective for handling articulation deformation [31]. It is
however highly sensitive to segmentation errors especially
for noisy data. Those methods that can deal with partial
occlusion may not be suitable for real time application due
to their expensive computing cost. Therefore, developing a
method which can balance the demands of many aspects
instead of satisfying all the demands is achievable.
Automatic plant leaf identification is a significant
applications of computer vision and has received
considerable studies [1][3][5][6][9][10][37][38] in recent
years. However due to the small interclass difference (see
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6), the large intra-class variations (see Fig.
7) and particularly the natural self-overlap (see the middle
leaf image shown in the first row of Fig. 1) of the leaf
shapes, the issue of effectively and efficiently recognizing
the leaf shapes is still not well-addressed. For example, we
try the state-of-the-art approaches, shape contexts [15],
inner distance shape contexts [9], and height function [36]
respectively to distinguish the leaf shapes shown in the first
row of Fig. 1 and they all consider that the middle one is
more similar to the right one than the left one.

1. Introduction
The human vision system is efficient and has the strength
of recognizing objects only by their shapes. For machine
vision, shape is originally represented as a binary mask or
the contour is further extracted from the binary pattern after
the object is segmented from the image. The task of shape
analysis is to capture the geometrical information that is
independent of the transformational (scaling, rotation,
mirror, articulation, etc.) effects for the ultimate goal of
object recognition. However, from the available binary
mask or contour representation of the shape to the
successful recognition of the object, there exist many
challenges such as rigid and non-rigid deformation of the
object, noises, partial occlusion, intra-class variations, and

6119

Fig. 1. Three leaf images (the left two leaves belong to the same
species) and their corresponding outer contours. If only from their
outer contours, the middle one which is self-overlapped may be
identified as the species of the right one.

This work aims to develop a shape description and
matching method for effectively and efficiently recognizing
leaf shape. A hierarchical framework, using chord bunch

