From local to global: Edge profiles to camera motion in blurred images
Subeesh Vasu1 , A. N. Rajagopalan2
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
subeeshvasu@gmail.com1 , raju@ee.iitm.ac.in2

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the relation between the edge
profiles present in a motion blurred image and the underlying camera motion responsible for causing the motion blur.
While related works on camera motion estimation (CME)
rely on the strong assumption of space-invariant blur, we
handle the challenging case of general camera motion. We
first show how edge profiles ‘alone’ can be harnessed to
perform direct CME from a single observation. While it is
routine for conventional methods to jointly estimate the latent image too through alternating minimization, our above
scheme is best-suited when such a pursuit is either impractical or inefficacious. For applications that actually favor
an alternating minimization strategy, the edge profiles can
serve as a valuable cue. We incorporate a suitably derived constraint from edge profiles into an existing blind deblurring framework and demonstrate improved restoration
performance. Experiments reveal that this approach yields
state-of-the-art results for the blind deblurring problem.

1. Introduction
Camera motion estimation (CME) plays a vital role in
many multi-image based applications such as structure from
motion, super-resolution, HDR imaging etc. These applications involve sharing of information across images, which is
typically achieved by establishing feature correspondences.
But this becomes a challenging task in the presence of motion blur. CME is also important in many single motion
blurred image based applications such as image restoration,
scene depth estimation ([18, 36]), splicing detection ([12]),
estimation of 3D structure of light sources ([38]) etc.
A common approach for CME from a motion blurred image is to pose it as a blind deblurring problem, wherein both
latent image (or its features) and camera motion are estimated within an alternating minimization (AM) framework.
In the blind deblurring literature, most approaches assume
space invariant (SI) blur (i.e. pure in-plane camera translations) ([3, 9, 27, 10, 11, 1, 35, 15, 17, 2, 4, 29, 20, 21]).
While this leads to very efficient blind deblurring algo-

rithms, this assumption does not hold true in practice. It is
well-known ([16, 13]) that natural camera shake often contains rotational components resulting in spatially varying
(SV) blur in the captured images. As is evident from recent
works ([5, 31, 7, 34, 37, 22]), one needs to account for the
SV nature of blur for accurate estimation of general camera
motion. While this is an important problem, the increase in
number of unknowns makes it quite ill-posed, demanding
stronger priors for achieving quality performance. Very illposed problems such as depth-aware deblurring and rolling
shutter motion deblurring, either avoid using AM altogether
([24]) or need a good initialization of the camera motion
([36, 28]) derived from local point spread functions (PSFs)
i.e., blur kernel estimates returned by an off-the-shelf blind
deblurring algorithm. However, their performance is limited because PSF estimates from small regions can be erroneous.
A recent trend in blind deblurring is to come up with
class specific or generic priors ([35, 2, 29, 37, 20, 21, 22])
to reduce the ill-posedness of the problem. While some of
these priors have shown great promise, their performance is
limited due to one or more of the following reasons: failure on images for which prior does not hold good, inability
to handle SV blur, computational complexity etc. In SV deblurring, [37] has been widely popular for a long time. They
employed an L0 prior on the gradients of the image while
performing CME. The state-of-the-art work in [22] employs
dark channel prior in addition to the L0 prior of [37] to significantly improve the performance of SV deblurring.
In this work, we address the problem of CME from a
single motion blurred image by harnessing edge profiles.
There are only two notable works that have used edge profiles to derive useful information. Cho et al. [2] have modeled the relation between PSF and edge profiles to perform
SI deblurring. Tai et al. [30] have used edge profiles for estimation of camera response function (CRF) from SI blurred
images. We first propose an approach (called EpAlone)
for efficient and direct CME from edge profiles i.e., sans
the need for latent image estimation. We expand the scope
of edge profiles and employ them for estimation of general
camera motion. While problems such as blind deblurring,

4447

