A clever elimination strategy for efficient minimal solvers
Zuzana Kukelova1
1

Joe Kileel2

Bernd Sturmfels 2

Tomas Pajdla1

Czech Technical University in Prague,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Prague, Czech Republic

kukelova@cmp.felk.cvut.cz, pajdla@cvut.cz
2

University of California, Berkeley, USA

jkileel@math.berkeley.edu, bernd@math.berkeley.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Computing multi-view geometry is one of the most basic
and important tasks in computer vision [1]. These include
minimal problem solvers [2, 3] in, e.g., structure from motion [4], visual navigation [5], large scale 3D reconstruction [6] and image based localization [7]. Fast, and efficient,
minimal solvers are instrumental in RANSAC [8] based robust estimation algorithms [9].
In this paper we present a new insight into the systematic
generation of minimal solvers [3], which leads to smaller
and faster solvers. We explain our approach in the context
of elimination theory [10] and we offer an interpretation of
the theory that is useful for practice in computer vision.
Our main technical contribution is a new strategy for
solving minimal problems. For many computer vision applications, that strategy allows to do more computation in

Eq (17)
Eq (18)

4
2
y

We present a new insight into the systematic generation of
minimal solvers in computer vision, which leads to smaller
and faster solvers. Many minimal problem formulations are
coupled sets of linear and polynomial equations where image measurements enter the linear equations only. We show
that it is useful to solve such systems by first eliminating all
the unknowns that do not appear in the linear equations and
then extending solutions to the rest of unknowns. This can
be generalized to fully non-linear systems by linearization
via lifting. We demonstrate that this approach leads to more
efficient solvers in three problems of partially calibrated relative camera pose computation with unknown focal length
and/or radial distortion. Our approach also generates new
interesting constraints on the fundamental matrices of partially calibrated cameras, which were not known before.

6

0
-2
-4
-6
-6

-4

-2

0
x

2

4

6

Figure 1. An illustration of the two equations (17) and (18), which
define the f+E+f problem, cut by six linear equations for six image
point correspondences.

an off-line stage and less computation in an on-line stage.
We exploit that many minimal problems in computer vision lead to coupled sets of linear and polynomial equations
where image measurements enter the linear equations only.
We show how to solve such systems efficiently by first eliminating all unknowns which do not appear in the linear equations, and then extending solutions to the other unknowns.
Moreover, our approach can be generalized to fully nonlinear systems by linearization via monomial lifting [11].
We demonstrate that this approach leads to more efficient
on-line solvers in three problems of partially calibrated relative camera pose computation with unknown focal length
and/or radial distortion. Interestingly, our approach also
generates new constraints on the fundamental matrices of
partially calibrated cameras, which were not known before.

1.1. Related work
Historically, minimal problems [12, 13, 14, 15] addressed
problems in geometry of one and two perspective cameras.
Later, a more systematic approach to solving minimal prob14912

