Adversarially Tuned Scene Generation
VSR Veeravasarapu1 , Constantin Rothkopf2 , Ramesh Visvanathan1
1
Center for Cognition and Computation, Dept. of Computer Science, Goethe University, Frankfurt
2
Center for Cognitive Science & Dept. of Psychology, Technical University Darmstadt.

Abstract
Generalization performance of trained computer vision
(CV) systems that use computer graphics (CG) generated
data is not yet effective due to the concept of ’domainshift’ between virtual and real data. Although simulated
data augmented with a few real-world samples has been
shown to mitigate domain shift and improve transferability of trained models, guiding or bootstrapping the virtual
data generation with the distributions learnt from target
real world domain is desired, especially in the fields where
annotating even few real images is laborious (such as semantic labeling, optical flow, and intrinsic images etc.). In
order to address this problem in an unsupervised manner,
our work combines recent advances in CG, which aims at
generating stochastic scene layouts using large collections
of 3D object models, and generative adversarial training,
which aims at training generative models by measuring discrepancy between generated and real data in terms of their
separability in the space of a deep discriminatively-trained
classifier. Our method uses iterative estimation of the posterior density of prior distributions for a generative graphical model. This is done within a rejection sampling framework. Initially, we assume uniform distributions as priors over parameters of a scene described by a generative
graphical model. As iterations proceed the uniform prior
distributions are updated sequentially to distributions that
are closer to the unknown distributions of target data. We
demonstrate the utility of adversarially tuned scene generation on two real world benchmark datasets (CityScapes
and CamVid) for traffic scene semantic labeling with a deep
convolutional net (DeepLab). We obtained performance improvements by 2.28 and 3.14 points on the IoU metric between the DeepLab models trained on simulated sets prepared from the scene generation models before and after
tuning to CityScapes and CamVid respectively.

1. INTRODUCTION
Recently, computer graphics (CG) generated data has
been actively utilized to train and validate computer vi-

sion (CV) systems, especially, in situations where acquiring large scale data and groundtruth is costly. Examples are
many pixel level prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation [8, 17, 16, 19], optical flow [7] and intrinsic images
[11] etc. However, the performance of CV systems when
they are trained only on simulated data is not as good as expected due to the issue of domain shift [17]. This problem is
due to the fact that the probability distribution over parameters resulting from the simulation process, P (Θ), may not
match those parameters describing real-world data, Q(Θ).
This can be caused by many factors such as deviations in
lighting, camera parameters, scene geometry and many others from the true unknown underlying distributions Q(Θ).
These deviations may result in poor generalization of the
trained CV models to the target application domains. The
term used to describe this phenomenon is ’domain-shift’ or
’data-shift’.
In the classical CV literature, two alternatives to reduce
domain-shift have been discussed: 1) Using engineered feature spaces that achieve invariance to large variations in specific attributes such as illumination or pose, and 2) learning
of scene priors for the generative process that are optimized
to the specific target domain. Several works designed [3]
or transferred the representations from virtual domains that
are quasi invariant to domain shift, for instance, geometry
or motion feature representations as well as their distributions (see for instance [14]). With the advent of automated
feature learning architectures, recent works [17, 16] have
demonstrated that augmenting large scale simulated training data with a few labelled real-world samples can ameliorate domain shift. However, annotating even a few samples
is expensive and laborious in many pixel level applications
such as optical flow and intrinsic images. Hence, bootstrapping generative models from real-world data is often desired but difficult to achieve due to its inherent complexities
in the bootstrapping process and the need for richly annotated seed data along with meta-information such as camera
parameters, geographic information, etc. [8].
Recently, advances in the field of unsupervised generative learning, i.e. Generative Adversarial Training [9], popularly known as generative adversarial networks (GANs),
12587

