Video Acceleration Magnification
Yichao Zhang, Silvia L. Pintea, and Jan C. van Gemert
Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology
Delft, Netherlands

250

intensity

200

Raw
Phase-based
Ours

150
100
50
0

100

120

140

160

180

frame idx

(a) Original video.

(b) Phase-based [26].

(c) Ours.

(d) Intensity changes.

Figure 1: A toy moving along a trajectory depicted by the black arrow, while vibrating at a high frequency. The top row shows 3 frames
overlayed to indicate the toy’s trajectory. The bottom row shows a single column of pixels – the green line in (a) – for relevant video frames.
(a) Original video. (b) Phase-based motion magnification [26]. (c) Our proposed acceleration magnification. (d) Intensity changes at the
location of the red pixel in the top row in (a) — corresponding to a spatio-temporal rectangle in the bottom row. Our method generates
sharper results with a greater magnification than the phase-based method in [26]. See the supplementary material for the video result.

Abstract
The ability to amplify or reduce subtle image changes
over time is useful in contexts such as video editing, medical
video analysis, product quality control and sports. In these
contexts there is often large motion present which severely
distorts current video amplification methods that magnify
change linearly. In this work we propose a method to cope
with large motions while still magnifying small changes. We
make the following two observations: i) large motions are
linear on the temporal scale of the small changes; ii) small
changes deviate from this linearity. We ignore linear motion
and propose to magnify acceleration. Our method is pure
Eulerian and does not require any optical flow, temporal
alignment or region annotations. We link temporal secondorder derivative filtering to spatial acceleration magnification. We apply our method to moving objects where we show
motion magnification and color magnification. We provide
quantitative as well as qualitative evidence for our method
while comparing to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Essential properties of dynamic objects become clear
only when they move. Consider, for example, the mechanical stability of a drone in flight, the muscles of an athlete

doing sports, or the tremors of a Parkinson patient during
walking. For these examples the properties of interest do
not emerge while remaining still. The essential properties
are the tiny variations that occur only during motion.
Tiny temporal variations that are hard or impossible to
see with the naked eye can be enhanced by impressive video
magnification algorithms [26, 27]. The strength of these
methods stems from using Eulerian motion analysis instead
of Lagrangian motion. The Lagrangian approach uses optical flow which is expensive and an unsolved research topic
in its own [6, 14, 21]. Instead, the Eulerian approach does
not require tracking; it measures flux at a fixed position.
The Eulerian motion magnification methods [26, 27] give
excellent results for magnifying blood flow, a heart-beat, or
tiny breathing when the object and camera remain still. Unfortunately, these methods fail for moving objects because
large motions overwhelm the small temporal variations.
A useful video magnification method that deals with
large motion is developed by Elgharib et al. [7]. It offers
a hybrid of Eulerian and Lagrangian methods. By manually selecting the regions to magnify, these regions can be
tracked by Lagrangian methods and subsequently temporally aligned using a homography. After alignment standard Eulerian magnification methods [26, 27] can be applied, yielding good magnification results. A disadvantage
of this method is that regions of interest require manual seg-

529

