Distinguishing the Indistinguishable:
Exploring Structural Ambiguities via Geodesic Context
Qingan Yan1
Long Yang1
Ling Zhang1
Chunxia Xiao21
1
School of Computer, Wuhan University, China
2
State Key Lab of Software Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{yanqingan,yanglong,lingzhang,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn

Mis-registered model

Abstract
sky

A perennial problem in structure from motion (SfM) is
visual ambiguity posed by repetitive structures. Recent disambiguating algorithms infer ambiguities mainly via explicit background context, thus face limitations in highly
ambiguous scenes which are visually indistinguishable. Instead of analyzing local visual information, we propose a
novel algorithm for SfM disambiguation that explores the
global topology as encoded in photo collections. An important adaptation of this work is to approximate the available imagery using a manifold of viewpoints. We note that,
while ambiguous images appear deceptively similar in appearance, they are actually located far apart on geodesics.
We establish the manifold by adaptively identifying cameras
with adjacent viewpoint, and detect ambiguities via a new
measure, geodesic consistency. We demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed approach on a range of
complex ambiguity datasets, even including the challenging
scenes without background conflicts.

1. Introduction
Repetitive structures are widely existed in human world.
When put them directly into 3D reconstruction, e.g., structure from motion (SfM), significant geometric errors would
occur. Such reconstruction deficiency stems from the deceptive correspondence between ambiguous pictures. As
in standard SfM pipelines [2, 11, 26], a pairwise feature
matching [20] is usually applied first to establish visual connectivity across images. However, in the presence of repetitive structures, this step becomes very unreliable. Many
similar but distinct features on different facades would be
equally connected, which consequently misguide the following SfM process to register multiple instances onto a
single surface, and give rise to hallucinating reconstruction
models.
Distinguishing structural ambiguities is a challenging

SfM

ground

(a) Background context
Viewpoint path

from

to

(b) Geodesic context

Figure 1. An example of visually indistinguishable scenes. (a)
shows the symmetric structures of Temple of Heaven in Beijing.
They are extremely similar in texture and contain little information in background for ambiguity inferring. Hence recent disambiguating methods would still lead to incorrect models for such
scenes. (b) demonstrates that, rather than background context, the
geodesic relationship explored by neighboring images provides a
more meaningful way for ambiguity reasoning.

and vital task in SfM. Recent state-of-the-art methods [13,
16, 29] identify ambiguities relying highly on background
context. That means, sufficient visual contradiction beside
duplicate structures should exist within ambiguous images.
Yet, for some scenes without noticeable background distinction, e.g., the Temple of Heaven shown in Fig. 1(a), the assumption will be violated.
The reason we, human observers, have the ability to
distinguish ambiguities is likely because we can extract a
global scene prior from the input collection, and then draw
upon this knowledge to bridge the location gap between different views for decision making. In this paper we also intend to exploit this information. We note that the captured
imagery of a scene often clusters along certain accessible
paths in practice. Such assembled viewpoint collection reveals a high level knowledge on the global topology of input

3836

