Deep Photo Style Transfer
Fujun Luan
Cornell University

Sylvain Paris
Adobe

Eli Shechtman
Adobe

Kavita Bala
Cornell University

fujun@cs.cornell.edu

sparis@adobe.com

elishe@adobe.com

kb@cs.cornell.edu

Figure 1: Given a reference style image (a) and an input image (b), we seek to create an output image of the same scene as
the input, but with the style of the reference image. The Neural Style algorithm [5] (c) successfully transfers colors, but also
introduces distortions that make the output look like a painting, which is undesirable in the context of photo style transfer. In
comparison, our result (d) transfers the color of the reference style image equally well while preserving the photorealism of
the output. On the right (e), we show 3 insets of (b), (c), and (d) (in that order). Zoom in to compare results.

Abstract

This paper introduces a deep-learning approach to photographic style transfer that handles a large variety of image
content while faithfully transferring the reference style. Our
approach builds upon the recent work on painterly transfer
that separates style from the content of an image by considering different layers of a neural network. However, as is,
this approach is not suitable for photorealistic style transfer.
Even when both the input and reference images are photographs, the output still exhibits distortions reminiscent of a
painting. Our contribution is to constrain the transformation
from the input to the output to be locally affine in colorspace,
and to express this constraint as a custom fully differentiable
energy term. We show that this approach successfully suppresses distortion and yields satisfying photorealistic style
transfers in a broad variety of scenarios, including transfer
of the time of day, weather, season, and artistic edits.

1. Introduction
Photographic style transfer is a long-standing problem
that seeks to transfer the style of a reference style photo
onto another input picture. For instance, by appropriately
choosing the reference style photo, one can make the input
picture look like it has been taken under a different illumination, time of day, or weather, or that it has been artistically
retouched with a different intent. So far, existing techniques
are either limited in the diversity of scenes or transfers that
they can handle or in the faithfulness of the stylistic match
they achieve. In this paper, we introduce a deep-learning
approach to photographic style transfer that is at the same
time broad and faithful, i.e., it handles a large variety of
image content while accurately transferring the reference
style. Our approach builds upon the recent work on Neural
Style transfer by Gatys et al. [5]. However, as shown in
Figure 1, even when the input and reference style images
are photographs, the output still looks like a painting, e.g.,
straight edges become wiggly and regular textures wavy.
One of our contributions is to remove these painting-like

4990

