Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model CNNs
Federico Monti1∗
Davide Boscaini1∗
Jonathan Masci1,4
Emanuele Rodolà1
Jan Svoboda1
Michael M. Bronstein1,2,3
1
2
3
4
USI Lugano
Tel Aviv University
Intel Perceptual Computing
Nnaisense

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved a remarkable performance
breakthrough in several fields, most notably in speech
recognition, natural language processing, and computer vision. In particular, convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures currently produce state-of-the-art performance
on a variety of image analysis tasks such as object detection and recognition. Most of deep learning research has
so far focused on dealing with 1D, 2D, or 3D Euclideanstructured data such as acoustic signals, images, or videos.
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in geometric deep learning, attempting to generalize deep learning
methods to non-Euclidean structured data such as graphs
and manifolds, with a variety of applications from the domains of network analysis, computational social science,
or computer graphics. In this paper, we propose a unified framework allowing to generalize CNN architectures to
non-Euclidean domains (graphs and manifolds) and learn
local, stationary, and compositional task-specific features.
We show that various non-Euclidean CNN methods previously proposed in the literature can be considered as particular instances of our framework. We test the proposed
method on standard tasks from the realms of image-, graphand 3D shape analysis and show that it consistently outperforms previous approaches.

1. Introduction
In recent years, increasingly more fields have to deal
with geometric non-Euclidean structured data such as manifolds or graphs. Social networks are perhaps the most
prominent example of such data; additional examples include transportation networks, sensor networks, functional
networks representing anatomical and functional structure
of the brain, and regulatory networks modeling gene expressions. In computer graphics, 3D objects are traditionally
modeled as Riemannian manifolds. The success of deep
learning methods in many fields has recently provoked a
∗ Equal contribution

keen interest in geometric deep learning [10] attempting to
generalize such methods to non-Euclidean structured data.

1.1. Related works
Deep learning on graphs. The earliest attempts to generalize neural networks to graphs we are aware of are due to
Scarselli et al. [16, 31]. This work remained practically unnoticed and has been rediscovered only recently [24, 37].
The interest in non-Euclidean deep learning has recently
surged in the computer vision and machine learning communities after the seminal work of Bruna et al. [11, 18], in
which the authors formulated CNN-like [23] deep neural architectures on graphs in the spectral domain, employing the
analogy between the classical Fourier transforms and projections onto the eigenbasis of the graph Laplacian operator
[33]. In a follow-up work, Defferrard et al. [13] proposed
an efficient filtering scheme that does not require explicit
computation of the Laplacian eigenvectors by using recurrent Chebyshev polynomials. Kipf and Welling [21] further
simplified this approach using simple filters operating on
1-hop neighborhoods of the graph. Similar methods were
proposed in [3] and [15]. Finally, in the network analysis
community, several works constructed graph embeddings
[28, 38, 12, 17, 44] methods inspired by the Word2Vec technique [27].
A key criticism of spectral approaches such as [11, 18,
13] is the fact that the spectral definition of convolution
is dependent on the Fourier basis (Laplacian eigenbasis),
which in turn is domain-dependent. It implies that a spectral CNN model learned on one graph cannot be trivially
transferred to another graph with a different Fourier basis,
as it would be expressed in a ‘different language’.
Deep learning on manifolds. In the computer graphics
community, we can notice a parallel effort of generalizing
deep learning architectures to 3D shapes modeled as manifolds (surfaces). Masci et al. [26] proposed the first intrinsic
version of convolutional neural networks on manifolds applying filters to local patches represented in geodesic polar
coordinates. Boscaini et al. [7] used anisotropic heat kernels [1] as an alternative way of extracting intrinsic patches

5115

