Full-Resolution Residual Networks for Semantic Segmentation in Street Scenes
Tobias Pohlen

Alexander Hermans
Markus Mathias
Visual Computing Institute
RWTH Aachen University, Germany

tobias.pohlen@rwth-aachen.de

Bastian Leibe

{hermans, mathias, leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

+

:

Unpooling

RU

FRRU

:

FRRU

Pooling

+
:

+

:

Recent years have seen an increasing interest in self driving cars and in driver assistance systems. A crucial aspect
of autonomous driving is to acquire a comprehensive understanding of the surroundings in which a car is moving. Semantic image segmentation [49, 38, 21, 53, 33], the task of
assigning a set of predefined class labels to image pixels, is
an important tool for modeling the complex relationships of
the semantic entities usually found in street scenes, such as
cars, pedestrians, road, or sidewalks. In automotive scenarios it is used in various ways, e.g. as a pre-processing step to
discard image regions that are unlikely to contain objects of

+
:

1. Introduction

+
RU

:

Semantic image segmentation is an essential component of modern autonomous driving systems, as an accurate understanding of the surrounding scene is crucial to
navigation and action planning. Current state-of-the-art
approaches in semantic image segmentation rely on pretrained networks that were initially developed for classifying images as a whole. While these networks exhibit outstanding recognition performance (i.e., what is visible?),
they lack localization accuracy (i.e., where precisely is
something located?). Therefore, additional processing steps
have to be performed in order to obtain pixel-accurate segmentation masks at the full image resolution. To alleviate this problem we propose a novel ResNet-like architecture that exhibits strong localization and recognition performance. We combine multi-scale context with pixel-level
accuracy by using two processing streams within our network: One stream carries information at the full image resolution, enabling precise adherence to segment boundaries.
The other stream undergoes a sequence of pooling operations to obtain robust features for recognition. The two
streams are coupled at the full image resolution using residuals. Without additional processing steps and without pretraining, our approach achieves an intersection-over-union
score of 71.8% on the Cityscapes dataset.

FRRU

Residual stream
Pooling stream

Figure 1. Example output and the abstract structure of our fullresolution residual network. The network has two processing
streams. The residual stream (blue) stays at the full image resolution, the pooling stream (red) undergoes a sequence of pooling
and unpooling operations. The two processing streams are coupled
using full-resolution residual units (FRRUs).

interest [42, 15], to improve object detection [4, 23, 24, 58],
or in combination with 3D scene geometry [32, 17, 35].
Many of those applications require precise region boundaries [20]. In this work, we therefore pursue the goal of
achieving high-quality semantic segmentation with precise
boundary adherence.
Current state-of-the-art approaches for image segmentation all employ some form of fully convolutional network
(FCN) [38] that takes the image as input and outputs a probability map for each class. Many papers rely on network
architectures that have already been proven successful for
image classification such as variants of the ResNet [25] or
the VGG architecture [50]. Starting from pre-trained nets,
where a large number of weights for the target task can
be pre-set by an auxiliary classification task, reduces training time and often yields superior performance compared to
training a network from scratch using the (possibly limited
amount of) data of the target application. However, a main
limitation of using such pre-trained networks is that they
14151

