A New Representation of Skeleton Sequences for 3D Action Recognition
Qiuhong Ke1 , Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Senjian An1 , Ferdous Sohel2 , Farid Boussaid1
1

The University of Western Australia 2 Murdoch University
qiuhong.ke@research.uwa.edu.au
{mohammed.bennamoun,senjian.an,farid.boussaid}@uwa.edu.au
f.sohel@murdoch.edu.au

Abstract
This paper presents a new method for 3D action recognition with skeleton sequences (i.e., 3D trajectories of human
skeleton joints). The proposed method first transforms each
skeleton sequence into three clips each consisting of several frames for spatial temporal feature learning using deep
neural networks. Each clip is generated from one channel of the cylindrical coordinates of the skeleton sequence.
Each frame of the generated clips represents the temporal
information of the entire skeleton sequence, and incorporates one particular spatial relationship between the joints.
The entire clips include multiple frames with different spatial relationships, which provide useful spatial structural information of the human skeleton. We propose to use deep
convolutional neural networks to learn long-term temporal
information of the skeleton sequence from the frames of the
generated clips, and then use a Multi-Task Learning Network (MTLN) to jointly process all frames of the generated
clips in parallel to incorporate spatial structural information for action recognition. Experimental results clearly
show the effectiveness of the proposed new representation
and feature learning method for 3D action recognition.

1. Introduction
3D skeleton data records the trajectories of human skeleton joints and is robust to illumination changes and invariant to camera views [14]. With the prevalence of highlyaccurate and affordable devices, action recognition based
on 3D skeleton sequence has been attracting increasing attention [49, 42, 6, 37, 54, 26, 22, 46, 19]. In this paper, we
focus on skeleton-based 3D action recognition.
To recognize a video action, the temporal information of
the sequence needs to be exploited to understand the dynamics of human postures [29, 9, 44, 8, 20]. For skeleton

data, the spatial structure of the human skeleton is also an
important clue for action recognition [54]. Each skeleton
sequence provides only the trajectory of human skeleton
joints. The time series of the joints can be used in recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) neurons [11, 12] to explore the spatial structure
and temporal structure of the skeleton sequence for action
recognition [6, 41, 54, 37, 26]. Although LSTM networks
are designed to explore the long-term temporal dependency
problem, it is still difficult for LSTM to memorize the information of the entire sequence with many timesteps [48, 13].
In addition, it is also difficult to construct deep LSTM to
extract high-level features [35, 30].
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [24] nowadays
have achieved great success in image classification [2, 3,
23, 38, 39, 50, 21]. However, for video action recognition,
it lacks the capacity to model the long-term temporal dependency of the entire video [45]. In this paper, instead of
directly exploring the long-term temporal information from
the skeleton sequences, we first represent the skeleton sequences as clips consisting of only a few frames. With
the generated clips, the long-term temporal structure of the
skeleton sequence can be effectively learned by using deep
CNNs to process the frame images of the generated clips.
In addition, the spatial structural information of the human
skeleton can be exploited from the entire clips.
More specifically, for each skeleton sequence, we generate three clips corresponding to the three channels of the
cylindrical coordinates of the skeleton sequence. Each clip
consists of four frames, which are generated by computing
the relative positions of the joints to four reference joints.
Each frame of the clips describes the temporal information
of the entire skeleton sequence, and includes one particular
spatial relationship between the joints. The entire clips aggregate multiple frames with different spatial relationships,
providing important information of the spatial structure of
the skeleton joints.

3288

