A Minimal Solution for Two-view Focal-length Estimation using
Two Affine Correspondences
Daniel Barath, Tekla Toth, and Levente Hajder
Machine Perception Research Laboratory
MTA SZTAKI, Budapest, Hungary
{barath.daniel,hajder.levente}@sztaki.mta.hu

Abstract
A minimal solution using two affine correspondences is
presented to estimate the common focal length and the fundamental matrix between two semi-calibrated cameras –
known intrinsic parameters except a common focal length.
To the best of our knowledge, this problem is unsolved. The
proposed approach extends point correspondence-based
techniques with linear constraints derived from local affine
transformations. The obtained multivariate polynomial system is efficiently solved by the hidden-variable technique.
Observing the geometry of local affinities, we introduce
novel conditions eliminating invalid roots. To select the best
one out of the remaining candidates, a root selection technique is proposed outperforming the recent ones especially
in case of high-level noise. The proposed 2-point algorithm
is validated on both synthetic data and 104 publicly available real image pairs. A Matlab implementation of the proposed solution is included in the paper.

1. Introduction
The recovery of camera parameters and scene structure
have been studied for over two decades since several applications, such as 3D vision from multiple views [13], are
heavily dependent on the quality of the camera calibration.
In particular, two major calibration types can be considered: aiming at the determination of the intrinsic and/or extrinsic parameters. The former ones include focal lengths,
principal point, aspect ratio, and non-perspective distortion
parameters, while the extrinsic parameters are the relative
pose. Assuming two cameras with unknown extrinsic and a
priori intrinsic parameters except a common focal length is
called the semi-calibrated case [19]. It leads to the unknown
focal-length problem: estimation of the relative motion and
common focal length, simultaneously. The semi-calibrated
case is realistic since (1) the aspect ratio is determined by
the shape of the pixels on the sensors, it is usually 1:1; (2)

the principal point is close to the center of the image, thus it
is a reasonable approximation and (3) the distortion can be
omitted if narrow field-of-view lenses are applied. Considering solely the locations of point pairs makes the problem
solvable using at least six point pairs [19, 30, 31]. The objective of this paper is to solve the problem exploiting only
two local affine transformations.
In general, 3D vision approaches [13] including stateof-the-art structure-from-motion pipelines [1, 7, 11, 24] apply a robust estimator, e.g. RANSAC [10], augmented with
a minimal method, such as the five [25] or six-point [19]
algorithm as an engine. Selecting a method exploiting as
few point pairs as possible gains accuracy and drastically
reduces the processing time. Benefiting from estimators
which use less input data, the understanding of low-textured
environment becomes significantly easier [28]. Moreover,
minimal methods are advantageous from theoretical pointof-view leading to deeper understanding.
Local affine transformations represent the warp between the infinitely close vicinities of corresponding point
pairs [15] and have been investigated for a decade. Their
application field includes homography [4] and surface normal [15, 5] estimation; recovery of the epipoles [6]; triangulation of points in 3D [15]; camera pose estimation [16]; structure-from-motion [28]. In practice, local affinities can be accurately retrieved [3, 22] using e.g.
affine-covariant feature detectors, such Affine-SIFT [23]
and Hessian-Affine [21]. To the best of our knowledge, no
paper has dealt with the unknown focal length problem using local affine transformations.
This paper proposes two novel linear constraints describing the relationship between local affinities and epipolar
geometry. Forming a multivariate polynomial system and
solving it by the hidden-variable technique [9], the proposed method is efficient and estimates the focal length and
the relative motion using only two affinities. In order to
eliminate invalid roots, a novel condition is introduced investigating the geometry of local affinities. To select the
best candidate out of the remaining ones, we propose a root

6003

