Scale-Aware Face Detection
Zekun Hao1 , Yu Liu1 , Hongwei Qin2 , Junjie Yan2 , Xiu Li2 , Xiaolin Hu2
1
SenseTime, 2 Tsinghua University
{haozekun, yanjunjie}@outlook.com, liuyuisanai@gmail.com,
{qhw12@mails., xlhu@, li.xiu@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn

FLOPS

Abstract

5.6G

1x

1. Introduction
Face detection is one of the most widely used computer
vision applications. Popular face detectors have been proposed, including the Viola-Jones[34]and its extensions, part
model [9] and its successors and the convolutional neural
network (CNN) based approaches [33]. The CNN based
approaches have recently shown great successes [13, 39, 4].
A face detection system should be able to handle faces of
various scales, poses and appearances. For CNN-based face
detectors, the variance in pose and appearance can be handled by the large capacity of convolutional neural network.
The variance in scale, however, is not carefully considered
and there is room for improvement. The popularity of CNN
in computer vision domain largely comes from its translation invariance property, which significantly reduces computation and model size compared to fully-connected neural
networks. However, as for scale invariance, CNN meets the
limitation that is similar to the limitation of translation invariance for fully-connected networks. The CNN does not
inherently have scale invariance. A CNN can be trained to
have certain extent of scale invariance, but it needs more

1/2x
1/4x
1/8x
1/16x

Single scale detector

Convolutional neural network (CNN) based face detectors are inefficient in handling faces of diverse scales. They
rely on either fitting a large single model to faces across a
large scale range or multi-scale testing. Both are computationally expensive. We propose Scale-aware Face Detection
(SAFD) to handle scale explicitly using CNN, and achieve
better performance with less computation cost. Prior to detection, an efficient CNN predicts the scale distribution histogram of the faces. Then the scale histogram guides the
zoom-in and zoom-out of the image. Since the faces will
be approximately in uniform scale after zoom, they can be
detected accurately even with much smaller CNN. Actually,
more than 99% of the faces in AFW can be covered with
less than two zooms per image. Extensive experiments on
FDDB, MALF and AFW show advantages of SAFD.

1.4G
350M

NMS

87.5M
21.9M

Figure 1. The motivation of SAFD. Single-scale detectors need
to perform multi-scale testing on image pyramids in order to cover
a large scale range. However, in most cases only a few layers in
the image pyramids contain faces of valid scales (green arrow).
Finding faces on those invalid scales is a waste of computation
(red dashed arrow). In the proposed method, we show that the
prediction of those valid scales can be done efficiently by a CNN,
which considerably reduces computation.

parameters and more complex structures to retain performance. Despite the importance, works that involve scale are
rarely seen, and no work focuses on the essence of the scale
problem. One possible reason is that in academic research,
the simple multi-scale testing on image pyramids can be
used to avoid the problem and get good accuracy. However, multi-scale testing leads to heavy computation cost.
Another way to avoid this problem is to fit a CNN model to
multiple scales. This may also lead to an increase in model
size and computation.
To solve this problem, we consider estimating the scale
explicitly. If we know the face scales in each image, we can
resize the image to suitable scales that best fit the detector.
It eliminates the need to cover variances caused by scales
so that smaller detector network can be used while achieving even better performance. It also prevents exhaustively
testing all the scales in an image pyramid, which saves computation, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In this way, the face detection procedure can be divided
into face scale estimation and single scale detection.
The scale proposal stage is implemented through a lightweight, fully-convolutional network called Scale Proposal
16186

