Event-based Visual Inertial Odometry
Alex Zihao Zhu, Nikolay Atanasov, Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsyvlania
{alexzhu, atanasov, kostas}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Event-based cameras provide a new visual sensing
model by detecting changes in image intensity asynchronously across all pixels on the camera. By providing
these events at extremely high rates (up to 1MHz), they allow for sensing in both high speed and high dynamic range
situations where traditional cameras may fail. In this paper, we present the first algorithm to fuse a purely eventbased tracking algorithm with an inertial measurement unit,
to provide accurate metric tracking of a camera’s full 6dof
pose. Our algorithm is asynchronous, and provides measurement updates at a rate proportional to the camera velocity. The algorithm selects features in the image plane,
and tracks spatiotemporal windows around these features
within the event stream. An Extended Kalman Filter with
a structureless measurement model then fuses the feature
tracks with the output of the IMU. The camera poses from
the filter are then used to initialize the next step of the
tracker and reject failed tracks. We show that our method
successfully tracks camera motion on the Event-Camera
Dataset [16] in a number of challenging situations.

1. Introduction
Event-based cameras capture changes in the scene at ultra high rates (1MHz), and thus enable processing of very
fast motions without suffering from image blur, temporal
aliasing, high bandwidths, or high intensity ranges. Since
no absolute intensity is captured, there is no notion of a
frame that can be read out from the sensor. Hence, none
of the traditional computer vision low- and mid-level techniques like spatial differentiation and spatial segmentation
can be directly applied. While recent approaches [11] tried
to reconstruct frames, we believe that basic geometric estimation problems such as visual odometry can be solved
using only features defined by asynchronous events.
In this paper, we introduce a novel feature tracking
method and a visual-inertial odometry estimation scheme
in order to track 6dof pose from events and inertial measurements without using any intensity frames. State of the
art in visual-inertial odometry relies on feature-tracks over

temporal windows [14]. Such tracks are difficult to obtain
among asynchronous events due to the lack of any intensity neighborhood. We propose a data association scheme
where multiple spatially neighboring events are softly associated with one feature whose motion is computed using
the weighted event positions. This leads to an ExpectationMaximization algorithm that estimates the optical flow.
Events corrected to the estimated optical flow value are then
used to compute an affine estimate of optical flow with respect to the onset time of the feature. Finally, filter estimates of the 3D rotation are used in a 2-feature RANSAC
inlier selection with the translation direction as unknown.
At no point during feature tracking do we use a fixed temporal window: the spatiotemporal neighborhood is always
defined using the length of the computed optical flow.
Given several feature tracks over time, we employ an Extended Kalman Filter which estimates all camera poses during the lifespan of the features. Similar to the MSCKF [14],
we eliminate the depth from the measurement equations so
that we do not have to keep triangulated features in the state
vector. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• A novel event association scheme resulting in robust
feature tracks by employing two EM-steps and variable temporal frames depending on flow and rotation
estimates obtained from the odometry filter.
• The first visual odometry system for event-based cameras that makes use of inertial information.
• We demonstrate results on very fast benchmark sequences and we show superiority with respect to classic temporally sparse KLT features in high speed and
high dynamic range situations.

2. Related Work
Weikersdorfer et al. [22] present the first work on eventbased pose estimation, using a particle filter based on a
known 2D map. They later extend this work in [23] by fusing the previous work with a 2D mapping thread to perform
SLAM in an artificially textured environment. Similarly,
Censi et al. [3] use a known map of active markers to localize using a particle filter. The work in [7] also assumes a
known set of images, poses and depth maps to perform 6dof
pose estimation using an EKF. Several methods also com15391

