Self-learning Scene-specific Pedestrian Detectors
using a Progressive Latent Model
Qixiang Ye1 †, Tianliang Zhang1 , Wei Ke1 †, Qiang Qiu2 , Jie Chen3 , Guillermo Sapiro2 , and Baochang Zhang4
1
EECE, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
ECE, Duke University. 3 University of Oulu, Finland. 4 ASEE, Beihang University.
qxye@ucas.ac.cn; kewei11@mails.ucas.ac.cn
A video of pedestrians

Abstract
In this paper, a self-learning approach is proposed
towards solving scene-specific pedestrian detection problem without any human’ annotation involved. The selflearning approach is deployed as progressive steps of object
discovery, object enforcement, and label propagation. In
the learning procedure, object locations in each frame are
treated as latent variables that are solved with a progressive
latent model (PLM). Compared with conventional latent
models, the proposed PLM incorporates a spatial regularization term to reduce ambiguities in object proposals
and to enforce object localization, and also a graph-based
label propagation to discover harder instances in adjacent
frames. With the difference of convex (DC) objective
functions, PLM can be efficiently optimized with a concaveconvex programming and thus guaranteeing the stability of
self-learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that even
without annotation the proposed self-learning approach
outperforms weakly supervised learning approaches, while
achieving comparable performance with transfer learning
and fully supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
With widespread use of surveillance cameras, the need
for automatically detecting objects, e.g., pedestrians, has
significantly increased. Recent methods [9, 13, 18, 27]
have achieved encouraging progress for detecting objects
in images. However, their performance in video scenes is
limited for the following reasons: 1) Supervised learning
of detectors for different scenes requires repeated human
effort; 2) Offline-trained detectors usually degrade with
changes in the scene or camera; 3) Scene specific cues
including object resolution, occlusions, and background
structures are not incorporated into the detectors [29].
†Corresponding Authors

Negative images

Input
video:

Progressive latent model

Iteration

Object enforcement

Label propagation

Score
maps:

Object discovery

Figure 1. Proposed self-learning framework. Given a video
where pedestrians are dominant moving objects, self-learning
progressively constructs a scene-specific detector using object
discovery, object enforcement, and label propagation procedures.

Learning scene-specific detectors, which aims at modeling objects in video scenes by incorporating scene-specific
discriminative information, has been increasingly investigated [19, 25, 31]. To learn scene-specific detectors
with less human supervision, transfer learning and semisupervised learning are commonly used [19, 25, 31]. Transfer learning adapts pre-trained detectors to new specific
domains, reduces annotation requirements and improves detector performance [35, 36, 37]. Semi-supervised learning
saves human annotation effort by initially training detectors
with a few annotated examples, and incrementally improving the detectors by extending the sample domains [11,
25, 41]. However, transfer learning is challenged when
the object appearance in the target domains has significant
differences with that in the source domains; while semisupervised models might drift away from the intended aims
given noisy or unrelated samples [25]. Most importantly,
both methods require partial object-level annotations, and
therefore, do not fully eliminate human supervision.
As a promising direction, recent unsupervised video object discovery techniques [23, 26, 39] had been significantly improved, which are supposed to break the bottleneck
1509

