Online Video Object Segmentation via Convolutional Trident Network
Won-Dong Jang
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

wdjang@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A semi-supervised online video object segmentation algorithm, which accepts user annotations about a target object at the first frame, is proposed in this work. We propagate the segmentation labels at the previous frame to the
current frame using optical flow vectors. However, the
propagation is error-prone. Therefore, we develop the convolutional trident network (CTN), which has three decoding branches: separative, definite foreground, and definite
background decoders. Then, we perform Markov random
field optimization based on outputs of the three decoders.
We sequentially carry out these processes from the second
to the last frames to extract a segment track of the target object. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art conventional algorithms on the DAVIS benchmark dataset.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation aims at clustering pixels in
videos into objects or background. In general, video object segmentation algorithms can be grouped into three
categories: unsupervised, semi-supervised, and supervised
ones. Unsupervised algorithms [11, 27, 28, 33, 35, 53] do
not require any annotations about objects. Instead of annotations, they discover primary objects in videos using
objectness, saliency, and motion cues. While some algorithms [11, 35, 53] yield a single segment track, the others [27, 28, 33] produce multiple segment tracks. Semisupervised algorithms [15, 37, 40, 54] track and segment a
target object (or foreground), which is annotated by a user
in the first frame. Supervised algorithms [1, 12, 13] take
user annotations interactively during the segmentation process. Although they yield a fine segment track, the annotation tasks can be burdensome for users.
With explosive researches in deep learning, there are remarkable advances in many vision problems, e.g., object
detection [18], contour detection [57], and semantic segmentation [7]. The encoder-decoder architecture [20] is
widely used in deep learning systems [7,29,32,38,57]. The

encoder extracts features from an input image. The convolutional neural networks [18, 25, 45, 47], trained for image classification, are fine-tuned and used as the encoder
in many cases. Since image classification attempts to identify the class of an object in an image [43], the trained networks extract high-level features effectively. The decoder
design varies more according to applications. For example, pixel-level classification algorithms (e.g. contour detection [57] and semantic segmentation [32]) adopt convolution layers with unpooling layers in the decoder. On the
contrary, fully connected layers are used for image-level
classification problems (e.g. image classification [45] and
object detection [41]). In this work, we design decoders
for semi-supervised video object segmentation. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first deep learning-based approach to semi-supervised video object segmentation.
We propose a semi-supervised online segmentation algorithm, which can separate a target object from the background sequentially from the first to last frames with minimum user efforts at the first frame only. To track and segment the target object, we develop the convolutional trident
network (CTN), which has the encoder-decoder architecture. The CTN outputs three probability maps from three
decoding branches: separative, definite foreground, and
definite background decoders. First, we propagate a segmentation label map from the previous frame to the current
frame. We then predict the three probability maps via the
CTN. The three maps are tailored for a two-class Markov
random field (MRF) optimization problem. At the beginning of the MRF optimization, we assign initial pixel labels by thresholding the separative probability map. Also,
we use the definite foreground and background maps to discover the pixels that should be definitely labeled as the foreground and the background, respectively. By fixing the labels on these definite pixels, the MRF optimizer extracts
the target object more precisely. We perform these processes from the second to the last frames. Experimental
results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms the
state-of-the-art conventional algorithms [12, 31, 37, 40] on
the DAVIS dataset [36]. Three major contributions of this
work are:

5849

