Self-calibration-based Approach to Critical Motion Sequences of
Rolling-shutter Structure from Motion
Eisuke Ito† and Takayuki Okatani†,∗
∗
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
Tohoku University
1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
980-8579 Sendai, Miyagi, Japan
†

{ito,okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper we consider critical motion sequences
(CMSs) of rolling-shutter (RS) SfM. Employing an RS camera model with linearized pure rotation, we show that the RS
distortion can be approximately expressed by two internal
parameters of an “imaginary” camera plus one-parameter
nonlinear transformation similar to lens distortion. We then
reformulate the problem as self-calibration of the imaginary
camera, in which its skew and aspect ratio are unknown and
varying in the image sequence. In the formulation, we derive a general representation of CMSs. We also show that
our method can explain the CMS that was recently reported
in the literature, and then present a new remedy to deal with
the degeneracy. Our theoretical results agree well with experimental results; it explains degeneracies observed when
we employ naive bundle adjustment, and how they are resolved by our method.

1. Introduction
Most consumer imaging devices such as smartphones
and action cameras use CMOS sensors, the majority of
which use a rolling-shutter. In recent years, increasing attention has been paid to performing SfM (structure-frommotion) from multi-view images with distortion created by
a rolling shutter (RS). A number of methods have been proposed that can deal with RS distortion in several different
problem settings [7, 1, 12, 6, 3]. The standard formulation
is RS bundle adjustment (BA), which is to assume a model
of RS distortion and optimize its model parameters together
with standard camera parameters in the framework of bundle adjustment [12, 11, 24].
Despite the many studies of RS SfM, there were few
studies about its degeneracy. An only exception is the recent study of Albl et al. [4]. They showed that there is
a degenerate case in RS SfM and then they explained the
mechanism of why it arises. However, the study only deals

with a single, specific case of degeneracy. Thus, there remain several open questions, for instance, are there more
degeneracy and critical cases?
A central motivation behind this study is to answer such
questions. We wish to derive general representation of
degeneracy in RS SfM. However, it is not a simple task,
since RS SfM is a highly nonlinear problem with many unknowns. To mitigate this difficulty, in this paper, we limit
our attention to a simple but practically important type of
RS distortion, and then borrow the classical formulation of
self-calibration of a camera, in which CMSs were previously studied extensively. To be specific, we first assume
that camera motion inducing the RS distortion is pure rotation with a constant angular velocity, which may be independent of the camera pose of the viewpoint. Further assuming that the rotation is small and can be linearized, we
then show that the RS distortion can be expressed by two
internal parameters, specifically, skew and aspect ratio, of
an imaginary camera, along with a parameter of a nonlinear transformation that is similar to (and may be regarded
as a special type of) lens distortion. Assuming this model,
we show that RS SfM can be recasted as self-calibration of
the imaginary camera in the case where the above parameters are unknown and varying in an image sequence. In this
self-calibration formulation, we will derive a general representation of critical motion sequences (CMSs). We also
derive an explicitly represented CMS, which coincides with
the one derived in [4], with a new remedy to deal with it.
We will finally show the usefulness and effectiveness of our
approach through a series of experimental results.

2. Related work
A number of studies have been conducted to deal with
RS distortion in single or multi-view images. Depending on
the type of problems, they are classified into absolute pose
problem [1, 18, 3, 23], relative pose problem [5], multiview optimization (bundle adjustment) [11, 12, 24], stereo
[2, 22], and rectification/stabilization [6, 21, 16, 9].
4321
801

