Unite the People: Closing the Loop Between 3D and 2D Human Representations
Christoph Lassner1,2

Javier Romero3,*

Martin Kiefel2

classner@tue.mpg.de

javier.romero@bodylabs.com

mkiefel@tue.mpg.de

Federica Bogo4,*

Michael J. Black2

Peter V. Gehler5,*

febogo@microsoft.com

black@tue.mpg.de

pgehler@tue.mpg.de

1

Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
2
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
4
Body Labs Inc., New York, United States
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK
5
University of Würzburg, Germany

Abstract
3D models provide a common ground for different representations of human bodies. In turn, robust 2D estimation
has proven to be a powerful tool to obtain 3D fits “in-thewild”. However, depending on the level of detail, it can be
hard to impossible to acquire labeled data for training 2D
estimators on large scale. We propose a hybrid approach to
this problem: with an extended version of the recently introduced SMPLify method, we obtain high quality 3D body
model fits for multiple human pose datasets. Human annotators solely sort good and bad fits. This procedure leads
to an initial dataset, UP-3D, with rich annotations. With a
comprehensive set of experiments, we show how this data
can be used to train discriminative models that produce results with an unprecedented level of detail: our models predict 31 segments and 91 landmark locations on the body.
Using the 91 landmark pose estimator, we present state-ofthe art results for 3D human pose and shape estimation using an order of magnitude less training data and without
assumptions about gender or pose in the fitting procedure.
We show that UP-3D can be enhanced with these improved
fits to grow in quantity and quality, which makes the system
deployable on large scale. The data, code and models are
available for research purposes.

1. Introduction
Teaching computers to recognize and understand humans in images and videos is a fundamental task of computer vision. Different applications require different tradeoffs between fidelity of the representation and inference
complexity. This led to a wide range of parameterizations
for human bodies and corresponding prediction methods
ranging from bounding boxes to detailed 3D models.
* This work was performed while J. Romero and F. Bogo were with
the MPI-IS2 ; P. V. Gehler with the BCCN1 and MPI-IS2 .

Label Generation

31 Parts

91 Landmarks

3D Fits

Direct 3D

3D Fit Improvement

Leeds Sports Pose / extended MPII HPDB FashionPose
United People Dataset

Figure 1: Lower row: validated 3D body model fits on various datasets form our initial dataset, UP-3D, and provide labels for multiple tasks. Top row: we perform experiments
on semantic body part segmentation, pose estimation and
3D fitting. Improved 3D fits can extend the initial dataset.

Learning-based algorithms, especially convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), are the leading methods to cope
with the complexity of human appearance. Their representational power has led to increasingly robust algorithms for
bounding box detection [10], keypoint detection [19, 32, 42]
and body part segmentation [7, 15, 43]. However, they are
usually applied in isolation on separate datasets and independent from the goal of precise 3D body estimation. In
this paper we aim to overcome this separation and “unite
the people” of different datasets and for multiple tasks.
With this strategy, we attack the main problem of learningbased approaches for complex body representations: the
lack of data. While it is feasible to annotate a small number
of keypoints in images (e.g., 14 in the case of the MPIIHumanPose dataset [1]), scaling to larger numbers quickly
becomes impractical and prone to annotation inconsistency.
The same is true for semantic segmentation annotations:
most datasets provide labels for only a few body parts.

6050

