Joint Geometrical and Statistical Alignment for Visual Domain Adaptation
Jing Zhang, Wanqing Li, Philip Ogunbona
Advanced Multimedia Research Lab, University of Wollongong, Australia
jz960@uowmail.edu.au, wanqing@uow.edu.au, philipo@uow.edu.au

Abstract
This paper presents a novel unsupervised domain adaptation method for cross-domain visual recognition. We
propose a unified framework that reduces the shift between domains both statistically and geometrically, referred to as Joint Geometrical and Statistical Alignment
(JGSA). Specifically, we learn two coupled projections that
project the source domain and target domain data into lowdimensional subspaces where the geometrical shift and distribution shift are reduced simultaneously. The objective
function can be solved efficiently in a closed form. Extensive
experiments have verified that the proposed method significantly outperforms several state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods on a synthetic dataset and three different real
world cross-domain visual recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
A basic assumption of statistical learning theory is that
the training and test data are drawn from the same distribution. Unfortunately, this assumption does not hold in many
applications. For example, in visual recognition, the distributions between training and test can be discrepant due
to the environment, sensor type, resolution, and view angle. In video based visual recognition, more factors are involved in addition to those in image based visual recognition. For example, in action recognition, the subject, performing style, and performing speed increase the domain
shift further. Labelling data is labour intensive and expensive, thus it is impractical to relabel a large amount of data
in a new domain. Hence, a realistic strategy, domain adaptation, can be used to employ previous labeled source domain
data to boost the task in the new target domain. Based on
the availability of target labeled data, domain adaptation can
be generally divided into semi-supervised and unsupervised
domain adaptation. The semi-supervised approach requires
a certain amount of labelled training samples in the target
domain and the unsupervised one requires none labelled
data. However, in both semi-supervised and unsupervised
domain adaptation, sufficient unlabeled target domain data

are required. In this paper, we focus on unsupervised domain adaptation which is considered to be more practical
and challenging.
The most commonly used domain adaptation approaches
include instance-based adaptation, feature representation
adaptation, and classifier-based adaptation [1, 2]. In unsupervised domain adaptation, as there is no labeled data in
the target domain, the classifier-based adaptation is not feasible. Alternatively, we can deal with this problem by minimizing distribution divergence between domains as well as
the empirical source error [3]. It is generally assumed that
the distribution divergence can be compensated either by an
instance based adaptation method, such as reweighting samples in the source domain to better match the target domain
distribution, or by a feature transformation based method
that projects features of two domains into another subspace
with small distribution shift. The instance-based approach
requires the strict assumptions [1, 4] that 1) the conditional
distributions of source and target domain are identical, and
2) certain portion of the data in the source domain can be
reused for learning in the target domain through reweighting. While the feature transformation based approach relaxes these assumptions, and only assumes that there exists
a common space where the distributions of two domains are
similar. This paper follows the feature transformation based
approach.
Two main categories of feature transformation methods
are identified [5] among the literature, namely data centric methods and subspace centric methods. The data centric methods seek a unified transformation that projects data
from two domains into a domain invariant space to reduce
the distributional divergence between domains while preserving data properties in original spaces, such as [6, 7, 8,
9]. The data centric methods only exploit shared feature
in two domains, which will fail when the two different domains have large discrepancy, because there may not exist
such a common space where the distributions of two domains are the same and the data properties are also maximumly preserved in the mean time. For the subspace centric methods, the domain shift is reduced by manipulating the subspaces of the two domains such that the sub11859

