Unsupervised Semantic Scene Labeling for Streaming Data
Maggie Wigness and John G. Rogers III
U.S. Army Research Laboratory
maggie.b.wigness.civ@mail.mil,john.g.rogers59.civ@mail.mil

Abstract
We introduce an unsupervised semantic scene labeling
approach that continuously learns and adapts semantic
models discovered within a data stream. While closely related to unsupervised video segmentation, our algorithm
is not designed to be an early video processing strategy
that produces coherent over-segmentations, but instead,
to directly learn higher-level semantic concepts. This is
achieved with an ensemble-based approach, where each
learner clusters data from a local window in the data
stream. Overlapping local windows are processed and encoded in a graph structure to create a label mapping across
windows and reconcile the labelings to reduce unsupervised
learning noise. Additionally, we iteratively learn a merging
threshold criteria from observed data similarities to automatically determine the number of learned labels without
human provided parameters. Experiments show that our
approach semantically labels video streams with a high degree of accuracy, and achieves a better balance of under
and over-segmentation entropy than existing video segmentation algorithms given similar numbers of label outputs.

1. Introduction
Visual perception is critical in many applications that use
scene semantics to help successfully perform tasks. Motivating examples include planning routes that avoid undesirable terrain and identifying goal landmarks in autonomous
driving. Deep learning has helped push the state-of-the-art
in visual classification [17, 30, 37] and semantic scene labeling [4, 7, 19] in recent years. These advances, in part,
have been due to large sets of labeled data that required a
tremendous amount of human annotation effort [5, 37].
However, the generalization of supervised learners
across domains is still an open area of research. Even
with millions of training images, the data distribution of
a training set is unable to adequately represent all domains. Adapting requires additional training data, parameter tuning and/or re-training of at least part of the supervised learning system. This batch style training process in-

Figure 1. Comparison of segmentation output for our technique
which directly models semantics without regard to locality, and
hierarchical graph-based (GBH) segmentation which emphasizes
segmentation coherency using strict locality rules. Our approach
labels all four traffic cones consistently (column two), whereas
GBH assigns unique labels to each cone (column three).

hibits on-line learning and discovery of novel concepts. In
some real-world applications, the time latency introduced
while humans label data to adapt visual classifiers has been
addressed with semi-supervised [33] and self-supervised
learning techniques [26, 27], but still require hours of labeling effort or are limited to binary classification tasks.
To further address the needs of these real-world applications, we introduce an unsupervised semantic scene labeling
(USSL) technique. Similar to video segmentation, USSL
localizes semantic concepts from a data stream without human intervention. However, most existing segmentation algorithms are used as an early pre-processing step to generate coherent, over-segmented regions in video [1, 18, 34].
In other words, the segmented output adheres to strict pixel
connectivity in localized regions. Since our motivating applications seek semantic models for visual classification,
USSL directly models the semantics in a scene without regard to locality. Figure 1 illustrates this difference, where
the four traffic cones are assigned the same label by our
USSL technique (second column), but assigned unique labels with a similar number of segments from the hierarchical graph-based segmentation [11] (column three).
Unsupervised learning can be error prone because of
the lack of explicit guidance on which feature patterns to
learn. Variations in illumination, perspective and occlusion
are only some of the many challenges that impact feature
patterns in data. To minimize variance of visual properties
seen during processing, USSL learns on a local level, i.e.,
a small window of sequential frames from the data stream.
14612

