Self-supervised learning of visual features through embedding images into text
topic spaces
Lluis Gomez∗
Computer Vision Center, UAB, Spain

Yash Patel∗
CVIT, KCIS, IIIT Hyderabad, India

lgomez@cvc.uab.es

yash.patel@students.iiit.ac.in

Marçal Rusiñol
Computer Vision Center, UAB, Spain

Dimosthenis Karatzas
Computer Vision Center, UAB, Spain

marcal@cvc.uab.es

dimos@cvc.uab.es

C.V. Jawahar
CVIT, KCIS, IIIT Hyderabad, India
jawahar@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
End-to-end training from scratch of current deep architectures for new computer vision problems would require
Imagenet-scale datasets, and this is not always possible.
In this paper we present a method that is able to take
advantage of freely available multi-modal content to train
computer vision algorithms without human supervision. We
put forward the idea of performing self-supervised learning
of visual features by mining a large scale corpus of multimodal (text and image) documents. We show that discriminative visual features can be learnt efficiently by training a
CNN to predict the semantic context in which a particular
image is more probable to appear as an illustration. For
this we leverage the hidden semantic structures discovered
in the text corpus with a well-known topic modeling technique.
Our experiments demonstrate state of the art performance in image classification, object detection, and multimodal retrieval compared to recent self-supervised or
natural-supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
A picture is worth a thousand words. When we read an
article about an unknown object, event, or place we greatly
appreciate that it is accompanied by some image that supports the textual information. These images complement
the textual description and at the same time provide context
to our imagination. Illustrated texts are thus ubiquitous in
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1: Our CNN learns to predict the semantic context in
which images appear as illustration. Given an illustrated article we
project its textual information into the topic-probability space provided by a topic modeling framework. Then we use this semantic
level representation as the supervisory signal for CNN training.

our culture: newspaper articles, encyclopedia entries, web
pages, etc. Can we take advantage of all this available multimodal content to train computer vision algorithms without
human supervision?
Training deep networks requires a signficant amount of
annotated data. The emergence of large-scale annotated
datasets [5] has undoubtedly been one of the key ingredients for the tremendous impact deep learning is having on
almost every computer vision task. However, the amount of
human resources needed to manually annotate such datasets
represents a problem. The goal of this paper is to propose an
alternative solution to fully supervised training of CNNs by
leveraging the correlation between images and text found in
illustrated articles.
In most cases human generated data annotations consist
of textual information with different granularity depending
on the visual task they address: a single word to identify an
14230

