iCaRL: Incremental Classifier and Representation Learning
Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi
University of Oxford/IST Austria

Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria

Abstract
A major open problem on the road to artificial intelligence is the development of incrementally learning systems
that learn about more and more concepts over time from
a stream of data. In this work, we introduce a new training strategy, iCaRL, that allows learning in such a classincremental way: only the training data for a small number
of classes has to be present at the same time and new classes
can be added progressively.
iCaRL learns strong classifiers and a data representation simultaneously. This distinguishes it from earlier works
that were fundamentally limited to fixed data representations and therefore incompatible with deep learning architectures. We show by experiments on CIFAR-100 and
ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 data that iCaRL can learn many
classes incrementally over a long period of time where other
strategies quickly fail.

1. Introduction
Natural vision systems are inherently incremental: new
visual information is continuously incorporated while existing knowledge is preserved. For example, a child visiting
the zoo will learn about many new animals without forgetting the pet it has at home. In contrast, most artificial object
recognition systems can only be trained in a batch setting,
where all object classes are known in advance and they the
training data of all classes can be accessed at the same time
and in arbitrary order.
As the field of computer vision moves closer towards artificial intelligence it becomes apparent that more flexible
strategies are required to handle the large-scale and dynamic
properties of real-world object categorization situations. At
the very least, a visual object classification system should be
able to incrementally learn about new classes, when training data for them becomes available. We call this scenario
class-incremental learning.
Formally, we demand the following three properties of
an algorithm to qualify as class-incremental:
i) it should be trainable from a stream of data in which
examples of different classes occur at different times,

Class 1

Class 2

Class 3

data

data

data

class-incremental learner

Figure 1: Class-incremental learning: an algorithm learns
continuously from a sequential data stream in which new
classes occur. At any time, the learner is able to perform
multi-class classification for all classes observed so far.
ii) it should at any time provide a competitive multi-class
classifier for the classes observed so far,
iii) its computational requirements and memory footprint
should remain bounded, or at least grow very slowly,
with respect to the number of classes seen so far.
The first two criteria express the essence of classincremental learning. The third criterion prevents trivial algorithms, such as storing all training examples and retraining an ordinary multi-class classifier whenever new data becomes available.
Interestingly, despite the vast progress that image classification has made over the last decades, there is not a single satisfactory class-incremental learning algorithm these
days. Most existing multi-class techniques simply violate
i) or ii) as they can only handle a fixed number of classes
and/or need all training data to be available at the same
time. Naively, one could try to overcome this by training
classifiers from class-incremental data streams, e.g. using
stochastic gradient descent optimization. This, however,
will cause the classification accuracy to quickly deteriorate,
an effect known in the literature as catastrophic forgetting
or catastrophic interference [22]. The few existing techniques that do fulfill the above properties are principally
limited to situations with a fixed data representation. They
cannot be extended to deep architectures that learn classifiers and feature representations at the same time and are
therefore not competitive anymore in terms of classification
accuracy. More related work is discussed in Section 3.
In this work, we introduce iCaRL (incremental classifier
and representation learning), a practical strategy for simultaneously learning classifiers and a feature representation in
the class-incremental setting. Based on a careful analysis of

2001

