Radiometric Calibration from Faces in Images
Chen Li1
1

Stephen Lin2

Kun Zhou1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
We present a method for radiometric calibration of cameras from a single image that contains a human face. This
technique takes advantage of a low-rank property that exists
among certain skin albedo gradients because of the pigments within the skin. This property becomes distorted in
images that are captured with a non-linear camera response
function, and we perform radiometric calibration by solving for the inverse response function that best restores this
low-rank property in an image. Although this work makes
use of the color properties of skin pigments, we show that
this calibration is unaffected by the color of scene illumination or the sensitivities of the camera’s color filters. Our
experiments validate this approach on a variety of images
containing human faces, and show that faces can provide
an important source of calibration data in images where
existing radiometric calibration techniques perform poorly.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision algorithms, image intensity is
assumed to be linearly related to scene radiance. However, the camera response function (CRF) of most imaging
devices induces a non-linear mapping between these two
quantities for the purpose of dynamic range compression.
To address this issue, radiometric calibration aims to invert
this non-linear mapping in images, so that the linear relationship between image intensity and scene radiance is restored.
Radiometric calibration is often performed using images that contain various known differences in relative radiance values, such as from a calibration target [24, 28],
an image sequence captured with different exposure settings [3, 6, 20, 25, 35], or multiple images recorded under
different illuminations [10, 21, 29]. These approaches can
easily be applied if the camera is at hand and the appropriate images can be taken. But in many instances, one wishes
to process an image captured by an unknown camera for
which such calibration images are unavailable. This need
has motivated work on radiometric calibration using just a

Katsushi Ikeuchi2
2

Microsoft Research

single arbitrary image as input.
The existing single-image techniques all rely on ﬁnding
image regions that exhibit certain properties, such as locally
planar irradiance [26], uniform regions of various intensity
levels [32, 33], or color blending between uniform regions
at edges [18, 30] or caused by blur [31, 36]. However, in
many images, the number of regions that can be reliably
extracted with these scene properties can be rather limited,
thus reducing the effectiveness of these techniques.
To help deal with this problem, we propose in this work
to take advantage of the frequent appearance of human faces
in photographs by utilizing them for radiometric calibration. It has been found that faces exist in a large proportion
of camera phone images [8] and Flickr1 photos [1]. We
show that, similar to a calibration target, human faces contain known radiance properties that can be exploited for radiometric calibration. The color of human skin arises from a
combination of two independent pigments, namely melanin
in the epidermal layer and hemoglobin in the dermal layer.
From the spatial distributions of melanin and hemoglobin,
we show that there exists a low-rank property among certain skin albedo gradients. However, these sets of gradients
lose their low-rank property in images when intensity values
are non-linearly transformed by the camera response function. For radiometric calibration, we solve for an inverse
response function that restores this low-rank property and
hence undoes the non-linear mapping. In order to analyze
skin albedo gradients, our method extracts skin albedo values from the image through intrinsic image decomposition,
a technique for separating the reﬂectance and shading layers
of an image.
Although color properties of human skin are utilized in
this work for radiometric calibration, we show that the lowrank property of skin albedo gradients is invariant to scene
illumination and the color ﬁlter sensitivities of the camera.
It is furthermore demonstrated that calibration with the lowrank property is stable to weak specular reﬂections, which
are generally present over much of a face and are difﬁcult to
remove. With this approach, our method can reliably perform radiometric calibration in images that are challenging
for other single-image techniques.
1 Flickr: http://www.flickr.com/.

4321
3117

