One-Shot Metric Learning for Person Re-identification
Sławomir B ˛
ak Peter Carr
Disney Research
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 15213
{slawomir.bak,peter.carr}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract

CNN

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is the task of finding the same
individual across a network of cameras. A successful algorithm must cope with significant appearance changes
caused by variations in color, background, camera viewpoint and a person’s pose. Most successful state-of-the-art
approaches employ supervised learning [14, 28, 32–34, 36,
62] and require hundreds of labeled image pairs of people
across each camera pair. Novel deep architectures [2,11,55]
can outperform these approaches, but training them from
scratch requires thousands of labeled image pairs. Finetuning for target camera pairs [60] may help to decrease
the amount of required training data to hundreds of image
pairs. However, annotating hundreds of subjects in each
camera pair is still tedious and does not scale to real-world

…"

…"

…"

T
Re-identification of people in surveillance footage must
cope with drastic variations in color, background, viewing
angle and a person’s pose. Supervised techniques are often
the most effective, but require extensive annotation which
is infeasible for large camera networks. Unlike previous
supervised learning approaches that require hundreds of
annotated subjects, we learn a metric using a novel oneshot learning approach. We first learn a deep texture representation from intensity images with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). When training a CNN using only
intensity images, the learned embedding is color-invariant
and shows high performance even on unseen datasets without fine-tuning. To account for differences in camera color
distributions, we learn a color metric using a single pair
of ColorChecker images. The proposed one-shot learning achieves performance that is competitive with supervised methods, but uses only a single example rather than
the hundreds required for the fully supervised case. Compared with semi-supervised and unsupervised state-of-theart methods, our approach yields significantly higher accuracy.

soft-max
layer

fc7

Source datasets

!

!

I 0
M=
0G
c

Target dataset

Figure 1: One-Shot Metric Learning. We split metric M
into texture and color components. Deep texture features T
are trained with CNN on intensity images to enforce color
invariance without having to fine-tune. Joint learning on
multiple source datasets (labeled data) increases good generalization under the Euclidean distance (identity matrix I).
We adapt for color differences specific to target camera pair
(unlabelled data) using a single image of color chart and
learning color metric G for patch color features c.
networks. To overcome this issue, semi-supervised and unsupervised methods have been proposed [15, 26, 49, 52, 58].
Unfortunately, without labeled data, they usually look for
feature invariance, which often reduces discriminativity
and specificity (inability to adapt to camera-pair-specific
changes). This makes them uncompetitive with supervised
techniques. As a result, unsupervised and semi-supervised
methods have received little attention in the research community because practicality and scalability have not been
the main concern in current benchmark datasets (often limited to a small number of cameras).
In this paper, we propose a metric learning approach that
scales to large camera networks by employing techniques
similar to one-shot-learning [16]. We assume the metric
learned for a pair of cameras can be split into texture and
color components (see Fig. 1). For texture, we learn a colorinvariant deep representation T that has good generalization abilities without fine-tuning. We can achieve this if we

2990

