Analyzing Computer Vision Data - The Good, the Bad and the Ugly
Oliver Zendel

Katrin Honauer
Markus Murschitz
Martin Humenberger
Gustavo Fernández Domı́nguez
AIT, Austrian Institute of Technology, Donau-City-Strasse 1, 1220, Vienna, Austria
HCI, IWR at Heidelberg University, Berliner Strasse 43 D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

{oliver.zendel;markus.murschitz;martin.humenberger;gustavojavier.fernandez}@ait.ac.at,
katrin.honauer@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
In recent years, a great number of datasets were published to train and evaluate computer vision (CV) algorithms. These valuable contributions helped to push CV
solutions to a level where they can be used for safetyrelevant applications, such as autonomous driving.
However, major questions concerning quality and usefulness of test data for CV evaluation are still unanswered.
Researchers and engineers try to cover all test cases by using as much test data as possible.
In this paper, we propose a different solution for this
challenge. We introduce a method for dataset analysis
which builds upon an improved version of the CV-HAZOP
checklist, a list of potential hazards within the CV domain.
Picking stereo vision as an example, we provide an extensive survey of 28 datasets covering the last two decades.
We create a tailored checklist and apply it to the datasets
Middlebury, KITTI, Sintel, Freiburg, and HCI to present a
thorough characterization and quantitative comparison. We
confirm the usability of our checklist for identification of
challenging stereo situations by applying nine state-of-theart stereo matching algorithms on the analyzed datasets,
showing that hazard frames correlate with difficult frames.
We show that challenging datasets still allow a meaningful algorithm evaluation even for small subsets. Finally, we
provide a list of missing test cases that are still not covered
by current datasets as inspiration for researchers who want
to participate in future dataset creation.

1. Introduction
Vision solutions are used in safety critical applications
such as self-driving cars and guided surgical procedures.
Rigorous quality assurance measures are thus needed to ensure safe operations. Software quality assurance provides
two main techniques that can be applied in CV: verifica-

tion and validation (V&V). Verification is the process of
checking whether a given implementation fulfills the specifications used to define the program’s behavior. In essence these are semi-automatic or automatic checks to detect software bugs and glitches. Validation on the other hand
evaluates if the system fulfills a given task even under difficult circumstances. This is done by using test datasets
and comparing the results obtained from the system to a
defined ground truth (GT). Major questions about the quality and usefulness of test data for CV evaluation are still
unanswered: What are the characteristics of a good dataset? How can shortcomings be identified and supplemented
to create test datasets which are truly effective at uncovering
algorithmic shortcomings? In this work we tackle the question: What constitutes good test data for robustness testing,
i.e. the detection of possible shortcomings and weaknesses.
We show that special care should be taken to cover a wide
variety of difficult situations because whether for validation
of CV algorithms or for training applications: Datasets need
a mixture of positive cases (the Good), border cases (the
Bad), and negative test cases (the Ugly). This paper focuses
on test data for validating stereo vision algorithms but the
presented methodology is applicable to basically all CV algorithms as well as the composition of machine learning
training data.
To give an idea about the impact of selected datasets,
Figure 1 shows the number of papers which cite stereo vision datasets published annually at three major computer
vision conferences (CVPR, ICCV, and ECCV). It is interesting to note that the popular Middlebury dataset (indoor
scenes) was recently overtaken by KITTI (driving scenes)
which shows the importance of stereo vision in the field of
autonomous driving and driver assistance systems.
Section 2 gives a thorough overview and listing of 28
stereo vision datasets and summarizes how content has
changed historically. Section 3.1 reviews CV-HAZOP, a
tool for systematic analysis of test datasets. It presents
our improvements on the method: specialization of generic
11980

