Global Optimality in Neural Network Training
Benjamin D. Haeffele and René Vidal
Johns Hopkins University, Center for Imaging Science, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
bhaeffele@jhu.edu rvidal@cis.jhu.edu

Abstract
The past few years have seen a dramatic increase in the
performance of recognition systems thanks to the introduction of deep networks for representation learning. However,
the mathematical reasons for this success remain elusive.
A key issue is that the neural network training problem is
nonconvex, hence optimization algorithms may not return a
global minima. This paper provides sufficient conditions to
guarantee that local minima are globally optimal and that
a local descent strategy can reach a global minima from
any initialization. Our conditions require both the network
output and the regularization to be positively homogeneous
functions of the network parameters, with the regularization being designed to control the network size. Our results apply to networks with one hidden layer, where size is
measured by the number of neurons in the hidden layer, and
multiple deep subnetworks connected in parallel, where size
is measured by the number of subnetworks.

1. Introduction
As a broad definition, feed-forward deep networks are
a collection of feature extraction layers, where each layer
applies some form of linear transformation (e.g., convolution, dot-product), followed by a nonlinearity (e.g., rectification, max-pooling) to the output of the preceding layer.
Modern networks are similar to classical neural networks,
except that they involve many more layers and typically replace classical sigmoid nonlinearities by linear rectification
(i.e., ReLU units). These modifications, together with the
availability of massive amounts of data for training, have led
to dramatic improvements in classification performance for
various applications in computer vision, speech and natural
language processing. However, the mathematical reasons
for this success remain elusive.
An important mathematical challenge is that the problem
of learning the parameters of a deep network is non-convex,
hence optimization algorithms can get stuck in non-global
minima. In contrast, local minimizers of a convex optimization problem are also global minimizers, so convex formu-

lations of learning problems are often preferable as they facilitate the analysis of the properties of the learning algorithm. This is one of the reasons for the popularity of classical learning algorithms such as linear regression, support
vector machines, ℓ1 minimization, and nuclear norm minimization, all of which involve solving a convex optimization
problem of the form:
min ℓ(Y, Φ(X, S)) + λΘ(X).
X

(1)

For classification problems, ℓ(Y, Φ(X, S)) is a loss function that measures the agreement between the true labels, Y ,
and the predicted labels, Φ(X, S), where S is the input data
to be classified and X represents the classifier parameters,
while Θ(X) is a regularization function designed to prevent
overfitting. Convex formulations require both the loss function and the regularization function to be convex on X, e.g.,
ℓ(Y, Φ(X, S)) = kY − S ⊤ Xk2F and Θ(X) = kXk2F .
Unfortunately, in practice many learning algorithms –
and particularly those that seek to learn an appropriate
representation of features directly from the data, such as
principal component analysis (PCA), low-rank matrix completion, nonnegative matrix factorization, sparse dictionary
learning, tensor factorization and deep learning – involve
solving a non-convex optimization problem such as:
min ℓ(Y, Φ(W 1 , . . . , W K ))+λΘ(W 1 , . . . , W K ), (2)

{W i }K
i=1

where Φ is an arbitrary, convexity destroying mapping.1 For
example, in deep neural network training, the output of the
network is typically generated by applying an alternating
series of linear and non-linear functions to the input data:
Φ(W 1 , . . . , W K ) = ψK (ψK−1 (· · ·
ψ2 (ψ1 (S ⊤ W 1 )W 2 ) · · · W K−1 )W K ),

(3)

where each W i is an appropriately sized matrix that contains the connection weights between layers i − 1 and i of
the network, and the ψi (·) functions apply some form of
1 For the sake of notational simplicity, we will omit the dependency of
Φ on the data, S, from now on.

7331

