Skeleton Key: Image Captioning by Skeleton-Attribute Decomposition
Yufei Wang1 Zhe Lin2 Xiaohui Shen2
1
University of California, San Diego

Scott Cohen2 Garrison W. Cottrell1
2
Adobe Research

{yuw176, gary}@ucsd.edu

{zlin, xshen, scohen}@adobe.com

Abstract
Recently, there has been a lot of interest in automatically generating descriptions for an image. Most existing language-model based approaches for this task learn
to generate an image description word by word in its original word order. However, for humans, it is more natural
to locate the objects and their relationships first, and then
elaborate on each object, describing notable attributes. We
present a coarse-to-fine method that decomposes the original image description into a skeleton sentence and its attributes, and generates the skeleton sentence and attribute
phrases separately. By this decomposition, our method can
generate more accurate and novel descriptions than the
previous state-of-the-art. Experimental results on the MSCOCO and a larger scale Stock3M datasets show that our
algorithm yields consistent improvements across different
evaluation metrics, especially on the SPICE metric, which
has much higher correlation with human ratings than the
conventional metrics. Furthermore, our algorithm can generate descriptions with varied length, benefiting from the
separate control of the skeleton and attributes. This enables image description generation that better accommodates user preferences.

1. Introduction
The task of automatically generating image descriptions,
or image captioning, has drawn great attention in the computer vision community. The problem is challenging in that
the description generation process requires the understanding of high level image semantics beyond simple object or
scene recognition, and the ability to generate a semantically
and syntactically correct sentence to describe the important
objects, their attributes and relationships.
The image captioning approaches generally fall into
three categories. The first category tackles this problem
based on retrieval: given a query image, the system searches
for visually similar images in a database, finds and transfers the best descriptions from the nearest neighbor captions for the description of the query image [11, 20, 26, 34].

Figure 1: Illustration of the inference stage of our coarse-tofine captioning algorithm with skeleton-attribute decomposition. First, the skeleton sentence is generated, describing
the objects and relationships. Then the objects are revisited
and the attributes for each object are generated.
The second category typically uses template-based methods to generate descriptions that follow predefined syntactic rules[17, 25, 28, 14, 46, 32]. Most recent work falls
into the third category: language model-based methods
[16, 42, 45, 12, 31, 23]. Inspired by the machine translation task [37, 3, 7], an image to be described is viewed as a
“sentence” in a source language, and an Encoder-Decoder
network is used to translate the input to the target sentence.
Unlike machine translation, the source “sentence” is an image in the captioning task. Therefore, a natural encoder is a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) instead of a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).
Starting from the basic form of a CNN encoder-RNN
decoder, there have been many attempts to improve the system. Inspired by their success in machine translation, Longshort Term Memory (LSTM) networks are used as the decoder in [42, 12]. Xu et al. [45] add an attention mechanism that learns to attend to parts of the image for word
prediction. It is also found that feeding high level attributes
instead of CNN features yields improvements [47, 44].
Despite the variation in approaches, most of the existing
LSTM-based methods suffer from two problems: 1) they
tend to parrot back sentences from the training corpus, and
lack variation in the generated captions [10]; 2) due to the
word-by-word prediction process in sentence generation, attributes are generated before the object they refer to. Mixtures of attributes, subjects, and relations in a complete sentence create large variations across training samples, which
can affect training effectiveness.
17272

