Forecasting Human Dynamics from Static Images
Yu-Wei Chao1 , Jimei Yang2 , Brian Price2 , Scott Cohen2 , and Jia Deng1
1

2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ywchao,jiadeng}@umich.edu

Adobe Research

{jimyang,bprice,scohen}@adobe.com

Abstract
This paper presents the first study on forecasting human
dynamics from static images. The problem is to input a single RGB image and generate a sequence of upcoming human body poses in 3D. To address the problem, we propose
the 3D Pose Forecasting Network (3D-PFNet). Our 3DPFNet integrates recent advances on single-image human
pose estimation and sequence prediction, and converts the
2D predictions into 3D space. We train our 3D-PFNet using
a three-step training strategy to leverage a diverse source
of training data, including image and video based human
pose datasets and 3D motion capture (MoCap) data. We
demonstrate competitive performance of our 3D-PFNet on
2D pose forecasting and 3D pose recovery through quantitative and qualitative results.

1. Introduction
Human pose forecasting is the capability of predicting
future human body dynamics from visual observations. Human beings are endowed with this great ability. For example, by looking at the left image of Fig. 1, we can effortlessly imagine the upcoming body dynamics of the target
tennis player, namely a forehand swing, as shown in the
right image of Fig. 1 Such prediction is made by reasoning
on the scene context (i.e. a tennis court), the current body
pose of the target (i.e. standing and holding a tennis racket),
and our visual experience of a tennis forehand swing.
The ability of forecasting reflects a higher-level intelligence beyond perception and recognition and plays an
important role for agents to survive from challenging natural and social environments. In the context of humanrobot interactions, such ability is particularly crucial for
assistant robots that need to interact with surrounding humans in an efficient and robust manner. Apparently, the
abilities of identifying and localizing the action categories
[24, 6, 37, 23] after observing an image or video are not
sufficient to achieve this goal. For example, when a person
throws a ball at a robot, the robot needs to identify the ac-

Figure 1: Forecasting human dynamics from static images. Left:
the input image. Right: the sequence of upcoming poses.

tion and forecast the body pose trajectory even before the
person finishes so that it can response effectively (either by
catching the ball or dodging it).
This paper presents the first study on human pose forecasting from static images. Our task is to take a single RGB
image and output a sequence of future human body poses.
Our approach has two key features. First, as opposed to
other forecasting tasks that assume a multi-frame input (i.e.
videos) [25, 9, 17], our work assumes a single-frame input. Although this assumption increases the learning challenge due to the lack of explicit motion cues, it encourages
the algorithm to learn high-level dynamics instead of lowlevel smoothness. Note that our approach can be trivially
extended to take multi-frame inputs as shown later in the
methodology section. Second, like most forecasting problems [38, 30, 21, 31, 29], we first represent the forecasted
poses in the 2D image space. However, we include an extra component to our approach to further convert each forecasted pose from 2D space to 3D space. Both forecasting
and 3D conversion are performed using a deep neural network (DNN). The two networks are integrated into one single unified framework to afford end-to-end training. Since
human bodies feature a complex articulated structure, we
believe the 3D output is more actionable and useful for future applications (e.g. shape and texture rendering) as we
demonstrate in the supplementary materials.
The main contributions of this paper are three-fold: (1)
We present the first study on single-frame human pose forecasting. This extends the dimension of current studies on
human pose modeling from recognition (i.e. pose estima-

548

