Zero-Shot Recognition using Dual Visual-Semantic Mapping Paths
Yanan Li

Donghui Wang∗
Huanhang Hu
Yuetan Lin
Yueting Zhuang
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang University
{ynli, dhwang, huhh, linyuetan, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
(1)

Zero-shot recognition aims to accurately recognize objects of unseen classes by using a shared visual-semantic
mapping between the image feature space and the semantic embedding space. This mapping is learned on training
data of seen classes and is expected to have transfer ability
to unseen classes. In this paper, we tackle this problem by
exploiting the intrinsic relationship between the semantic
space manifold and the transfer ability of visual-semantic
mapping. We formalize their connection and cast zero-shot
recognition as a joint optimization problem. Motivated by
this, we propose a novel framework for zero-shot recognition, which contains dual visual-semantic mapping paths.
Our analysis shows this framework can not only apply prior semantic knowledge to infer underlying semantic manifold in the image feature space, but also generate optimized
semantic embedding space, which can enhance the transfer
ability of the visual-semantic mapping to unseen classes.
The proposed method is evaluated for zero-shot recognition
on four benchmark datasets, achieving outstanding results.

1. Introduction
Visual object recognition typically requires a large collection of labeled images for each category, and can only classify objects into categories that have been seen.
As recognition tasks evolve towards large-scale and finegrained categories, it is difficult to meet these requirements.
For example, many object classes, such as critically endangered birds and rare plant species, often follow a long-tailed
distribution [38] and we can not easily collect their images
beforehand. Moreover, fine-grained annotation of a large
number of images is laborious and even requires annotators with specialized domain knowledge [16, 29, 34]. These
challenges motivate the rise of zero-shot recognition (ZSR) algorithms, in which many classes have no labeled images [20, 17].
∗ Corresponding author

(2)

lea

gen

rnin

era

Ks

g fs

te K
~
s

Xs

(3a)

(3b)

le a r n

in g f~

~

Ks

s

r e fi n

~
eK
s

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed method for ZSR. All object
classes present two different class-level manifolds in Xs and Ks
respectively, as shown in the subgraphs. Two parallel paths, starting with the same space Xs , arriving at different spaces Ks and
K̃s , represent two visual-semantic mappings fs and f˜s . Current
ZSR methods only need a single path, i.e. fs , to project Xs onto
Ks , and predict labels in Ks . Our method uses dual paths setup
and includes three steps: (1) learning fs from two heterogeneous
space Xs and Ks ; (2) extract underlying class-level manifold in
Xs and generate K̃s that is homologous to Xs ; (3) iteratively align
two manifolds in Xs and K̃s to obtain f˜s and refined K̃s .

Current ZSR algorithms widely adopt an effective
methodology of introducing some intermediate semantic
embedding space K between input image feature space
X and output label space L. The space K contains a
number of semantic embeddings (abbreviated as embedding), which can be attribute vectors that have been manually defined [35, 1, 17, 24, 10, 11], or word vectors that
have been automatically extracted from auxiliary text corpus [19, 2, 5, 18, 21]. Being a more semantic counterpart
to object labels, that is, each attribute vector or word vector
corresponds to a unique object class, the embeddings can
establish the inter-class connections. For example, the attributes e.g. furry, striped and four-legged etc., are shared
among all categories and can be transferred to predict the
unseen tigers from the seen zebras, cats and so on.
Compared with the class labels, the embeddings own
several special properties. (1) They present a more complicated geometric structure in the space K than an ordi-

3279

