Latent Multi-view Subspace Clustering
Changqing Zhang1 , Qinghua Hu1∗, Huazhu Fu2 , Pengfei Zhu1 , Xiaochun Cao3,4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research
3
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhangchangqing,huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel Latent Multi-view
Subspace Clustering (LMSC) method, which clusters data points with latent representation and simultaneously explores underlying complementary information from multiple views. Unlike most existing single view subspace clustering methods that reconstruct data points using original features, our method seeks the underlying latent representation and simultaneously performs data reconstruction based on the learned latent representation. With the
complementarity of multiple views, the latent representation
could depict data themselves more comprehensively than
each single view individually, accordingly makes subspace
representation more accurate and robust as well. The proposed method is intuitive and can be optimized efficiently by
using the Augmented Lagrangian Multiplier with Alternating Direction Minimization (ALM-ADM) algorithm. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets have validated the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Subspace clustering is a fundamental and important technique in many applications, especially for the high dimensional data. Generally, subspace clustering methods [7, 18, 12] hold the assumption that data points are
drawn from multiple subspaces corresponding to different
clusters. Recently, the subspace clustering based on selfrepresentation has been proposed, where each data point
can be expressed with a linear combination of the data
points themselves. The general formulation can be presented as
min L(X, XZ) + αΩ(Z),
(1)
Z
where the scalar α > 0 balances the reconstruction error and the regularization for subspace representation Z.
∗ Corresponding Author (Qinghua Hu)

L(·, ·) and Ω(·) denote the loss function and regularization term, respectively, which are usually defined based
on different assumptions. For example, Sparse Subspace
Clustering (SSC) [7] searches a sparsest representation among the infinitely many possible representations based
on ℓ1 -norm. Low-Rank Representation Clustering (LRR)
[18] tries to reveal cluster structure with a low-rank representation. SMooth Representation clustering (SMR) [12]
analyzes the grouping effect of self-representation based
methods in depth. Based on the self-representation matrix Z, the similarity matrix is often constructed with S =
abs(Z) + abs(ZT ), where abs(·) is the element-wise absolute operator. Finally, based on the similarity matrix S,
spectral clustering algorithm is usually performed for the
final clustering result [7, 18, 12].
These subspace clustering methods achieve promising
performances, however, they are usually affected by the
quality of original features, especially under the condition
that the observations are insufficient and/or grossly corrupted. Therefore, the multi-view subspace clustering methods
have been proposed [3, 31, 9], in which each data point is
described with information from multiple sources of features. These multi-view representations hold rich information from multiple cues, which could be beneficial to clustering task. With proper multi-view constraints, these subspace clustering methods have shown their power. They
usually reconstruct the data points on the original view directly, and generate the individual subspace representation
for each view. However, each single view alone is usually
not sufficient to describe data points, which makes the reconstruction by using only one view itself risky. Moreover,
the data collection may be noisy, which further increases the
difficulty of clustering.
To address these issues, in this paper, we introduce a latent representation to explore the relationships among data
points and handle the possible noise. As agreed by [11, 26],
we assume that multiple views are originated from one underlying latent representation, which could depict the data

4279

