Deep Multitask Architecture for Integrated 2D and 3D Human Sensing
Alin-Ionut Popa2∗, Mihai Zanfir2∗, Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
alin.popa@imar.ro, mihai.zanfir@imar.ro cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Abstract
We propose a deep multitask architecture for fully automatic 2d and 3d human sensing (DMHS), including recognition and reconstruction, in monocular images. The system computes the figure-ground segmentation, semantically
identifies the human body parts at pixel level, and estimates
the 2d and 3d pose of the person. The model supports
the joint training of all components by means of multi-task
losses where early processing stages recursively feed into
advanced ones for increasingly complex calculations, accuracy and robustness. The design allows us to tie a complete
training protocol, by taking advantage of multiple datasets
that would otherwise restrictively cover only some of the
model components: complex 2d image data with no body
part labeling and without associated 3d ground truth, or
complex 3d data with limited 2d background variability. In
detailed experiments based on several challenging 2d and
3d datasets (LSP, HumanEva, Human3.6M), we evaluate
the sub-structures of the model, the effect of various types
of training data in the multitask loss, and demonstrate that
state-of-the-art results can be achieved at all processing
levels. We also show that in the wild our monocular RGB
architecture is perceptually competitive to a state-of-the art
(commercial) Kinect system based on RGB-D data.

1. Introduction
The visual analysis of humans has applications as diverse
as autonomous vehicles, robotics, human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and digital libraries, among others. The
problem is challenging due to the large variety of human
poses and body proportions, occlusion, and the diversity of
scenes, angles of observation, and backgrounds humans are
pictured against. The monocular case, which is intrinsic to
many scenarios like the analysis of photographs or video
available on the web, adds complexity as depth information
is missing for 3d reconstruction. This leads to geometric
∗ Authors contributed equally

ambiguity and occlusion which are difficult to resolve compared to situations where multiple cameras are present.
A detailed analysis at both 2d and 3d levels, further exposes the need for both measurement and prior-knowledge,
and the necessary inter-play between segmentation, reconstruction, and recognition within models that can jointly
perform all tasks. This is one of our objectives.
As training is essential, a major difficulty is also the limited coverage of current datasets: 2d repositories like LSP
[18] or MPI-II [3] exhibit challenging backgrounds, human
body proportions, clothing, and poses, but offer single viewpoints, provide only approximate 2d joint location ground
truth, and do not carry human segmentation or body part
labeling information. Their size is also relatively small by
today’s deep learning standards. In contrast, 3d datasets like
HumanEva [39] or Human3.6M [16] offer extremely accurate 2d and 3d anatomical joint or body surface reconstructions and a variety of poses captured under multiple viewpoints. Human 3.6M is also large-scale. However, being
captured indoors, the 3d datasets typically lack the background and clothing variability that represent a strength of
the 2d datasets captured in the wild, although the situation
is slightly more nuanced. Some of the 3d datasets (e.g. Human3.6M) come with mixed-reality training setups where
a moderately realistic graphics character is placed, with a
geometrically correct setup, into a real scene and animated
using human motion capture. Arguably, though, a complete
fully realistic training setting that contains accurate 2d and
3d information is still elusive. An open question is how one
can leverage the separate strengths of existing 2d and 3d
datasets towards training models that can operate in challenging images and offer accurate recognition and reconstruction estimates.
In this paper we propose one such deep learning model
which, given a monocular RGB image, is able to fully
automatically sense the humans at multiple levels of detail: figure-ground segmentation, body-part labeling at pixel
level, as well as 2d and 3d pose estimation. By designing
multi-task loss functions at different, recursive processing
stages (human body joint detection and 2d pose estima16289

