Building a Regular Decision Boundary with Deep Networks
Edouard Oyallon
Département Informatique
Ecole Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
edouard.oyallon@ens.fr

Abstract
In this work, we build a generic architecture of Convolutional Neural Networks to discover empirical properties
of neural networks. Our first contribution is to introduce
a state-of-the-art framework that depends upon few hyper
parameters and to study the network when we vary them.
It has no max pooling, no biases, only 13 layers, is purely
convolutional and yields up to 95.4% and 79.6% accuracy
respectively on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. We show that the
nonlinearity of a deep network does not need to be continuous, non expansive or point-wise, to achieve good performance. We show that increasing the width of our network
permits being competitive with very deep networks. Our
second contribution is an analysis of the contraction and
separation properties of this network. Indeed, a 1-nearest
neighbor classifier applied on deep features progressively
improves with depth, which indicates that the representation is progressively more regular. Besides, we defined and
analyzed local support vectors that separate classes locally.
All our experiments are reproducible and code is available
online, based on TensorFlow.

1. Introduction
Classification in high dimension requires building a representation that reduces a lot of variability while being discriminative. For example, in the case of images, there are
geometric variabilities such as affine roto-translation, scaling changes, color changes, lighting, or intra-class variabilities such as style. Deep networks have been shown to be covariant to such actions [1, 16], to linearize them [24, 22, 30]
and combing those strategies permit building invariants to
them [3, 20, 9]. The creation of those invariants corresponds
to a contraction of feature space, while separating the different classes. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) consist
of cascades of convolutional operators and non-linearities,
and lead to state-of-the-art results on benchmarks where
enough data are available [15, 11].

Geometric variabilities can be successfully handled by
prior representations such as scattering transforms [23, 4,
20, 19, 25]. They use cascades of wavelet transform and
complex modulus to build a representation which is covariant to the action of several groups of variabilities. Invariants
to those variabilities are built by linear averaging that does
not require to be learned, which corresponds to a contraction of the space along the orbits of those groups. Such priors can be derived from the physical laws that permit generating natural signals, such as the euclidean group. They
lead to state-of-the-art results when all the groups of variabilities of the problem are understood, since in this case
one only has a problem of variance. However, in the case of
complex images datasets such as CIFAR10, CIFAR100 or
ImageNet, understanding the nature of the non-geometrical
invariants that are built remains an open question.
Several works address the problem to understand theoretically CNNs, but most of them assume the existence of
a low-dimensional structure [26]. As in [22], we chose instead to have an empirical analysis. Our objective is to determine general properties which were not predictable by
the theory and to characterize them rigorously. Are there
restrictions on the property of a non-linearity? How can
one estimate a decision boundary? Can we find layerwise
properties built by the deep cascade? Is there a layerwise
dimensionality reduction?
In a classification task, one builds an estimator of
the class for a test set using the samples of a training
dataset. The intrinsic dimension of the classes is a quite
low-dimensional structure in comparison with the original dimension of the signals, thus a classification task requires estimating a (often non-linear) projection onto a lowdimensional space. Observe that building this estimator is
equal to estimating the boundary of classification of this
task. It can be done in several ways that are related to each
others. First, one can estimate the group of symmetry of
the classification task as suggested in [20, 4]. Those papers
suggest that a deep network could potentially build a linear approximation of the group of symmetry of a classifica-

5106

