Multi-View 3D Object Detection Network for Autonomous Driving
Xiaozhi Chen1 , Huimin Ma1 , Ji Wan2 , Bo Li2 , Tian Xia2
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Baidu Inc.
{chenxz12@mails., mhmpub@}tsinghua.edu.cn, {wanji, libo24, xiatian}@baidu.com

Abstract
This paper aims at high-accuracy 3D object detection in
autonomous driving scenario. We propose Multi-View 3D
networks (MV3D), a sensory-fusion framework that takes
both LIDAR point cloud and RGB images as input and predicts oriented 3D bounding boxes. We encode the sparse
3D point cloud with a compact multi-view representation.
The network is composed of two subnetworks: one for 3D
object proposal generation and another for multi-view feature fusion. The proposal network generates 3D candidate boxes efficiently from the bird’s eye view representation of 3D point cloud. We design a deep fusion scheme
to combine region-wise features from multiple views and
enable interactions between intermediate layers of different
paths. Experiments on the challenging KITTI benchmark
show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art by
around 25% and 30% AP on the tasks of 3D localization
and 3D detection. In addition, for 2D detection, our approach obtains 14.9% higher AP than the state-of-the-art on
the hard data among the LIDAR-based methods.

1. Introduction
3D object detection plays an important role in the visual
perception system of Autonomous driving cars. Modern
self-driving cars are commonly equipped with multiple sensors, such as LIDAR and cameras. Laser scanners have the
advantage of accurate depth information while cameras preserve much more detailed semantic information. The fusion
of LIDAR point cloud and RGB images should be able to
achieve higher performance and safty to self-driving cars.
The focus of this paper is on 3D object detection utilizing both LIDAR and image data. We aim at highly accurate 3D localization and recognition of objects in the road
scene. Recent LIDAR-based methods place 3D windows
in 3D voxel grids to score the point cloud [25, 6] or apply convolutional networks to the front view point map in
a dense box prediction scheme [16]. Image-based methods [4, 3] typically first generate 3D box proposals and

then perform region-based recognition using the Fast RCNN [9] pipeline. Methods based on LIDAR point cloud
usually achieve more accurate 3D locations while imagebased methods have higher accuracy in terms of 2D box
evaluation. [10, 7] combine LIDAR and images for 2D
detection by employing early or late fusion schemes. However, for the task of 3D object detection, which is more
challenging, a well-designed model is required to make use
of the strength of multiple modalities.
In this paper, we propose a Multi-View 3D object detection network (MV3D) which takes multimodal data as
input and predicts the full 3D extent of objects in 3D space.
The main idea for utilizing multimodal information is to
perform region-based feature fusion. We first propose a
multi-view encoding scheme to obtain a compact and effective representation for sparse 3D point cloud. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the multi-view 3D detection network consists of two parts: a 3D Proposal Network and a Regionbased Fusion Network. The 3D proposal network utilizes
a bird’s eye view representation of point cloud to generate
highly accurate 3D candidate boxes. The benefit of 3D object proposals is that it can be projected to any views in
3D space. The multi-view fusion network extracts regionwise features by projecting 3D proposals to the feature maps
from mulitple views. We design a deep fusion approach
to enable interactions of intermediate layers from different
views. Combined with drop-path training [14] and auxiliary loss, our approach shows superior performance over the
early/late fusion scheme. Given the multi-view feature representation, the network performs oriented 3D box regression which predict accurate 3D location, size and orientation of objects in 3D space.
We evaluate our approach for the tasks of 3D proposal generation, 3D localization, 3D detection and 2D detection on the challenging KITTI [8] object detection benchmark. Experiments show that our 3D proposals significantly outperforms recent 3D proposal methods 3DOP [4]
and Mono3D [3]. In particular, with only 300 proposals,
we obtain 99.1% and 91% 3D recall at Intersection-overUnion (IoU) threshold of 0.25 and 0.5, respectively. The

1907

