VidLoc: A Deep Spatio-Temporal Model for 6-DoF Video-Clip Relocalization
Ronald Clark1 , Sen Wang1 , Andrew Markham1 , Niki Trigoni1 , Hongkai Wen2
1
University of Oxford
2
University of Warwick
firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning techniques, namely convolutional neural networks (CNN) and regression forests, have recently
shown great promise in performing 6-DoF localization
of monocular images. However, in most cases imagesequences, rather only single images, are readily available. To this extent, none of the proposed learning-based
approaches exploit the valuable constraint of temporal
smoothness, often leading to situations where the per-frame
error is larger than the camera motion. In this paper we
propose a recurrent model for performing 6-DoF localization of video-clips. We find that, even by considering
only short sequences (20 frames), the pose estimates are
smoothed and the localization error can be drastically reduced. Finally, we consider means of obtaining probabilistic pose estimates from our model. We evaluate our method
on openly-available real-world autonomous driving and indoor localization datasets.

ject outlier correspondences and optimize the camera pose
on inliers. Although this traditional approach has proven to
be incredibly accurate in many situations, it faces numerous
and signiﬁcant challenges. These methods rely on local and
unintuitive hand-crafted features, such as SIFT keypoints.
Because of their local nature, establishing a sufﬁcient number of reliable correspondences between the image pixels
and the map is very challenging. Spurious correspondences
arise due to both “well-behaved” phenomena such as sensor noise and quantization effects as well as pure outliers
which arise due to the local correspondence assumptions
not being satisﬁed [6]. These include inevitable environmental appearance changes due to, for example, changing
light levels or dynamic elements such as clutter or people
in the frame or the opening and closing of doors. These aspects conspire to give rise to a vast number of suprious correspondences, making it difﬁcult to use for any purpose but
the localization of crisp and high-resolution images. Secondly, the maps often consists of millions of elements which
need to be searched, making it very computationally intensive and difﬁcult to establish correspondences in real-time.

1. Introduction
Localization of monocular images is a fundamental
problem in computer vision and robotics. Camera localization forms the basis of many functions in computer vision
where it is an important component of the Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) process and has direct
application, for example, in the navigation of autonomous
robots and drones in ﬁrst-response scenarios or the localization of wearable devices in assistive living applications.
The most common means of performing 6-DOF pose estimation using visual data is to make use of specially-built
models, which are constructed from a vast number of local
features that have been extracted from the images captured
during mapping. The 3D locations of these features are then
found using a Structure-from-Motion (SfM) process, creating a many-to-one mapping from feature descriptors to 3D
points. Traditionally, localizing a new query image against
these models involves ﬁnding a large set of putative correspondences. The pose is then found using RANSAC to re-

Figure 1: An extreme example of perceptual aliasing in the
Stairs scene of the Microsoft 7-Scenes dataset. One of the
frames is taken at the bottom of the staircase and the other
near the top. Using only single frames, as in the competing approaches, it would be impossible to correctly localize
these images.

6856

