ROAM: a Rich Object Appearance Model with Application to Rotoscoping
Ondrej Miksik1∗

Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa2∗
Philip H. S. Torr1
1
University of Oxford
2
Technicolor Research & Innovation

Patrick Pérez2

Figure 1: ROAM for video object segmentation. Designed to help rotoscoping, the proposed object appearance model allows
the automatic delineation of a complex object in a shot, starting from an initial outline provided by the user.

Abstract
Rotoscoping, the detailed delineation of scene elements
through a video shot, is a painstaking task of tremendous
importance in professional post-production pipelines. While
pixel-wise segmentation techniques can help for this task,
professional rotoscoping tools rely on parametric curves that
offer the artists a much better interactive control on the definition, editing and manipulation of the segments of interest.
Sticking to this prevalent rotoscoping paradigm, we propose
a novel framework to capture and track the visual aspect
of an arbitrary object in a scene, given a first closed outline of this object. This model combines a collection of local
foreground/background appearance models spread along the
outline, a global appearance model of the enclosed object
and a set of distinctive foreground landmarks. The structure
of this rich appearance model allows simple initialization,
efficient iterative optimization with exact minimization at
each step, and on-line adaptation in videos. We demonstrate
qualitatively and quantitatively the merit of this framework
through comparisons with tools based on either dynamic segmentation with a closed curve or pixel-wise binary labelling.

∗ Assert joint first authorship.
J-M is also with Inria (Centre Rennes - Bretagne Atlantique, France).
Code available at http://www.miksik.co.uk
This work was supported by Technicolor, EPSRC, ERC grant ERC-2012AdG 321162-HELIOS, EPSRC grant Seebibyte EP/M013774/1, EPSRC/MURI grant EP/N019474/1, ANRT and Cifre convention No. 2014/1041.

1. Introduction
Modern high-end visual effects (vfx) and post-production
rely on complex workflows whereby each shot undergoes
a succession of artistic operations. Among those, rotoscoping is probably the most ubiquitous and demanding one
[6, 16]. Rotoscoping amounts to outlining accurately one
or several scene elements in each frame of a shot. This is a
key operation for compositing [28] (insertion of a different
background, whether natural or synthetic), where it serves
as an input to subsequent operations such as matting and
motion blur removal.1 Rotoscoping is also a pre-requisite
for other important operations, such as object colour grading,
rig removal and new view synthesis, with large amounts of
elements to be handled in the latter case.
Creating such binary masks is a painstaking task accomplished by trained artists. It can take up to several days of
work for a complex shot of only a few seconds, using dedicated tools within video editing softwares like Silhouettefx,
Adobe After Effect, Autodesk Flame or The Foundry Nuke.
As discussed in [16], professional roto artists use mostly
tools based on roto-curves, i.e., parametric closed curves
that can be easily defined, moved and edited throughout
shots. By contrast, these artists hardly use brush-based tools,
even if empowered by local appearance modelling, graphbased regularization and optic flow-based tracking as After
Effect’s ROTOBRUSH.
1 The use of blue or green screens on set can ease compositing but

remains a contrived set-up. Even if accessible, such screens lead to chromakeying and de-spilling operations that are not trivial and are not suited to all
foreground elements, thus rotoscoping remains crucial.

14691

