DeepNav: Learning to Navigate Large Cities
Samarth Brahmbhatt
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta USA

James Hays
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta USA

samarth.robo@gatech.edu

hays@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present DeepNav, a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) based algorithm for navigating large cities using locally visible street-view images. The DeepNav agent learns
to reach its destination quickly by making the correct navigation decisions at intersections. We collect a large-scale
dataset of street-view images organized in a graph where
nodes are connected by roads. This dataset contains 10 city
graphs and more than 1 million street-view images. We propose 3 supervised learning approaches for the navigation
task and show how A* search in the city graph can be used
to generate supervision for the learning. Our annotation
process is fully automated using publicly available mapping services and requires no human input. We evaluate
the proposed DeepNav models on 4 held-out cities for navigating to 5 different types of destinations. Our algorithms
outperform previous work that uses hand-crafted features
and Support Vector Regression (SVR) [19].

1. Introduction
Man-made environments like houses, buildings, neighborhoods and cities have a structure - microwaves are found
in kitchens, restrooms are usually situated in the corners
of buildings, and restaurants are found in specific kinds of
commercial areas. This structure is also shared across environments - for example, most cities will have restaurants
in their business district. It has been a long-standing goal of
computer vision to learn this structure and use it to guide exploration of unknown man-made environments like unseen
cities, buildings and houses. Knowledge of such structure
can be used to recognize tougher visual concepts like occluded or small objects [8, 29], to better delimit the boundaries of objects [6, 38], and for robotic automation tasks like
deciding drivable terrain for robots [13], etc.
In this paper, we address a task that requires understanding the large-scale structure of cities – street-view based
navigation in a new city to reach a destination in as few
steps as possible. The agent neither has a map of the envi-

Figure 1: These street-view images are taken from roughly
the same location. Which direction do you think the nearest
gas station is in?1

ronment, nor does it know the location of the destination or
itself. All it knows is that it needs to reach a particular type
of destination, e.g. go to the nearest gas station in the city.
The naive approach is a random walk of the environment.
But if the agent has some learnt model of the structure of
cities, then it can make informed decisions - for example,
gas stations are very likely to be found near freeway exits.
We finely discretize the city into a grid of locations connected by roads. At each location, the agent has access only
to street view images pointing towards the navigable directions and it has to pick the next direction to take a step in
(Figure 1). We show that learning structural characteristics of cities can help the agent reach a destination faster
than random walk. This technology can be used to guide
pedestrians and cars in GPS denied environments like remote places or urban areas with tall buildings. A similar
agent trained to navigate buildings to reach elevators, restrooms and fire exits can be used to guide visually impaired
persons in unknown buildings.
1 The correct answer is: W.

15193

