Matrix Tri-Factorization with Manifold Regularizations for Zero-shot Learning
Xing Xu, Fumin Shen, Yang Yang, Dongxiang Zhang, Heng Tao Shen∗ and Jingkuan Song
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize objects of
unseen classes with available training data from another
set of seen classes. Existing solutions are focused on exploring knowledge transfer via an intermediate semantic
embedding (e.g., attributes) shared between seen and unseen classes. In this paper, we propose a novel projection
framework based on matrix tri-factorization with manifold
regularizations. Specifically, we learn the semantic embedding projection by decomposing the visual feature matrix
under the guidance of semantic embedding and class label
matrices. By additionally introducing manifold regularizations on visual data and semantic embeddings, the learned
projection can effectively capture the geometrical manifold
structure residing in both visual and semantic spaces. To
avoid the projection domain shift problem, we devise an effective prediction scheme by exploiting the test-time manifold structure. Extensive experiments on four benchmark
datasets show that our approach significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-arts, yielding an average improvement ratio
by 7.4% and 31.9% for the recognition and retrieval task,
respectively.

1. Introduction
Conventional visual recognition systems usually require
an enormous amount of manually labeled training data to
achieve good classification accuracy, typically several thousand images for each class to be learned [8, 40]. Due to the
ever increasing number of available images and categories
to be recognized, it then becomes infeasible to label images
for each possible class. For example, this problem is essentially crippling when classifying fine-grained object classes
[9] such as species of animals or brands of consumer products, since the number of labeled images for these classes may be far from sufficient to directly build high-quality
classifiers.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) [19, 17] has long been believed
to hold the key to the above problem. ZSL aims to recognize
∗ Corresponding author: Heng Tao Shen.

new-coming instances (e.g., images) of unseen classes with
only labeled instances of seen classes that are available for
training. Without labeled examples, classifiers for unseen
classes are obtained by transferring knowledge learned from
the seen classes. This is typically achieved by exploring a
semantic embedding space where the seen and unseen classes can be related in. The spaces used by most existing works
are based on attributes [11, 17, 27, 41] and word2vec representations [12, 23, 24, 33]. In such spaces, each class name
can be represented by a high dimensional binary/continuous
vector based on a pre-defined attribute ontology, or a vast unannotated text corpus by natural language processing.
Given a semantic embedding space, the semantic relation between an unseen class and each seen class can be
measured as the distance between their semantic embedding
vectors. However, as a test image is represented by a visual feature vector, its similarity to unsee classes cannot be
obtained by directly measuring it with the semantic embedding vectors of unseen classes. To solve this problem, several existing ZSL approaches [1, 12, 33, 31, 42, 6, 21] rely
on directly learning a projection function between the visual feature space and the semantic embedding space from
the labeled images of seen classes. Then the prediction for a
test image can be performed by mapping the visual feature
via the projection function and measuring similarity with
the unseen classes in the semantic embedding space.
However, these projection based methods still have several primary shortcomings. Firstly, the intrinsic manifold
structure residing in both the visual feature space and the semantic embedding space are not well explored when learning the projection function. Secondly, these methods suffer from the projection domain shift problem [13, 16, 37],
i.e. the visual feature mapping (projection function) learned
from the seen class data may not generalize well to the unseen class data. The main reason is that the test data distribution of unseen classes in the projection space could be
different from the estimation obtained by the learned projection based on the training data of seen classes. Thirdly, existing projection-based approaches still have a large
gap with the ideal performance under the generalized ZSL
setting [7], where test data are from both seen and unseen
classes and they are required to be predicted into the joint
13798

