Efficient Linear Programming for Dense CRFs
Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan1 , Alban Desmaison2 , Rudy Bunel2 , Mathieu Salzmann3 , Philip H.S. Torr2 ,
and M. Pawan Kumar2,4
1

2
Australian National University & Data61, CSIRO
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
4
Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL
Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
The fully connected conditional random field (CRF) with
Gaussian pairwise potentials has proven popular and effective for multi-class semantic segmentation. While the energy of a dense CRF can be minimized accurately using a
linear programming (LP) relaxation, the state-of-the-art algorithm is too slow to be useful in practice. To alleviate
this deficiency, we introduce an efficient LP minimization
algorithm for dense CRFs. To this end, we develop a proximal minimization framework, where the dual of each proximal problem is optimized via block coordinate descent. We
show that each block of variables can be efficiently optimized. Specifically, for one block, the problem decomposes
into significantly smaller subproblems, each of which is defined over a single pixel. For the other block, the problem
is optimized via conditional gradient descent. This has two
advantages: 1) the conditional gradient can be computed
in a time linear in the number of pixels and labels; and 2)
the optimal step size can be computed analytically. Our
experiments on standard datasets provide compelling evidence that our approach outperforms all existing baselines
including the previous LP based approach for dense CRFs.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, the dense conditional random field
(CRF) with Gaussian pairwise potentials has become popular for multi-class image-based semantic segmentation. At
the origin of this popularity lies the use of an efficient filtering method [1], which was shown to lead to a linear time
mean-field inference strategy [12]. Recently, this filtering
method was exploited to minimize the dense CRF energy
using other, typically more effective, continuous relaxation
methods [6]. Among the relaxations considered in [6], the
linear programming (LP) relaxation provides strong theoretical guarantees on the quality of the solution [9, 15].
In [6], the LP was minimized via projected subgradient
descent. While relying on the filtering method, computing
the subgradient was shown to be linearithmic in the number
of pixels, but not linear. Moreover, even with the use of a
line search strategy, the algorithm required a large number
of iterations to converge, making it inefficient.
We introduce an iterative LP minimization algorithm for

a dense CRF with Gaussian pairwise potentials which has
linear time complexity per iteration. To this end, instead of
relying on a standard subgradient technique, we propose to
make use of the proximal method [20]. The resulting proximal problem has a smooth dual, which can be efficiently optimized using block coordinate descent. We show that each
block of variables can be optimized efficiently. Specifically,
for one block, the problem decomposes into significantly
smaller subproblems, each of which is defined over a single
pixel. For the other block, the problem can be optimized via
the Frank-Wolfe algorithm [8, 16]. We show that the conditional gradient required by this algorithm can be computed
efficiently. In particular, we modify the filtering method
of [1] such that the conditional gradient can be computed
in a time linear in the number of pixels and labels. Besides
this linear complexity, our approach has two additional benefits. First, it can be initialized with the solution of a faster,
less accurate algorithm, such as mean-field [12] or the difference of convex (DC) relaxation of [6], thus speeding up
convergence. Second, the optimal step size of our iterative
procedure can be obtained analytically, thus preventing the
need to rely on an expensive line search procedure.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on the
MSRC and Pascal VOC 2010 [7] segmentation datasets.
The experiments evidence that our algorithm is significantly faster than the state-of-the-art LP minimization technique of [6]. Furthermore, it yields assignments whose
energies are much lower than those obtained by the baselines [6, 12]. Altogether, our framework constitutes the
first efficient and effective minimization algorithm for
dense CRFs with Gaussian pairwise potentials. Our code
is available at https://github.com/oval-group/
DenseCRF and a more detailed version of the paper can be
found at https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09718.

2. Preliminaries
Before introducing our method, let us first provide some
background on the dense CRF model and its LP relaxation.
Dense CRF energy function. A dense CRF is defined on
a set of n random variables X = {X1 , . . . , Xn }, where
each random variable Xa takes a label xa ∈ L, with |L| =
m. For a given labelling x, the energy associated with a

3298

