Correlational Gaussian Processes for Cross-domain Visual Recognition
Chengjiang Long
Kitware Inc.
28 Corporate Dr, Clifton Park, NY, USA 12065

Gang Hua
Microsoft Research Asia
Haidian District, Beijing, P.R. China 100080

chengjiang.long@kitware.com

ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a probabilistic model that captures higherorder co-occurrence statistics for joint visual recognition in
a collection of images and across multiple domains. More
importantly, we predict the structured output across multiple domains by correlating outputs from the multi-classes
Gaussian process classifiers in each individual domain. A
set of correlational tensors is adopted to model the relationship within a single domain as well as across multiple
domains. This renders it possible to explore a high-order
relational model instead of using just a set of pairwise relational models. Such tensor relations are based on both the
positive and negative co-occurrences of different categories
of visual instances across multi-domains. This is in contrast
to most previous models where only pair-wise relationships
are explored. We conduct experiments on four challenging
image collections. The experimental results clearly demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed model.

1. Introduction
The cross-domain visual recognition problem was firstly
explicitly proposed in [33], although many previous works
[29, 3, 40, 4, 36, 37, 38, 7] also implicitly tackled part of
such a problem. In such a problem, multiple visual recognition problems in different semantic domains are simultaneously solved through a joint formulation instead of being
handled independently. This is based on the intuition that
the semantics across different domains are associated with
the same visual entity and hence there are intrinsic correlations among them to facilitate the joint inference of all of
these visual semantics. For example, we can interpret each
photo from people, location and event domain, and then employ the estimated cross-domain correlations to improve the
recognition accuracy in each domain, e.g., face recognition
in people domain.
To better solve cross-domain visual recognition problems, we propose a probabilistic framework, namely correlational Gaussian processes classifier (CGPC), for joint

visual recognition across a collection of images, and across
multiple domains based on co-occurrence statistics of different instances across multiple domains. This is achieved
by correlating the outputs of the Gaussian process classifiers from each individual domain, and formulate the joint
visual recognition problem as a structured prediction problem. We choose Gaussian Process because it (1) is a nonparametric model to handle the linear and nonlinear data,
(2) has a well-founded framework for learning and model
selection, and (3) presents a good interpretation of model
predictions.
We explore both the flip-noise model [23], which is good
at handling label errors around the decision boundaries,
and the robust likelihood model using a back-up mechanism [15], which is expected to be robust when the label errors occur far away from the decision boundaries,
in the multi-class Gaussian process classifiers (MGPC) for
each individual domain. Hence we obtain two versions of
MGPC, dubbed SMGPC and RMGPC in brief with “S” indicating “standard” and “R” referring to “robust”, respectively. Since both SMGPC and RMGPC have their own
strengths to deal with different labeling noise scenarios, we
determine the better one for our CGPC model based on the
specific task in each individual domain. And then we integrate outputs from the multi-classes Gaussian process in
each individual domain with a set of relational tensors based
on both the positive and negative, and both the pair-wise and
high-order cross-domain co-occurrence statistics.
Several aspects distinguish our proposed CGPC model
from the existing works [43, 45, 24, 44, 6, 41, 32]. First,
they often directly integrate the relational information with
the input attributes in the Gaussian process prior [6, 43, 45]
or encode relations as random variables conditioned on the
latent function values of entities involved in pairwise relations [24, 44, 6, 41, 32]. In contrast, our proposed CGPC
model integrates outputs from the multi-classes Gaussian
process in each individual domain with a set of relational
tensors based on the cross-domain co-occurrence statistics.
Second, their models focus on predicting the relational tasks
and it is not clear how these learned relations can be ex-

118

