Recurrent Modeling of Interaction Context for Collective Activity Recognition
Minsi Wang, Bingbing Ni, Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
mswang1994@gmail.com, {nibingbing,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Modeling of high order interactional context, e.g., group
interaction, lies in the central of collective/group activity
recognition. However, most of the previous activity recognition methods do not offer a flexible and scalable scheme
to handle the high order context modeling problem. To
explicitly address this fundamental bottleneck, we propose
a recurrent interactional context modeling scheme based
on LSTM network. By utilizing the information propagation/aggregation capability of LSTM, the proposed scheme
unifies the interactional feature modeling process for single
person dynamics, intra-group (e.g., persons within a group)
and inter-group (e.g., group to group) interactions. The proposed high order context modeling scheme produces more
discriminative/descriptive interactional features. It is very
flexible to handle a varying number of input instances (e.g.,
different number of persons in a group or different number
of groups) and linearly scalable to high order context modeling problem. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
collective/group activity datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Analysis of collective activity groups provides useful information for several real-world applications including social role understanding and social event prediction. The
main challenge of collective activity recognition is modeling of interactional context information among persons.
This is because that the number of persons involved in an
interaction is always varying. Moreover, in most cases a
collective activity is associated with several sub groups of
interactions, and how to model the group to group interaction is even more challenging.
Previous methods for activity recognition mainly focuses on modeling unary features, e.g., single person appearance or dynamics information [21, 26] and person to person
interaction (e.g., pairwise features) [22]. However, these
contextual information modeling schemes are not sufficient for collective activity recognition. It is because that in

Input Image Sequence
t-2
t-1
t

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

Person Level
Context

Group Level
Context

Scene Level
Context

Figure 1. The overview of proposed framework. A hierarchical
recurrent interactional context modeling framework is proposed to
model intra-group and inter-group interaction context.

collective activity, different activity categories might share
the same type of unary or pairwise features (e.g., “standing alone” in the cases of queueing or discussion, “facing
to same direction” in the case of walking and crossing). In
other words, besides modeling the intra-group interaction
(e.g., interaction among the persons within a group), how
to effectively describe the group to group interaction is of
more importance. Low order contextual features do not provide sufficient cues to recognize these activities. To address
this fundamental problem, most previous methods attempt to encode the high order relationship among persons in
the scene by inferring the latent graphical structures [9, 8].
However, applying these approaches for collective activity recognition is infeasible because these methods often requires high computational cost in the case of tree-structured
model during inference and learning. Moreover, it is very
difficult to generalize methods based on graphical models to
handle higher order interactional context. Ni et al. [24] proposed a causality analysis framework to encode unary, pairwise and group interaction features. However, this method
is only capable of modeling human trajectory level information, which is insufficient to recognize finer-grained actions,
e.g., those can only be recognized by human appearance or
local body part dynamics.
A fundamental problem becomes: how to systematically
encode the high order human interactional context, i.e, the

3048

