Split-Brain Autoencoders:
Unsupervised Learning by Cross-Channel Prediction
Richard Zhang

Phillip Isola

Alexei A. Efros

Berkeley AI Research (BAIR) Laboratory
University of California, Berkeley
{rich.zhang,isola,efros}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose split-brain autoencoders, a straightforward
modification of the traditional autoencoder architecture, for
unsupervised representation learning. The method adds a
split to the network, resulting in two disjoint sub-networks.
Each sub-network is trained to perform a difficult task –
predicting one subset of the data channels from another.
Together, the sub-networks extract features from the entire input signal. By forcing the network to solve crosschannel prediction tasks, we induce a representation within
the network which transfers well to other, unseen tasks.
This method achieves state-of-the-art performance on several large-scale transfer learning benchmarks.

X

"
X

Raw Data

Reconstructed
Data

Traditional Autoencoder
X#
%$
X

X
Raw Data

%#
X
X$
Raw Data
Channels

"
X
Predicted
Data

Predicted Data
Channels

Split-Brain Autoencoder

1. Introduction
A goal of unsupervised learning is to model raw data
without the use of labels, in a manner which produces a
useful representation. By “useful” we mean a representation that should be easily adaptable for other tasks, unknown during training time. Unsupervised deep methods
typically induce representations by training a network to
solve an auxiliary or “pretext” task, such as the image reconstruction objective in a traditional autoencoder model,
as shown on Figure 1(top). We instead force the network to
solve complementary prediction tasks by adding a split in
the architecture, shown in Figure 1 (bottom), dramatically
improving transfer performance.
Despite their popularity, autoencoders have actually not
been shown to produce strong representations for transfer
tasks in practice [43, 34]. Why is this? One reason might
be the mechanism for forcing model abstraction. To prevent
a trivial identity mapping from being learned, a bottleneck
is typically built into the autoencoder representation. However, an inherent tension is at play: the smaller the bottleneck, the greater the forced abstraction, but the smaller the
information content that can be expressed.
Instead of forcing abstraction through compression, via
a bottleneck in the network architecture, recent work has
explored withholding parts of the input during training

Figure 1: Traditional vs Split-Brain Autoencoder architectures. (top) Autoencoders learn feature representation F by learning to reconstruct input data X. (bottom)
The proposed split-brain autoencoder is composed of two
disjoint sub-networks F1 , F2 , each trained to predict one
data subset from another, changing the problem from reconstruction to prediction. The split-brain representation
F is formed by concatenating the two sub-networks, and
achieves strong transfer learning performance. The model is
publicly available on https://richzhang.github.
io/splitbrainauto.
[43, 34, 47]. For example, Vincent et al. [43] propose
denoising autoencoders, trained to remove iid noise added
to the input. Pathak et al. [34] propose context encoders,
which learn features by training to inpaint large, random
contiguous blocks of pixels. Rather than dropping data in
the spatial direction, several works have dropped data in
the channel direction, e.g. predicting color channels from
grayscale (the colorization task) [26, 47].
Context encoders, while an improvement over autoencoders, demonstrate lower performance than competitors
on large-scale semantic representation learning benchmarks [47]. This may be due to several reasons. First, im11058

