More is Less: A More Complicated Network with Less Inference Complexity
Xuanyi Dong1∗, Junshi Huang2 , Yi Yang1 , Shuicheng Yan2,3
1
CAI, University of Technology Sydney, 2 360 AI Institute, 3 National University of Singapore
dongxuanyi888@icloud.com; huangjunshi@360.cn
yi.yang@uts.edu.au; yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract

Despite the continuously improved performance of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1, 10, 21, 24, 30, 32],
their computation costs are still tremendous. Without the
support of high-efficiency servers, it is hard to establish
CNN models on real-world applications. For example, to
process a 224 × 224 image, AlexNet [21] requires 725M
FLOPs with 61M parameters, VGG-S [1] involves 2640M
FLOPs with 103M parameters, and GoogleNet [32] needs
1566M FLOPs with 6.9M parameters. Therefore, to leverage the success of deep neural networks on mobile devices
with limited computational capacity, accelerating network
inference has become imperative.
∗ This work was done when Xuanxi Dong was an Intern at 360 AI Institute.

k

Kernel W
V

*

1. Introduction

V

softmax
fully connected

Option 1:
1

Conv Layers

Option 2:

C

V

`

In this paper, we present a novel and general network
structure towards accelerating the inference process of convolutional neural networks, which is more complicated in
network structure yet with less inference complexity. The
core idea is to equip each original convolutional layer
with another low-cost collaborative layer (LCCL), and the
element-wise multiplication of the ReLU outputs of these
two parallel layers produces the layer-wise output. The
combined layer is potentially more discriminative than the
original convolutional layer, and its inference is faster for
two reasons: 1) the zero cells of the LCCL feature maps will
remain zero after element-wise multiplication, and thus it is
safe to skip the calculation of the corresponding high-cost
convolution in the original convolutional layer; 2) LCCL
is very fast if it is implemented as a 1 × 1 convolution or
only a single filter shared by all channels. Extensive experiments on the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ILSCRC-2012
benchmarks show that our proposed network structure can
accelerate the inference process by 32% on average with
negligible performance drop.

ox
oxcart
ram, tup
bighorn, bighorn sheep
gazelle

T

k

Input

Collaborative
Intermediate
Output
Kernels
Result (after ReLU)

Figure 1. Basic acceleration block. The orange panel in the figure
shows two different kinds of low-cost collaborative kernels. One
′
uses 1 × 1 convolution, and the other uses shared kernels (Wi =
′
Wj for i, j ∈ [1, T ]). The black response map represents the output of the original convolutional layer with the kernel W , and the
orange response map is generated by the low-cost collaborative
layer. The purple cells represent the zero elements, of which the
calculation of corresponding positions can be skipped in the original convolutional layer. We apply element-wise multiplication on
the activated response maps from the original convolutional layer
and low-cost layer to generate the final results of this basic acceleration block.

In this paper, we investigate the acceleration of CNN
models based on the observation that the response maps
of many convolutional layers are usually sparse after
ReLU [26] activation. Therefore, instead of fully calculating the layer response, we can skip calculating the zero cells
in the ReLU output and only compute the values of non-zero
cells in each response map. Theoretically, the locations of
zero cells can be predicted by a lower cost layer. The values of non-zero cells from this lower-cost layer can be collaboratively updated by the responses of the original filters.
Eventually, the low-cost collaborative layer (LCCL) accompanied by the original layer constitute the basic element of
our proposed low-cost collaborative network (LCCN).
15840

