Fast Boosting based Detection using Scale Invariant
Multimodal Multiresolution Filtered Features
Arthur Daniel Costea, Robert Varga and Sergiu Nedevschi
Image Processing and Pattern Recognition Research Center
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
{arthur.costea, robert.varga, sergiu.nedevschi}@cs.utcluj.ro

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel boosting-based sliding window solution for object detection which can keep
up with the precision of the state-of-the art deep learning
approaches, while being 10 to 100 times faster. The solution takes advantage of multisensorial perception and exploits information from color, motion and depth. We introduce multimodal multiresolution filtering of signal intensity,
gradient magnitude and orientation channels, in order to
capture structure at multiple scales and orientations. To
achieve scale invariant classification features, we analyze
the effect of scale change on features for different filter types
and propose a correction scheme. To improve recognition
we incorporate 2D and 3D context by generating spatial,
geometric and symmetrical channels. Finally, we evaluate
the proposed solution on multiple benchmarks for the detection of pedestrians, cars and bicyclists. We achieve competitive results at over 25 frames per second.

Our main goal is to provide a fast solution that can keep
up with the current best performing deep learning solutions.
We also focus on efficient ways to exploit additional information such as motion and depth. There are some existing
solutions that use motion [33], depth from stereo [26] or
LIDAR data [21] to improve detection results from mono.
However, current benchmarks are dominated by solutions
that use as input only individual monocular images and
seem to outperform the current multimodal solutions, or report only minor improvements [47]. As noted in [3], the
efficient use of other modalities has not been explored yet.
In this work we consider as baseline the solution proposed in [10], which relies on multiresolution filtered channel features. It is a sliding window type approach and applies a fast filtering scheme over LUV+HOG channels to
generate classification features. We focus on improving
classification features and exploring efficient ways to incorporate multimodal features. The main contributions of this
paper are:
• multimodal multiresolution channels;

1. Introduction

• a feature correction scheme for achieving scale invariant classification features;

Due to the fast evolution of intelligent vehicles, there is
a pressing need for robust but also real-time environment
perception solutions in order to enable advanced driver assistance or autonomous driving. One of the main perception
tasks is the detection of traffic participants, which is still
an active research problem. The performance of state-ofthe-art solutions is getting closer and closer to human level
recognition [46]; however, results are far from saturation
and there is still room for improvement.
The current benchmarks are dominated by deep learning
solutions that are able to automatically learn image features
at multiple abstraction levels from raw image data. Unfortunately, these powerful approaches come with a high computational cost. The fastest top-performing deep learning
solutions struggle to achieve a processing speed of 2-3 FPS
even with high-end GPUs.

• exploitation of 2D and 3D context information;
• a common framework for detecting pedestrians, cars
and bicyclists.

2. Related work
The progress of the pedestrian detection algorithms is
due to the existence of numerous and extensive benchmarks.
Pushing the boundaries for obtaining better results each
year on these datasets has lead to the fast evolution of detection methods. Some of the most relevant benchmarks are:
Inria[12], Caltech-USA [18], KITTI [22].
For a comprehensive review on the best performing detection methods the reader is invited to consult recent reviews and surveys. The review from [3] indicates that improvements due to newly proposed features will continue.
16674

