3D Human Pose Estimation from a Single Image via Distance Matrix Regression
Francesc Moreno-Noguer
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC), 08028, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D human pose estimation from a single image. We follow a standard two-step
pipeline by first detecting the 2D position of the N body
joints, and then using these observations to infer 3D pose.
For the first step, we use a recent CNN-based detector. For
the second step, most existing approaches perform 2N -to3N regression of the Cartesian joint coordinates. We show
that more precise pose estimates can be obtained by representing both the 2D and 3D human poses using N × N distance matrices, and formulating the problem as a 2D-to-3D
distance matrix regression. For learning such a regressor
we leverage on simple Neural Network architectures, which
by construction, enforce positivity and symmetry of the predicted matrices. The approach has also the advantage to
naturally handle missing observations and allowing to hypothesize the position of non-observed joints. Quantitative results on Humaneva and Human3.6M datasets demonstrate consistent performance gains over state-of-the-art.
Qualitative evaluation on the images in-the-wild of the LSP
dataset, using the regressor learned on Human3.6M, reveals very promising generalization results.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose from a single RGB image is
known to be a severely ill-posed problem, because many
different body configurations can have virtually the same
projection. A typical solution consists in using discriminative strategies to directly learn mappings from image evidence (e.g. HOG, SIFT) to 3D poses [1, 9, 32, 36, 44].
This has been recently extended to end-to-end mappings using CNNs [23, 46]. In order to be effective, though, these
approaches require large amounts of training images annotated with the ground truth 3D pose. While obtaining this
kind of data is straightforward for 2D poses, even for images ‘in the wild’ (e.g. FLIC [35] or LSP [18] datasets), it
requires using sophisticated Motion Capture (MoCap) systems for the 3D case. Additionally, the datasets acquired
this way (e.g. Humaneva [37], Human3.6M [17]) are mostly
indoors and their images are not representative of the type

of image appearances outside the laboratory.
It seems therefore natural to split the problem in two
stages: Initially use robust image-driven 2D joint detectors,
and then infer the 3D pose from these image observations
using priors learned from MoCap data. This pipeline has
already been used in a number of works [10, 31, 39, 40, 50,
52] and is the strategy we consider in this paper. In particular, we first estimate 2D joints using a recent CNN detector [51]. For the second stage, most previous methods perform the 2D-to-3D inference in Cartesian space, between
2N - and 3N - vector representations of the N body joints.
In contrast, we propose representing 2D and 3D poses using N × N matrices of Euclidean distances between every
pair of joints, and formulate the 3D pose estimation problem as one of 2D-to-3D distance matrix regression1 . Fig. 1,
illustrates our pipeline.
Despite being extremely simple to compute, Euclidean
Distance Matrices (EDMs) have several interesting advantages over vector representations that are particularly suited
for our problem. Concretely, EDMs: 1) naturally encode
structural information of the pose. Inference on vector representations needs to explicitly formulate such constraints;
2) are invariant to in-plane image rotations and translations,
and normalization operations bring invariance to scaling; 3)
capture pairwise correlations and dependencies between all
body joints.
In order to learn a regression function that maps 2D-to3D EDMs we consider Fully Connected (FConn) and Fully
Convolutional (FConv) Network architectures. Since the dimension of our data is small (N × N square matrices, with
N = 14 joints in our model), input-to-output mapping can
be achieved through shallow architectures, with only 2 hidden layers for the FConn and 4 convolutional layers for the
FConv. And most importantly, since the distance matrices
used to train the networks are built from solely point configurations, we can easily synthesize artifacts and train the
network under 2D detector noise and body part occlusion.
We achieve state-of-the-art results on standard benchmarks including Humaneva-I and Human3.6M datasets, and
we show our approach to be robust to large 2D detector er1 Once the 3D distance matrix is predicted, the position of the 3D body
joints can be estimated using Multidimensional Scaling (MDS).

12823

