MDNet: A Semantically and Visually Interpretable
Medical Image Diagnosis Network
Zizhao Zhang, Yuanpu Xie, Fuyong Xing, Mason McGough, Lin Yang
University of Florida
zizhao@cise.ufl.edu

Abstract
The inability to interpret the model prediction in semantically and visually meaningful ways is a well-known shortcoming of most existing computer-aided diagnosis methods.
In this paper, we propose MDNet to establish a direct multimodal mapping between medical images and diagnostic
reports that can read images, generate diagnostic reports,
retrieve images by symptom descriptions, and visualize attention, to provide justifications of the network diagnosis
process. MDNet includes an image model and a language
model. The image model is proposed to enhance multi-scale
feature ensembles and utilization efficiency. The language
model, integrated with our improved attention mechanism,
aims to read and explore discriminative image feature descriptions from reports to learn a direct mapping from sentence words to image pixels. The overall network is trained
end-to-end by using our developed optimization strategy.
Based on a pathology bladder cancer images and its diagnostic reports (BCIDR) dataset, we conduct sufficient experiments to demonstrate that MDNet outperforms comparative baselines. The proposed image model obtains state-ofthe-art performance on two CIFAR datasets as well.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid development of deep learning
technologies has shown remarkable impact on the biomedical image domain. Conventional image analysis tasks, such
as segmentation and detection [2], support quick knowledge
discovery from medical metadata to help specialists’ manual diagnosis and decision-making. Automatic decisionmaking tasks (e.g. diagnosis) are usually treated as standard
classiﬁcation problems. However, generic classiﬁcation
models are not an optimal solution for intelligent computeraided diagnosis, because such models conceal the rationale
for their conclusions, and therefore lack the interpretable
justiﬁcations to support their decision-making process. It
is rather difﬁcult to investigate how well the model captures and understands the critical biomarker information. A

Report with attention
Images
&
Reports

The nuclei are
pleomorphic to a
severe degree. …
Moderate nuclear
crowding is seen ...
High grade cancer

Image retrieval

Report query

Interpretable
diagnosis
process

MDNet

Figure 1: Overview of our medical image diagnosis network (MDNet) for interpretable diagnosis process.
model that is able to visually and semantically interpret the
underlying reasons that support its diagnosis results is signiﬁcant and critical (Figure 1).
In clinical practice, medical specialists usually write diagnosis reports to record microscopic ﬁndings from images
to diagnose and select treatment options. Teaching machine
learning models to automatically imitate this process is a
way to provide interpretability to machine learning models.
Recently, image to language generation [14, 22, 4, 33] and
attention [36] methods attract some research interests.
In this paper, we present a uniﬁed network, namely MDNet, that can read images, generate diagnostic reports, retrieve images by symptom descriptions, and visualize network attention, to provide justiﬁcations of the network diagnosis process. For evaluation, we have applied MDNet on
a pathology bladder cancer image dataset with diagnostic
reports (Section 5.2 introduces dataset details). In bladder
pathology images, changes in the size and density of urothelial cell nuclei or thickening of the urothelial neoplasm of
bladder tissue indicate carcinoma. Accurately describing
these features facilitates the accurate diagnosis and is critical for the identiﬁcation of early-stage bladder cancer. The
accurate discrimination of those subtle appearance changes
is challenging even for observers with extensive experience.
To train MDNet, we address the problem of directly mining discriminative image feature information from reports
and learn a direct multimodal mapping from report sentence words to image pixels. This problem is signiﬁcant
because discriminative image features to support diagnostic
conclusion inference is “latent” in reports rather than offered by speciﬁc image/object labels. Effectively utilizing
16428

