Dynamic Time-of-Flight
Michael Schober
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems

Amit Adam∗

Omer Yair∗

1. Introduction
Current time-of-flight depth cameras operate by capturing
a set of RAW intensity frames under active illumination in
the infrared band. A depth algorithm then combines multiple
captured RAW frames to produce a single depth image [17].
Since both the camera and objects in the scene may move,
the cameras are inherently designed to collect the set of IR
frames over a very short exposure period. Likewise, the
standard algorithms do not use previously captured frames
because compensating for motion is not straightforward.
If the scene and camera were static we could obtain more
accurate estimates by using a larger number of IR frames
captured over longer periods of time since then our signal
will be stronger and we integrate more light. In addition, if
our hardware allows this, we will also be able to use different
active measurement patterns at different frames. This can
enable better depth disambiguation.
In this paper we propose a realtime solution for integrating time-of-flight observations over large time periods in the
presence of object and camera motion. Figure 1 illustrates

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research

time

Abstract
Time-of-flight (TOF) depth cameras provide robust depth
inference at low power requirements in a wide variety of
consumer and industrial applications. These cameras reconstruct a single depth frame from a given set of infrared (IR)
frames captured over a very short exposure period. Operating in this mode the camera essentially forgets all information previously captured - and performs depth inference from
scratch for every frame. We challenge this practice and propose using previously captured information when inferring
depth. An inherent problem we have to address is camera
motion over this longer period of collecting observations.
We derive a probabilistic framework combining a simple but
robust model of camera and object motion, together with an
observation model. This combination allows us to integrate
information over multiple frames while remaining robust to
rapid changes. Operating the camera in this manner has implications in terms of both computational efficiency and how
information should be captured. We address these two issues
and demonstrate a realtime TOF system with robust temporal integration that improves depth accuracy over strong
baseline methods including adaptive spatio-temporal filters.

Shai Mazor∗

time

IR

IR

depth

depth

(a) Static TOF camera

(b) Dynamic TOF camera

Figure 1: Basic idea of the proposed method: (a) an ordinary
(static) time-of-flight camera captures a set of infrared (IR)
frames using the same active measurement pattern (grey)
in each time step and uses the captured information only
once, in the current time step, to reconstruct depth; (b) the
proposed dynamic time-of-flight camera uses different measurement patterns in each time step (in this case two, shown
in orange and purple) and integrates multiple measurements
in time (additional arrows) to improve the depth accuracy.
our approach. The standard “static” approach is illustrated in
Figure 1a, where depth is computed from the measured RAW
intensities through simple phase-space methods [17, 16] for
modulated TOF, or via a simple generative model [1] for
pulsed TOF. All current depth cameras are forgetful because
they discard previously captured information and use only
the most recent RAW frames, as shown in Fig. 1a.
But RAW frames that were captured in the near past
do contain information about the scene depth, even when
objects or the camera are moving. We propose a model to use
this information across frames to improve depth accuracy.
On the right, Figure 1b illustrates the novel sensing and
inference framework we describe in this paper. Inference is
done using both current frame’s IR images, and the previous
frame’s IRs, as shown by the additional arrows. Sensing is
more flexible and may be done using different active measurement patterns, as shown by the orange and purple boxes.
We obtain the added flexibility in sensing and the ability
to use previous observations by a probabilistic generative
model combining motion and observation.
We remark that the (hardware) ability to change active
measurement patterns is not theoretical. It is common to
distinguish between modulated TOF (e.g. [3, 38]) and
pulsed TOF technologies (e.g. [40, 1]). In the former both the
illumination and the integration profiles are sinusoidal, and
changing the measurement pattern is not straightforward. In
pulsed TOF, the integration profile is more flexible and may
indeed be changed between different frames. In this work
we use a pulsed TOF camera, similar to the one used by [1].1
This device enables us to toggle between two different active

∗ A. Adam, O. Yair, and S. Mazor were with Microsoft AIT, Haifa, Israel.
{email.amitadam, omeryair, smazor.shai}@gmail.com.

1 The hardware details of this camera are described in [40, 12, 42].

16109

