Fast Fourier Color Constancy
Jonathan T. Barron

Yun-Ta Tsai

barron@google.com

yuntatsai@google.com

Abstract
We present Fast Fourier Color Constancy (FFCC), a
color constancy algorithm which solves illuminant estimation by reducing it to a spatial localization task on a
torus. By operating in the frequency domain, FFCC produces lower error rates than the previous state-of-the-art by
13 − 20% while being 250 − 3000× faster. This unconventional approach introduces challenges regarding aliasing,
directional statistics, and preconditioning, which we address. By producing a complete posterior distribution over
illuminants instead of a single illuminant estimate, FFCC
enables better training techniques, an effective temporal
smoothing technique, and richer methods for error analysis. Our implementation of FFCC runs at ∼ 700 frames per
second on a mobile device, allowing it to be used as an accurate, real-time, temporally-coherent automatic white balance algorithm.

1. Intro
A fundamental problem in computer vision is that of estimating the underlying world that resulted in some observed
image [1, 5]. One subset of this problem is color constancy:
estimating the color of the illuminant of the scene and the
colors of the objects in the scene viewed under a white light.
Despite its apparent simplicity, this problem has yielded a
great deal of depth and challenge for both the human vision
and computer vision communities [17, 22]. Color constancy
is also a practical concern in the camera industry: producing a natural looking photograph without user intervention
requires that the illuminant be automatically estimated and
discounted, a process referred to as “auto white balance”
among practitioners. Though there is a profound historical connection between color constancy and consumer photography (exemplified by Edwin Land, the inventor of both
Retinex theory [26] and the Polaroid instant camera), “color
constancy” and “white balance” have come to mean different things — color constancy aims to recover the veridical
world behind an image, while white balance aims to give an
image a pleasant appearance consistent with some aesthetic
or cultural norm. But with the current ubiquity of learning-

based techniques in computer vision, both problems reduce
to just estimating the “best” illuminant from an image, and
the question of whether that illuminant is objectively true
or subjectively attractive is just a matter of the data used
during training.
Despite their accuracy, modern learning-based color
constancy algorithms are not immediately suitable as practical white balance algorithms, as practical white balance
has several requirements besides accuracy:
Speed - An algorithm running in a camera’s viewfinder
must run at 30 FPS on mobile hardware. But a camera’s
compute budget is precious: demosaicing, face detection,
auto exposure, etc, must also run simultaneously and in real
time. Spending more than a small fraction (say, 5 − 10%)
of a camera’s compute budget on white balance is impractical, suggesting that our speed requirement is closer to 1 − 5
milliseconds per frame.
Impoverished Input - Most color constancy algorithms are
designed for full resolution, high bit-depth input images, but
operating on such large images is challenging and costly in
practice. To be fast, the algorithm must work well on the
small, low bit-depth “preview” images (32 × 24 or 64 × 48
pixels, 8-bit) which are usually computed by specialized
camera hardware for this task.
Uncertainty - In addition to the illuminant, the algorithm
should produce some confidence measure or a complete
posterior distribution over illuminants, thereby enabling
convenient downstream integration with hand-engineered
heuristics or external sources of information.
Temporal Coherence - The algorithm should allow the estimated illuminant to be smoothed over time, to prevent
color composition in videos from varying erratically.
In this paper we present a novel color constancy algorithm, which we call “Fast Fourier Color Constancy”
(FFCC). Viewed as a color constancy algorithm, FFCC is
13 − 20% more accurate than the state of the art on standard benchmarks. Viewed as a prospective white balance algorithm, FFCC addresses our previously described requirements: Our technique is 250−3000× faster than the state of
the art, and is capable of running at 1.44 milliseconds per
frame on a standard consumer mobile platform using the
thumbnail images already produced by that camera’s hard1886

