Predicting Behaviors of Basketball Players from First Person Videos
Shan Su1 , Jung Pyo Hong2 , Jianbo Shi1 , Hyun Soo Park3
1

University of Pennsylvania, 2 KAIST, 3 University of Minnesota

{sushan,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu

jphong@ai.kaist.ac.kr

hspark@umn.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a method to predict the future movements (location and gaze direction) of basketball players as
a whole from their first person videos. The predicted behaviors reflect an individual physical space that affords to take
the next actions while conforming to social behaviors by engaging to joint attention. Our key innovation is to use the
3D reconstruction of multiple first person cameras to automatically annotate each other’s visual semantics of social
configurations.
We leverage two learning signals uniquely embedded in
first person videos. Individually, a first person video records
the visual semantics of a spatial and social layout around a
person that allows associating with past similar situations.
Collectively, first person videos follow joint attention that
can link the individuals to a group. We learn the egocentric visual semantics of group movements using a Siamese
neural network to retrieve future trajectories. We consolidate the retrieved trajectories from all players by maximizing a measure of social compatibility—the gaze alignment
towards joint attention predicted by their social formation,
where the dynamics of joint attention is learned by a longterm recurrent convolutional network. This allows us to
characterize which social configuration is more plausible
and predict future group trajectories.

1. Introduction
We physically interact with people around us while mentally engaging with them via joint attention. For example,
you as an audience in a concert are locally affected by the
people around you and are globally connected to the people on the other side of the stage by sharing joint attention. While the physical connection delineates the proximal
space around us, the mental connection encodes the group’s
intent in a way that facilitates communications, role playing, and group task accomplishment. These connections
provide social cues to further reason about the spatial and
temporal extent of the social behaviors, which is a key de-

Figure 1. We predict a group trajectory of basketball players from
first person videos. The red is the ground truth and blue is the
predicted trajectories with gaze direction.

sign factor for an artificial intelligence of social robots.
However, such social cues are rather ambiguous, subtle,
and situation dependent, which is challenging to be computationally learned by third person computer vision systems [4, 25, 26, 32] due to their limited expressibility: it is
necessary to tap into what we actually see. In this paper,
we propose to use first person cameras collectively to decode the social cues and to further predict their future social
behaviors.
What visual information makes us to stay connected to
people, physically and mentally? We conjecture that two
unique signals recorded in first person videos can describe
the connections. (1) Individually, a first person video encodes the egocentric visual semantics that provides a social and spatial context to take the next action. (2) Collectively, first person videos follow joint attention spatially
arranged by social formation [24, 38], e.g., audiences dynamically change their social formation to secure visibility, which links the individuals to a group. As a proof-ofconcept, we integrate these two learning signals to predict
the movement (location and gaze directions) of basketball
players, one of most complex forms of social interactions,
from their first person videos (Figure 1).
Our method takes an input, the first person videos of basketball players and outputs a set of plausible future trajectories. We learn an egocentric visual representation to recognize similar social and spatial configurations, e.g., which
makes us to move, using a Siamese neural network. This
representation is used to retrieve a set of future trajecto11501

