Fine-To-Coarse Global Registration of RGB-D Scans
Maciej Halber
Princeton University

Thomas Funkhouser
Princeton University

mhalber@cs.princeton.edu

funk@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
RGB-D scanning of indoor environments is important for many applications, including real estate, interior design, and virtual reality. However, it is still
challenging to register RGB-D images from a handheld camera over a long video sequence into a globally
consistent 3D model. Current methods often can lose
tracking or drift and thus fail to reconstruct salient
structures in large environments (e.g., parallel walls in
different rooms). To address this problem, we propose
a “fine-to-coarse” global registration algorithm that
leverages robust registrations at finer scales to seed
detection and enforcement of new correspondence and
structural constraints at coarser scales. To test global
registration algorithms, we provide a benchmark with
10,401 manually-clicked point correspondences in 25
scenes from the SUN3D dataset. During experiments
with this benchmark, we find that our fine-to-coarse
algorithm registers long RGB-D sequences better than
previous methods.

Figure 1: We present a fine-to-coarse optimization strategy for globally registering RGB-D scans in indoor environments. Given an initial registration (left), our algorithm iteratively detects and enforces
planar structures and feature correspondences at increasing scales.
This way, it discovers long-range constraints important for a globally consistent registration – e.g., note how opposing walls are parallel even across different rooms in our results on the right.

distances [28], local tracking often fails in textureless regions and/or drifts over long ranges [9, 30] (left
side of Figure 1). These errors can be fixed with
asynchronous or global optimizations based on detected loop closures [8, 19, 46]. However, finding
loop closures is difficult without prior constraints in
large real-world scans with multiple rooms and/or repeated structures. In our experience, even state-of-theart global registration methods produce warped surfaces and improbable structures in these cases [8].

1. Introduction
The proliferation of inexpensive RGB-D video
cameras allows for easy scanning of static indoor environments, enabling applications in many domains,
including cultural heritage, real estate and virtual reality. Motivated by these, our goal is to create a method
that takes a sequence of RGB-D frames captured with
a hand-held camera as input and produces a globally
consistent 3D model as output. We would like the algorithm to register frames robustly in a wide range of
indoor environments (offices, homes, museums, etc.),
execute off-line within practical computational limits,
and work with data acquired by inexpensive commodity cameras, so that it can be used by non-experts.
Despite much prior work, it is still difficult to register RGB-D data acquired with a hand-held camera. Although camera poses can usually be tracked over short

To address this issue, global refinement methods
have been proposed based on fitting structural models
[24, 25, 27] and/or aligning closest point correspondences [5, 14]. However, these methods only succeed
when the alignments provided as input are nearly correct. Otherwise, they may detect and amplify erroneous constraints found in the misaligned inputs.
We introduce a new “fine-to-coarse” global registration algorithm that refines an initial set of camera
poses by iteratively detecting and enforcing geometric
constraints within gradually growing subsets of the trajectory. During each iteration, closest point and geo-

1755

