Crossing Nets: Combining GANs and VAEs with a
Shared Latent Space for Hand Pose Estimation
Chengde Wan1 , Thomas Probst1 , Luc Van Gool1,3 , and Angela Yao2
1

ETH Zürich 2 University of Bonn 3 KU Leuven

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for 3D hand pose estimation
from depth images require large amounts of annotated
training data. We propose to model the statistical relationships of 3D hand poses and corresponding depth images using two deep generative models with a shared latent space.
By design, our architecture allows for learning from unlabeled image data in a semi-supervised manner. Assuming a
one-to-one mapping between a pose and a depth map, any
given point in the shared latent space can be projected into
both a hand pose and a corresponding depth map. Regressing the hand pose can then be done by learning a discriminator to estimate the posterior of the latent pose given some
depth map. To improve generalization and to better exploit
unlabeled depth maps, we jointly train a generator and a
discriminator. At each iteration, the generator is updated
with the back-propagated gradient from the discriminator
to synthesize realistic depth maps of the articulated hand,
while the discriminator benefits from an augmented training
set of synthesized and unlabeled samples. The proposed discriminator network architecture is highly efficient and runs
at 90ḞPS on the CPU with accuracies comparable or better
than state-of-art on 3 publicly available benchmarks.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of estimating 3D hand pose
from single depth images. Accurate estimation of the 3D
pose in real-time has many challenges, including the presence of local self-similarity and self-occlusions.Since the
availability of low-cost depth sensors, the progress made in
developing fast and accurate hand trackers have relied heavily on having a large corpus of depth images annotated with
hand joints. This is especially true for the recent success of
deep learning-based methods [46, 20, 21, 32, 9, 51, 45, 48]
which are all fully-supervised.
Accurately annotating 3D hand joints on a depth map is

Figure 1. Random walk in the learned shared latent space. A
set of points is sampled on the connecting line between two points
in the shared latent space. The pose and corresponding depth map
are then reconstructed through our network. Our method generates meaningful and realistic interpolations in both pose and appearance space.

both difficult and time-consuming. While it is possible to
synthesize data with physical renderers, there are usually
discrepancies between the real and synthesized data. Generated hand poses are not always natural nor reflective of
poses seen in real-life applications. More importantly, it is
very difficult to accurately model and render depth sensor
noise in a realistic way.
On the other “hand”, it is very simple to collect an unlabeled dataset of real human hands with standard consumer depth cameras. This begs the question: how can one
use these unlabeled samples for training? To date, there
has been virtually no work presented on semi-supervised
learning for hand pose estimation. The one notable exception [41] is a discriminative approach using transductive
random forests and largely ignores high-order pixel correlations of unlabeled depth maps.
Previous works from neuroscience [29], robotics [1]
and hand motion capture [15] have demonstrated that hand
movements exhibit strong correlations between joints. We
therefore conclude that the space of realistic hand posescan
be represented by a manifold in a lower-dimensional subspace. We further intuit that depth maps of the hand can be
similarly encoded in a low-dimensional manifold, and be
1680

