Discriminative Covariance Oriented Representation Learning
for Face Recognition with Image Sets

1

Wen Wang1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2,3 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2,3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, China
wen.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
For face recognition with image sets, while most existing works mainly focus on building robust set models with
hand-crafted feature, it remains a research gap to learn better image representations which can closely match the subsequent image set modeling and classification. Taking sample covariance matrix as set model in the light of its recent promising success, we present a Discriminative Covariance oriented Representation Learning (DCRL) framework
to bridge the above gap. The framework constructs a feature learning network (e.g. a CNN) to project the face images into a target representation space, and the network is
trained towards the goal that the set covariance matrix calculated in the target space has maximum discriminative ability. To encode the discriminative ability of set covariance
matrices, we elaborately design two different loss functions, which respectively lead to two different representation
learning schemes, i.e., the Graph Embedding scheme and
the Softmax Regression scheme. Both schemes optimize the
whole network containing both image representation mapping and set model classification in a joint learning manner.
The proposed method is extensively validated on three challenging and large scale databases for the task of face recognition with image sets, i.e., YouTube Celebrities, YouTube
Face DB and Point-and-Shoot Challenge.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of multimedia technologies,
increasing interest has been attracted on face recognition
with image sets in real-world applications such as video
surveillance, classification with images from multi-view
camera networks or online face books, etc. Different from
traditional single-shot image based face recognition task,
for face recognition with image sets, both the gallery and

probe samples are image sets, each of which contains a large
number of images belonging to the same class. Nevertheless, large intra-class variations are usually contained in the
image sets due to changes in pose, expression, illumination
and other factors, thus how to represent these variations using robust set models and further discover invariance from
them is considered a key issue.
Among the existing set models, set covariance matrix has
gained a promising success [39, 37, 26, 15]. As a natural
second-order statistics, set covariance matrix characterizes
each image set with different number of samples as a fixeddimensional and comparable representation compactly and
effectively, thus is chosen to represent image set in this paper. Since non-singular covariance matrices lie on a specific
Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) Riemannian manifold,
their distances are usually measured with the Riemannian
metrics, e.g., the Log-Euclidean metric (LEM) [2]. Alternatively, several works [5, 35, 36] propose to apply the matrix
logarithm operator to convert a covariance matrix from the
SPD manifold to a vector in the tangent space at the identity
matrix where Euclidean geometry applies.
For face recognition with image sets, most existing
works, e.g., [39, 26, 24, 15, 41, 13], etc., mainly focus on
building robust set models with hand-crafted feature. Moreover, motivated by the proven success of deep network,
class-specific neural networks are trained in [17, 25] to extract image representations in different image sets respectively, which learn the within-class structure merely using
the class-specific mechanism yet without an explicit set representation. Thus, we argue that it still remains a research
gap to learn more desirable image representations which
can closely match the subsequent image set modeling and
classification.
To address this issue, we present a Discriminative Covariance oriented Representation Learning (DCRL) method
which aims to learn a feature learning network, such as

5599

