Borrowing Treasures from the Wealthy: Deep Transfer Learning through
Selective Joint Fine-Tuning
Weifeng Ge
Yizhou Yu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Deep neural networks require a large amount of labeled
training data during supervised learning. However, collecting and labeling so much data might be infeasible in many
cases. In this paper, we introduce a deep transfer learning scheme, called selective joint fine-tuning, for improving the performance of deep learning tasks with insufficient
training data. In this scheme, a target learning task with
insufficient training data is carried out simultaneously with
another source learning task with abundant training data.
However, the source learning task does not use all existing
training data. Our core idea is to identify and use a subset
of training images from the original source learning task
whose low-level characteristics are similar to those from
the target learning task, and jointly fine-tune shared convolutional layers for both tasks. Specifically, we compute
descriptors from linear or nonlinear filter bank responses
on training images from both tasks, and use such descriptors to search for a desired subset of training samples for
the source learning task.
Experiments demonstrate that our deep transfer learning scheme achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple visual classification tasks with insufficient training
data for deep learning. Such tasks include Caltech 256,
MIT Indoor 67, and fine-grained classification problems
(Oxford Flowers 102 and Stanford Dogs 120). In comparison to fine-tuning without a source domain, the proposed method can improve the classification accuracy
by 2% - 10% using a single model. Codes and models are available at https://github.com/ZYYSzj/
Selective-Joint-Fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become
deeper and larger to pursue increasingly better performance
on classification and recognition tasks [22, 18, 40, 12, 46].
Looking at the successes of deep learning in computer
vison, we find that a large amount of training or pretraining data is essential in training deep neural networks.

Large-scale image datasets, such as the ImageNet ILSVRC
dataset [36], Places [50], and MS COCO [23], have led to
a series of breakthroughs in visual recognition, including
image classification [24], object detection [10], and semantic segmentation [25]. Many other related visual tasks have
benefited from these breakthroughs.
Nonetheless, researchers face a dilemma when using
deep convolutional neural networks to perform visual tasks
that do not have sufficient training data. Training a deep
network with insufficient data might even give rise to inferior performance in comparison to traditional classifiers fed
with handcrafted features. Fine-grained classification problems, such as Oxford Flowers 102 [29] and Stanford Dogs
120 [19], are such examples. The number of training samples in these datasets is far from being enough for training
large-scale deep neural networks, and the networks would
become overfit quickly.
Solving the overfitting problem for deep convolutional
neural networks on learning tasks without sufficient training data is challenging [39]. Transfer learning techniques
that apply knowledge learnt from one task to other related
tasks have been proven helpful [30]. In the context of deep
learning, fine-tuning a deep network pre-trained on the ImageNet or Places dataset is a common strategy to learn taskspecific deep features.This strategy is considered a simple
transfer learning technique for deep learning. However,
since the ratio between the number of learnable parameters
and the number of training samples still remains the same,
fine-tuning needs to be terminated after a relatively small
number of iterations; otherwise, overfitting still occurs.
In this paper, we attempt to tackle the problem of training
deep neural networks for learning tasks that have insufficient training data. We adopt the source-target joint training
methodology [45] when fine-tuning deep neural networks.
The original learning task without sufficient training data
is called the target learning task, T t . To boost its performance, the target learning task is teamed up with another
learning task with rich training data. The latter is called
the source learning task, T s . Suppose the source learning
task has a large-scale training set D s , and the target learning task has a small-scale training set D t . Since the target
11086

