OctNet: Learning Deep 3D Representations at High Resolutions
Gernot Riegler1
Ali Osman Ulusoy2
Andreas Geiger2,3
1
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
2
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
3
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich

We present OctNet, a representation for deep learning
with sparse 3D data. In contrast to existing models, our representation enables 3D convolutional networks which are
both deep and high resolution. Towards this goal, we exploit the sparsity in the input data to hierarchically partition the space using a set of unbalanced octrees where each
leaf node stores a pooled feature representation. This allows to focus memory allocation and computation to the
relevant dense regions and enables deeper networks without
compromising resolution. We demonstrate the utility of our
OctNet representation by analyzing the impact of resolution
on several 3D tasks including 3D object classification, orientation estimation and point cloud labeling.

1. Introduction
Over the last several years, convolutional networks have
lead to substantial performance gains in many areas of computer vision. In most of these cases, the input to the network
is of two-dimensional nature, e.g., in image classification
[18], object detection [35] or semantic segmentation [13].
However, recent advances in 3D reconstruction [33] and
graphics [21] allow capturing and modeling large amounts
of 3D data. At the same time, large 3D repositories such as
ModelNet [47], ShapeNet [6] or 3D Warehouse1 as well as
databases of 3D object scans [7] are becoming increasingly
available. These factors have motivated the development of
convolutional networks that operate on 3D data.
Most existing 3D network architectures [8,29,34,47] replace the 2D pixel array by its 3D analogue, i.e., a dense and
regular 3D voxel grid, and process this grid using 3D convolution and pooling operations. However, for dense 3D
data, computational and memory requirements grow cubically with the resolution. Consequently, existing 3D networks are limited to low 3D resolutions, typically in the
order of 303 voxels. To fully exploit the rich and detailed
1 https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com

Dense 3D ConvNet

Abstract

Dense 3D ConvNet

{osman.ulusoy,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

OctNet

riegler@icg.tugraz.at

(a) Layer 1: 323

(b) Layer 2: 163

(c) Layer 3: 83

Figure 1: Motivation. For illustration purposes, we
trained a dense convolutional network to classify 3D shapes
from [47]. Given a voxelized bed as input, we show the
maximum response across all feature maps at intermediate
layers (a-c) of the network before pooling. Higher activations are indicated with darker colors. Voxels with zero
activation are not displayed. The first row visualizes the
responses in 3D while the second row shows a 2D slice.
Note how voxels close to the object contour respond more
strongly than voxels further away. We exploit the sparsity
in our data by allocating memory and computations using a
space partitioning data structure (bottom row).
geometry of our 3D world, however, much higher resolution
networks are required.
In this work, we build on the observation that 3D data is
often sparse in nature, e.g., point clouds, or meshes, resulting in wasted computations when applying 3D convolutions
13577

