Weakly Supervised Action Learning with RNN based Fine-to-coarse Modeling
Alexander Richard, Hilde Kuehne, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
{richard,kuehne,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
We present an approach for weakly supervised learning
of human actions. Given a set of videos and an ordered list
of the occurring actions, the goal is to infer start and end
frames of the related action classes within the video and
to train the respective action classifiers without any need
for hand labeled frame boundaries. To address this task,
we propose a combination of a discriminative representation of subactions, modeled by a recurrent neural network,
and a coarse probabilistic model to allow for a temporal
alignment and inference over long sequences. While this
system alone already generates good results, we show that
the performance can be further improved by approximating
the number of subactions to the characteristics of the different action classes. To this end, we adapt the number of
subaction classes by iterating realignment and reestimation
during training. The proposed system is evaluated on two
benchmark datasets, the Breakfast and the Hollywood extended dataset, showing a competitive performance on various weak learning tasks such as temporal action segmentation and action alignment.

1. Introduction
Given the large amount of available video data, e.g. on
Youtube, from movies or even in the context of surveillance,
methods to automatically find and classify human actions
within these videos gained an increased interest within the
last years [30, 12, 26, 23, 34].
While there are several successful methods to classify
trimmed video clips [30, 26], temporal localization and
classification of human actions in untrimmed, long video
sequences are still a huge challenge. Most existing approaches in this field rely on fully annotated video data, i.e.
the exact start and end time of each action in the training set
needs to be provided [24, 23, 34]. For real world applications, this requires an enormous effort of creating training
data and can be too expensive to realize. Therefore, weakly
supervised methods are of particular interest. Such methods
usually assume that only an ordered list of actions occurring

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed weak learning system. Given
a list of ordered actions for each video, an initial segmentation is
generated by uniform segmentation. Based on this input information we iteratively train an RNN-based fine-to-coarse system to
align the frames to the respective action.

in the video is annotated instead of exact framewise start
and end points [7, 3, 9]. This information is much easier
to generate for human annotators, or can even be automatically derived from scripts [17, 20] or subtitles [1]. The idea
that all those approaches share is that - given a set of videos
and a respective list of the actions that occur in the video it is possible to learn the characteristics of the related action
classes, to infer their start and end frames within the video,
and to build the corresponding action models without any
need for hand labeled frame boundaries (see Figure 1).
In this work, we address the task of weak learning of
human actions by a fine-to-coarse model. On the fine
grained level, we use a discriminative representation of subactions, modeled by a recurrent neural network as e.g. used
by [6, 35, 27, 33]. In our case, the RNN is used as basic recognition model as it provides robust classification of
small temporal chunks. This allows to capture local temporal information. The RNN is supplemented by a coarse
probabilistic model to allow for temporal alignment and inference over long sequences.
Further, to bypass the difficulty of modeling long and
complex action classes, we divide all actions into smaller
building blocks. Those subactions are eventually modeled
within the RNN and later combined by the inference process. The usage of subactions allows to distribute hetero1754

