Geometric loss functions for camera pose regression with deep learning
Alex Kendall and Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge
{agk34, rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning has shown to be effective for robust and
real-time monocular image relocalisation. In particular,
PoseNet [22] is a deep convolutional neural network which
learns to regress the 6-DOF camera pose from a single image. It learns to localize using high level features and is
robust to difficult lighting, motion blur and unknown camera intrinsics, where point based SIFT registration fails.
However, it was trained using a naive loss function, with
hyper-parameters which require expensive tuning. In this
paper, we give the problem a more fundamental theoretical treatment. We explore a number of novel loss functions
for learning camera pose which are based on geometry and
scene reprojection error. Additionally we show how to automatically learn an optimal weighting to simultaneously
regress position and orientation. By leveraging geometry,
we demonstrate that our technique significantly improves
PoseNet’s performance across datasets ranging from indoor
rooms to a small city.

1. Introduction
Designing a system for reliable large scale localisation is a challenging problem. The discovery of the positioning system in mammalian brains, located in the hippocampus, was awarded the 2014 Nobel prize in Physiology or Medicine [36, 32]. It is an important problem for
computer vision too, with localisation technology essential
for many applications including autonomous vehicles, unmanned aerial vehicles and augmented reality. State of the
art localisation systems perform very well within controlled
environments [24, 34, 12, 33, 44]. However, we are yet to
see their wide spread use in the wild because of their inability to cope with large viewpoint or appearance changes.
Many of the visual localisation systems use point landmarks such as SIFT [30] or ORB [40] to localise. These
features perform well for incremental tracking and estimating ego-motion [33]. However, these point features are not
able to create a representation which is sufficiently robust to
challenging real-world scenarios. For example, point fea-

Single RGB Input Image

6-DoF Camera Pose

Figure 1: PoseNet [22] is trained end-to-end to estimate the camera’s six degree of freedom pose from a single monocular image.
In this paper we show how to apply a principled loss function
based on the scene’s geometry to learn camera pose without any
hyper-parameters.

tures are often not robust enough for localising across different weather, lighting or environmental conditions. Additionally, they lack the ability to capture global context, and
require robust aggregation of hundreds of points to form a
consensus to predict pose [57].
To address this problem, we introduced PoseNet [22, 19]
which uses end-to-end deep learning to predict camera pose
from a single input image. It was shown to be able localise more robustly using deep learning, compared with
point features such as SIFT [30]. PoseNet learns a representation using the entire image context based on appearance
and shape. These features generalise well and can localise
across challenging lighting and appearances changes. It is
also fast, being able to regress the camera’s pose in only a
few milliseconds. It is very scalable as it does not require
a large database of landmarks. Rather, it learns a mapping
from pixels to a high dimensional space linear with pose.
The main weakness of PoseNet [22] was that despite
its scalability and robustness it did not produce metric accuracy which is comparable to other geometric methods
15974

