Reflectance Adaptive Filtering Improves Intrinsic Image Estimation
Thomas Nestmeyer1,3
Peter V. Gehler1,2,3
1
University of Würzburg, Germany
2
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Tübingen, Germany
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{tnestmeyer, pgehler}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Separating an image into reflectance and shading layers poses a challenge for learning approaches because no
large corpus of precise and realistic ground truth decompositions exists. The Intrinsic Images in the Wild (IIW)
dataset provides a sparse set of relative human reflectance
judgments, which serves as a standard benchmark for intrinsic images. A number of methods use IIW to learn
statistical dependencies between the images and their reflectance layer. Although learning plays an important role
for high performance, we show that a standard signal processing technique achieves performance on par with current state-of-the-art. We propose a loss function for CNN
learning of dense reflectance predictions. Our results show
a simple pixel-wise decision, without any context or prior
knowledge, is sufficient to provide a strong baseline on IIW.
This sets a competitive baseline which only two other approaches surpass. We then develop a joint bilateral filtering
method that implements strong prior knowledge about reflectance constancy. This filtering operation can be applied
to any intrinsic image algorithm and we improve several
previous results achieving a new state-of-the-art on IIW.
Our findings suggest that the effect of learning-based approaches may have been over-estimated so far. Explicit
prior knowledge is still at least as important to obtain high
performance in intrinsic image decompositions.

1. Introduction
Almost 40 years ago, the seminal paper of Barrow and
Tenenbaum [3] conjectured that “A robust visual system
should be organized around a noncognitive, nonpurposive
level of processing that attempts to recover an intrinsic description of the scene”. Their work motivates the task of decomposing an image into constituent layers such as surface
reflectance, surface orientation, distance and incident illumination. Ever since, significant progress has been made
on this problem, but the recovery of these physical proper-

ties of visual scenes or videos remains an open challenge.
A successful model needs to resolve the ill-posedness of the
problem and cope with the variety of image appearances.
A possible line of attack are supervised learning methods
which have been used with great success for a wide range
of computer vision applications. Standing out for superior
performance combined with favorable runtimes is the class
of Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs), a dominant contender for many vision problems. CNNs are mostly falling
into the category of purposive models, guided by task specific goals such as image classification or recognition. The
obvious question is whether CNNs will fare equally well on
the problem of intrinsic image decompositions.
Several works have included CNN methods in systems
that recover reflectance and shading layers [25, 26, 37, 38].
However, prior work uses CNNs mostly in combination
with additional methods, such as Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs), to achieve a dense image decomposition. An
advantage of CRF models is their ability to encode prior information about the problem. In the pre-CNN time, intrinsic
image methods were dominated by CRF models with carefully designed priors on reflectance, shading, and their combination. In this paper we attempt to answer the question
whether prior terms are necessary when human annotation
in the form of weak labels is available.
Acquiring accurate training data for intrinsic images is a
challenge. The MIT intrinsic dataset [16] with 20 images
and 10 (single color) light configurations was a first attempt
to empirically validate intrinsic estimation techniques. It
has served this purpose well, but lacks realism and diversity.
Recently, [4] proposed an extension to multi illuminants,
but without overcoming the limitations on extent. Another
possible route to generate datasets is the use of computer
graphics rendering engines. This has been explored by the
authors of [5] who created a dataset of synthetic scenes rendered using the Blender open source rendering engine [19].
This led to a dataset of 32 single objects and 36 scene compositions which is still limited in terms of detail and diversity. The MPI-Sintel dataset has been created using the open

6789

