A Deep Regression Architecture with Two-Stage Re-initialization for
High Performance Facial Landmark Detection

1

Jiangjing Lv1,2 ∗, Xiaohu Shao1,2 ∗, Junliang Xing3 , Cheng Cheng1 , Xi Zhou1
Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lvjiangjing,shaoxiaohu,chengcheng,zhouxi}@cigit.ac.cn

Abstract
Regression based facial landmark detection methods
usually learns a series of regression functions to update the
landmark positions from an initial estimation. Most of existing approaches focus on learning effective mapping functions with robust image features to improve performance.
The approach to dealing with the initialization issue, however, receives relatively fewer attentions. In this paper, we
present a deep regression architecture with two-stage reinitialization to explicitly deal with the initialization problem. At the global stage, given an image with a rough face
detection result, the full face region is firstly re-initialized
by a supervised spatial transformer network to a canonical
shape state and then trained to regress a coarse landmark
estimation. At the local stage, different face parts are further separately re-initialized to their own canonical shape
states, followed by another regression subnetwork to get the
final estimation. Our proposed deep architecture is trained
from end to end and obtains promising results using different kinds of unstable initialization. It also achieves superior
performances over many competing algorithms.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection, or face alignment, is to locate
some predefined landmarks on the face given the face detection result, providing a representation of the face shape.
It is one of the most important tasks in the field of computer
vision and has been a key component of many other computer vision tasks, e.g., 3D face reconstruction [1, 11], face
animation [4] and face recognition [12, 3, 40].
In the past decades, computer vision researchers have devoted great efforts to solving this task, and have made significant progress [7, 8, 9, 41, 30, 33, 5, 21, 16, 29, 2, 35,
38, 39]. Among all these developments in years of studies,
∗ These authors contributed equally to this study.

jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

regression based algorithms [30, 9, 33, 5, 21, 16, 29, 2, 35,
38, 39] currently dominant the approach to solving this task.
Compared with the methods using parameterized models to
describe the face appearance and shape [7, 8, 41], regression
based methods directly learn a series of mapping functions,
i.e., regressors, to progressively update the estimations of
the landmark positions towards the true locations. Summarizing the results from previous studies, the pose-indexed
robust features [9], the cascade regression structure [5], and
the regression model [30, 21, 16], are the three most important aspects in designing a high performance landmark
detection algorithm. By deploying these study results from
conventional methods to the powerful deep learning framework, many promising deep learning based face alignment
algorithms have been developed [35, 24, 23, 36, 27, 20].
Although great progresses have been made in the last
decade, facial landmark detection still remains a very challenging problem. When the face images appear with large
view variations, different expressions, and partial occlusions, even state-of-the-art algorithms may fail to locate
the landmarks correctly, which restricts the applications of
many facial landmark detection algorithms into practical
systems. To deal with these problems, many previous work
[41, 33, 27] devote much effort to learning robust image
features and effective regression functions. The approach
to initializing the regression based methods, however, receives relatively fewer attentions, which we believe is also
crucial to the solving of this problem.
Currently most of the facial landmark detection algorithms depend on the face detection to provide a good rectangular face region as an initialization. According to recent
studies [31, 32, 21], if the initial detection rectangle during testing varies from the one used in training stage, the
performances of many landmark detectors degrade a lot. In
many situations, users may have to choose other face detector different from the one used in training. Since different
face detectors often return various face bounding boxes with
13317

