Real-Time Video Super-Resolution with Spatio-Temporal Networks and Motion
Compensation
Jose Caballero, Christian Ledig, Andrew Aitken, Alejandro Acosta,
Johannes Totz, Zehan Wang, Wenzhe Shi
Twitter
{jcaballero, cledig, aaitken, aacostadiaz, johannes, zehanw, wshi}@twitter.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have enabled accurate
image super-resolution in real-time. However, recent attempts to benefit from temporal correlations in video superresolution have been limited to naive or inefficient architectures. In this paper, we introduce spatio-temporal subpixel convolution networks that effectively exploit temporal
redundancies and improve reconstruction accuracy while
maintaining real-time speed. Specifically, we discuss the
use of early fusion, slow fusion and 3D convolutions for
the joint processing of multiple consecutive video frames.
We also propose a novel joint motion compensation and
video super-resolution algorithm that is orders of magnitude more efficient than competing methods, relying on a
fast multi-resolution spatial transformer module that is endto-end trainable. These contributions provide both higher
accuracy and temporally more consistent videos, which we
confirm qualitatively and quantitatively. Relative to singleframe models, spatio-temporal networks can either reduce
the computational cost by 30% whilst maintaining the same
quality or provide a 0.2dB gain for a similar computational
cost. Results on publicly available datasets demonstrate
that the proposed algorithms surpass current state-of-theart performance in both accuracy and efficiency.

Figure 1: Proposed design for video SR. The motion estimation and ESPCN modules are learnt end-to-end to obtain
a motion compensated and fast algorithm.

In single image SR, where only one LR image is provided, methods exploit inherent image redundancy in the
form of local correlations to recover lost high-frequency
details by imposing sparsity constraints [39] or assuming
other types of image statistics such as multi-scale patch recurrence [12]. In multi-image SR [28] it is assumed that
different observations of the same scene are available, hence
the shared explicit redundancy can be used to constrain the
problem and attempt to invert the downscaling process directly. Transitioning from images to videos implies an additional data dimension (time) with a high degree of correlation that can also be exploited to improve performance in
terms of accuracy as well as efficiency.

1.1. Related work

1. Introduction
Image and video super-resolution (SR) are long-standing
challenges of signal processing. SR aims at recovering a
high-resolution (HR) image or video from its low-resolution
(LR) version, and finds direct applications ranging from
medical imaging [38, 34] to satellite imaging [5], as well
as facilitating tasks such as face recognition [13]. The
reconstruction of HR data from a LR input is however a
highly ill-posed problem that requires additional constraints
to be solved. While those constraints are often applicationdependent, they usually rely on data redundancy.

Video SR methods have mainly emerged as adaptations
of image SR techniques. Kernel regression methods [35]
have been shown to be applicable to videos using 3D kernels instead of 2D ones [36]. Dictionary learning approaches, which define LR images as a sparse linear combination of dictionary atoms coupled to a HR dictionary,
have also been adapted from images [38] to videos [4]. Another approach is example-based patch recurrence, which
assumes patches in a single image or video obey multi-scale
relationships, and therefore missing high-frequency content
at a given scale can be inferred from coarser scale patches.

4778

