Soft-Margin Mixture of Regressions
Dong Huang∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Longfei Han∗
Beijing Institute of Technology

Fernando De la Torre
Carnegie Mellon University

donghuang@cmu.edu

hanlongfei@hotmail.com

ftorre@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Nonlinear regression is a common statistical tool to solve
many computer vision applications such as age estimation [21], crowd counting [2] or pose estimation [27, 18].
These methods typically learn a mapping from hand-crafted
features (e.g., Histogram of Oriented Gradients(HoG),
Scale-Invariant Feature Transform(SIFT)) to the desired
output (e.g., facial attributes, pose angles, landmarks). Recently, deep learning architectures (e.g., [33, 35]) directly
learn a convolutional nonlinear mapping from images to
outputs and achieved state-of-the-art results. Despite the
exciting advances in deep learning, it is unclear how optimal these techniques are in the case of naturalistic input data
that is heterogeneous, non-uniformly sampled, or discontin∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

52

41
36
34

Output

25

16

GMR
GPR
Ground-Truth
Regressor

Input

(b)

Output

Nonlinear regression is a common statistical tool to
solve many computer vision problems (e.g., age estimation,
pose estimation). Existing approaches to nonlinear regression fall into two main categories: (1) The universal approach provides an implicit or explicit homogeneous feature
mapping (e.g., kernel ridge regression, Gaussian process
regression, neural networks). These approaches may fail
when data is heterogeneous or discontinuous. (2) Divideand-conquer approaches partition a heterogeneous input
feature space and learn multiple local regressors. However, existing divide-and-conquer approaches fail to deal
with discontinuities between partitions (e.g., Gaussian mixture of regressions) and they cannot guarantee that the partitioned input space will be homogeneously modeled by local regressors (e.g., ordinal regression). To address these
issues, this paper proposes Soft-Margin Mixture of Regressions (SMMR), a method that directly learns homogeneous
partitions of the input space and is able to deal with discontinuities. SMMR outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on three popular computer vision tasks: age estimation,
crowd counting and viewpoint estimation from images.

67

(a)

soft-margin

SMMR
Ground-Truth
Regressor

Input

Figure 1. Nonlinear regression for the problem of age estimation
(number on top of the face image). Gray dots denote data points.
Gray lines denote the ground truth nonlinear regressor between
input features and outputs. The colored dotted curves denote the
predictions for different methods. (a) Gaussian Process Regression (GPR), the red dotted curve and Gaussian Mixture Regression
(GMR), the blue dotted curve. (b) Soft-Margin Mixture of Regressions (SMMR), the green dotted curve (Best viewed in color).

uous. Recall that in many real problems it is labor intensive
to collect well-sampled training data and heuristic to select
training batches [13]; Moreover, the features learned are
difficult to be shared among different databases. To address
these issues in the standard regression and deep learning
methods, novel nonlinear regression approaches are needed
to deal with heterogeneous and discontinuous data.
Existing approaches to nonlinear regression fall into two
main categories: (1) Universal approaches and (2) Divideand-conquer approaches. Universal approaches find a implicit or explicit global non-linear mapping. Examples of
4321
6532

