Harmonic Networks: Deep Translation and Rotation Equivariance
Daniel E. Worrall, Stephan J. Garbin, Daniyar Turmukhambetov and Gabriel J. Brostow
{d.worrall, s.garbin, d.turmukhambetov, g.brostow}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

University College London∗

Abstract
Translating or rotating an input image should not affect the
results of many computer vision tasks. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are already translation equivariant: input image
translations produce proportionate feature map translations.
This is not the case for rotations. Global rotation equivariance
is typically sought through data augmentation, but patch-wise
equivariance is more difficult. We present Harmonic Networks
or H-Nets, a CNN exhibiting equivariance to patch-wise translation and 360-rotation. We achieve this by replacing regular
CNN filters with circular harmonics, returning a maximal
response and orientation for every receptive field patch.
H-Nets use a rich, parameter-efficient and fixed computational complexity representation, and we show that deep feature
maps within the network encode complicated rotational invariants. We demonstrate that our layers are general enough to be
used in conjunction with the latest architectures and techniques,
such as deep supervision and batch normalization. We also
achieve state-of-the-art classification on rotated-MNIST, and
competitive results on other benchmark challenges.

1. Introduction
We tackle the challenge of representing 360◦-rotations
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [19]. Currently,
convolutional layers are constrained by design to map an image
to a feature vector, and translated versions of the image map
to proportionally-translated versions of the same feature vector
[21] (ignoring edge effects)—see Figure 1. However, until now,
if one rotates the CNN input, then the feature vectors do not
necessarily rotate in a meaningful or easy to predict manner.
The sought-after property, directly relating input transformations
to feature vector transformations, is called equivariance.
A special case of equivariance is invariance, where feature
vectors remain constant under all transformations of the input.
This can be a desirable property globally for a model, such as a
classifier, but we should be careful not to restrict all intermediate
levels of processing to be transformation invariant. For example,
∗ http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/harmonicNets/

Figure 1. Patch-wise translation equivariance in CNNs arises from
translational weight tying, so that a translation π of the input image I,
leads to a corresponding translation ψ of the feature maps f(I), where
π 6= ψ in general, due to pooling effects. However, for rotations, CNNs
do not yet have a feature space transformation ψ ‘hard-baked’ into
their structure, and it is complicated to discover what ψ may be, if it
exists at all. Harmonic Networks have a hard-baked representation,
which allows for easier interpretation of feature maps—see Figure 3.

consider detecting a deformable object, such as a butterfly. The
pose of the wings is limited in range, and so there are only certain
poses our detector should normally see. A transformation invariant detector, good at detecting wings, would detect them whether
they were bigger, further apart, rotated, etc., and it would encode
all these cases with the same representation. It would fail to
notice nonsense situations, however, such as a butterfly with
wings rotated past the usual range, because it has thrown that
extra pose information away. An equivariant detector, on the
other hand, does not dispose of local pose information, and so it
hands on a richer and more useful representation to downstream
processes. Equivariance conveys more information about an
input to downstream processes, it also constrains the space of
possible learned models to those that are valid under the rules of
natural image formation [30]. This makes learning more reliable
and helps with generalization. For instance, consider CNNs.
The key insight is that the statistics of natural images, embodied
in the correlations between pixels, are a) invariant to translation,
and b) highly localized. Thus features at every layer in a CNN
are computed on local receptive fields, where weights are shared
15028

