Temporal Action Localization by Structured Maximal Sums
Zehuan Yuan1,2 , Jonathan C. Stroud2 , Tong Lu1 , and Jia Deng2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
We address the problem of temporal action localization in videos. We pose action localization as a structured
prediction over arbitrary-length temporal windows, where
each window is scored as the sum of frame-wise classification scores. Additionally, our model classifies the start,
middle, and end of each action as separate components, allowing our system to explicitly model each action’s temporal evolution and take advantage of informative temporal
dependencies present in this structure. In this framework,
we localize actions by searching for the structured maximal
sum, a problem for which we develop a novel, provablyefficient algorithmic solution. The frame-wise classification
scores are computed using features from a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which are trained end-toend to directly optimize for a novel structured objective. We
evaluate our system on the THUMOS ’14 action detection
benchmark and achieve competitive performance.

1. Introduction
In temporal action localization, we are given a video
and aim to detect if and when a particular action occurs.
Specifically, we answer three questions – “is there an action in the video?”, “when does the action start?”, and
“when does the action end?”. By automating this process,
we can enable people to efficiently search through the millions of hours of video data which are generated each and
every day. However, this remains a challenging problem
for several reasons. Crucially, actions have inherent temporal structure, so we require a representation that can model
the temporal evolution of actions in addition to their instantaneous spatial appearance. Previous methods have either
failed to model temporal evolution, or done so at significant
computational cost [11, 16, 15]. High computational cost
is a significant problem for these methods, because in many
This work was done while Zehuan Yuan was a visiting student at the
University of Michigan.

practical applications, the videos of interest may be arbitrarily long, and methods must gracefully scale to videos that
last hours (e.g. movies, web videos) or even days (e.g. security footage, first-person vision). Finally, extracting powerful features for detecting actions in videos remains an unsolved challenge.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a method that
directly models the temporal evolution of actions, and we
develop a provably-efficient algorithm to perform localization in this framework. Our temporal evolution framework
is based on the observation that all actions have a start, middle, and end, and that these components each have distinct
patterns of appearance and motion. We hypothesize that by
localizing these three action parts separately, we can significantly improve localization performance by enforcing consistent structure in their ordering. Specifically, we model an
action as a temporal window – a variable-length sequence of
video frames – and we assume that each temporal window
begins with a single start frame, followed by one or more
middle frames, and finally a single end frame (Figure 1).
We otherwise impose no restrictive constraints on the temporal sequence of each action. In doing this, we recover
just enough temporal information to take advantage of the
inherent structure present in each action, without requiring
any additional annotations or making unrealistic assumptions about the composition of actions.
At test time, we localize actions by searching for the
structured maximal sum – the sequence of start, middle,
and end frames which has the highest sum of corresponding frame-wise confidence scores. Solving this problem is
non-trivial, as it naı̈vely requires a search over a quadratic
number of possible start-end pairs. However, in Section 4,
we propose a novel dynamic programming algorithm which
provably finds the top-k structured maximal sums for a
video of arbitrary length. We prove that this algorithm is
efficient, and specifically we show that it finds the structured maximal sum in linear time. Our solution is related to
that of the well-studied k-maximal sums problem, for which
similar efficient algorithms exist [2]. Our structured maxi-

3684

