4D Light Field Superpixel and Segmentation∗
Hao Zhu, Qi Zhang, Qing Wang
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P.R. China
qwang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Superpixel segmentation of 2D image has been widely
used in many computer vision tasks. However, limited to
the Gaussian imaging principle, there is not a thorough
segmentation solution to the ambiguity in defocus and occlusion boundary areas. In this paper, we consider the essential element of image pixel, i.e., rays in the light space,
and propose light field superpixel (LFSP) segmentation to
eliminate the ambiguity. The LFSP is first defined mathematically and then a refocus-invariant metric named LFSP
self-similarity is proposed to evaluate the segmentation performance. By building a clique system containing 80 neighbors in light field, a robust refocus-invariant LFSP segmentation algorithm is developed. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real light field datasets demonstrate the advantages over the state-of-the-arts in terms of traditional
evaluation metrics. Additionally the LFSP self-similarity
evaluation under different light field refocus levels shows
the refocus-invariance of the proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Superpixel segmentation is the key fundamental to connect pixel-based low-level vision to object-based high-level
understanding, which aims at grouping similar pixels into
larger and more meaningful regions to increase the accuracy
and speed of post processing [21]. To accomplish a good
over-segmentation, previous works [22, 8, 26, 12, 27, 1, 15]
have built various grouping methods to model the proximity, similarity and good continuation [21] in the classical
Gestalt theory [9]. However, in traditional imaging system
(ideal pinhole model and thin lens model), there inevitably
exist ambiguities in object boundaries where the light rays
emitted from different objects are accumulated, including
vignette, occlusions. These ambiguities may cause image
degradation to disturb superpixel segmentation and further
to decrease the accuracy of object segmentation and recognition.
∗ The work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 61531014,
Grant 61401359 and Grant 61272287.

Figure 1. Light ﬁeld superpixel segmentation on real scene data.
The left image is a 2D slice of LFSP segmentation in the central
view. For each region in the right images, the ﬁrst row shows
the close-up and the second and third rows are the corresponding
segmentations on horizontal and vertical EPIs respectively.

To overcome the ambiguity in traditional superpixel segmentation, we introduce the light ﬁeld superpixel segmentation. The light ﬁeld [13] records the scene information
both in angular and spatial spaces, forming a 4D function
named L(u, v, x, y). The light ﬁeld data can beneﬁt superpixel segmentation on two aspects. First, since each ray is
recorded in light ﬁeld, the ambiguity in object boundaries
can be well analyzed. Second, the multi-view nature of the
light ﬁeld enables the bottom-up grouping not only in the
color and position but also in the structure.
However, 4D light ﬁeld segmentation is still a challenging task. As mentioned in [11], light ﬁeld segmentation
faces two major difﬁculties. First, each segmentation in
light ﬁeld ought to be propagated coherently to preserve the
redundance of the 4D data. Second, although the depth is
embedded in the multi-view images, it is still unavailable,
inconvenient and imperfect to segment the full 4D data.
In this paper, we explore superpixel segmentation on 4D
light ﬁeld. We show that the LFSP can represent the proximity regions better, especially in object boundaries (in Section 3). The traditional superpixel is just a 2D slice of LFSP
by ﬁxing the angular dimensions. Additionally, the angular
segmentation by ﬁxing the spatial dimensions in LFSP coincides with the light ﬁeld occlusion theory in [28]. On the
basis of LFSP deﬁnition, we analyze the characteristics of

6384

