Learning Detailed Face Reconstruction from a Single Image
Elad Richardson1
Matan Sela1
Roy Or-El2
Ron Kimmel1
1
Department of Computer Science, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
{eladrich,matansel,ron}@cs.technion.ac.il

royorel@cs.washington.edu

Figure 1: Results of the proposed network. Reconstructed geometries are shown next to the corresponding input images.

Abstract
Reconstructing the detailed geometric structure of a face
from a given image is a key to many computer vision and
graphics applications, such as motion capture and reenactment. The reconstruction task is challenging as human
faces vary extensively when considering expressions, poses,
textures, and intrinsic geometries. While many approaches
tackle this complexity by using additional data to reconstruct the face of a single subject, extracting facial surface
from a single image remains a difficult problem. As a result, single-image based methods can usually provide only
a rough estimate of the facial geometry. In contrast, we propose to leverage the power of convolutional neural networks
to produce a highly detailed face reconstruction from a single image. For this purpose, we introduce an end-to-end
CNN framework which derives the shape in a coarse-to-fine
fashion. The proposed architecture is composed of two main
blocks, a network that recovers the coarse facial geometry
(CoarseNet), followed by a CNN that refines the facial features of that geometry (FineNet). The proposed networks
are connected by a novel layer which renders a depth image
given a mesh in 3D. Unlike object recognition and detection
problems, there are no suitable datasets for training CNNs
to perform face geometry reconstruction. Therefore, our
training regime begins with a supervised phase, based on
synthetic images, followed by an unsupervised phase that
uses only unconstrained facial images. The accuracy and
robustness of the proposed model is demonstrated by both
qualitative and quantitative evaluation tests.

1. Introduction
Faces, with all their complexities and vast number of
degrees of freedom, allow us to communicate and express
ourselves through expressions, mimics, and gestures. Facial muscles enable us to express our emotions and feelings, while facial geometric features determine one’s identity. However, the flexibility of these qualities makes the
recovery of facial geometry from a flat image a challenge.
Moreover, additional ambiguities arise as the projection of a
face onto an image depends also on its texture and material
properties, lighting conditions, and viewing direction.
Various methods mitigate this uncertainty by using additional data such as a large photo collection of the same subject [36, 35, 21, 28, 33], continuous video frames [44, 40,
5, 11] or a rough depth map [44, 18]. In many cases, however, we only have access to a single facial image. In this
setup, common schemes can be divided to 3D morphable
model (3DMM) techniques [3, 4], template-based methods
[20, 15] and data-driven approaches [26, 41, 34].
Here, we propose an end-to-end neural network for reconstructing a detailed facial surface in 3D from a single
image. At the core of our method is the idea of breaking
the reconstruction problem into two phases, each solved by
a dedicated neural network architecture. First, we introduce
CoarseNet, a network for recovering the coarse facial geometry as well as the pose of the face directly from the image. To train CoarseNet, a synthetic dataset of facial images
with their matching face geometry and pose is synthetically
generated. The rough facial geometries are modeled using
a 3DMM [3], which provides a compact representation that
can be recovered using the proposed network. However,

1259

