Outlier-Robust Tensor PCA
Pan Zhou∗
∗

Jiashi Feng∗

National University of Singapore, Singapore

pzhou@u.nus.edu

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Low-rank tensor analysis is important for various real
applications in computer vision. However, existing methods focus on recovering a low-rank tensor contaminated
by Gaussian or gross sparse noise and hence cannot effectively handle outliers that are common in practical tensor
data. To solve this issue, we propose an outlier-robust tensor principle component analysis (OR-TPCA) method for
simultaneous low-rank tensor recovery and outlier detection. For intrinsically low-rank tensor observations with arbitrary outlier corruption, OR-TPCA is the first method that
has provable performance guarantee for exactly recovering
the tensor subspace and detecting outliers under mild conditions. Since tensor data are naturally high-dimensional
and multi-way, we further develop a fast randomized algorithm that requires small sampling size yet can substantially
accelerate OR-TPCA without performance drop. Experimental results on four tasks: outlier detection, clustering,
semi-supervised and supervised learning, clearly demonstrate the advantages of our method.

1. Introduction
In this work, we consider outlier-robust tensor principle
component analysis (OR-TPCA) – a new problem for tensor
data analysis. As shown in Fig. 1, suppose we are given a
3-way tensor datum X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 that is a mixture of
clean low-rank tensor L0 and sparse outlier noise E 0 :
X = L0 + E 0 .
OR-TPCA aims to address such a problem, i.e. how to exactly recover the low-rank tensor L0 (or its column space)
in presence of outliers. This problem is important in many
real applications, such as image/video denoising and inpainting [1, 2], data mining [3], collaborative ﬁltering [4],
text analysis [5], etc. On one hand, recent research [6]
shows that high dimensional tensor data of interest, such as
videos and image collections, are usually intrinsically lowrank or approximately so. Thus, low-rank tensor data analysis is seeing increasingly more applications. On the other
hand, outliers or sample-speciﬁc corruptions are common
in real data due to sensor failures, malicious tampering, or

Outlier-corrupted tensor

Intrinsically low-rank tensor

Outlier tensor

Figure 1: The problem solved by this work: isolate the clean
low-rank component from outliers for an outlier-corrupted
tensor.
other system errors [7, 8]. In these cases, large errors concentrate only on a number of samples or several parts of
data. These two factors together lead to the problem of recovering low-rank tensor data from outlier corruptions. But,
to date, most low-rank tensor analysis methods [2, 9–13]
simply assume the noise to be Gaussian or sparse and thus
cannot handle outliers or sample-speciﬁc corruptions. ORTPCA substantially generalizes outlier-robust matrix PCA
(OR-PCA) problems [7, 14, 15] by not only considering 2way data (matrix) and providing wider applications.
In this work, we develop the ﬁrst algorithmic solution
to this problem both theoretically and practically. We perform robust low-rank analysis on the raw tensor data directly and propose an outlier-robust tensor principle component analysis (OR-TPCA) method (sharing the name with
the problem) which recovers the tensor subspace and detect outliers through polynomial-time convex optimization.
We also provide theoretical performance guarantee for ORTPCA: under mild conditions, OR-TPCA can recover the
column space of L0 and detect outliers exactly.
Moreover, since tensor data are naturally multi-way and
high-dimensional, e.g. long video sequences and millionsof-image collection, algorithm efﬁciency is critical in practical applications. Therefore, we develop a fast OR-TPCA
algorithm. It ﬁrst randomly samples a small fraction of samples and exactly recovers the underlying subspace from the
sampled data that is also shared by the entire data. Thus,
the recovered low-rank subspace is the desired one, and by
utilizing it, outliers in remaining data can also be effectively
detected. We further prove that when the size of randomly
sampled data is lower bounded by a positive constant which
is much less than the overall data number, fast OR-TPCA

2263

