Action-Decision Networks for Visual Tracking with Deep Reinforcement
Learning
Sangdoo Yun1 Jongwon Choi1 Youngjoon Yoo2 Kimin Yun3 and Jin Young Choi1
ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng., Seoul National University, South Korea
2
Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul National University, South Korea
3
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), South Korea
1

{yunsd101, i0you200, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, jwchoi.pil@gmail.com, kimin.yun@etri.re.kr

Abstract

…

…

This paper proposes a novel tracker which is controlled
by sequentially pursuing actions learned by deep reinforcement learning. In contrast to the existing trackers using
deep networks, the proposed tracker is designed to achieve
a light computation as well as satisfactory tracking accuracy in both location and scale. The deep network to control actions is pre-trained using various training sequences
and fine-tuned during tracking for online adaptation to
target and background changes. The pre-training is done
by utilizing deep reinforcement learning as well as supervised learning. The use of reinforcement learning enables
even partially labeled data to be successfully utilized for
semi-supervised learning. Through evaluation of the OTB
dataset, the proposed tracker is validated to achieve a competitive performance that is three times faster than stateof-the-art, deep network–based trackers. The fast version of
the proposed method, which operates in real-time on GPU,
outperforms the state-of-the-art real-time trackers.

…

…

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the fundamental problems in
the computer vision field. Finding the location of the target object is difficult because of several tracking obstacles
such as motion blur, occlusion, illumination change, and
background clutter. Conventional tracking methods [17, 42,
7, 15, 13] follow target objects using a low-level handcrafted feature. Although they achieve computational efficiency and comparable tracking performance, they are still
limited in solving the above-mentioned obstacles because
of their insufficient feature representation.
Recently, tracking methods [35, 14, 24] using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been proposed for
robust tracking and vastly improved tracking performance
with the help of rich feature representation. Several algo-

Figure 1: The concept of the proposed visual tracking controlled by sequential actions. The first column shows the initial location of the target, and the second and third columns
show the iterative action flow to find the target bounding
box in each frame. The sequential actions selected by the
proposed method control the tracker to iteratively move the
initial bounding box (blue) to the target bounding box (red)
in each frame.
rithms [35, 14] utilize pre-trained CNNs on a large-scale
classification dataset such as ImageNet [26]. However, due
to the gap between classification and tracking problem, the
pre-trained CNN is not sufficient to solve the difficult tracking issues. Nam et al. [24] proposed a tracking-by-detection
algorithm with CNNs trained with tracking video datasets
such as [40, 20] and achieved the better performance compared to the traditional trackers. However, this approach
usually focuses on improving the ability to distinguish the
target and background using the appearance model and may
thus overlook the following problems: (1) inefficient search
algorithms that explore the region of interest and select the
best candidate by matching with the tracking model, and (2)
the need for a large amount of labeled tracking sequences
for training and the inability to utilize unlabeled frames in a
semi-supervised case.
12711

