Deep Learning Human Mind for Automated Visual Classification
C. Spampinato, S. Palazzo, I. Kavasidis, D. Giordano
Department of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering - PeRCeiVe Lab
Viale Andrea Doria, 6 - 95125 Catania
http://perceive.dieei.unict.it

N. Souly, M. Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision – University of Central Florida
4328 Scorpius St., HEC 245D Orlando, FL 32816-2365
http://crcv.ucf.edu/

Abstract
What if we could effectively read the mind and transfer
human visual capabilities to computer vision methods? In
this paper, we aim at addressing this question by developing
the first visual object classifier driven by human brain signals. In particular, we employ EEG data evoked by visual
object stimuli combined with Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) to learn a discriminative brain activity manifold of
visual categories in a reading the mind effort. Afterward,
we transfer the learned capabilities to machines by training
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)–based regressor
to project images onto the learned manifold, thus allowing
machines to employ human brain–based features for automated visual classification. We use a 128-channel EEG with
active electrodes to record brain activity of several subjects
while looking at images of 40 ImageNet object classes. The
proposed RNN-based approach for discriminating object
classes using brain signals reaches an average accuracy of
about 83%, which greatly outperforms existing methods attempting to learn EEG visual object representations. As for
automated object categorization, our human brain–driven
approach obtains competitive performance, comparable to
those achieved by powerful CNN models and it is also able
to generalize over different visual datasets.

1. Introduction

Humans show excellent performance, still unreachable by
machines, in interpreting visual scenes. Despite the recent
rediscovery of Convolutional Neural Networks has led to a
significant performance improvement in automated visual
classification, their generalization capabilities are not at the

human level, since they learn a discriminative feature space,
which strictly depends on the employed training dataset
rather than on more general principles. More specifically,
the first-layer features of a CNN appear to be generalizable
across different datasets, as they are similar to Gabor filters and color blobs, while the last-layer features are very
specific to a particular dataset or task. In humans, instead,
the process behind visual object recognition stands at the
interface between perception, i.e., how objects appear visually in terms of shape, colors, etc. (all features that can be
modeled with first CNN layers) and conception, which involves higher cognitive processes that have never been exploited. Several cognitive neuroscience studies [12, 16, 17]
have investigated which parts of visual cortex and brain are
responsible for such cognitive processes, but, so far, there
is no clear solution. Of course, this reflects on the difficulties of cognition-based automated methods to perform
visual tasks.
We argue that one possible solution is to act in a reverse
engineering manner, i.e., by analyzing human brain activity – recorded through neurophysiology (EEG/MEG) and
neuroimaging techniques (e.g., fMRI) – to identify the feature space employed by humans for visual classification.
In relation to this, it is has been acknowledged that brain
activity recordings contain information about visual object
categories [6, 26, 19, 4, 3, 10, 20]. Understanding EEG
data evoked by specific stimuli has been the goal of brain
computer interfaces (BCI) research for years. Nevertheless,
BCIs aim mainly at classifying or detecting specific brain
signals to allow direct-actuated control of machines for disabled people. In this paper, we want to take a great leap forward with respect to classic BCI approaches, i.e., we aim at
exploring a new and direct form of human involvement (a
new vision of the “human-based computation” strategy) for
automated visual classification. The underlying idea is to

6809

