The Geometry of First-Returning Photons for Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
Chia-Yin Tsai† , Kiriakos N. Kutulakos‡ , Srinivasa G. Narasimhan† , and Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan†
†
‡
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Toronto

Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging utilizes the full 5D
light transient measurements to reconstruct scenes beyond
the camera’s field of view. Mathematically, this requires
solving an elliptical tomography problem that unmixes the
shape and albedo from spatially-multiplexed measurements
of the NLOS scene. In this paper, we propose a new approach for NLOS imaging by studying the properties of
first-returning photons from three-bounce light paths. We
show that the times of flight of first-returning photons are
dependent only on the geometry of the NLOS scene and
each observation is almost always generated from a single
NLOS scene point. Exploiting these properties, we derive
a space carving algorithm for NLOS scenes. In addition,
by assuming local planarity, we derive an algorithm to localize NLOS scene points in 3D and estimate their surface
normals. Our methods do not require either the full transient measurements or solving the hard elliptical tomography problem. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods through simulations as well as real data captured from
a SPAD sensor.

1. Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging [8, 14] refers to estimation of the shape, texture, and reflectance of scene points
that lie beyond the field of view of an imaging system.
There are numerous approaches for estimating the shape of
the scene within the field of view of the imaging system. In
contrast, the NLOS shape estimation is a challenging task
requiring capture and analysis of photons that have traveled
beyond the line of sight (LOS). This is typically achieved by
measuring the so-called 5D light transient transport tensor
which captures light propagation — from the LOS scene
onto the NLOS scene and back — at ultra-high temporal
resolutions (typically, in picoseconds).

1.1. NLOS imaging via the 5D light transient
Suppose that the scene which we seek to recover consists
of two components — the LOS scene L that can be illuminated and imaged by the imaging system, and the NLOS

LOS scene L

sensing point

sj
lk
illumination point

field of view
NLOS scene N

co-located laser/camera

occluder

Figure 1. Non-line-of-sight imaging setup. NLOS imaging uses
properties measured in LOS L to infer the properties of the NLOS
scene N . In this paper, our goal is to use the first-returning photon
associated with illuminating point lk and sensing point sj to infer
shape of the NLOS scene.

scene N , which is beyond the field of view of the imaging
and illumination system (see Fig. 1); here, we assume that
L and N are simply collections of 3D points.
Consider an imaging system consisting of an ultra-fast
laser, capable of emitting an optical pulse with an extremely short duration, and an ultra-fast camera; we will
discuss specific approaches to realize such setups in Section 2. Given two points lk , sj ∈ L (see Fig. 1), we define
L(t; lk , sj ) as the light transient observed at sj while illuminating lk with a dirac-delta. We refer to
{L(t; lk , sj ) | ∀ lk , sj ∈ L}

as the 5D light transient transport tensor [13, 10] since it
encodes one degree of freedom along time and two angular
degrees, each, for both illumination and sensing.
For simplicity of explanation, lets assume that the LOS
scene L is convex (no interreflections of photons within
LOS). When lk 6= sj , the convexity of L implies that there
are no single- or two-bounce light paths from the laser to
the camera; in fact, there are no light paths from the laser
to the camera that involve only LOS scene points. Hence,
a non-zero intensity in the light transient L(t; lk , sj ) en17216

