Wetness and Color from A Single Multispectral Image
Mihoko Shimano†
†

Hiroki Okawa‡

National Institute of Informatics
{miho,bise-r,imarik}@nii.ac.jp

Yuta Asano‡
‡

Ryoma Bise†

Ko Nishino†⋆

Tokyo Institute of Technology

⋆

{okawa.h.ac,asano.y.ac}@m.titech.ac.jp

Drexel University
kon@drexel.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recognition of surface conditions of scene constituents,
not just what they are (object recognition) and where they
are (place recognition) but whether they are, for instance,
clean, smooth, rusty, or soft, is vital for computer vision to
succeed in the real world. Wetness is one of the key surface conditions that is critical to robustly recognize in computer vision applications. Water or other liquids absorbed
by the surface cause muddy trails that humanoid robots may
have to carefully walk over, slippery roads after rain for autonomous vehicles to brake earlier, and fruits to maintain
their freshness for us to consume. The degree of wetness

Water absorption
wet
dry

Intensity (normalized)

Visual recognition of wet surfaces and their degrees of
wetness is important for many computer vision applications. It can inform slippery spots on a road to autonomous
vehicles, muddy areas of a trail to humanoid robots, and
the freshness of groceries to us. In the past, monochromatic
appearance change, the fact that surfaces darken when wet,
has been modeled to recognize wet surfaces. In this paper,
we show that color change, particularly in its spectral behavior, carries rich information about a wet surface. We
derive an analytical spectral appearance model of wet surfaces that expresses the characteristic spectral sharpening
due to multiple scattering and absorption in the surface. We
derive a novel method for estimating key parameters of this
spectral appearance model, which enables the recovery of
the original surface color and the degree of wetness from
a single observation. Applied to a multispectral image, the
method estimates the spatial map of wetness together with
the dry spectral distribution of the surface. To our knowledge, this work is the first to model and leverage the spectral characteristics of wet surfaces to revert its appearance.
We conduct comprehensive experimental validation with a
number of wet real surfaces. The results demonstrate the
accuracy of our model and the effectiveness of our method
for surface wetness and color estimation.

Imari Sato†

400

500

600

700

800

900

Wavelength [nm]

Figure 1: Example spectral distributions of dry and wet
surface points (red and blue curves, respectively). The
wet spectral distribution shows characteristic darkening (decrease in magnitude) and spectral sharpening (narrowing of
distribution, i.e., contrast increase). The spectral energy is
normalized for better visualization; the actual magnitude is
signiﬁcantly higher than that of the wet surface across the
spectrum. We derive a novel spectral appearance model that
accurately encodes both of these characteristics of wet surfaces and use it to estimate wetness and color from a single
multispectral image.
directly reﬂects the desirable or undesirable condition of
the surface: the more the muddier and the fresher. Can we
estimate the wetness of a surface just from its looks? In
this paper, we derive a rigorous spectral appearance model
for water-wet surfaces. Our model and method for surface
wetness and color recovery, however, can be applied to any
liquid if we know its spectral behavior.
Making a surface wet causes characteristic appearance
change. As shown in Figure 1, there are two fundamental
components to this appearance change. The ﬁrst is the decreased intensity across the spectrum, whose magnitude is
proportional to the degree of wetness. This monochromatic
characteristic of wet surface appearance has been modeled
13967

