Learning Deep CNN Denoiser Prior for Image Restoration
Kai Zhang1,2 , Wangmeng Zuo1,∗, Shuhang Gu2 , Lei Zhang2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
cskaizhang@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn, shuhanggu@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Model-based optimization methods and discriminative
learning methods have been the two dominant strategies for
solving various inverse problems in low-level vision. Typically, those two kinds of methods have their respective merits and drawbacks, e.g., model-based optimization methods
are flexible for handling different inverse problems but are
usually time-consuming with sophisticated priors for the
purpose of good performance; in the meanwhile, discriminative learning methods have fast testing speed but their
application range is greatly restricted by the specialized
task. Recent works have revealed that, with the aid of variable splitting techniques, denoiser prior can be plugged in
as a modular part of model-based optimization methods to
solve other inverse problems (e.g., deblurring). Such an integration induces considerable advantage when the denoiser is obtained via discriminative learning. However, the
study of integration with fast discriminative denoiser prior
is still lacking. To this end, this paper aims to train a set of
fast and effective CNN (convolutional neural network) denoisers and integrate them into model-based optimization
method to solve other inverse problems. Experimental results demonstrate that the learned set of denoisers can not
only achieve promising Gaussian denoising results but also
can be used as prior to deliver good performance for various low-level vision applications.

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) has been a long-standing problem for its highly practical value in various low-level vision
applications [1, 9, 47]. In general, the purpose of image
restoration is to recover the latent clean image x from its
degraded observation y = Hx + v, where H is a degradation matrix, v is additive white Gaussian noise of standard
deviation σ. By specifying different degradation matrices,
one can correspondingly get different IR tasks. Three clas∗ Corresponding author.

sical IR tasks would be image denoising when H is an identity matrix, image deblurring when H is a blurring operator,
image super-resolution when H is a composite operator of
blurring and down-sampling.
Since IR is an ill-posed inverse problem, the prior which
is also called regularization needs to be adopted to constraint the solution space [50, 66]. From a Bayesian perspective, the solution x̂ can be obtained by solving a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) problem,
x̂ = arg max log p(y|x) + log p(x)

(1)

x

where log p(y|x) represents the log-likelihood of observation y, log p(x) delivers the prior of x and is independent
of y. More formally, Eqn. (1) can be reformulated as
x̂ = arg min
x

1
ky − Hxk2 + λΦ(x)
2

(2)

where the solution minimizes an energy function composed
of a fidelity term 12 ky − Hxk2 , a regularization term Φ(x)
and a trade-off parameter λ. The fidelity term guarantees
the solution accords with the degradation process, while the
regularization term enforces desired property of the output.
Generally, the methods to solve Eqn. (2) can be divided into two main categories, i.e., model-based optimization
methods and discriminative learning methods. The modelbased optimization methods aim to directly solve Eqn. (2)
with some optimization algorithms which usually involve a
time-consuming iterative inference. On the contrary, discriminative learning methods try to learn the prior parameters Θ and a compact inference through an optimization of
a loss function on a training set containing degraded-clean
image pairs [2, 13, 51, 55, 57]. The objective is given by
1
ky−Hxk2 +λΦ(x; Θ)
2
(3)
Because the inference is guided by the MAP estimation, we
refer to such methods as MAP inference guided discriminative learning methods. By replacing the MAP inference
with a predefined nonlinear function x̂ = f (y, H; Θ), one
min ℓ(x̂, x)
Θ

3929

s.t.

x̂ = arg min
x

