Position Tracking for Virtual Reality Using Commodity WiFi
Manikanta Kotaru, Sachin Katti
Stanford University
{mkotaru, skatti}@stanford.edu

Abstract

WiCapture

Ground truth

1. Introduction
Immersive experiences like virtual reality (VR) require
accurate tracking of the headset and other accessories like
hand-motion controllers. Current commercial tracking systems like Oculus Rift [4] and HTC Vive [1] are outside-in
where the tracking is performed using infrastructure external to the VR accessories. The external infrastructure is specialized and typically uses infrared (IR) cameras along with
sensors on the headset to perform the tracking. These systems are very accurate but have the following limitations:
• They require installing specialized hardware and dedicated infrastructure wherever user wants to experience
VR. So if a user wishes to use VR headsets anywhere
in her home, one would need IR cameras everywhere.
• These systems are not occlusion resistant. For example, if the camera is blocked by furniture or if the user
turns away from the camera, then the tracking fails.
• These systems have limited range, typically around 2
m in front of the camera [8].
A competing technology to provide position tracking is
inside-out position tracking found in systems like the Microsoft Hololens [3]. These systems use cameras (both

z (cm)

2

Today, experiencing virtual reality (VR) is a cumbersome
experience which either requires dedicated infrastructure
like infrared cameras to track the headset and hand-motion
controllers (e.g. Oculus Rift, HTC Vive), or provides only
3-DoF (Degrees of Freedom) tracking which severely limits
the user experience (e.g. Samsung Gear VR). To truly enable VR everywhere, we need position tracking to be available as a ubiquitous service. This paper presents WiCapture, a novel approach which leverages commodity WiFi
infrastructure, which is ubiquitous today, for tracking purposes. We prototype WiCapture using off-the-shelf WiFi radios and show that it achieves an accuracy of 0.88 cm compared to sophisticated infrared-based tracking systems like
the Oculus, while providing much higher range, resistance
to occlusion, ubiquity and ease of deployment.

0
−2
1 0−1

0

5

10

15

20

x (cm)

y (cm)

Figure 1. Solid blue path estimated by WiCapture is compared
against the dotted red ground truth trajectory.

RGB and depth sensing) and implement vision based tracking algorithms on the headset. These systems are both accurate and infrastructure-free, however they come with certain limitations. Specifically, they significantly increase the
complexity of the headset since they need to have several
cameras as well as complex algorithms running on the headset to provide tracking. Further they are not robust, tracking fails in environments with transparent or texture-less
objects (e.g. a white wall) [63]. Finally and most importantly, these systems cannot be used for tracking peripherals
such as hand-motion controllers; the complexity of insideout tracking is too high to be implemented on such peripherals which are meant to be lightweight and cheap.
In this paper, we present WiCapture, a novel VR position tracking system which addresses the above limitations
of existing systems. WiCapture is a WiFi based position
tracking system. Headsets transmit standard WiFi packets
which are received by standard WiFi access points (APs).
The WiFi APs receive metadata from each WiFi packet reception called Channel State Information (CSI) which encodes the transformation the environment has induced upon
the transmitted WiFi signals. WiCapture invents novel algorithms that mine the CSI metadata to recover the position
of the headset accurately. It has the following properties:
• WiCapture does not require special hardware, it uses
commodity APs that can be bought in retail stores.
• WiCapture is occlusion resistant, it continues to work
even when the APs and headsets are occluded due to
furniture or other objects in between.

68

