Forecasting Interactive Dynamics of Pedestrians with Fictitious Play
Wei-Chiu Ma1 De-An Huang2 Namhoon Lee3 Kris M. Kitani4
1

MIT

2

Stanford

3

Oxford

Abstract
We develop predictive models of pedestrian dynamics by
encoding the coupled nature of multi-pedestrian interaction
using game theory and deep learning-based visual analysis
to estimate person-specific behavior parameters. We focus
on predictive models since they are important for developing interactive autonomous systems (e.g., autonomous cars,
home robots, smart homes) that can understand different
human behavior and pre-emptively respond to future human
actions. Building predictive models for multi-pedestrian interactions however, is very challenging due to two reasons:
(1) the dynamics of interaction are complex interdependent
processes, where the decision of one person can affect others; and (2) dynamics are variable, where each person may
behave differently (e.g., an older person may walk slowly
while the younger person may walk faster). We address
these challenges by utilizing concepts from game theory
to model the intertwined decision making process of multiple pedestrians and use visual classifiers to learn a mapping from pedestrian appearance to behavior parameters.
We evaluate our proposed model on several public multiple pedestrian interaction video datasets. Results show that
our strategic planning model predicts and explains human
interactions 25% better when compared to a state-of-the-art
activity forecasting method.

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to imitate the predictive abilities of human cognition, by building a predictive model
that takes into account complex reasoning about: (1) the
interdependent interactions of multiple pedestrians and (2)
important visual cues needed to infer individual behavior
patterns. Consider the complexities of predicting the trajectories of multiple pedestrians from a single image, as depicted in Figure 1 where four pedestrians are walking on
the street. Given this single image, what would one forecast as their future trajectories? A simple prediction would
be that all people will walk in a straight line (i.e., the minimum distance) to their goal as in Figure 1(b). This strategy, however, might lead to collisions between pedestrians

4

CMU

(a) Input Image

(b) Prediction 1

Old
Man

Old
Woman

Young
Man

Young
Man

(c) Prediction 2

(d) Our Prediction

Figure 1. Can you forecast their future behavior? A single image
contains rich information about future trajectories.

(e.g., the young man (yellow) and the older couple (green)
may collide). A more thoughtful model might consider the
possibility that one or more pedestrians will alter their trajectory based on their prediction of other pedestrians (Figure 1(c)). Going further, a more informed model might attempt to take into account the observation that on average,
elderly couples tend to walk at a slower rate, while a young
man is more likely walk quickly and take pre-emptive maneuvers (Figure 1(d)). Taking these observations into consideration, we might hypothesize that the younger man is
more likely to exemplify preemptive avoidance behaviors
and weave through the two pedestrians. This illustration
serves to highlight the complex reasoning that is involved
in predicting the walking trajectories of several people given
limited amount of information (in our scenario a single image). Our goal is to mimic – computationally – this ability
to reason about the dynamics of interactive social processes.
Developing computational models for interactive dynamics among humans, however, is an extremely challenging task. This requires a deep understanding of the complex
and often subtle norms of human interactions. Pioneering
works have attempted to address this by parameterizing human behaviors with models such as social forces [13, 30],
potential fields [2], and flow fields [3, 4]. Yet most of these
works are performing either long-term prediction in static
1774

