Lifting from the Deep: Convolutional 3D Pose Estimation from a Single Image
Denis Tome
University College London
D.Tome@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Chris Russell
The Turing Institute and
The University of Edinburgh
crussell@turing.ac.uk

Lourdes Agapito
University College London
l.agapito@cs.ucl.ac.uk

http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/liftingFromTheDeep

Abstract
We propose a unified formulation for the problem of
3D human pose estimation from a single raw RGB image
that reasons jointly about 2D joint estimation and 3D pose
reconstruction to improve both tasks. We take an integrated approach that fuses probabilistic knowledge of 3D
human pose with a multi-stage CNN architecture and uses
the knowledge of plausible 3D landmark locations to refine
the search for better 2D locations. The entire process is
trained end-to-end, is extremely efficient and obtains stateof-the-art results on Human3.6M outperforming previous
approaches both on 2D and 3D errors.

1. Introduction
Estimating the full 3D pose of a human from a single
RGB image is one of the most challenging problems in
computer vision. It involves tackling two inherently ambiguous tasks. First, the 2D location of the human joints, or
landmarks, must be found in the image, a problem plagued
with ambiguities due to the large variations in visual appearance caused by different camera viewpoints, external
and self occlusions or changes in clothing, body shape or
illumination. Next, lifting the coordinates of the 2D landmarks into 3D from a single image is still an ill-posed problem – the space of possible 3D poses consistent with the
2D landmark locations of a human, is infinite. Finding the
correct 3D pose that matches the image requires injecting
additional information usually in the form of 3D geometric
pose priors and temporal or structural constraints.
We propose a new joint approach to 2D landmark detection and full 3D pose estimation from a single RGB image that takes advantage of reasoning jointly about the estimation of 2D and 3D landmark locations to improve both
tasks. We propose a novel CNN architecture that learns to
combine the image appearance based predictions provided
by convolutional-pose-machine style 2D landmark detectors [44], with the geometric 3D skeletal information en-

coded in a novel pretrained model of 3D human pose.
Information captured by the 3D human pose model is
embedded in the CNN architecture as an additional layer
that lifts 2D landmark coordinates into 3D while imposing that they lie on the space of physically plausible poses.
The advantage of integrating the output proposed by the 2D
landmark location predictors – based purely on image appearance – with the 3D pose predicted by a probabilistic
model, is that the 2D landmark location estimates are improved by guaranteeing that they satisfy the anatomical 3D
constraints encapsulated in the human 3D pose model. In
this way, both tasks clearly benefit from each other.
A further advantage of our approach is that the 2D and
3D training data sources may be completely independent.
The deep architecture only needs that images are annotated
with 2D poses, not 3D poses. The human pose model is
trained independently and exclusively from 3D mocap data.
This decoupling between 2D and 3D training data presents
a huge advantage since we can augment the training sets
completely independently. For instance we can take advantage of extra 2D pose annotations without the need for 3D
ground truth or extend the 3D training data to further mocap
datasets without the need for synchronized 2D images.
Our contribution: In this work, we show how to integrate
a prelearned 3D human pose model directly within a novel
CNN architecture (illustrated in figure 1) for joint 2D landmark and 3D human pose estimation. In contrast to preexisting methods, we do not take a pipeline approach that
takes 2D landmarks as given. Instead, we show how such
a model can be used as part of the CNN architecture itself,
and how the architecture can learn to use physically plausible 3D reconstructions in its search for better 2D landmark
locations. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on
the Human3.6M dataset both in terms of 2D and 3D errors.

2. Related Work
We first describe methods that assume that 2D joint locations are provided as input and focus on solving the 3D

2500

