Cross-View Image Matching for Geo-localization in Urban Environments
Yicong Tian, Chen Chen, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
tyc.cong@gmail.com, chenchen870713@gmail.com, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Reference database (geo-tagged bird’s eye ie images)

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of cross-view
image geo-localization. Specifically, we aim to estimate
the GPS location of a query street view image by finding the matching images in a reference database of geotagged bird’s eye view images, or vice versa. To this end,
we present a new framework for cross-view image geolocalization by taking advantage of the tremendous success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in image classification and object detection. First, we employ
the Faster R-CNN [16] to detect buildings in the query and
reference images. Next, for each building in the query image, we retrieve the k nearest neighbors from the reference
buildings using a Siamese network trained on both positive
matching image pairs and negative pairs. To find the correct
NN for each query building, we develop an efficient multiple nearest neighbors matching method based on dominant
sets. We evaluate the proposed framework on a new dataset
that consists of pairs of street view and bird’s eye view images. Experimental results show that the proposed method
achieves better geo-localization accuracy than other approaches and is able to generalize to images at unseen locations.

1. Introduction
Geo-localization is the problem of determining the realworld geographic location (e.g. GPS coordinates) of each
pixel of a query image. It plays a key role in a wide range
of real-world applications such as target tracking, change
monitoring, navigation, etc. Traditional geo-localization
approaches deal with satellite and aerial imagery that usually involve different image sensing platforms and require
accurate sensor modeling and pixel-wise geo-reference image, e.g. digital ortho-quad (DOQ), [29] and Digital Elevation Map (DEM). Recently, image geo-localization methods
have been devised for coarse image level geo-localization
instead of pixel-wise geo-localization pursued in traditional
geo-localization methods. In particular, this problem has
attracted considerable attention due to the availability of

…
Find match

Query street view image
GPS location?

…

(Latitude, Longitude) = (40.441426，-80.003586)

Figure 1. An example of geo-localization by cross-view image
matching. The GPS location of a street view image is predicted
by finding its match in a database of geo-tagged bird’s eye view
images.

ground-level geo-tagged imagery [8, 27, 21, 28, 19, 18].
In these methods, the geo-location of a query image is obtained by finding its matching reference images from the
same view (e.g. ground-level Google Street View images),
based on the assumption that a reference dataset consisting of geo-tagged images is available. However, such geotagged reference data may not be available. For example,
ground-level images of some geo-graphical locations do not
have geo-location information.
An alternative is to predict the geo-location of a query
image by finding its matching reference images from some
other views. For example, predict the geo-location of a
query street view image based on a reference database of
bird’s eye view images (see Figure 1). This becomes a
cross-view image matching problem, which is very challenging because of the following reasons. 1) Images taken
from different viewpoints are visually different. 2) The images may be captured with different lighting conditions and
during different seasons. 3) The mapping from one viewpoint to the other may be highly non-linear and very complex. 4) Traditional low-level features like SIFT, HOG, etc.
may be very different for cross-view images as shown in
Figure 2.
Historically, viewpoint invariance has been an active area
of research in computer vision. Some of this work was
inspired by classic work of Biederman on recognition-by-

3608

