Bidirectional Multirate Reconstruction for Temporal Modeling in Videos
Linchao Zhu
Zhongwen Xu
Yi Yang
CAI, University of Technology Sydney
{zhulinchao7, zhongwen.s.xu, yee.i.yang}@gmail.com

Abstract

Fixed rate
Multiple rates

Despite the recent success of neural networks in image feature learning, a major problem in the video domain is the lack of sufficient labeled data for learning to
model temporal information. In this paper, we propose an
unsupervised temporal modeling method that learns from
untrimmed videos. The speed of motion varies constantly,
e.g., a man may run quickly or slowly. We therefore train
a Multirate Visual Recurrent Model (MVRM) by encoding frames of a clip with different intervals. This learning
process makes the learned model more capable of dealing
with motion speed variance. Given a clip sampled from a
video, we use its past and future neighboring clips as the
temporal context, and reconstruct the two temporal transitions, i.e., present→past transition and present→future
transition, reflecting the temporal information in different
views. The proposed method exploits the two transitions simultaneously by incorporating a bidirectional reconstruction which consists of a backward reconstruction and a forward reconstruction. We apply the proposed method to two
challenging video tasks, i.e., complex event detection and
video captioning, in which it achieves state-of-the-art performance. Notably, our method generates the best single
feature for event detection with a relative improvement of
10.4% on the MEDTest-13 dataset and achieves the best
performance in video captioning across all evaluation metrics on the YouTube2Text dataset.

1. Introduction
Temporal information plays a key role in video representation modeling. In earlier years, hand-crafted features,
e.g., Dense Trajectories (DT) and improved Dense Trajectories (iDT) [46, 47], use local descriptors along trajectories to model video motion structures. Despite achieving
promising performance, DT and iDT are very expensive
to extract, due to the heavy computational cost of optical
flows and it takes about a week to extract iDT features for
8,000 hours of web videos using 1,000 CPU cores [49].
Deep visual features have recently achieved significantly

Figure 1. Frame sampling rate should vary in accordance with different motion speed. In this example, only the last three frames
have fast motion. The dashed arrow corresponds to a fixed sampling rate, while the solid arrow corresponds to multiple rates.

better performance in image classification and detection
tasks than hand-crafted features at an efficient processing
speed [23, 14, 12]. However, learning a video representation on top of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (ConveNets) remains a challenging problem. Two-stream ConvNet [36] is groundbreaking in learning video motion structures over short video clips. Although it achieves comparable performance to iDT for temporally trimmed videos,
two-stream ConvNet still needs to extract optical flows. The
heavy cost severely limits the utility of methods based on
optical flows, especially in the case of large scale video data.
Extending 2D ConvNet to 3D, C3D ConvNet has been
demonstrated to be effective for spatio-temporal modeling
and it avoids extracting optical flows. However, it can
only model temporal information in short videos, usually
of 16 frames [42]. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
particularly Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [16, 27]
and a modified Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Encoder
(HRNE) [28], have been used to model temporal information in videos. A major limitation of [27] and [28] is that the
input frames are encoded with a fixed sampling rate when
training the RNNs. On the other hand, the motion speed
of videos varies even in the same video. As shown in the
Figure 1, there is almost no apparent motion in the first four
frames, but fast motion is observed in the last three frames.
The encoding rate should be correspondingly low for the
first four frames, but high for the last three, as indicated

2653

