Multimodal Transfer: A Hierarchical Deep Convolutional Neural Network for
Fast Artistic Style Transfer
Xin Wang1,2 ,

Geoffrey Oxholm2 ,
1

Da Zhang1 ,

Yuan-Fang Wang1

University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
2
Adobe Research, San Francisco, CA

{xwang,dazhang,yfwang}@cs.ucsb.edu, oxholm@adobe.com

Abstract
Transferring artistic styles onto everyday photographs
has become an extremely popular task in both academia
and industry. Recently, offline training has replaced online iterative optimization, enabling nearly real-time stylization. When those stylization networks are applied directly to high-resolution images, however, the style of localized regions often appears less similar to the desired artistic
style. This is because the transfer process fails to capture
small, intricate textures and maintain correct texture scales
of the artworks. Here we propose a multimodal convolutional neural network that takes into consideration faithful
representations of both color and luminance channels, and
performs stylization hierarchically with multiple losses of
increasing scales. Compared to state-of-the-art networks,
our network can also perform style transfer in nearly realtime by conducting much more sophisticated training offline. By properly handling style and texture cues at multiple scales using several modalities, we can transfer not
just large-scale, obvious style cues but also subtle, exquisite
ones. That is, our scheme can generate results that are visually pleasing and more similar to multiple desired artistic
styles with color and texture cues at multiple scales.

network can be trained offline with the same loss criterion
to generate stylized results that are visually close (but still
somewhat inferior). In this way, only one single inference
pass of the feed-forward network is needed at the application time. This results in a computational algorithm that is
hundreds of times faster [13, 25].

1. Introduction

Though past work creates visually pleasing results for
many different types of artworks, two important drawbacks
stand out: (1) The current feed-forward networks [13, 25]
are trained on a specific resolution of the style image, so
deviating from that resolution (bigger or smaller) results in
a scale mismatch. For example, applying a model trained
with a style guide of size 256 on higher-resolution images
would generate results whose texture scale is smaller than
that of the artistic style, and (2) Current networks often
fail to capture small, intricate textures, like brushwork, of
many kinds of artworks on high-resolution images. While
it has been shown that these feed-forward networks function quite well on artworks with abstract, large-scale textures and easily discernible strokes, e.g., The Starry Night
by Vincent van Gogh, artistic styles are much more encompassing than what has been demonstrated. That is, different artistic styles may be characterized by exquisite, subtle
brushes and strokes, and hence, our observations are that
results of these style-transfer networks are often not satisfactory for a large variety of artistic styles.

Style transfer, or to repaint an existing photograph with
the style of another, is considered a challenging but interesting problem in arts. Recently, this task has become an
active topic both in academia and industry due to the influential work by Gatys et al. [8], where a pre-trained deep
learning network for visual recognition is used to capture
both style and content representations, and achieves visually stunning results. Unfortunately, the transfer run time
is prohibitively long because of the online iterative optimization procedure. To resolve this issue, a feed-forward

In this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical deep convolutional neural network architecture for fast style transfer.
Our contribution is fourfold: (1) We introduce a hierarchical network and design an associated training scheme that
is able to learn both coarse, large-scale texture distortion
and fine, exquisite brushwork of an artistic style by utilizing multiple scales of a style image; (2) Our hierarchical
training scheme and end-to-end CNN network architecture
allow us to combine multiple models into one network to
handle increasingly larger image sizes; (3) Instead of taking
15239

