From Zero-shot Learning to Conventional Supervised Classification: Unseen
Visual Data Synthesis
Yang Long1 , Li Liu2 , Ling Shao2 , Fumin Shen3 , Guiguang Ding4 , and Jungong Han5
1

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Sheffield, UK
2
School of Computing Science, University of East Anglia, UK
3
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
4
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Digital Technologies, Northumbria University, UK
1

ylong2@sheffield.ac.uk, {li.liu, ling.shao}@uea.ac.uk, fumin.shen@gmail.com,
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, jungong.han@northumbria.ac.uk

Abstract
Robust object recognition systems usually rely on powerful feature extraction mechanisms from a large number
of real images. However, in many realistic applications,
collecting sufficient images for ever-growing new classes is
unattainable. In this paper, we propose a new Zero-shot
learning (ZSL) framework that can synthesise visual features for unseen classes without acquiring real images. Using the proposed Unseen Visual Data Synthesis (UVDS) algorithm, semantic attributes are effectively utilised as an
intermediate clue to synthesise unseen visual features at
the training stage. Hereafter, ZSL recognition is converted
into the conventional supervised problem, i.e. the synthesised visual features can be straightforwardly fed to typical
classifiers such as SVM. On four benchmark datasets, we
demonstrate the benefit of using synthesised unseen data.
Extensive experimental results suggest that our proposed
approach significantly improve the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Object Recognition is arguably one of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision field. Most of the conventional frameworks, e.g. Deep Neural Networks (DNN) [22],
rely on a large number of training samples to build statistical
models. However, such a premise is unattainable in many
real-world situations. The main reasons can be summarised
as follows: 1) Obtaining well-annotated training samples is
expensive. Although abundant digital images and videos

Figure 1. Given a conceptual description, human can imagine the
outline of the scene by combining previous seen visual elements.

can be retrieved from the Internet, existing search engines
crucially depend on user-defined keywords that are often
vague and not suitable for learning tasks. 2) The number of newly defined classes is ever-growing. Meanwhile,
fine-grained tasks make existing categories go deeper, e.g.
to recognise a newly released handbag in a novel pattern.
Training a particular model for each of them is infeasible.
3) Collecting instances for rare classes is difficult. For example, one might wish to detect an ancient or rare species
automatically. It could be difficult to provide even a single
example for them since available knowledge could be only
textual descriptions or some distinctive attributes.
As a feasible solution, Zero-shot Learning (ZSL) aims to
leverage a closed-set of semantic models that can generalise
to unseen classes [25, 23]. The common paradigm of ZSL
methods first train a prediction model that can map visual
data to a semantic representation. Hereafter, new objects
11627

