Learning Shape Abstractions by Assembling Volumetric Primitives
Shubham Tulsiani1 , Hao Su2 , Leonidas J. Guibas2 , Alexei A. Efros1 , Jitendra Malik1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Stanford University
1

{shubhtuls, efros, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu, 2 {haosu, guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

Figure 1: Examples of chair and animal shapes assembled by composing simple volumetric primitives (cuboids). The
obtained reconstructions allows an interpretable representation for each object and provides a consistent parsing across shapes
e.g. chair seats are captured by the same primitive across the category.

Abstract
We present a learning framework for abstracting complex shapes by learning to assemble objects using 3D volumetric primitives. In addition to generating simple and
geometrically interpretable explanations of 3D objects, our
framework also allows us to automatically discover and exploit consistent structure in the data. We demonstrate that
using our method allows predicting shape representations
which can be leveraged for obtaining a consistent parsing
across the instances of a shape collection and constructing
an interpretable shape similarity measure. We also examine
applications for image-based prediction as well as shape
manipulation.

1. Introduction
“Treat nature by means of the cylinder, the sphere, the
cone, everything brought into proper perspective”
Paul Cezanne

Cezanne’s insight that an object can be conceived as assembled from a set of volumetric primitives has resurfaced

multiple times in the vision and graphics literature. In computer vision, generalized cylinders were introduced by Binford back in 1971, where a cross-sectional area is swept
along a straight or curved axis while possibly being shrunk
or expanded during the process [3]. One of the key motivations was parsimony of description – an object could be
described by relatively few generalized cylinders, each of
which in turn requiring only a few parameters. Volumetric primitives remained popular through the 1990s as they
provided a coherent framework for explaining shape inference from a single image, perceptual organization, as well
as recognition of a 3D object from 2D views. However,
fitting generalized cylinders to image data required considerable hand crafting, and as machine learning techniques
for object recognition came to the fore in the 1990s, this
paradigm faded from the main stage.
Of course, finding parsimonious explanations for complex phenomena lies at the core of learning-based visual
understanding. Indeed, machine learning is only possible
because our visual world, despite its enormous complexity,
is also highly structured – visual patterns don’t just happen
once, but keep on repeating in various configurations. In
contemporary computer vision, this structure is most often
12635

