From Motion Blur to Motion Flow: a Deep Learning Solution for
Removing Heterogeneous Motion Blur
Dong Gong†‡ , Jie Yang‡ , Lingqiao Liu‡§ , Yanning Zhang† , Ian Reid‡§ ,
Chunhua Shen‡§ , Anton van den Hengel‡§ , Qinfeng Shi‡∗
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
‡
The University of Adelaide, § Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
https://donggong1.github.io/blur2mflow

Abstract
Removing pixel-wise heterogeneous motion blur is challenging due to the ill-posed nature of the problem. The predominant solution is to estimate the blur kernel by adding
a prior, but extensive literature on the subject indicates the
difficulty in identifying a prior which is suitably informative,
and general. Rather than imposing a prior based on theory, we propose instead to learn one from the data. Learning a prior over the latent image would require modeling
all possible image content. The critical observation underpinning our approach, however, is that learning the motion flow instead allows the model to focus on the cause
of the blur, irrespective of the image content. This is a
much easier learning task, but it also avoids the iterative
process through which latent image priors are typically applied. Our approach directly estimates the motion flow from
the blurred image through a fully-convolutional deep neural network (FCN) and recovers the unblurred image from
the estimated motion flow. Our FCN is the first universal
end-to-end mapping from the blurred image to the dense
motion flow. To train the FCN, we simulate motion flows
to generate synthetic blurred-image-motion-flow pairs thus
avoiding the need for human labeling. Extensive experiments on challenging realistic blurred images demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is ubiquitous in photography, especially
when using light-weight mobile devices, such as cellphones and on-board cameras. While there has been sig∗ This work was supported by NSFC (61231016, 61572405), China 863
(2015AA016402), ARC (DP160100703), ARC Centre for Robotic Vision
CE140100016; an ARC Laureate Fellowship FL130100102 to I. Reid, and
an ARC DECRA Fellowship DE170101259 to L. Liu. D. Gong was supported by a scholarship from CSC.

(a) Blurry image

(b) Xu and Jia [42]

(c) Sun et al. [33]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. A blurry image with heterogeneous motion blur from
a widely used dataset Microsoft COCO [23]. Estimated motion
flows are shown in the bottom right corner of each image.

nificant progress in image deblurring [9, 6, 42, 27, 28, 10],
most work focuses on spatially-uniform blur. Some recent
methods [40, 12, 14, 18, 26, 32] have been proposed to
remove spatially-varying blur caused by camera panning,
and/or object movement, with some restrictive assumptions
on the types of blur, image prior, or both. In this work,
we focus on recovering a blur-free latent image from a single observation degraded by heterogeneous motion blur, i.e.
the blur kernels may independently vary from pixel to pixel.
Motion blur in real images has a variety of causes, including camera [40, 47] and object motion [15, 26], leading to blur patterns with complex variations (See Figure 1
(a)). In practice, uniform deblurring methods [9, 6, 42] usually fail to remove the non-uniform blur (See Figure 1 (b)).
Most existing non-uniform deblurring methods rely on a
specific motion model, such as 3D camera motion modeling

2319

