A Novel Tensor-based Video Rain Streaks Removal Approach via Utilizing
Discriminatively Intrinsic Priors

1

Tai-Xiang Jiang1 , Ting-Zhu Huang1∗, Xi-Le Zhao1 , Liang-Jian Deng1 , Yao Wang2
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xian Jiaotong University

{taixiangjiang, yao.s.wang}@gmail.com {tingzhuhuang, liangjian1987112}@126.com xlzhao122003@163.com

Abstract
Rain streaks removal is an important issue of the outdoor
vision system and has been recently investigated extensively. In this paper, we propose a novel tensor based video
rain streaks removal approach by fully considering the discriminatively intrinsic characteristics of rain streaks and
clean videos, which needs neither rain detection nor timeconsuming dictionary learning stage. In specific, on the one
hand, rain streaks are sparse and smooth along the raindrops’ direction, and on the other hand, the clean videos
possess smoothness along the rain-perpendicular direction
and global and local correlation along time direction. We
use the l1 norm to enhance the sparsity of the underlying
rain streaks, two unidirectional Total Variation (TV) regularizers to guarantee the different discriminative smoothness, and a tensor nuclear norm and a time directional difference operator to characterize the exclusive correlation of
the clean video along time. Alternation direction method of
multipliers (ADMM) is employed to solve the proposed concise tensor based convex model. Experiments implemented
on synthetic and real data substantiate the effectiveness and
efficiency of the proposed method. Under comprehensive
quantitative performance measures, our approach outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Outdoor vision system is frequently affected by bad
weather, one of which is the rain. Due to its scattering
light out and into the complementary metal oxide semiconductor of cameras and its high velocities, raindrops usually
bring the bright streaks to the images or videos. Moreover,
rain streaks also interfere with the nearby pixels, because of
their specular highlights, scattering, and blurring effect [1].
This undesirable interference will degrade the performance
of various subsequent computer vision algorithms, such as
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. From left to right: 1) the histograms of difference of
the 1st and 2nd frame from the rainy video, clean video and rain
streaks, respectively; 2) the singular values of O(3) , B(3) and R(3)
in decreasing order, severally; 3) some example frames of rainy
video, clean video and rain streaks; 4) the histograms (c-1,2,3) of
rain directional difference of the 10th frame, and the intensities of
a row (d-1,2,3) of the rainy video, clean video and rain streaks,
respectively.

event detection [2], object detection [3, 4], tracking[5], and
recognition [6], and scene analysis [7]. For instance, in the
field of background substraction for the surveillance video,

4057

