Multigrid Neural Architectures
Tsung-Wei Ke
UC Berkeley / ICSI

Michael Maire
TTI Chicago

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI

twke@icsi.berkeley.edu

mmaire@ttic.edu

stellayu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose a multigrid extension of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Rather than manipulating representations living on a single spatial grid, our network layers
operate across scale space, on a pyramid of grids. They
consume multigrid inputs and produce multigrid outputs;
convolutional filters themselves have both within-scale and
cross-scale extent. This aspect is distinct from simple multiscale designs, which only process the input at different
scales. Viewed in terms of information flow, a multigrid
network passes messages across a spatial pyramid. As a
consequence, receptive field size grows exponentially with
depth, facilitating rapid integration of context. Most critically, multigrid structure enables networks to learn internal
attention and dynamic routing mechanisms, and use them to
accomplish tasks on which modern CNNs fail.
Experiments demonstrate wide-ranging performance advantages of multigrid. On CIFAR and ImageNet classification tasks, flipping from a single grid to multigrid within the
standard CNN paradigm improves accuracy, while being
compute and parameter efficient. Multigrid is independent
of other architectural choices; we show synergy in combination with residual connections. Multigrid yields dramatic improvement on a synthetic semantic segmentation
dataset. Most strikingly, relatively shallow multigrid networks can learn to directly perform spatial transformation
tasks, where, in contrast, current CNNs fail. Together, our
results suggest that continuous evolution of features on a
multigrid pyramid is a more powerful alternative to existing CNN designs on a flat grid.

encompassing the entire input. Work following this mold
includes LeNet [23], the breakthrough AlexNet [21], and
the many architectural enhancements that followed, such as
VGG [32], GoogLeNet [34], residual networks [11, 12, 38]
and like [22, 15]. Coupled with large datasets and compute
power, this pipeline drives state-of-the-art vision systems.
However, sufficiency of this design does not speak to its
optimality. A revolution in performance may have blinded
the community to investigating whether or not unfolding
computation in this standard manner is the best choice. In
fact, there are shortcomings to the typical CNN pipeline:
• It conflates abstraction and scale. Early layers cannot
see coarser scales, while later layers only see them.
For tasks requiring fine-scale output, such as semantic
segmentation, this necessitates specialized designs for
reintegrating spatial information [24, 10, 3, 1].
• The fine-to-coarse processing within a standard CNN
is in opposition to a near universal principle for efficient algorithm design: coarse-to-fine processing. The
first layer in a standard CNN consists of many filters
independently looking at tiny, almost meaningless regions of the image. Would it not be more reasonable
for the system to observe some coarse-scale context
before deciding how to probe the details?
• Communication is inefficient. A neuron’s receptive
field is determined by the units in the input layer that
could propagate a signal to it. Standard CNNs implement a slow propagation scheme, diffusing information across a single grid at rate proportional to convolutional filter size. This may be a reason extremely deep
networks [34, 11, 22] appear necessary; many layers
are needed to counteract inefficient signal propagation.

1. Introduction
Since Fukushima’s neocognitron [9], the basic architectural design of convolutional neural networks has persisted
in form similar to that shown in the top of Figure 1. Processing begins on a high resolution input, of which filters
examine small local pieces. Through stacking many layers, in combination with occasional pooling and subsampling, receptive fields slowly grow with depth, eventually

These points can be summarized as inherent deficiencies
in representation, computation, and communication. Our
multigrid architecture (Figure 1, bottom) endows CNNs
with additional structural capacity in order to dissolve these
deficiencies. It is explicitly multiscale, pushing choices
about scale-space representation into the training process.

6665

