Compact Matrix Factorization with Dependent Subspaces
Viktor Larsson1
1

Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University

Carl Olsson1,2
2

Department of Signals and Systems
Chalmers University of Technology

{viktorl,calle}@maths.lth.se

Abstract
Traditional matrix factorization methods approximate
high dimensional data with a low dimensional subspace.
This imposes constraints on the matrix elements which allow for estimation of missing entries. A lower rank provides
stronger constraints and makes estimation of the missing
entries less ambiguous at the cost of measurement fit.
In this paper we propose a new factorization model
that further constrains the matrix entries. Our approach
can be seen as a unification of traditional low-rank matrix factorization and the more recent union-of-subspace
approach. It adaptively finds clusters that can be modeled
with low dimensional local subspaces and simultaneously
uses a global rank constraint to capture the overall scene
interactions. For inference we use an energy that penalizes
a trade-off between data fit and degrees-of-freedom of the
resulting factorization. We show qualitatively and quantitatively that regularizing both local and global dynamics
yields significantly improved missing data estimation. 1

1. Introduction
Matrix factorization is a an important tool in many engineering applications. The assumption that data belongs to a
low dimensional subspace has been proven useful in numerous computer vision applications, e.g. non-rigid and articulated structure from motion [6, 1, 41], photometric stereo
[3], optical flow [15], face recognition [40, 34] and texture
reparation [25].
Given an m × n matrix M containing m-dimensional
measurements a low dimensional approximation X ≈ M ,
where rank(X) = r0 , can be found using singular value
decomposition (SVD). Since rank(X) = r0 the matrix X
can be written
X = BC T ,
(1)
where B is m × r0 and C is n × r0 . The columns of B
constitute a basis for the column-space of X. The matrix C
contains coefficients used to form the columns of X from
the basis. Alternatively one may think of the rows of X as
1 This work has been funded by the Swedish Research Council (grant
no. 2012-4213) and the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Semantic Mapping and Visual Navigation for Smart Robots).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: 3D illustration of subspace representations. (a) A 2D subspace is fitted to all the data (global model). (b) A union of independent 1D subspaces is fitted to clustered
data (local models). (c) - Our unified approach. 1D subspaces are fitted to clustered data and restricted to lie in a
2D subspace. (For this data m = 3, n = 100, r0 = 2 and
rk = 1, see Section 2 for definitions.)
n-dimensional data, C as a basis for the row-space and B as
the coefficients. In both cases the data is approximated by
an r0 -dimensional subspace, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
In a sense the factorization BC T can be seen as a compressed representation of M where the mn elements have
been reduced to (m + n − r0 )r0 degrees of freedom (see
Section 3.1). It is therefore possible to compute the factorization even if only a subset of the elements of M are
known, by solving W ⊙M ≈ W ⊙(BC T ). Here ⊙ denotes
element-wise multiplication and the matrix W has elements
wij = 1 for known data and 0 for missing data. Note that
once computed, BC T contains estimates of both known and
missing data. In this way it is theoretically possible to ”predict” at most mn − (m + n − r0 )r0 missing elements.
In the presence of missing data the low rank approximation problem becomes very difficult, some variations of the
problem even NP-hard [17]. However, due to its practical
importance a lot of research have been directed at finding
good algorithms. In [2] it is shown that under the spectral
norm a closed form solution exist if the missing data forms a
so called Young pattern. A recent trend has been to replace
the rank function with the nuclear norm [31, 8, 30]. However, in many applications such as structure from motion,
where missing entries are highly correlated, this approach
has been shown to perform poorly (e.g. [24]).
If the rank of the sought matrix is known, the bilinear
1280

