PolyNet: A Pursuit of Structural Diversity in Very Deep Networks
Xingcheng Zhang∗

Zhizhong Li∗

Chen Change Loy

Dahua Lin

{zx016, lz015, ccloy, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
The past four years witnessed a dramatic reduction of
classification error on the ILSVRC benchmark [19]. Along
with this progress is a remarkable increase in network depth
– from AlexNet [16] to ResNet [9], the numbers of layers
have been raised from 8 to 152. This strong correlation
between performance and depth has motivated a series of
work [10, 21] to pursue very deep networks. On the other
hand, increasing the width of a network has also been shown
to be an effective way to improve performance [1, 28, 33].
This line of exploration also draws lots of attention recently.
Is increasing the depth or width the best strategy to pursue optimal performance? Whereas a positive answer to
this question seems to be backed by numerous evidences
∗ These two authors contribute equally to the work.
1 Codes available at https://github.com/CUHK-MMLAB/polynet.

5.6
PolyNet Series
Inception-ResNet-v2 Series
5.2
Top-5 Error

A number of studies have shown that increasing the
depth or width of convolutional networks is a rewarding approach to improve the performance of image recognition. In
our study, however, we observed difficulties along both directions. On one hand, the pursuit for very deep networks is
met with a diminishing return and increased training difficulty; on the other hand, widening a network would result in
a quadratic growth in both computational cost and memory
demand. These difficulties motivate us to explore structural
diversity in designing deep networks, a new dimension beyond just depth and width. Specifically, we present a new
family of modules, namely the PolyInception, which can
be flexibly inserted in isolation or in a composition as replacements of different parts of a network. Choosing PolyInception modules with the guidance of architectural efficiency can improve the expressive power while preserving
comparable computational cost. The Very Deep PolyNet1 ,
designed following this direction, demonstrates substantial
improvements over the state-of-the-art on the ILSVRC 2012
benchmark. Compared to Inception-ResNet-v2, it reduces
the top-5 validation error on single crops from 4.9% to
4.25%, and that on multi-crops from 3.7% to 3.45%.

Output

4.8
4.48

4.4
4.25
4
100

200

300

400

500

# Convolution Layers

600

700

Image

Figure 1: We propose a new family of building blocks called
PolyInceptions. PolyNet, a new network architecture using PolyInceptions, outperforms Inception-ResNet-v2 and a deepened version thereof, reducing the single-crop top-5 error to 4.25% on
ILSVRC 2012 validation set.

in previous work, our empirical study suggested otherwise.
Specifically, we found that as we continue to increase the
depth, the reward is diminishing beyond a certain level.
Another direction, namely, widening a network, also has
its own problems. The most significant problem is the
quadratic growth in both runtime complexity and memory
demand. Our study showed that this significant increase in
computational cost may not be justified by the performance
gain that it brings.
These issues motivate us to explore structural diversity,
an alternative dimension in network design. Actually, the
significance of diversity has been repeatedly demonstrated
in previous work, such as Inception modules [26], network
ensembles [15], and a recent study [30] that relates ResNet
with an implicit ensemble. However, several questions remain yet to be answered: (1) what is the best way to build
diversity into a network, and (2) when the pursuit of diversity is a more rewarding strategy than the pursuit of depth.

718

