A Graph Regularized Deep Neural Network for Unsupervised Image
Representation Learning
Shijie Yang1,2 , Liang Li2∗ , Shuhui Wang2 , Weigang Zhang1,3 ,Qingming Huang1,2∗
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, 264209, China
shijie.yang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, liang.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn
wgzhang@hit.edu.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep Auto-Encoder (DAE) has shown its promising power in high-level representation learning. From the perspective of manifold learning, we propose a graph regularized deep neural network (GR-DNN) to endue traditional DAEs with the ability of retaining local geometric
structure. A deep-structured regularizer is formulated upon
multi-layer perceptions to capture this structure. The robust
and discriminative embedding space is learned to simultaneously preserve the high-level semantics and the geometric structure within local manifold tangent space. Theoretical analysis presents the close relationship between the
proposed graph regularizer and the graph Laplacian regularizer in terms of the optimization objective. We also alleviate the growth of the network complexity by introducing the anchor-based bipartite graph, which guarantees the
good scalability for large scale data. The experiments on
four datasets show the comparable results of the proposed
GR-DNN with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning via Deep AutoEncoder (DAE) has shown its promising power in computer vision. Basically, an under-complete encoder compresses the input data into low-dimensional codes, and a similar
inverted decoder reconstructs the input from the codes. Equipped with multiple layers of non-linear transformations,
DAEs can simulate the perception of human brain to extract high-level semantic abstractions from low-level input
signals [19, 24, 9].
To capture the high-level semantics and avoid learning
the trivial suboptimal function, regularized DAEs make a
tradeoff-decision between attaining some speciﬁc proper-

class 1

class 1

class k

class 2
(a)

class 2
(b)

class k
(c)

Figure 1: Toy examples of the learned embedding subspace: (a)
traditional DAEs, (b) local invariance learners, (c) our GR-DNN.
Different shapes denote the labels, and different colors denote the
neighbor relations.

ties and preserving the input information X. A regularization term Φ is added to the reconstruction cost as follows.
Cost = Δ(X, X̃) + γΦ.

(1)

The regularizations include the sparsity of the code [6], the
robustness to noise inputs [24] and the insensitivity of the
input signals [19]. These strategies penalize the sensitivity
of the code to small perturbations of the input signals, which
makes crucial contribution to the success of DAEs.
Meanwhile, a stream of successful manifold learning
methods beneﬁt from the local invariance theory, such as the
Locally Linear Embedding (LLE) [20], Laplacian Eigenmap [1], and Locality Preserving Projections (LPP) [18].
They emphasize that the geometric relation among neighboring points on the original manifold should be maintained
in the learned embedding space, which has been widely
used in unsupervised dimensional reduction [4] and semisupervised learning [27].
Comparing the above DAEs (Fig. 1a) with the manifold
learning models (Fig. 1b), the former follow a global reconstruction criterion and extract the high-level salient factors

1203

