Semi-calibrated Near Field Photometric Stereo
Fotios Logothetis1 ,

Roberto Mecca∗ 1,2 ,

Roberto Cipolla1

{fl302, rm822, rc10001}@cam.ac.uk
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Bologna, Italy

Abstract
3D reconstruction from shading information through
Photometric Stereo is considered a very challenging problem in Computer Vision. Although this technique can potentially provide highly detailed shape recovery, its accuracy
is critically dependent on a numerous set of factors among
them the reliability of the light sources in emitting a constant amount of light.
In this work, we propose a novel variational approach
to solve the so called semi-calibrated near field Photometric Stereo problem, where the positions but not the brightness of the light sources are known. Additionally, we take
into account realistic modeling features such as perspective viewing geometry and heterogeneous scene composition, containing both diffuse and specular objects. Furthermore, we also relax the point light source assumption
that usually constraints the near field formulation by explicitly calculating the light attenuation maps. Synthetic
experiments are performed for quantitative evaluation for
a wide range of cases whilst real experiments provide comparisons, qualitatively outperforming the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Extracting 3D clues from shading information in multiple images has been known in the Computer Vision community since Woodham [49] introduced the problem of Photometric Stereo (PS). The goal is to reconstruct the 3D shape
of a static object knowing its shading under different illumination conditions. First attempts employed several assumptions in order to deal with a solvable problem; those
included diffuse reflectance, orthographic viewing geometry as well as uniform directional lighting. Up to now, most
of the literature regarding PS still relies on the same “fully
orthographic” set of assumptions.
Motivation PS approaches can be divided into two main
categories. The first one solves calibrated PS by requir∗ Roberto Mecca is a Marie Curie Fellow of the Istituto Nazionale di
Alta Matematica, Italy.

Figure 1. The first row shows two samples of near field images
acquired under different lighting and different exposure (both unknown) and the computed albedo. Below it is the shape reconstructed using the proposed semi-calibrated PS approach.

ing an a priori knowledge of the light source’s geometry,
position and brightness. The second category solves the
uncalibrated PS problem where the information about the
illumination of the scene is unknown. Recently, Cho et
al. [9] introduced the idea of semi-calibrated PS where the
brightness but not the positions of the light sources was
considered unknown. Indeed, accurate knowledge of the
brightness requires careful measurements with either specialized equipment (LUX meters) or reference objects with
known geometry. Moreover the brightness commonly tends
to vary from acquisition to acquisition, and this variation is
mainly caused by three important reasons. First of all, the
lighting status of a light source: most LEDs used as light
sources have a non-negligible ramp-up time when turned
on corresponding to constantly increasing brightness; this
is followed by a gradual decrease of brightness because of
heating-up that affects their electrical properties. This is especially relevant for high speed acquisitions performed with
high power emitters. Under these circumstances, electrical
1941

