A Point Set Generation Network for
3D Object Reconstruction from a Single Image
Haoqiang Fan ∗
Institute for Interdisciplinary
Information Sciences
Tsinghua University

Hao Su∗
Leonidas Guibas
Computer Science Department

fanhqme@gmail.com

{haosu,guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

Stanford University

Abstract
Generation of 3D data by deep neural networks has
been attracting increasing attention in the research community. The majority of extant works resort to regular
representations such as volumetric grids or collections of
images; however, these representations obscure the natural
invariance of 3D shapes under geometric transformations,
and also suffer from a number of other issues. In this paper
we address the problem of 3D reconstruction from a single
image, generating a straight-forward form of output – point
cloud coordinates. Along with this problem arises a unique
and interesting issue, that the groundtruth shape for an
input image may be ambiguous. Driven by this unorthodox
output form and the inherent ambiguity in groundtruth, we
design architecture, loss function and learning paradigm
that are novel and effective. Our final solution is a
conditional shape sampler, capable of predicting multiple
plausible 3D point clouds from an input image. In
experiments not only can our system outperform state-ofthe-art methods on single image based 3d reconstruction
benchmarks; but it also shows strong performance for 3D
shape completion and promising ability in making multiple
plausible predictions.

1. Introduction
As we try to duplicate the successes of current deep
convolutional architectures in the 3D domain, we face a
fundamental representational issue. Extant deep net architectures for both discriminative and generative learning in
the signal domain are well-suited to data that is regularly
sampled, such as images, audio, or video. However,
most common 3D geometry representations, such as 2D
meshes or point clouds are not regular structures and do
not easily fit into architectures that exploit such regularity
∗ equal contribution

Input

Reconstructed 3D point cloud

Figure 1. A 3D point cloud of the complete object can be
reconstructed from a single image. Each point is visualized as a
small sphere. The reconstruction is viewed at two viewpoints (0◦
and 90◦ along azimuth). A segmentation mask is used to indicate
the scope of the object in the image.

for weight sharing, etc. That is why the majority of
extant works on using deep nets for 3D data resort to
either volumetric grids or collections of images (2D views
of the geometry). Such representations, however, lead to
difficult trade-offs between sampling resolution and net
efficiency. Furthermore, they enshrine quantization artifacts
that obscure natural invariances of the data under rigid
motions, etc.
In this paper we address the problem of generating the
3D geometry of an object based on a single image of that
object. We explore generative networks for 3D geometry
based on a point cloud representation. A point cloud
representation may not be as efficient in representing the
underlying continuous 3D geometry as compared to a CAD
model using geometric primitives or even a simple mesh,
but for our purposes it has many advantages. A point cloud
is a simple, uniform structure that is easier to learn, as
it does not have to encode multiple primitives or combinatorial connectivity patterns. In addition, a point cloud
allows simple manipulation when it comes to geometric
transformations and deformations, as connectivity does not
1605

