High-Resolution Image Inpainting using Multi-Scale Neural Patch Synthesis
Chao Yang¡1 , Xin Lu§2 , Zhe Lin†2 , Eli Shechtman‡2 , Oliver Wang∗2 , and Hao Lik1,3,4
1

University of Southern California
2
Adobe Research
3
Pinscreen
4
USC Institute for Creative Technologies

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have shown exciting promise in filling large holes in natural images with
semantically plausible and context aware details, impacting fundamental image manipulation tasks such as object
removal. While these learning-based methods are significantly more effective in capturing high-level features
than prior techniques, they can only handle very lowresolution inputs due to memory limitations and difficulty
in training. Even for slightly larger images, the inpainted
regions would appear blurry and unpleasant boundaries
become visible. We propose a multi-scale neural patch
synthesis approach based on joint optimization of image
content and texture constraints, which not only preserves
contextual structures but also produces high-frequency
details by matching and adapting patches with the most
similar mid-layer feature correlations of a deep classification network. We evaluate our method on the ImageNet
and Paris Streetview datasets and achieved state-of-theart inpainting accuracy. We show our approach produces
sharper and more coherent results than prior methods,
especially for high-resolution images.

(a) Input Image

(b) Context Encoder

(c) PatchMatch
(d) Our Result
Figure 1. Qualitative illustration of the task. Given an image
(512 × 512) with a missing hole (256 × 256) (a), our algorithm
can synthesize sharper and more coherent hole content (d) comparing with Context Encoder [32] (b) and Content-Aware Fill
using PatchMatch [1] (c).

has been an active research topic in the computer vision
and graphics communities for the past few decades. Due
to its inherent ambiguity and the complexity of natural
images, general hole-filling remains challenging.
Existing methods that address the hole-filling problem fall into two groups. The first group of approaches
relies on texture synthesis techniques, which fills in the
hole by extending textures from surrounding regions [14,
13, 27, 26, 6, 12, 40, 41, 23, 24, 2]. A common idea in
these techniques is to synthesize the content of the hole
region in a coarse to fine manner, using patches of similar textures. In [12, 41], multiple scales and orientations
are introduced to find better matching patches. Barnes et
al. [2] proposed PatchMatch as a fast approximate nearest

1. Introduction
Before sharing a photo, users may want to make modifications such as erasing distracting scene elements, adjusting object positions in an image for better composition, or recovering the image content in occluded image areas. These, and many other editing operations, require automated hole-filling (image completion), which
¡ chaoy@usc.edu
§ xinl@adobe.com
† zlin@adobe.com
‡ elishe@adobe.com
∗ owang@adobe.com
k hao@hao-li.com

6721

