CNN-based Patch Matching for Optical Flow with Thresholded Hinge
Embedding Loss

1

Christian Bailer1

Kiran Varanasi1

Christian.Bailer@dfki.de

Kiran.Varanasi@dfki.de

Didier Stricker1,2
Didier.Stricker@dfki.de
2

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), University of Kaiserslautern

Abstract
Learning based approaches have not yet achieved their
full potential in optical flow estimation, where their performance still trails heuristic approaches. In this paper, we
present a CNN based patch matching approach for optical flow estimation. An important contribution of our approach is a novel thresholded loss for Siamese networks. We
demonstrate that our loss performs clearly better than existing losses. It also allows to speed up training by a factor
of 2 in our tests. Furthermore, we present a novel way for
calculating CNN based features for different image scales,
which performs better than existing methods. We also discuss new ways of evaluating the robustness of trained features for the application of patch matching for optical flow.
An interesting discovery in our paper is that low-pass filtering of feature maps can increase the robustness of features
created by CNNs. We proved the competitive performance
of our approach by submitting it to the KITTI 2012, KITTI
2015 and MPI-Sintel evaluation portals where we obtained
state-of-the-art results on all three datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, variants of the PatchMatch [5] approach
showed not only to be useful for nearest neighbor field
estimation, but also for the more challenging problem of
large displacement optical flow estimation. So far, most
top performing methods like Deep Matching [32] or Flow
Fields [3] strongly rely on robust multi-scale matching
strategies, while they still use engineered features (data
terms) like SIFTFlow [22] for the actual matching.
On the other hand, works like [30, 34] demonstrated
the effectiveness of features based on Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs) for matching patches. However, these
works did not validate the performance of their features using an actual patch matching approach like PatchMatch or
Flow Fields that matches all pixels between image pairs. Instead, they simply treat matching patches as a classification

problem between a predefined set of patches.
This ignores many practical issues. For instance, it is
important that CNN based features are not only able to distinguish between different patch positions, but the position
should also be determined accurately. Furthermore, the top
performing CNN architectures are very slow when used for
patch matching as it requires matching several patches for
every pixel in the reference image. While Siamese networks
with L2 distance [30] are reasonably fast at testing time
and still outperform engineered features regarding classification, we found that they are usually underperforming engineered features regarding (multi-scale) patch matching.
We think that this has among other things (see Section 4)
to do with the convolutional structure of CNNs: as neighboring patches share intermediate layer outputs it is much
easier for CNNs to learn matches of neighboring patches
than non neighboring patches. However, due to propagation [5] correctly matched patches close to each other usually contribute less for patch matching than patches far apart
from each other. Classification does not differentiate here.
A first solution to succeed in CNN based patch matching is to use pixel-wise batch normalization [12]. While it
weakens the unwanted convolutional structure, it is computationally expensive at test time. Thus, we do not use it.
Instead, we improve the CNN features themselves to a level
that allows us to outperform existing approaches.
Our first contribution is a novel loss function for the
Siamese architecture with L2 distance [30]. We show that
the hinge embedding loss [30] which is commonly used for
Siamese architectures and variants of it have an important
design flaw: they try to decrease the L2 distance unlimitedly for correct matches, although very small distances for
patches that differ due to effects like illumination changes or
partial occlusion are not only very costly but also unnecessary, as long as false matches have larger L2 distances. We
demonstrate that we can significantly increase the matching
quality by relaxing this flaw.
Furthermore, we present a novel way to calculate CNN
based features for the scales of Flow Fields [3], which
clearly outperforms the original multi-scale feature creation
13250

