Hyperspectral image super-resolution via non-local sparse tensor factorization
Renwei Dian, Leyuan Fang, Shutao Li
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University
drw@hnu.edu.cn, fangleyuan@gmail.com, shutao li@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Hyperspectral image (HSI) super-resolution, which fuses
a low-resolution (LR) HSI with a high-resolution (HR) multispectral image (MSI), has recently attracted much attention. Most of the current HSI super-resolution approaches
are based on matrix factorization, which unfolds the threedimensional HSI as a matrix before processing. In general,
the matrix data representation obtained after the matrix unfolding operation makes it hard to fully exploit the inherent
HSI spatial-spectral structures. In this paper, a novel HSI
super-resolution method based on non-local sparse tensor
factorization (called as the NLSTF) is proposed. The sparse
tensor factorization can directly decompose each cube of
the HSI as a sparse core tensor and dictionaries of three
modes, which reformulates the HSI super-resolution problem as the estimation of sparse core tensor and dictionaries
for each cube. To further exploit the non-local spatial selfsimilarities of the HSI, similar cubes are grouped together,
and they are assumed to share the same dictionaries. The
dictionaries are learned from the LR-HSI and HR-MSI for
each group, and corresponding sparse core tensors are estimated by spare coding on the learned dictionaries for each
cube. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed NLSTF approach over several state-of-the-art
HSI super-resolution approaches.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging has been recently applied in
many computer vision tasks, including the tracking [19],
face recognition[20] and segmentation[28]. However, hyperspectral images (HSIs) usually have abundant spectral
information, but limited spatial resolution due to hardware
restrictions [13]. On the contrary, the high-resolution (HR)
gray images and multispectral images (MSIs) with much
less spectral bands can be easily obtained by current imaging sensors. To enhance the spatial resolution of the HSI, the low-resolution (LR) HSIs are generally fused with
these HR images. The traditional spatial-spectral image fusion methods focus on combining the LR-HSI with a HR

(a) Matrix factorization based HR-HSI decomposition.

(b) Tensor factorization based HR-HSI decomposition.

Figure 1. Illustration of the traditional matrix decomposition and
tensor decomposition of the HR-HSI.

panchromatic images (gray image), which is called as pansharpening [5]. Representative methods in pan-sharpening
include the Intensity-Hue-Saturation (IHS) transform [22],
PCA-based method [23], and compressed sensing based
method [16]. Since the single band pan-sharpening has very
limited spectral resolution, the reconstructed HR-HSIs by
these approaches usually contain spectral distortions.
More recently, the HSI super-resolution approaches
which fuse a LR-HSI with a HR-MSI (often RGB image)
based on matrix factorization have been actively investigated [13, 34, 38, 15, 2, 24, 30, 9, 33, 3]. Assuming that a
typical scene of the HSI contains only a small number of
pure spectral signatures, these approaches first unfold HSI
as a matrix, and then decompose the matrix as spectral basis
and corresponding coefficients, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The
problem of the HSI super-resolution becomes the estimation of spectral basis and corresponding coefficients from
the LR-HSI and the HR-MSI of the same scene. In specific,

5344

