Sequential Person Recognition in Photo Albums with a Recurrent Network
Yao Li1

Guosheng Lin2∗ Bohan Zhuang1 Lingqiao Liu1 Chunhua Shen1 Anton van den Hengel1
1
2
The University of Adelaide
Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Recognizing the identities of people in everyday photos
is still a very challenging problem for machine vision, due
to issues such as non-frontal faces, changes in clothing, location and lighting. Recent studies have shown that rich
relational information between people in the same photo
can help in recognizing their identities. In this work, we
propose to model the relational information between people as a sequence prediction task. At the core of our work is
a novel recurrent network architecture, in which relational
information between instances’ labels and appearance are
modeled jointly. In addition to relational cues, scene context is incorporated in our sequence prediction model with
no additional cost. In this sense, our approach is a unified
framework for modeling both contextual cues and visual appearance of person instances. Our model is trained endto-end with a sequence of annotated instances in a photo
as inputs, and a sequence of corresponding labels as targets. We demonstrate that this simple but elegant formulation achieves state-of-the-art performance on the newly
released People In Photo Albums (PIPA) dataset.

1. Introduction
With the widespread adoption of digital cameras, the
number of photos being taken has increased astronomically.
The culture surrounding the use of these cameras means that
a large proportion of these photos contain people. The overwhelming volume of these images is creating a demand for
smart tools to organize photos containing people. One cornerstone step is to recognize each person in these everyday images. Previous work [1, 7, 8, 23, 29, 14, 12, 15] has
shown that person recognition in such unconstrained settings remains a challenge problem for machine vision due to
various factors, such as non-frontal faces, varying lighting
and settings, and even just the variability in the appearance
of a face over time.
To tackle these challenges, in addition to the appearance
of the face, recent studies [1, 29, 14, 12] have shown that
∗ G. Lin’s contribution was made when he was with The University of
Adelaide. Correspondence should be addressed to C. Shen.

scene context

CNN

LSTM

CNN

LSTM

CNN

LSTM

CNN
LSTM
relation context

Figure 1. Our approach performs person recognition in photo albums as a sequence prediction task. Both contextual cues and instances’ visual appearance are exploited in a unified framework.

contextual cues can help in recognizing peoples’ identities
in everyday photos. Other features of an individual, such as
clothing [1, 7], may also provide valuable cues. The relationships between the person to be recognized and others,
can also be a vital cue [23, 4, 12]. To take advantage of
different relation cues, probabilistic graphical models have
been widely exploited [1, 23, 4, 12].
In this work, we propose to model the rich relations between people in an image as a sequence prediction task.
This is much motivated from the success of sequence prediction formulations in modeling relations between words
in language problems [18, 22].
In our work, we propose a novel Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architecture for the sequence prediction task
(see Fig. 1), which consists of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network [10] . LSTMs have shown impressive performance on
several sequence prediction problems such as image captioning [22], video description [6, 20], multi-label image
classification [24], machine translation [18], etc. Initially
we feed the LSTM with global image information provided
by the CNN. At each subsequent step, the input to the
LSTM is a joint embedding of the CNN feature representation of the current person instance and its predicted label
at the last step. The LSTM then predicts the identity label
for this person instance. In this sense, the number of steps
in our sequence model is of variable length, depending on
the number of annotated instances in the image.

1338

