Global Hypothesis Generation for 6D Object Pose Estimation
Frank Michel, Alexander Kirillov, Eric Brachmann, Alexander Krull
Stefan Gumhold, Bogdan Savchynskyy, Carsten Rother
TU Dresden
frank.michel@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of estimating the 6D pose
of a known 3D object from a single RGB-D image. Most
modern approaches solve this task in three steps: i) Compute local features; ii) Generate a pool of pose-hypotheses;
iii) Select and refine a pose from the pool. This work focuses
on the second step. While all existing approaches generate the hypotheses pool via local reasoning, e.g. RANSAC
or Hough-voting, we are the first to show that global reasoning is beneficial at this stage. In particular, we formulate a novel fully-connected Conditional Random Field
(CRF) that outputs a very small number of pose-hypotheses.
Despite the potential functions of the CRF being nonGaussian, we give a new and efficient two-step optimization procedure, with some guarantees for optimality. We
utilize our global hypotheses generation procedure to produce results that exceed state-of-the-art for the challenging
“Occluded Object Dataset”.

RGB-D input
image & results

CRF to find
pose-consistent pixel

3D object
coordinates

Figure 1. Motivation. Given an RGB-D input image (left) we aim
at finding the 6D pose of a given object, despite it being strongly
occluded (see zoom). Here our result (green) is correct, while
Krull et al. [19] outputs an incorrect pose (red). The key concept
of this work is to have a global, and hence powerful, geometric
check, in the beginning of the pose estimation pipeline. This is
in stark contrast to local geometric checks performed by all other
methods. In a first step, a random forest predicts for each pixel
a set of three possible object coordinates, i.e. dense continuous
part labeling of the object (middle). Given this, a fully-connected
pairwise Conditional Random Field (CRF) infers globally those
pixels which are consistent with the 6D object pose. We refer to
those pixels as pose-consistent. The final pose is derived from
these pose-consistent pixels via an ICP-variant.

1. Introduction
The task of estimating the 6D pose of texture-less objects
has gained a lot of attention in recent years. From an application perspective this is probably due to the growing interest in industrial robotics, and in various forms of augmented
reality scenarios. From an academic perspective the dataset
of Hinterstoisser et al. [10] marked a milestone, since researchers started to benchmark their efforts and progress in
research started to be more measurable. In this work we
focus on the following task. Given an RGB-D image of a
3D scene, in which a known 3D object is present, i.e. its 3D
shape and appearance is known, we would like to identify
the 6D pose (3D translation and 3D rotation) of that object.
Let us consider an exhaustive-search approach to this
problem. We generate all possible 6D pose hypotheses, and
for each hypothesis we run a robust ICP algorithm [2] to
estimate a robust geometric fit of the 3D model to the underlying data. The final ICP score can then be used as the
objective function to select the final pose. This approach

has two great advantages: (i) It considers all hypotheses; (ii)
It uses a geometric error to prune all incorrect hypotheses.
Obviously, this approach is infeasible from a computational
perspective, hence most approaches generate first a pool of
hypotheses and use a geometrically motivated scoring function to select the right pose, which can be refined with robust ICP if necessary. Table 1 lists five recent works with
different strategies for “hypotheses generation” and “geometric selection”. The first work by Drost et al. [5], and
recently extended by Hinterstoisser et al. [11], has no geometric selection process, and generates a very large number
of hypotheses. The pool of hypotheses is put into a Houghspace and the peak of the distribution is found as the final
pose. Despite its simplicity, the method achieves very good
results, especially on the “Occluded Object Dataset”1 , i.e.
where objects are subject to strong occlusions. We conjecture that the main reason for its success is that it generates
1 http://cvlab-dresden.de/iccv2015-occlusion-challenge/

1462

