Generative Face Completion
Yijun Li1 , Sifei Liu1 , Jimei Yang2 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
2
University of California, Merced
Adobe Research
{yli62,sliu32,mhyang}@ucmerced.edu

jimyang@adobe.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an effective face completion
algorithm using a deep generative model. Different from
well-studied background completion, the face completion
task is more challenging as it often requires to generate
semantically new pixels for the missing key components
(e.g., eyes and mouths) that contain large appearance variations. Unlike existing nonparametric algorithms that search
for patches to synthesize, our algorithm directly generates
contents for missing regions based on a neural network.
The model is trained with a combination of a reconstruction loss, two adversarial losses and a semantic parsing
loss, which ensures pixel faithfulness and local-global contents consistency. With extensive experimental results, we
demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively that our model
is able to deal with a large area of missing pixels in arbitrary shapes and generate realistic face completion results.

1. Introduction
Image completion, as a common image editing operation, aims to fill the missing or masked regions in images with plausibly synthesized contents. The generated
contents can either be as accurate as the original, or simply fit well within the context such that the completed image appears to be visually realistic. Most existing completion algorithms [2, 10] rely on low-level cues to search
for patches from known regions of the same image and
synthesize the contents that locally appear similarly to the
matched patches. These approaches are all fundamentally
constrained to copy existing patterns and structures from
the known regions. The copy-and-paste strategy performs
particularly well for background completion (e.g., grass,
sky, and mountain) by removing foreground objects and filling the unknown regions with similar pattens from backgrounds.
However, the assumption of similar patterns can be
found in the same image does not hold for filling missing
parts of an object image (e.g., face). Many object parts
contain unique patterns, which cannot be matched to other

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Face completion results. In each row from left to right:
(a) original image (128 × 128 pixels). (b) masked input. (c) completion results by our method. In the top row, the face is masked
by a square. In the bottom row we show a real example where the
mouth region is occluded by the microphone.

patches within the input image, as shown in Figure 1(b).
An alternative is to use external databases as references [9].
Although similar patches or images may be found, the
unique patterns of objects that involve semantic representation are not well modeled, since both low-level [2] and midlevel [10] visual cues of the known regions are not sufficient
to infer semantically valid contents in missing regions.
In this paper, we propose an effective object completion
algorithm using a deep generative model. The input is first
masked with noise pixels on randomly selected square region, and then fed into an autoencoder [25]. While the encoder maps the masked input to hidden representations, the
decoder generates a filled image as its output. We regularize
the training process of the generative model by introducing
two adversarial losses [8]: a local loss for the missing region
to ensure the generated contents are semantically coherent,
and a global one for the entire image to render more realistic
and visually pleasing results. In addition, we also propose
a face parsing network [14, 22, 13] as an additional loss to
regularize the generation procedure and enforce a more reasonable and consistent result with contexts. This generative
model allows fast feed-forward image completion without
requiring an external databases as reference. For concrete13911

