Unsupervised Learning of Depth and Ego-Motion from Video
Tinghui Zhou∗
UC Berkeley

Matthew Brown
Google

Noah Snavely
Google

David G. Lowe
Google

Abstract
We present an unsupervised learning framework for the
task of monocular depth and camera motion estimation
from unstructured video sequences. In common with recent work [10, 14, 16], we use an end-to-end learning approach with view synthesis as the supervisory signal. In
contrast to the previous work, our method is completely unsupervised, requiring only monocular video sequences for
training. Our method uses single-view depth and multiview pose networks, with a loss based on warping nearby
views to the target using the computed depth and pose. The
networks are thus coupled by the loss during training, but
can be applied independently at test time. Empirical evaluation on the KITTI dataset demonstrates the effectiveness
of our approach: 1) monocular depth performs comparably
with supervised methods that use either ground-truth pose
or depth for training, and 2) pose estimation performs favorably compared to established SLAM systems under comparable input settings.

1. Introduction
Humans are remarkably capable of inferring ego-motion
and the 3D structure of a scene even over short timescales.
For instance, in navigating along a street, we can easily
locate obstacles and react quickly to avoid them. Years
of research in geometric computer vision has failed to
recreate similar modeling capabilities for real-world scenes
(e.g., where non-rigidity, occlusion and lack of texture are
present). So why do humans excel at this task? One hypothesis is that we develop a rich, structural understanding of the
world through our past visual experience that has largely
consisted of moving around and observing vast numbers of
scenes and developing consistent modeling of our observations. From millions of such observations, we have learned
about the regularities of the world—roads are flat, buildings
are straight, cars are supported by roads etc., and we can
apply this knowledge when perceiving a new scene, even
from a single monocular image.
∗ The majority of the work was done while interning at Google.

...

...

...

...

(a) Training: unlabeled video clips.
Target view

Depth CNN

Nearby views

Pose CNN

R, t

(b) Testing: single-view depth and multi-view pose estimation.

Figure 1. The training data to our system consists solely of unlabeled image sequences capturing scene appearance from different viewpoints, where the poses of the images are not provided.
Our training procedure produces two models that operate independently, one for single-view depth prediction, and one for multiview camera pose estimation.

In this work, we mimic this approach by training a model
that observes sequences of images and aims to explain its
observations by predicting likely camera motion and the
scene structure (as shown in Fig. 1). We take an end-toend approach in allowing the model to map directly from
input pixels to an estimate of ego-motion (parameterized as
6-DoF transformation matrices) and the underlying scene
structure (parameterized as per-pixel depth maps under a
reference view). We are particularly inspired by prior work
that has suggested view synthesis as a metric [44] and recent
work that tackles the calibrated, multi-view 3D case in an
end-to-end framework [10]. Our method is unsupervised,
and can be trained simply using sequences of images with
no manual labeling or even camera motion information.
Our approach builds upon the insight that a geometric view synthesis system only performs consistently well
when its intermediate predictions of the scene geometry
and the camera poses correspond to the physical ground11851

