Deep Laplacian Pyramid Networks for Fast and Accurate Super-Resolution
Wei-Sheng Lai1
Jia-Bin Huang2
Narendra Ahuja3
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1 University of California, Merced
2 Virginia Tech
3 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
http://vllab1.ucmerced.edu/˜wlai24/LapSRN

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have recently demonstrated high-quality reconstruction for single-image superresolution. In this paper, we propose the Laplacian Pyramid
Super-Resolution Network (LapSRN) to progressively reconstruct the sub-band residuals of high-resolution images.
At each pyramid level, our model takes coarse-resolution
feature maps as input, predicts the high-frequency residuals, and uses transposed convolutions for upsampling to the
finer level. Our method does not require the bicubic interpolation as the pre-processing step and thus dramatically reduces the computational complexity. We train the proposed
LapSRN with deep supervision using a robust Charbonnier
loss function and achieve high-quality reconstruction. Furthermore, our network generates multi-scale predictions in
one feed-forward pass through the progressive reconstruction, thereby facilitates resource-aware applications. Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations on benchmark datasets show that the proposed algorithm performs
favorably against the state-of-the-art methods in terms of
speed and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Single-image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct
a high-resolution (HR) image from a single low-resolution
(LR) input image. In recent years, example-based SR methods have demonstrated the state-of-the-art performance by
learning a mapping from LR to HR image patches using
large image databases. Numerous learning algorithms have
been applied to learn such a mapping, including dictionary
learning [37, 38], local linear regression [30, 36], and random forest [26].
Recently, Dong et al. [7] propose a Super-Resolution
Convolutional Neural Network (SRCNN) to learn a nonlinear LR-to-HR mapping. The network is extended to embed
a sparse coding-based network [33] or use a deeper structure [17]. While these models demonstrate promising results, there are three main issues. First, existing methods
use a pre-defined upsampling operator, e.g., bicubic inter-

polation, to upscale input images to the desired spatial resolution before applying the network for prediction. This preprocessing step increases unnecessary computational cost
and often results in visible reconstruction artifacts. Several
algorithms accelerate SRCNN by performing convolution
on LR images and replacing the pre-defined upsampling operator with sub-pixel convolution [28] or transposed convolution [8] (also named as deconvolution in some of the
literature). These methods, however, use relatively small
networks and cannot learn complicated mappings well due
to the limited network capacity. Second, existing methods
optimize the networks with an ℓ2 loss and thus inevitably
generate blurry predictions. Since the ℓ2 loss fails to capture the underlying multi-modal distributions of HR patches
(i.e., the same LR patch may have many corresponding HR
patches), the reconstructed HR images are often overlysmooth and not close to human visual perception on natural images. Third, most methods reconstruct HR images
in one upsampling step, which increases the difficulties of
training for large scaling factors (e.g., 8×). In addition, existing methods cannot generate intermediate SR predictions
at multiple resolutions. As a result, one needs to train a
large variety of models for various applications with different desired upsampling scales and computational loads.
To address these drawbacks, we propose the Laplacian
Pyramid Super-Resolution Network (LapSRN) based on a
cascade of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Our network takes an LR image as input and progressively predicts
the sub-band residuals in a coarse-to-fine fashion. At each
level, we first apply a cascade of convolutional layers to
extract feature maps. We then use a transposed convolutional layer for upsampling the feature maps to a finer level.
Finally, we use a convolutional layer to predict the subband residuals (the differences between the upsampled image and the ground truth HR image at the respective level).
The predicted residuals at each level are used to efficiently
reconstruct the HR image through upsampling and addition operations. While the proposed LapSRN consists of
a set of cascaded sub-networks, we train the network with
a robust Charbonnier loss function in an end-to-end fashion
(i.e., without stage-wise optimization). As depicted in Fig1624

