Joint Graph Decomposition & Node Labeling: Problem, Algorithms, Applications
Evgeny Levinkov1 , Jonas Uhrig3,4 , Siyu Tang1,2 , Mohamed Omran1 , Eldar Insafutdinov1 ,
Alexander Kirillov5 , Carsten Rother5 , Thomas Brox4 , Bernt Schiele1 and Bjoern Andres1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Daimler AG R&D, Sindelfingen, Germany
4
Computer Vision Lab, University of Freiburg, Germany 5 Computer Vision Lab, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
2

Abstract
We state a combinatorial optimization problem whose
feasible solutions define both a decomposition and a node
labeling of a given graph. This problem offers a common
mathematical abstraction of seemingly unrelated computer
vision tasks, including instance-separating semantic segmentation, articulated human body pose estimation and multiple
object tracking. Conceptually, the problem we state generalizes the unconstrained integer quadratic program and the
minimum cost lifted multicut problem, both of which are NPhard. In order to find feasible solutions efficiently, we define
two local search algorithms that converge monotonously to
a local optimum, offering a feasible solution at any time. To
demonstrate their effectiveness in tackling computer vision
tasks, we apply these algorithms to instances of the problem that we construct from published data, using published
algorithms. We report state-of-the-art application-specific
accuracy for the three above-mentioned applications.

1. Introduction and Related Work
In this article, we state a combinatorial optimization problem whose feasible solutions define both a decomposition
and a node labeling of a given graph (Fig. 1). This problem
that we call the minimum cost node labeling lifted multicut
problem, NL - LMP, generalizes the NP-hard unconstrained
integer quadratic program, UIQP, that has been studied intensively in the context of graphical models [14], and also
generalizes the NP-hard minimum cost lifted multicut problem, LMP [16]. Unlike solutions of pure node labeling problems such as the UIQP, solutions of the NL - LMP can assign
neighboring nodes with the same label to distinct components, and neighboring nodes with distinct labels to the same
component. Unlike in pure decomposition problems such as
the LMP, the cost of assigning nodes to the same component
or distinct components can depend on node labels.
In order to find feasible solutions of the NL - LMP efficiently, we define and implement two local search algorithms

(a) Decomposition

(b) Node Labeling

Figure 1: This article studies an optimization problem whose
feasible solutions define both a decomposition (a) and a node
labeling (b) of a given graph G = (V, E). A decomposition
of G is a partition Π of the node set V such that, for every
V ′ ∈ Π, the subgraph of G induced by V ′ is connected. A
node labeling of G is a map f : V → L from its node set V
to a finite, non-empty set L of labels.
that converge monotonously to a local optimum, offering a
feasible solution at any time. These algorithms do not compute lower bounds. They output feasible solutions without
approximation certificates. Hence, they belong to the class
of primal feasible heuristics for the NL - LMP. The first algorithm we define and refer to as alternating Kernighan-Lin
search with joins and node relabeling, KLj/r, is a generalization of the algorithm KLj of Keuper et al. [16] and of
Iterated Conditional Modes (ICM). The second algorithm
we define and refer to as joint Kernighan-Lin search with
joins and node relabeling, KLj∗r, is a generalization of KLj
that transforms a decomposition and a node labeling jointly.
Both algorithms build on work of Kernighan and Lin [15].
Toward applications, the NL - LMP offers a common mathematical abstraction of seemingly unrelated computer vision
tasks, including multiple object tracking, instance-separating
semantic segmentation and articulated human body pose
estimation. For these three applications, the abstraction is
introduced below and described in more detail in the later
sections. Also for these three applications, benchmark data
sets and feasible solutions found by our algorithms, we report state-of-the-art application-specific accuracy.
16012

