Comparative Evaluation of Hand-Crafted and Learned Local Features
Johannes L. Schönberger1 Hans Hardmeier1 Torsten Sattler1 Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
Microsoft Corp.
{jsch,harhans,sattlert,pomarc}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Matching local image descriptors is a key step in many
computer vision applications. For more than a decade,
hand-crafted descriptors such as SIFT have been used for
this task. Recently, multiple new descriptors learned from
data have been proposed and shown to improve on SIFT in
terms of discriminative power. This paper is dedicated to
an extensive experimental evaluation of learned local features to establish a single evaluation protocol that ensures
comparable results. In terms of matching performance, we
evaluate the different descriptors regarding standard criteria. However, considering matching performance in isolation only provides an incomplete measure of a descriptor’s
quality. For example, finding additional correct matches between similar images does not necessarily lead to a better
performance when trying to match images under extreme
viewpoint or illumination changes. Besides pure descriptor
matching, we thus also evaluate the different descriptors in
the context of image-based reconstruction. This enables us
to study the descriptor performance on a set of more practical criteria including image retrieval, the ability to register
images under strong viewpoint and illumination changes,
and the accuracy and completeness of the reconstructed
cameras and scenes. To facilitate future research, the full
evaluation pipeline is made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Matching local image features is a crucial step in
many computer vision applications, e.g., in Structure-fromMotion (SFM) and Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [1, 17, 33, 37,
39, 40], image retrieval [31, 34, 47, 48], and image-based localization [35, 36, 56]. In many of these applications, the
overall performance strongly depends on the quality of the
initial feature matching stage. Consequently, determining
which local feature descriptors offer the most discriminative
power and the best matching performance is of significant
interest to a large part of the computer vision community.
For more than a decade, SIFT [26] has arguably been the
most popular feature descriptor for such tasks. Recently, the

ability of neural networks to learn feature representations
from data that are superior to prior hand-crafted ones has
led to significant progress in the field of computer vision,
e.g., in object detection and recognition [12, 23, 41]. Consequently, neural networks have also been applied to the problem of descriptor learning [3, 14, 24, 42] in order to derive
more discriminative representations for local features. The
resulting methods demonstrate clear improvements over
standard hand-crafted representations, such as SIFT [26],
SURF [4], or DAISY [46]. However, there is usually no
direct comparison with more advanced hand-crafted SIFT
variants such as RootSIFT [2], RootSIFT-PCA [7], or DSPSIFT [9]. Moreover, learned descriptors are typically evaluated on the patch classification benchmark from Brown et
al. [6]. The task measures how well a descriptor can distinguish between related and unrelated patches based on their
distance in descriptor space. Yet, a better performance on
this benchmark does not necessarily imply a better matching quality, as shown by Balntas et al. [3]. For example,
pruning steps such as Lowe’s ratio test [26] or mutual nearest neighbor constraints might compensate for a higher false
positive matching rate in terms of descriptor distance. Similarly, reaching a better average matching performance does
not automatically imply a better performance in terms of
subsequent processing steps. In the context of SFM, finding additional correspondences for image pairs where SIFT
already provides enough matches does not necessarily result in more accurate or complete reconstructions. At the
same time, descriptors with a better average matching performance might still not find enough correspondences to be
able to handle hard image pairs where SIFT fails.
In this paper, we present a thorough experimental evaluation of learned and advanced hand-crafted feature descriptors in order to better understand their performance. In detail, this paper makes the following contributions: i) We
provide a more detailed study of the matching performance
of the different descriptors using a wider range of evaluation
criteria and scenes than previous evaluations such as [3]. ii)
Besides analyzing the matching quality in isolation of further processing steps, we also investigate the impact of different descriptors on the challenging and more practical task

1482

