Joint Sequence Learning and Cross-Modality Convolution for 3D Biomedical
Segmentation
Kuan-Lun Tseng1 , Yen-Liang Lin2 , Winston Hsu1 and Chung-Yang Huang1
1

National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
GE Global Research, NY, USA

tkuanlun350@gmail.com,yenlianglintw@gmail.com,whsu@ntu.edu.tw,cyhuang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Deep learning models such as convolutional neural network have been widely used in 3D biomedical segmentation
and achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, most of
them often adapt a single modality or stack multiple modalities as different input channels. To better leverage the multimodalities, we propose a deep encoder-decoder structure
with cross-modality convolution layers to incorporate different modalities of MRI data. In addition, we exploit convolutional LSTM to model a sequence of 2D slices, and
jointly learn the multi-modalities and convolutional LSTM
in an end-to-end manner. To avoid converging to the certain labels, we adopt a re-weighting scheme and two-phase
training to handle the label imbalance. Experimental results on BRATS-2015 [13] show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art biomedical segmentation approaches.

1. Introduction
3D image segmentation plays a vital role in biomedical analysis. Brain tumors like gliomas and glioblastomas
have different kinds of shapes, and can appear anywhere in
the brain, which make it challenging to localize the tumors
precisely. Four different modalities of magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) image are commonly referenced for the
brain tumor surgery: T1 (spin-lattice relaxation), T1C (T1contrasted), T2 (spin-spin relaxation), and FLAIR (fluid attenuation inversion recovery). Each modality has distinct
responses for different tumor tissues. We leverage multiple
modalities to automatically discriminate the tumor tissues
for assisting the doctors in their treatment planning.
Recently, deep learning methods have been adopted in
biomedical analysis and achieve the state-of-the-art performance. Patch-based methods [19, 10] extract small patches

of an image (in a sliding window fashion) and predict the label for each central pixel. These methods suffer from slow
training, as the features from the overlapped patches are recomputed. Besides, they only take a small region into a network, which ignores the global structure information (e.g.,
image contents and label correlations). Some methods apply 2D segmentation to 3D biomedical data [20] [5]. They
slice a 3D medical image into several 2D planes and apply 2D segmentation for each 2D plane. 3D segmentation
is then generated by concatenating the 2D results. However, these 2D approaches ignore the sequential information
between consecutive slices. For examples, there may have
rapid shape changes in the consecutive depths. 3D-based
approaches [14] use 3D convolution to exploit different
views of a 3D image. But, they often require a larger number of parameters and are prone to overfitting on the small
training dataset. The above methods often stack modalities
as different input channels for deep learning models, which
do not explicitly consider the correlations between different modalities. To address these problems, we propose a
new deep encoder-decoder structure that incorporates spatial and sequential information between slices, and leverage
the responses from multiple modalities for 3D biomedical
segmentation.
Figure 1 shows the system overview of our method.
Given a sequence of slices of multi-modal MRI data, our
method accurately predicts the different types of tumor issues for each pixel. Our model consists of three main parts:
multi-modal encoder, cross-modality convolution and convolutional LSTM. The slices from different modalities are
stacked together by the depth values (b). Then, they pass
through different CNNs in the multi-modal encoder (each
CNN is applied to a different modality) to obtain a semantic latent feature representation (c). Latent features from
multiple modalities are effectively aggregated by the proposed cross-modality convolution layer (d). Then, we leverage convolutional LSTM to better exploit the spatial and se16393

