Primary Object Segmentation in Videos Based on Region Augmentation and
Reduction
Yeong Jun Koh
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

yjkoh@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel algorithm to segment a primary object in a video
sequence is proposed in this work. First, we generate candidate regions for the primary object using both color and
motion edges. Second, we estimate initial primary object regions, by exploiting the recurrence property of the primary
object. Third, we augment the initial regions with missing
parts or reducing them by excluding noisy parts repeatedly.
This augmentation and reduction process (ARP) identifies
the primary object region in each frame. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art conventional algorithms on
recent benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Primary object segmentation (POS) is the task to segment a single primary object from the background in a video
sequence, where the primary object means the most frequently appearing and salient object in the video. POS is
applicable to many vision tasks, including video summarization, action recognition, and object class learning. POS,
however, is challenging due to many difficulties, such as
object deformation, occlusion, and background clutters. Especially, without user annotations or any prior information
about a primary object (e.g. its class), it is difficult to separate the primary object from the background.
POS is closely related to video object segmentation (VOS). VOS can be classified into three categories:
semi-supervised, multiple, and unsupervised VOS. Semisupervised VOS [17, 22, 23, 26, 28, 35] requires manual annotations at the first frame to segment target objects in subsequent frames. Multiple VOS [2, 7, 13, 14, 18, 19, 25, 32]
does not demand user annotations about objects, but yields
multiple segment tracks. In other words, multiple VOS
cannot identify the primary object among the multiple
tracks without the ground-truth. In contrast, unsupervised
VOS [5, 9, 16, 20, 30, 33, 36] aims to find only a single seg-

ment track, corresponding to a primary object, automatically. Thus, unsupervised VOS has the same purpose as
POS does. In this regard, we use the terms ‘POS’ and ‘unsupervised VOS’ exchangeably. Without manual annotations or ground-truth about a primary object, POS is more
challenging than semi-supervised or multiple VOS.
In general, POS methods estimate initial regions of primary objects, and refine the initial results using primary object cues, e.g. colors or positions. Object proposals are often used to find initial primary object regions [16,36]. However, the conventional techniques [16, 36] strongly depend
on the objectness score of each proposal, which is computed
in each frame, without exploiting the recurrence property
of the primary object. For the refinement of initial regions,
many POS methods [9, 16, 20, 36] extend the interactive image segmentation technique [24] to the VOS task. They
construct Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) for a primary
object and the background, respectively, based on initial region estimates. However, these GMMs may fail to model
temporally varying object and background information accurately and are vulnerable to incorrect initial estimates.
In this work, we propose a novel POS algorithm to yield
a segment track for a primary object in a video sequence.
First, we generate a pool of candidate regions for the primary object. To this end, both color and motion edges are
used to increase the recall rates of static and moving objects.
Second, we estimate initial regions for the primary object,
by exploiting the recurrence property of the primary object.
Third, instead of the GMM-based refinement, we refine the
initial regions by augmenting them with missing parts or reducing them by excluding noisy parts. This augmentation
and reduction process (ARP) is performed based on a cost
function. By minimizing the cost function iteratively, we
achieve the POS. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art semi-supervised, multiple, and unsupervised VOS
algorithms on the DAVIS [21] and FBMS [2] benchmark
datasets.

3442

