Subspace Clustering via Variance Regularized Ridge Regression

Chong Peng, Zhao Kang, Qiang Cheng
Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL, 62901, USA
{pchong,zhao.kang,qcheng}@siu.edu

Abstract
Spectral clustering based subspace clustering methods
have emerged recently. When the inputs are 2-dimensional
(2D) data, most existing clustering methods convert such
data to vectors as preprocessing, which severely damages
spatial information of the data. In this paper, we propose
a novel subspace clustering method for 2D data with enhanced capability of retaining spatial information for clustering. It seeks two projection matrices and simultaneously
constructs a linear representation of the projected data,
such that the sought projections help construct the most
expressive representation with the most variational information. We regularize our method based on covariance
matrices directly obtained from 2D data, which have much
smaller size and are more computationally amiable. Moreover, to exploit nonlinear structures of the data, a nonlinear
version is proposed, which constructs an adaptive manifold
according to updated projections. The learning processes
of projections, representation, and manifold thus mutually
enhance each other, leading to a powerful data representation. Efficient optimization procedures are proposed, which
generate non-increasing objective value sequence with theoretical convergence guarantee. Extensive experimental results confirm the effectiveness of proposed method.

1. Introduction
Representing and processing high-dimensional data has
been routinely used in many areas such as computer vision and machine learning. Often times, high-dimensonal
data have latent low-dimensional structures and can be well
represented by a union of low-dimensional subspaces. Recovering such low-dimensional subspaces usually requires
clustering data points into different groups such that each
group can be fitted with a subspace, which is refered to as
subspace clustering. During the last decade, subspace clustering algorithms have attracted substantial reserach attention, among which spectral-clustering based subspace clus-

tering methods have been popular due to their promising
performance; e.g., low-rank representation (LRR) [17] and
sparse subspace clustering (SSC) [6] are two typical such
methods that seek representation matrices with different assumptions, with LRR assuming low-rankness while SSC requiring sparsity.
Recently, a number of new subspace clustering methods have been developed. For example, [29] replaces the
nuclear norm used in LRR by some non-convex rank approximations, because the nuclear norm is far from being
accurate in estimating the rank of real world data. [30] reveals that not all features are equally important to recover
low-dimensional subspaces and with feature selection both
nuclear norm and non-convex rank approximations may obtain enhanced performance. [24] seeks a linear projection
to project the data and learns a sparse representation in the
projected latent low-dimensional space. To capture nonlinear structures of the data, nonlinear techniques such as kernel and manifold methods have been adopted for subspace
clustering. For example, kernel SSC (KSSC) [25] maps data
points into a higher-dimensional kernel space where sparse
coefficients are learned; [19, 34] construct low-rank representations by exploiting nonlinear structures of the data
in a kernel space or on manifold. A shared drawback of
these nonlinear methods is that the kernel matrix or graph
Laplacian is predefined, and thus may be independent from
the representation learning, potentially leading to clustering results far from optimal. A recently developed method,
thresholding ridge regression (TRR) [31], points out that
such methods as LRR and SSC achieve robustness by estimating and removing specifically structured representation
errors from the input space, which requires prior knowledge
on the usually unknown structures of the (also unknown)
errors. To overcome this limitation, [31] leverages an observation that the representation coefficients are larger over
intra-subspace than inter-subspace data points, and thus the
representation errors can be eliminated in the projection
space by thresholding small coefficients obtained with a
ridge regression model.
4321
2931

