Deep Crisp Boundaries
Yupei Wang1,2 , Xin Zhao1,2 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1
CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
wangyupei2014@ia.ac.cn; xzhao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; kaiqi.huang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Image

Abstract
Edge detection has made significant progress with the
help of deep Convolutional Networks (ConvNet). ConvNet
based edge detectors approached human level performance
on standard benchmarks. We provide a systematical study
of these detector outputs, and show that they failed to accurately localize edges, which can be adversarial for tasks
that require crisp edge inputs. In addition, we propose
a novel refinement architecture to address the challenging problem of learning a crisp edge detector using ConvNet. Our method leverages a top-down backward refinement pathway, and progressively increases the resolution of
feature maps to generate crisp edges. Our results achieve
promising performance on BSDS500, surpassing human
accuracy when using standard criteria, and largely outperforming state-of-the-art methods when using more strict criteria. We further demonstrate the benefit of crisp edge maps
for estimating optical flow and generating object proposals.

1. Introduction
Edge detection is a well-established problem in computer vision. Finding perceptually salient edges in natural images is important for mid-level vision [27]. Moreover, edge detection outputs, in terms of boundary maps,
are often used for other vision tasks, including optical
flow [30], object proposals [2] and object recognition [6].
We have witnessed a significant progress on edge detection, ever since our community embraced a learning based
approach [7]. In particular, state-of-the-art methods [39, 18]
such as Holistic Edge Detector [39] (HED), leveraging deep
ConvNet for detecting edges, achieved human level performance on standard datasets such as BSDS500 [1].
Is edge detection a solved problem? In Figure 1(a), we
show a visualization of human labeled edges, in comparison to outputs from HED (the current state-of-the-art) and
PMI (designed for accurately localizing edges). While the
HED result has a higher score, the quality of the edge map is

PMI

F1-Score
0.85
0.8
0.75
HED

Ground Truth

0.7

0.65
0.6
0.55
d
HED

(a)

d/2

d/4

PMI

Human

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Visualization of edge maps from PMI [14] and
HED [39] with input images and ground-truth edges; (b) Performance (on the left image) drops with decreased matching distance.
With a tighter distance, the gap between PMI and HED decreases
and the gap between HED and human increases. These results
suggest that edges from HED are not well aligned with image
boundaries. We seek to improve the localization ability of ConvNet based edge detector in this paper.

less satisfactory—edges are blurry and do not stick to actual
image boundaries. An accurate edge detector has to balance
between “correctness” of an edge (distinguishing between
edge and non-edge pixels) and “crispness” of the boundary
(precisely localizing edge pixels) [14]. We can capture the
“crispness” by decreasing the maximal permissible distance
when matching ground-truth edges during benchmark. The
F1 score drops dramatically when we tighten the evaluation
criteria (see Figure 1(b)).
Both qualitative and quantitative results suggest that
edge maps from a ConvNet are highly “correct” yet less
“crisp”—edges are not well localized. This issue is deeply
rooted in modern ConvNet architecture [19]. First, spatial
resolution of features is drastically reduced in more discriminative top layers, leading to blurred output of edges.
Second, fully convolutional architecture encourages similar
responses of neighboring pixels, and thus may fail to produce a thin edge map. Such a thick and blurred edge map

3892

