Pose-Aware Person Recognition
Vijay Kumar ⋆

Anoop Namboodiri ⋆
Manohar Paluri †
C. V. Jawahar ⋆
⋆
†
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad, India
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
(a)

Person recognition methods that use multiple body regions have shown significant improvements over traditional
face-based recognition. One of the primary challenges in
full-body person recognition is the extreme variation in pose
and view point. In this work, (i) we present an approach
that tackles pose variations utilizing multiple models that
are trained on specific poses, and combined using poseaware weights during testing. (ii) For learning a person
representation, we propose a network that jointly optimizes
a single loss over multiple body regions. (iii) Finally, we introduce new benchmarks to evaluate person recognition in
diverse scenarios and show significant improvements over
previously proposed approaches on all the benchmarks including the photo album setting of PIPA.

1. Introduction
People are ubiquitous in our images and videos. They
appear in photographs, entertainment videos, sport broadcasts, and surveillance and authentication systems. This
makes person recognition an important step towards automatic understanding of media content. Perhaps, the most
straight-forward and popular way of recognizing people is
through facial cues. Consequently, there is a large literature
focused on face recognition [25, 56]. Current face recognition algorithms [33, 35, 39, 40] achieve impressive performance on verification and recognition benchmarks [20, 44],
and are close to human-level performance.
Face based recognition approaches require that faces are
visible in images, which is often not the case in many practical scenarios. For instance, in social media photos, movies
and sport videos, faces may be occluded, be of low resolution, facing away from the camera or even cropped from the
view (Figure 1(a)). Hence it becomes necessary to look beyond faces for additional identity cues. It has been recently
demonstrated [23, 26, 53] that different body parts provide
complementary information and significantly improve person recognition when used in conjunction with face.
One of the major challenges in person recognition or
fine-grained object recognition in general is the pose and

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Different body regions provide cues that help
in recognition. (b) Each row shows the appearance of a person in different poses. Note that the distinguishing features
of a person that help classification are different in each pose.

alignment of different object parts. The appearance of the
same object changes drastically with different poses and
view-points (rows of Figure 1(b)) causing a serious challenge for recognition. One way to overcome this problem
is through pose normalization, where objects in different
poses and view-points are transformed to a canonical pose
[6, 10, 18, 40, 48, 57]. Another popular strategy is to model
the appearance of objects in individual poses by learning
view-specific representations [2, 22, 31, 52].
In this work, we aim to learn pose-aware representations
for person recognition. While it is straight-forward to align
objects such as faces, it is harder to align human body parts
that exhibit large variations. Hence we design view-specific
models to obtain pose-aware representations. We partition
the space of human pose into finite clusters (columns of Figure 1(b)) each containing samples in a particular body orientation or view-point. We then learn multi-region convolutional neural network (convnet) representations for each
view-point. However, unlike previous approaches that train
a convnet for each body region, we jointly optimize the network over multiple body regions with a single identification loss. This provides additional flexibility to the network
to make predictions based on a few informative body regions. This is in contrast to separate training which strictly
enforces correct predictions from each body region. Dur-

6223

