Multi-Modal Mean-Fields via Cardinality-Based Clamping
Pierre Baqué1
François Fleuret1,2
Pascal Fua1
1
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
IDIAP, Martigny, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Mean Field inference is central to statistical physics. It
has attracted much interest in the Computer Vision community to efficiently solve problems expressible in terms of
large Conditional Random Fields. However, since it models the posterior probability distribution as a product of
marginal probabilities, it may fail to properly account for
important dependencies between variables.
We therefore replace the fully factorized distribution of
Mean Field by a weighted mixture of such distributions, that
similarly minimizes the KL-Divergence to the true posterior. By introducing two new ideas, namely, conditioning on
groups of variables instead of single ones and using a parameter of the conditional random field potentials, that we
identify to the temperature in the sense of statistical physics
to select such groups, we can perform this minimization efficiently. Our extension of the clamping method proposed in
previous works allows us to both produce a more descriptive approximation of the true posterior and, inspired by the
diverse MAP paradigms, fit a mixture of Mean Field approximations. We demonstrate that this positively impacts
real-world algorithms that initially relied on mean fields.

1. Introduction
Mean Field (MF) is a modeling technique that has been
central to statistical physics for a century. Its ability to
handle stochastic models involving millions of variables
and dense graphs has attracted much attention in our community. It is routinely used for tasks as diverse as detection [14, 2], segmentation [31, 23, 10, 43], denoising [11, 27, 25], depth from stereo [15, 23] and poseestimation [35].
MF approximates a “true” probability distribution by a
fully-factorized one that is easy to encode and manipulate [22]. The true distribution is usually defined in practice through a Conditional Random Field (CRF), and may
not be representable explicitly, as it involves complex interdependencies between variables. In such a case the MF ap-

proximation is an extremely useful tool.
While this drastic approximation often conveys the information of interest, the true distribution may concentrate
on configurations that are very different, equally likely, and
that cannot be jointly encoded by a product law. Section 3
depicts such a case where groups of variables are correlated
and may take one among many values with equal probability. In this situation, MF will simply pick one valid configuration, which we call a mode, and ignore the others.
So-called structured Mean Field methods [32, 7] can help
overcome this limitation. This can be effective but requires
arbitrary choices in the design of a simplified sub-graph for
each new problem, which can be impractical especially if
the initial CRF is very densely connected.
Here we introduce a novel way to automatically add
structure to the MF approximation and show how it can be
used to return several potentially valid answers in ambiguous situations. Instead of relying on a single fully factorized probability distribution, we introduce a mixture of such
distributions, which we will refer to as Multi-Modal Mean
Field (MMMF).
We compute this MMMF by partitioning the state space
into subsets in which a standard MF approximation suffices.
This is similar in spirit to the approach of [39] but a key
difference is that our clamping acts simultaneously on arbitrarily sized groups of variables, as opposed to one at a
time. We will show that when dealing with large CRFs
with strong correlations, this is essential. The key to the
efficiency of MMMF is how we choose these groups. To
this end, we introduce a temperature parameter that controls how much we smooth the original probability distribution before the MF approximation. By doing so for several temperatures, we spot groups of variables that may take
different labels in different modes of the distribution. We
then force the optimizer to explore alternative solutions by
clamping them, that is, forcing them to take different values.
Our temperature-based approach, unlike the one of [39],
does not require a priori knowledge of the CRF structure
and is therefore compatible with “black box” models.
In the remainder of the paper, we will describe both MF
11726

