Generalized Deep Image to Image Regression
Venkataraman Santhanam, Vlad I. Morariu, Larry S. Davis
UMIACS
University of Maryland, College Park
[venkai,morariu,lsd]@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present a Deep Convolutional Neural Network architecture which serves as a generic image-to-image regressor
that can be trained end-to-end without any further machinery. Our proposed architecture, the Recursively Branched
Deconvolutional Network (RBDN), develops a cheap multicontext image representation very early on using an efficient
recursive branching scheme with extensive parameter sharing and learnable upsampling. This multi-context representation is subjected to a highly non-linear locality preserving transformation by the remainder of our network comprising of a series of convolutions/deconvolutions without
any spatial downsampling. The RBDN architecture is fully
convolutional and can handle variable sized images during
inference. We provide qualitative/quantitative results on 3
diverse tasks: relighting, denoising and colorization and
show that our proposed RBDN architecture obtains comparable results to the state-of-the-art on each of these tasks
when used off-the-shelf without any post processing or taskspecific architectural modifications.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, generic deep convolutional
neural network (DCNN) architectures such as variants of
VGG [49] and ResNet [28] have been immensely successful in tackling a diverse range of classification problems
and achieve state-of-the-art performance on most benchmarks when used out of the box. The key feature of
these architectures is an extremely high model capacity
along with a robustness to minor unwanted (e.g. translational/rotational/illumination) variations. Given suitable
training data, such models can be discriminatively trained
in a reliable end-to-end fashion. However, since classification tasks only require a single (potentially multi-variate)
class label corresponding to the entire image, early architectures focused solely on developing strong global image
features.
Semantic Segmentation was one of the first applica-

Figure 1. Proposed RBDN used for diverse Im2Im regression
tasks: (from left to right) Denoising, Relighting, Colorization.

tions to witness the extension of DCNNs to output dense
pixel wise predictions [42, 46, 12, 22, 27]. These approaches used either VGG or ResNet (without the fully
connected layers) as their backbone and introduced architectural changes such as skip layers [42], deconvolutional
networks [46, 4], hypercolumns [27] or laplacian pyramids [22] to facilitate the retention/reconstruction of local
input-output correspondences. While these approaches performed very well on segmentation benchmarks, they introduced a trade-off between locality and context. Since the
task still remained one of classification (albeit at a pixel
level), the trade-off was skewed in favor of incorporating
more context and subsequently reconstructing local correspondences from global activations. This is perhaps why
some of these approaches had to rely on ancillary methods
such as Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [46, 12] to enhance the granularity of their predictions.
Image-to-Image (Im2Im) regression entails the generation of dense “continuous” pixelwise predictions, where
the locality-context trade-off is highly task-dependent (typically skewed more in favor of locality). Several DCNN
based approaches have been proposed for specific Im2Im
regression tasks such as denoising, relighting, colorization, etc. These approaches typically involve highly task15609

