3D Convolutional Neural Networks for Efficient and Robust
Hand Pose Estimation from Single Depth Images

1

Liuhao Ge1 , Hui Liang1,2,∗, Junsong Yuan1,†, Daniel Thalmann1
Institute for Media Innovation, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University
2
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
ge0001ao@ntu.edu.sg, lianghui@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, {jsyuan, danielthalmann}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a simple, yet effective approach for real-time
hand pose estimation from single depth images using threedimensional Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs).
Image based features extracted by 2D CNNs are not directly suitable for 3D hand pose estimation due to the lack of
3D spatial information. Our proposed 3D CNN taking a 3D
volumetric representation of the hand depth image as input
can capture the 3D spatial structure of the input and accurately regress full 3D hand pose in a single pass. In order
to make the 3D CNN robust to variations in hand sizes and
global orientations, we perform 3D data augmentation on
the training data. Experiments show that our proposed 3D
CNN based approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on two challenging hand pose datasets, and is very efficient
as our implementation runs at over 215 fps on a standard
computer with a single GPU.

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed 3D CNN based hand
pose estimation method. We generate the 3D volumetric
representation of hand with projective D-TSDF from the 3D
point cloud. 3D CNN is trained in an end-to-end manner
to map the 3D volumetric representation to 3D hand joint
relative locations in the 3D volume.

1. Introduction
Articulated hand pose estimation is one of the core technologies for human computer interaction in virtual reality and augmented reality applications, since this technology provides a natural way for users to interact with virtual environments and objects. Accurate real-time 3D hand
pose estimation has aroused a lot of research attention in
the past few years [7, 10, 15, 18, 21, 30, 32, 34, 39] with
the emergence of consumer depth cameras. However, it is
still challenging to achieve efficient and robust estimation
performance because of large variations in hand pose, high
dimensionality of hand motion, severe self-occlusion and
self-similarity of fingers in the depth image.
Many recent works on hand pose estimation have
achieved good performance due to the success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [4, 17, 23, 34, 40, 42]
∗ This work was done when Hui Liang was a research staff at NTU.
† Corresponding author

and the availability of large hand pose datasets [28, 30, 34].
These methods directly take the depth image as input to
2D CNNs which output 3D joint locations [16, 17, 23, 40],
hand model parameters [42] or heat-maps [34]. Nevertheless, we argue that image based features extracted by 2D
CNNs are not directly suitable for 3D hand pose estimation due to the lack of 3D spatial information. For example,
in [17], the initial result of 2D CNN is very poor, and it
is iteratively refined by a feedback loop to incorporate 3D
information from a generative model. Ge et al. [4] better
utilize the depth cues by projecting the depth image onto
three views and applying multi-view CNNs to regress three
views’ heat-maps. However, the multi-view CNNs still cannot fully exploit 3D spatial information in the depth image,
since the projection from 3D to 2D will lose certain information. Although increasing the number of views may improve the performance, the computational complexity will
be increased when using more views.

1991

