Fixed-point Factorized Networks
Peisong Wang1,2 and Jian Cheng1,2,3∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{peisong.wang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNN) based
methods have achieved remarkable performance in a wide
range of tasks and have been among the most powerful
and widely used techniques in computer vision. However,
DNN-based methods are both computational-intensive and
resource-consuming, which hinders the application of these
methods on embedded systems like smart phones. To alleviate this problem, we introduce a novel Fixed-point Factorized Networks (FFN) for pretrained models to reduce
the computational complexity as well as the storage requirement of networks. The resulting networks have only
weights of -1, 0 and 1, which significantly eliminates the
most resource-consuming multiply-accumulate operations
(MACs). Extensive experiments on large-scale ImageNet
classification task show the proposed FFN only requires
one-thousandth of multiply operations with comparable accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently been setting new state of the art performance in many fields including computer vision, speech recognition as well as natural language processing. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), in particular, have outperformed traditional machine learning algorithms on computer vision tasks such
as image recognition, object detection, semantic segmentation as well as gesture and action recognition. These breakthroughs are partially due to the added computational complexity and the storage footprint, which makes these models very hard to train as well as to deploy. For example,
the Alexnet [20] involves 61M floating point parameters
and 725M high precision multiply-accumulate operations
(MACs). Current DNNs are usually trained offline by utilizing specialized hardware like NVIDIA GPUs and CPU
∗ The corresponding author.

clusters. But such an amount of computation may be unaffordable for portable devices such as mobile phones, tablets
and wearable devices, which usually have limited computing resources. What’s more, the huge storage requirement
and large memory accesses may hinder efficient hardware
implementation of neural networks, like FPGAs and neural
network oriented chips.
To speed-up test-phase computation of deep models, lots
of matrix and tensor factorization based methods are investigated by the community recently [5, 15, 32, 21, 18, 30].
However, these methods commonly utilize full-precision
weights, which are hardware-unfriendly especially for embedded systems. Moreover, the low compression ratios hinder the applications of these methods on mobile devices.
Fixed-point quantization can partially alleviate these two
problems mentioned above. There have been many studies working on reducing the storage and the computational
complexity of DNNs by quantizing the parameters of these
models. Some of these works [3, 6, 8, 22, 24] quantize
the pretrained weights using several bits (usually 3∼12
bits) with a minimal loss of performance. However, in
these kinds of quantized networks one still needs to employ
large numbers of multiply-accumulate operations. Others
[23, 1, 4, 2, 17, 12, 25] focus on training these networks
from scratch with binary (+1 and -1) or ternary (+1, 0 and 1) weights. These methods do not rely on pretrained models
and may reduce the computations at training stage as well
as testing stage. But on the other hand, these methods could
not make use of the pretrained models very efficiently due
to the dramatic information loss during the binary or ternary
quantization of weights.
In this paper, we propose a unified framework called
Fixed-point Factorized Network (FFN) to simultaneously
accelerate and compress DNN models with only minor performance degradation. Specifically, we propose to first directly factorize the weight matrix using fixed-point (+1, 0
and -1) representation followed by recovering the (pseudo)
full precision submatrices. We also propose an effective and
practical technique called weight balancing, which makes

4012

