Learning Video Object Segmentation from Static Images
*

Federico Perazzi1,2 * Anna Khoreva3 Rodrigo Benenson3
Bernt Schiele3 Alexander Sorkine-Hornung1
1

3

Disney Research 2 ETH Zurich
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract
Inspired by recent advances of deep learning in instance
segmentation and object tracking, we introduce the concept
of convnet-based guidance applied to video object segmentation. Our model proceeds on a per-frame basis, guided by
the output of the previous frame towards the object of interest in the next frame. We demonstrate that highly accurate
object segmentation in videos can be enabled by using a
convolutional neural network (convnet) trained with static
images only. The key component of our approach is a combination of offline and online learning strategies, where the
former produces a refined mask from the previous’ frame estimate and the latter allows to capture the appearance of the
specific object instance. Our method can handle different
types of input annotations such as bounding boxes and segments while leveraging an arbitrary amount of annotated
frames. Therefore our system is suitable for diverse applications with different requirements in terms of accuracy and
efficiency. In our extensive evaluation, we obtain competitive results on three different datasets, independently from
the type of input annotation.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (convnets) have shown
outstanding performance in many fundamental areas in
computer vision, enabled by the availability of large-scale
annotated datasets (e.g., ImageNet classification [24, 43]).
However, some important challenges in video processing
can be difficult to approach using convnets, since creating
a sufficiently large body of densely, pixel-wise annotated
video data for training is usually prohibitive.
One example of such domain is video object segmentation. Given only one or a few frames annotated with segmentation masks of a particular object instance, the task of
video object segmentation is to accurately segment the same
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

Input frame t

MaskTrack ConvNet
Refined mask t
Mask estimate t-1

Figure 1: Given a rough mask estimate from the previous
frame t − 1 we train a convnet to provide a refined mask
output for the current frame t.
instance in all other frames of the video. Current top performing approaches either interleave box tracking and segmentation [53], or propagate the first frame mask annotation
in space-time via CRF or GrabCut-like techniques [29, 49].
One of the key insights and contributions of this paper is
that fully annotated video data is not necessary. We demonstrate that highly accurate video object segmentation can be
enabled using a convnet trained with static images only. We
show that a convnet designed for semantic image segmentation [8] can be utilized to perform per-frame instance segmentation, i.e., segmentation of generic objects while distinguishing different instances of the same class. For each
new video frame the network is guided towards the object
of interest by feeding in the previous’ frame mask estimate.
We therefore refer to our approach as guided instance segmentation. To the best of our knowledge, it represents the
first fully trained approach to video object segmentation.
Our system is efficient due to its feed-forward architecture and can generate high quality results in a single
pass over the video, without the need for considering more
than one frame at a time. This is in stark contrast to many
other video segmentation approaches, which usually require
global connections over multiple frames or even the whole
12663

