Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation using Web-Crawled Videos
Seunghoon Hong† Donghun Yeo† Suha Kwak‡
†
‡
POSTECH
DGIST
Pohang, Korea
Daegu, Korea
{maga33, hanulbog, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel algorithm for weakly supervised semantic segmentation based on image-level class labels only.
In weakly supervised setting, it is commonly observed that
trained model overly focuses on discriminative parts rather
than the entire object area. Our goal is to overcome this
limitation with no additional human intervention by retrieving videos relevant to target class labels from web repository, and generating segmentation labels from the retrieved
videos to simulate strong supervision for semantic segmentation. During this process, we take advantage of image
classification with discriminative localization technique to
reject false alarms in retrieved videos and identify relevant
spatio-temporal volumes within retrieved videos. Although
the entire procedure does not require any additional supervision, the segmentation annotations obtained from videos
are sufficiently strong to learn a model for semantic segmentation. The proposed algorithm substantially outperforms existing methods based on the same level of supervision and is even as competitive as the approaches relying
on extra annotations.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has recently achieved prominent
progress thanks to Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(DCNNs) [3, 21, 24, 32, 37, 41]. The success of DCNNs
heavily depends on the availability of a large-scale training
dataset, where annotations are given manually in general.
In semantic segmentation, however, annotations are in the
form of pixel-wise masks, and collecting such annotations
for a large number of images demands tremendous effort
and cost. Consequently, accurate and reliable segmentation annotations are available only for a small number of
classes. Fully supervised DCNNs for semantic segmentation are thus limited to those classes and hard to be extended
to many other classes appearing in real world images.
Weakly supervised approaches have been proposed to alleviate this issue by leveraging a vast amount of weakly annotated images. Among several types of weak supervision
for semantic segmentation, image-level class label has been

Honglak Lee§ Bohyung Han†
§
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA

skwak@dgist.ac.kr

honglak@umich.edu

widely used [17, 26, 28, 29, 30] as it is readily available
from existing image databases [7, 10]. The most popular
approach to generating pixel-wise labels from an imagelevel label is self-supervised learning based on the joint
estimation of segmentation annotation and model parameters [6, 20, 29, 30]. However, since there is no way to measure the quality of estimated annotations, these approaches
easily converge to suboptimal solutions. To remedy this
limitation, other types of weak supervision have been employed in addition to image-level labels, e.g., bounding
box [6, 26], scribble [20], prior meta-information [28], and
segmentation ground-truths of other classes [13]. However, they often require additional human intervention to
obtain extra supervision [6, 13, 26] or employ domainspecific knowledge that may not be well-generalized to
other classes [28].
The objective of this work is to overcome the inherent limitation in weakly supervised semantic segmentation
without additional human supervision. Specifically, we propose to retrieve videos from the Web and use them as an
additional source of training data, since temporal dynamics in video offers rich information to distinguish objects
from background and estimate their shapes more accurately.
More importantly, our video retrieval process is performed
fully-automatically by using a set of class labels as search
keywords and collecting videos from web repositories (e.g.,
YouTube). The result of retrieval is a collection of weakly
annotated videos as each video is given its query keyword
as video-level class label. However, it is still not straightforward to learn semantic segmentation directly from weakly
labeled videos due to ambiguous association between labels
and frames. The association is temporally ambiguous since
only a subset of frames in a video is relevant to its class
label. Furthermore, although there are multiple regions exhibiting prominent motions, only a few among them might
be relevant to the class label, which causes spatial ambiguity. These ambiguities are ubiquitous in videos crawled
automatically with no human intervention.
The key idea of this paper is to utilize both weakly annotated images and videos to learn a single DCNN for semantic segmentation. Images are associated with clean class

7322

