Learning Cross-modal Embeddings for Cooking Recipes and Food Images
Amaia Salvador1∗

Nicholas Hynes2∗
Yusuf Aytar2
Javier Marin2
Ferda Ofli3
Ingmar Weber3
Antonio Torralba2
2
1
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU

amaia.salvador@upc.edu, nhynes@mit.edu, {yusuf,jmarin,torralba}@csail.mit.edu, {fofli,iweber}@qf.org.qa

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Recipe1M, a new large-scale,
structured corpus of over 1m cooking recipes and 800k food
images. As the largest publicly available collection of recipe
data, Recipe1M affords the ability to train high-capacity
models on aligned, multi-modal data. Using these data, we
train a neural network to find a joint embedding of recipes
and images that yields impressive results on an image-recipe
retrieval task. Additionally, we demonstrate that regularization via the addition of a high-level classification objective
both improves retrieval performance to rival that of humans
and enables semantic vector arithmetic. We postulate that
these embeddings will provide a basis for further exploration
of the Recipe1M dataset and food and cooking in general.
Code, data and models are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
There are few things so fundamental to the human experience as food. Its consumption is intricately linked to our
health, our feelings and our culture. Even migrants starting
a new life in a foreign country often hold on to their ethnic
food longer than to their native language. Vital as it is to
our lives, food also offers new perspectives on topical challenges in computer vision like finding representations that
are robust to occlusion and deformation (as occur during
ingredient processing).
The profusion of online recipe collections with usersubmitted photos presents the possibility of training machines to automatically understand food preparation by
jointly analyzing ingredient lists, cooking instructions and
food images. Far beyond applications solely in the realm of
culinary arts, such a tool may also be applied to the plethora
of food images shared on social media to achieve insight
into the significance of food and its preparation on public
∗ contributed equally.
1 http://im2recipe.csail.mit.edu

Figure 1: Learning cross-modal embeddings from recipeimage pairs collected from online resources. These enable
us to achieve in-depth understanding of food from its ingredients to its preparation.
health [4] and cultural heritage [14]. Developing a tool for
automated analysis requires large and well-curated datasets.
The emergence of massive labeled datasets [19, 26] and
deeply-learned representations [10, 20, 5] have redefined the
state-of-the-art in object recognition and scene classification.
Moreover, the same techniques have enabled progress in
new domains like dense labeling and image segmentation.
Perhaps the introduction of a new large-scale food dataset–
complete with its own intrinsic challenges–will yield a similar advancement of the field. For instance, categorizing an
ingredient’s state (e.g., sliced, diced, raw, baked, grilled, or
boiled) provides a unique challenge in attribute recognition–
one that is not well posed by existing datasets. Furthermore,
the free-form nature of food suggests a departure from the
concrete task of classification in favor of a more nuanced
objective that integrates variation in a recipe’s structure.
Existing work, however, has focused largely on the use
of medium-scale datasets for performing categorization
[1, 8, 16, 13]. For instance, Bossard et al. [1] introduced the
Food-101 visual classification dataset and set a baseline of
50.8% accuracy. Even with the impetus for food image categorization, subsequent work by [13], [16] and [17] could
only improve this result to 77.4%, 79% and 80.9%, respec13020

