DeLiGAN : Generative Adversarial Networks for Diverse and Limited Data
Swaminathan Gurumurthy∗
Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla∗
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, CDS, Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, INDIA 560012
gauthamsindia95@gmail.com, ravika@gmail.com, venky@cds.iisc.ac.in

Abstract
A class of recent approaches for generating images,
called Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), have been
used to generate impressively realistic images of objects,
bedrooms, handwritten digits and a variety of other image modalities. However, typical GAN-based approaches
require large amounts of training data to capture the diversity across the image modality. In this paper, we propose DeLiGAN – a novel GAN-based architecture for diverse and limited training data scenarios. In our approach,
we reparameterize the latent generative space as a mixture
model and learn the mixture model’s parameters along with
those of GAN. This seemingly simple modification to the
GAN framework is surprisingly effective and results in models which enable diversity in generated samples although
trained with limited data. In our work, we show that DeLiGAN can generate images of handwritten digits, objects and
hand-drawn sketches, all using limited amounts of data.
To quantitatively characterize intra-class diversity of generated samples, we also introduce a modified version of
“inception-score”, a measure which has been found to correlate well with human assessment of generated samples.

1. Introduction
Generative models for images have enjoyed a resurgence
in recent years, particularly with the availability of large
datasets [20, 25] and advent of deep neural networks [15].
In particular, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8]
and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) [13] have shown a lot
of promise in this regard. In this paper, we focus on GANbased approaches.
A typical GAN framework consists of two components,
a generator G and a discriminator D. The generator G is
modelled so that it transforms a random vector z into an
image I, i.e. I = G(z). z usually arises from an easy-to∗ Equal contribution

sample distribution (e.g. uniform). G is trained to generate images I which are indistinguishable from a sampling
of the true distribution, i.e I ∼ pdata , where pdata is the
true distribution of images. The discriminator D takes an
image as input and outputs the probability that the image
is from the true data distribution pdata . In practice, D is
trained to output a low probability pD when fed a “fake”
(generated) image. D and G are trained adversarially to
improve by competing with each other. A proper training
regime ensures that at end of training, G generates images
which are essentially indistinguishable from real images,
i.e. pD (G(z)) = 0.5 [8].
In recent times, GAN-based approaches have been used
to generate impressively realistic house-numbers [4], faces,
bedrooms [17] and a variety of other image categories [18,
21]. Usually, these image categories tend to have extremely
complex underlying distributions. This complexity arises
from two factors: (1) level of detail (e.g. color photos of
objects have more detail than binary handwritten digit images) (2) diversity (e.g. inter and intra-category variability
is larger for object categories compared to, say, house numbers). To be viable, generator G needs to have sufficient capacity for tackling these complexity-inducing factors. Typically, such capacity is attained by having deep networks
for G [2]. However, training high-capacity generators requires a large amount of training data. Therefore, existing
GAN-based approaches are not viable when the amount of
training data is limited.
Contributions:
• We propose DeLiGAN – a novel GAN-based framework which is especially suited for small-yet-diverse
data scenarios (Section 4).
• We show that DeLiGAN enables generation of diverse
images for a number of different modalities in limited
data regimes. In particular, we construct modalityspecific models which generate images of handwritten digits (Section 5.3), photo objects (Section 5.4) and
hand-drawn sketches (Section 5.5).
• To quantitatively characterize the intra-class diversity
of generated samples, we also design a modified ver-

166

