Unsupervised Learning of Long-Term Motion Dynamics for Videos
Zelun Luo, Boya Peng, De-An Huang, Alexandre Alahi, Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University
{zelunluo,boya,dahuang,alahi,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We present an unsupervised representation learning approach that compactly encodes the motion dependencies
in videos. Given a pair of images from a video clip, our
framework learns to predict the long-term 3D motions. To
reduce the complexity of the learning framework, we propose to describe the motion as a sequence of atomic 3D
flows computed with RGB-D modality. We use a Recurrent Neural Network based Encoder-Decoder framework
to predict these sequences of flows. We argue that in order for the decoder to reconstruct these sequences, the encoder must learn a robust video representation that captures
long-term motion dependencies and spatial-temporal relations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our learned temporal representations on activity classification across multiple modalities and datasets such as NTU RGB+D and MSR
Daily Activity 3D. Our framework is generic to any input
modality, i.e., RGB, depth, and RGB-D videos.

1. Introduction
Human activities can often be described as a sequence of
basic motions. For instance, common activities like brushing hair or waving a hand can be described as a sequence of
successive raising and lowering of the hand. Over the past
years, researchers have studied multiple strategies to effectively represent motion dynamics and classify activities in
videos [38, 20, 42]. However, the existing methods suffer
from the inability to compactly encode long-term motion
dependencies. In this work, we propose to learn a representation that can describe the sequence of motions by learning
to predict it. In other words, we are interested in learning a
representation that, given a pair of video frames, can predict
the sequence of basic motions (see in Figure 1). We believe
that if the learned representation has encoded enough information to predict the motion, it is discriminative enough to
classify activities in videos. Hence, our final goal is to use
our learned representation to classify activities in videos.
To classify activities, we argue that a video representation needs to capture not only the semantics, but also the

Figure 1. We propose a method that learns a video representation
by predicting a sequence of basic motions described as atomic 3D
flows. The learned representation is then extracted from this model
to recognize activities.

motion dependencies in a long temporal sequence. Since
robust representations exist to extract semantic information [29], we focus our effort on learning a representation
that encodes the sequence of basic motions in consecutive
frames. We define basic motions as atomic 3D flows. The
atomic 3D flows are computed by quantizing the estimated
dense 3D flows in space and time using RGB-D modality. Given a pair of images from a video clip, our framework learns a representation that can predict the sequence
of atomic 3D flows.
Our learning framework is unsupervised, i.e., it does
not require human-labeled data. Not relying on labels has
the following benefits. It is not clear how many labels
are needed to understand activities in videos. For a single image, millions of labels have been used to surpass
human-level accuracy in extracting semantic information
[29]. Consequently, we would expect that videos will require several orders of magnitude more labels to learn a representation in a supervised setting. It will be unrealistic to
collect all these labels.
Recently, a stream of unsupervised methods have been
proposed to learn temporal structures from videos. These

2203

