InstanceCut: from Edges to Instances with MultiCut
Alexander Kirillov1 Evgeny Levinkov2 Bjoern Andres2 Bogdan Savchynskyy1 Carsten Rother1
1
TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany 2 MPI for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
1

name.surname@tu-dresden.de

2

surname@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
This work addresses the task of instance-aware semantic segmentation. Our key motivation is to design a simple method with a new modelling-paradigm, which therefore has a different trade-off between advantages and disadvantages compared to known approaches.Our approach,
we term InstanceCut, represents the problem by two output
modalities: (i) an instance-agnostic semantic segmentation
and (ii) all instance-boundaries. The former is computed
from a standard convolutional neural network for semantic
segmentation, and the latter is derived from a new instanceaware edge detection model. To reason globally about the
optimal partitioning of an image into instances, we combine these two modalities into a novel MultiCut formulation.
We evaluate our approach on the challenging CityScapes
dataset. Despite the conceptual simplicity of our approach,
we achieve the best result among all published methods, and
perform particularly well for rare object classes.

1. Introduction
This work addresses the task of segmenting each individual instance of a semantic class in an image. The task is
known as instance-aware semantic segmentation, in short
instance segmentation, and is a more refined task than semantic segmentation, where each pixel is only labeled with
its semantic class. An example of semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation is shown in Fig. 1a-1b. While
semantic segmentation has been a very popular problem to
work on in the last half decade, the interest in instance segmentation has significantly increased recently. This is not
surprising since semantic segmentation has already reached
a high level of accuracy, in contrast to the harder task of
instance segmentation. Also, from an application perspective there are many systems, such as autonomous driving or
robotics, where a more detailed understanding of the surrounding is important for acting correctly in the world.
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
have tremendously increased the performance of many
computer vision tasks. This is also true for the task of in-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: An image from the CityScapes dataset [13]: (a)
Ground truth semantic segmentation, where all cars have
the same label. (b) The ground truth instance segmentation,
where each instance, i.e. object, is highlighted by a distinct color. In this work we use a “limiting” definition of
instance segmentation, in the sense that each instance must
be a connected component. Despite this limitation, we will
demonstrate high-quality results. (c) Shows the result of our
InstanceCut method. As can be seen, the front car is split
into two instances, in contrast to (b). (d) Our connectedcomponent instances are defined via two output modalities:
(i) the semantic segmentation, (ii) all instance-boundaries
(shown in bold-black).
stance segmentation, see the benchmarks [13, 37]. However, for this task it is, in our view, not clear whether the
best modelling-paradigm has already been found. Hence,
the motivation of this work is to explore a new, and very
different, modelling-paradigm. To be more precise, we believe that the problem of instance segmentation has four
core challenges, which any method has to address. Firstly,
the label of an instance, e.g. “car number 5”, does not
have a meaning, in contrast to semantic segmentation, e.g.
class “cars”. Secondly, the number of instances in an image
can vary greatly, e.g. between 0 and 120 for an image in
the CityScapes dataset [13]. Thirdly, in contrast to object
detection with bounding boxes, each instance (a bounding
box) cannot simply be described by four numbers (corners
of bounding box), but has to be described by a set of pixels.
Finally, in contrast to semantic segmentation, a more refined
labeling of the training data is needed, i.e. each instance has
15008

