Deep Visual-Semantic Quantization for Efficient Image Retrieval∗
Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, and Shichen Liu
KLiss, MOE; TNList; NEL-BDSS; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
{caoyue10,liushichen95}@gmail.com, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Compact coding has been widely applied to approximate
nearest neighbor search for large-scale image retrieval, due
to its computation efficiency and retrieval quality. This paper presents a compact coding solution with a focus on the
deep learning to quantization approach, which improves retrieval quality by end-to-end representation learning and
compact encoding and has already shown the superior performance over the hashing solutions for similarity retrieval.
We propose Deep Visual-Semantic Quantization (DVSQ),
which is the first approach to learning deep quantization
models from labeled image data as well as the semantic information underlying general text domains. The main contribution lies in jointly learning deep visual-semantic embeddings and visual-semantic quantizers using carefullydesigned hybrid networks and well-specified loss functions.
DVSQ enables efficient and effective image retrieval by supporting maximum inner-product search, which is computed
based on learned codebooks with fast distance table lookup.
Comprehensive empirical evidence shows that DVSQ can
generate compact binary codes and yield state-of-the-art
similarity retrieval performance on standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, large-scale and high-dimensional media data has been pervasive in search engines and social networks. To guarantee retrieval quality and computation efficiency, approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search has attracted increasing attention. Parallel to the traditional indexing methods [24], another advantageous solution is hashing
methods [38], which transform high-dimensional data into
compact binary codes and generate similar binary codes for
similar data items. In this paper, we will focus on learning
to quantization methods [38] that build data-dependent binary encoding schemes for efficient image retrieval, which
have shown better performance than data-independent hashing methods, e.g. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [16].
Many hashing methods have been proposed to enable efficient ANN search of high-dimensional data by ranking the
∗ Contact author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn).

Hamming distance across compact binary hash codes based
on shallow architectures [22, 18, 31, 13, 26, 37, 28, 17, 42,
43]. Recently, deep hashing methods [41, 23, 35, 12, 45, 5,
7, 6] have shown that end-to-end learning of feature representation and hash coding can be more effective using deep
networks [21, 3], which can naturally encode any nonlinear
hash functions. These deep hashing methods have shown
state-of-the-art performance on many benchmarks. It is
crucial to jointly learn similarity-preserving representations
and control quantization error of binarizing continuous representations to binary codes [45]. However, a key disadvantage of these deep hashing methods is that they need to first
learn continuous deep representations, which are then converted into hash codes by a separated binarization step. By
continuous relaxation, i.e. solving the discrete optimization
of hash codes with continuous optimization, all these methods essentially solve an optimization problem that deviates
significantly from the hashing objective as they cannot learn
exactly binary hash codes in their alternative optimization.
To address the limitation of continuous relaxation, Cao et
al. proposed Deep Quantization Network (DQN) [8] to integrate quantization method [15, 44, 39, 29] and deep learning. The quantization method represents each point by a
short code formed by the index of the nearest center, which
can generate natively binary codes that yield more powerful
representation ability than hashing for approximate nearest
neighbor search. DQN gives state-of-the-art image retrieval
performance, but several key problems remain unaddressed.
First, the semantic space spanned by the image labeling may
not be uniformly distributed. As can be observed in Figure
1, some labels (e.g. cat and dog) may be more similar than
others (e.g. cat and airplane). Such semantic relationship
between labels proves to be important for image recognition
[14], but has not been explored by prior hashing methods.
Second, maximum inner-product search has been prevalent
in many online search engines, but it remains unclear how
to exploit both visual and semantic information to enable it.
This paper presents Deep Visual-Semantic Quantization
(DVSQ) for fast image retrieval, which learns end-to-end:
(1) a deep visual-semantic embedding model that enables
transfer of semantic knowledge extracted from general text

1328

