Counting Everyday Objects in Everyday Scenes
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay∗,1

Ramakrishna Vedantam∗,1 Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju1
Dhruv Batra2 Devi Parikh2
1
Virginia Tech 2 Georgia Institute of Technology

1

2

{prithv1,vrama91,ram21}@vt.edu

{dbatra,parikh}@gatech.edu

Abstract

Bottle : 3

We are interested in counting the number of instances of
object classes in natural, everyday images. Previous counting approaches tackle the problem in restricted domains
such as counting pedestrians in surveillance videos. Counts
can also be estimated from outputs of other vision tasks like
object detection. In this work, we build dedicated models
for counting designed to tackle the large variance in counts,
appearances, and scales of objects found in natural scenes.
Our approach is inspired by the phenomenon of subitizing
– the ability of humans to make quick assessments of counts
given a perceptual signal, for small count values. Given
a natural scene, we employ a divide and conquer strategy
while incorporating context across the scene to adapt the
subitizing idea to counting. Our approach offers consistent improvements over numerous baseline approaches for
counting on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and COCO datasets.
Subsequently, we study how counting can be used to improve object detection. We then show a proof of concept
application of our counting methods to the task of Visual
Question Answering, by studying the ‘how many?’ questions in the VQA and COCO-QA datasets.

Spoon : 3

1. Introduction
We study the scene understanding problem of counting
common objects in natural scenes. That is, given for example the image in Fig. 1, we want to count the number
of everyday object categories present in it: for example 4
chairs, 1 oven, 1 dining table, 1 potted plant and 3 spoons.
Such an ability to count seems innate in humans (and even
in some animals [10]). Thus, as a stepping stone towards
Artificial Intelligence (AI), it is desirable to have intelligent
machines that can count.
Similar to scene understanding tasks such as object detection [43, 14, 18, 37, 17, 44, 34, 29] and segmentation [4, 30, 36] which require a fine-grained understanding
of the scene, object counting is a challenging problem that
∗

Denotes equal contribution.

Chair : 4
Potted Plant : 1
Dining Table : 1
Oven : 1
Figure 1: We study the problem of counting everyday objects in everyday scenes. Given an everyday scene, we want to predict the number of
instances of common objects like bottle, chair etc.

requires us to reason about the number of instances of objects present while tackling scale and appearance variations.
Another closely related vision task is visual question
answering (VQA), where the task is to answer free form
natural language questions about an image. Interestingly,
questions related to the count of a particular object - How
many red cars do you see? form a significant portion of
the questions asked in common visual question answering
datasets [2, 35]. Moreover, we observe that end-to-end networks [2, 35, 31, 15] trained for this task do not perform
well on such counting questions. This is not surprising,
since the objective is often setup to minimize the crossentropy classification loss for the correct answer to a question, which ignores ordinal structure inherent to counting.
In this work we systematically benchmark how well current VQA models do at counting, and study any benefits
from dedicated models for counting on a subset of counting
questions in VQA datasets in Sec. 5.4.
Counts can also be used as complimentary signals to aid
other vision tasks like detection. If we had an estimate of
how many objects were present in the image, we could use
that information on a per-image basis to detect that many
objects. Indeed, we find that our object counting models
improve object detection performance.
We first describe some baseline approaches to counting
and subsequently build towards our proposed model.
11135

