Filter Flow made Practical: Massively Parallel and Lock-Free
Sathya N. Ravi
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Yunyang Xiong
University of Wisconsin-Madison

ravi5@wisc.edu

yxiong43@wisc.edu

Lopamudra Mukherjee
University of Wisconsin-Whitewater

Vikas Singh
University of Wisconsin-Madison

mukherjl@uww.edu

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper is inspired by a relatively recent work of
Seitz and Baker which introduced the so-called Filter Flow
model. Filter flow finds the transformation relating a pair
of (or multiple) images by identifying a large set of local linear filters; imposing additional constraints on certain structural properties of these filters enables Filter Flow
to serve as a general “one stop” construction for a spectrum of problems in vision: from optical flow to defocus
to stereo to affine alignment. The idea is beautiful yet the
benefits are not borne out in practice because of significant computational challenges. This issue makes most (if
not all) deployments for practical vision problems out of
reach. The key thrust of our work is to identify mathematically (near) equivalent reformulations of this model that
can eliminate this serious limitation. We demonstrate via a
detailed optimization-focused development that Filter Flow
can indeed be solved fairly efficiently for a wide range of instantiations. We derive efficient algorithms, perform extensive theoretical analysis focused on convergence and parallelization and show how results competitive with the state
of the art for many applications can be achieved with negligible application specific adjustments or post-processing.
The actual numerical scheme is easy to understand and, implement (30 lines in Matlab) — this development will enable
Filter Flow to be a viable general solver and testbed for numerous applications in the community, going forward.

1. Introduction
Understanding how two or more images of the same
scene are related, is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Often, the coordinate systems of the respective images are related by a camera motion whereas in other cases,
the scene illumination may change, the shading may differ and/or the exposure, zoom and other parameters of the

camera may be modified from one image to the other. These
effects typically lead to a systemic (but otherwise arbitrary)
transformation in the image intensities. To enable follow-up
analysis, an important first step is to recover the parameters
describing the relationship between the images.
While technically accurate, the above description actually covers a large class of problems with a broad stroke.
In practice, instead of a common strategy, most problems
in this class are addressed piecemeal, by posing it as a particular instantiation of the high-level “transformation estimation” objective. One makes explicit use of additional information pertaining to the specific problem to be solved
(such as acquisition details, parameters to be estimated and
application specific constraints). The representative problems in this class correspond to a number of core topics in
modern vision literature: optical flow[30, 24, 38], deconvolution [21, 27], non-rigid morphing [25], stereo (plus its
variations)[34, 23, 37], defocus [22] and so on — these are
all distinct problems but at the high level, deal with estimating the relationship between two or more images. This
compartmentalized treatment has, over the years, provided
highly efficient algorithms and industry-strength implementations for numerous problems. Such solutions now drive
any number of downstream turnkey applications.
Despite this diversity of highly effective and mature algorithms for each stand-alone problem, an interesting scientific question is the following. Given that many of these formulations seek to estimate a transformation which explains
the change in image intensities over two (or more) images,
can we design a unified formulation that is rich enough to
model a broad class of transformations and yet offers the
flexibility to precisely express the nuances of each distinct
problem listed above? In an interesting paper a few years
back, Seitz and Baker, provided precisely such a framework
called Filter Flow [35]. Filter Flow models image transformations as a to-be-estimated space-variant (pixel-specific)
13549

