Learning the Multilinear Structure of Visual Data
Mengjiao Wang

Yannis Panagakis
Patrick Snape
Imperial College London

Stefanos Zafeiriou

{m.wang15,i.panagakis,p.snape,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Statistical decomposition methods are of paramount importance in discovering the modes of variations of visual
data. Probably the most prominent linear decomposition
method is the Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which
discovers a single mode of variation in the data. However,
in practice, visual data exhibit several modes of variations.
For instance, the appearance of faces varies in identity, expression, pose etc. To extract these modes of variations from
visual data, several supervised methods, such as the TensorFaces, that rely on multilinear (tensor) decomposition
(e.g., Higher Order SVD) have been developed. The main
drawbacks of such methods is that they require both labels
regarding the modes of variations and the same number of
samples under all modes of variations (e.g., the same face
under different expressions, poses etc.). Therefore, their applicability is limited to well-organised data, usually captured in well-controlled conditions. In this paper, we propose the first general multilinear method, to the best of our
knowledge, that discovers the multilinear structure of visual
data in unsupervised setting. That is, without the presence
of labels. We demonstrate the applicability of the proposed
method in two applications, namely Shape from Shading
(SfS) and expression transfer.

1. Introduction
Statistical methods for data decomposition are cornerstones in statistics, image and signal processing, and
computer vision. Probably, the most popular data decomposition method is the Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and the closely related Singular Value Decomposition (SVD).
Assuming that the data are stacked in the columns of a
matrix, the PCA finds a single mode of variation that explains the data. Nevertheless, most forms of visual data
have many different and possibly independent, modes of
variations and therefore the SVD is unable to extract them.
In order to disentangle the independent modes of variations,
several multilinear (tensor) decomposition methods have

Figure 1: Visualisation of the unsupervised multilinear decomposition and its applications. A sample vector xi is assumed to be generated by a common multilinear structure
B (in this example with two modes) and sample specific
weights li and ci .

been employed [25, 6, 15, 14, 16]. For example, the High
Order SVD (HOSVD) [6] assumes that the data are formed
as a result of some multifactor confluence and aims to find
the different modes of variation by decomposing the a carefully designed data tensor. Having found the HOSVD, the
data admit to a linear analysis per mode, since each mode
is allowed to vary in turn, while the remaining modes are
held constant. For instance, assume a population of faces
with differing identities, expressions and seen under different views (poses), then the HOSVD decomposes the population into different modes of variation for expressions,
identities, and poses per pixel. This method is known as
TensorFaces [26]. Thus, having disentangled the modes of
variation, we can vary expressions independently to identity
and pose.
The main limitation in applying the above multilinear
decompositions is that they require a complete data tensor
which has to be built using labels for each mode of variation. That is, each mode of variation must be represented in
the data. Using the aforementioned example of faces with
varying expression, identity and pose, we require that for
each and every person samples for every possible expression and pose should exist in order to build the required
14592

