Amodal Detection of 3D Objects:
Inferring 3D Bounding Boxes from 2D Ones in RGB-Depth Images
Zhuo Deng
Longin Jan Latecki
Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
dengzhuobhu@gmail.com, latecki@temple.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of amodal perception
of 3D object detection. The task is to not only find object
localizations in the 3D world, but also estimate their physical sizes and poses, even if only parts of them are visible
in the RGB-D image. Recent approaches have attempted
to harness point cloud from depth channel to exploit 3D
features directly in the 3D space and demonstrated the superiority over traditional 2.5D representation approaches.
We revisit the amodal 3D detection problem by sticking
to the 2.5D representation framework, and directly relate
2.5D visual appearance to 3D objects. We propose a novel
3D object detection system that simultaneously predicts objects’ 3D locations, physical sizes, and orientations in indoor scenes. Experiments on the NYUV2 dataset show
our algorithm significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
and indicates 2.5D representation is capable of encoding
features for 3D amodal object detection. All source code
and data is on https://github.com/phoenixnn/
Amodal3Det.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental challenges in
computer vision, the task of which is to detect the localizations of all object instances from known classes such as
chair, sofa, etc in images. Traditionally, detected object instances are represented by 2D bounding boxes around visible counterparts on images. Although 2D rectangles can
roughly indicate where objects are placed on image planes,
their true locations and poses in the physical 3D world are
difficult to determine due to multiple factors such as occlusions and the uncertainty arising from perspective projections. However, it is very natural for human beings to
understand how far objects are from viewers, object poses
and their full extents from still images. These kind of features are extremely desirable for many applications such as
robotics navigation, grasp estimation, and Augmented Reality (AR) etc. In order to fill the gap, a variety of efforts
were made in the past decade including inferring 3D object

localizations from monocular imagery [6, 13, 20, 3], and
3D object recognitions on CAD models [29, 27]. But these
works either rely on a huge number of ideal 3D graphics
models by assuming the locations are known or are inclined
to fail in cluttered environments where occlusions are very
common while depth orders are uncertain.
The recent advent of Microsoft Kinect and similar sensors alleviated some of these challenges, and thus enabled
an exciting new direction of approaches to 3D object detection [18, 17, 12, 11, 19, 25, 24]. Equipped with an active
infrared structured light sensor, Kinect is able to provide
much more accurate depth locations of objects associated
with their visual appearances. The RGB-Depth detection
approaches can be roughly categorized into two groups according to the way to formulate feature representations from
RGB-Depth images.
In general, 2.5D approaches start by exploiting proper
feature representations on color and depth images for object detection and building models to convert 2D results to
3D space. While 3D approaches start by putting detection
proposals directly in 3D space for extracting features from
3D point cloud within 3D windows. The competition to determine whether 2.5D or 3D approaches represent the right
direction for 3D amodal object detection is super intense:
[25] utilized 3D sliding window to directly infer detections
in 3D space and demonstrate its merits for dealing with occlusions, viewpoints etc over 2.5D approaches. Then 2.5D
approach [11] outperformed [25] by starting with well established 2D reasoning and aligning CAD models with 2D
detections. The most recent work [24] outperformed [11] by
a significant margin by introducing a 3D ConvNet model to
encode 3D geometric features directly. So far, 3D centric
sliding shapes leads the 3D detection performance on the
challenging NYUV2 RGB-Depth dataset [22].
Although utilizing 3D geometric features for detection is
promising, in practice the reconstructed 3D shapes are often incomplete (when projecting pixels of one single depth
map back to 3D space), noisy and sparse (due to occlusions,
reflections and absorptions of infrared lights). Hence, the
quality of obtained surfaces is very different from that of

5762

