InterpoNet, A brain inspired neural network for optical flow dense interpolation
Shay Zweig1 and Lior Wolf2,3
1

The Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan University, Israel
2
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel
3
Facebook AI Research
shayzweig@gmail.com, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Sparse-to-dense interpolation for optical flow is a fundamental phase in the pipeline of most of the leading optical flow estimation algorithms. The current state-of-theart method for interpolation, EpicFlow, is a local average
method based on an edge aware geodesic distance. We propose a new data-driven sparse-to-dense interpolation algorithm based on a fully convolutional network. We draw inspiration from the filling-in process in the visual cortex and
introduce lateral dependencies between neurons and multilayer supervision into our learning process. We also show
the importance of the image contour to the learning process. Our method is robust and outperforms EpicFlow on
competitive optical flow benchmarks with several underlying matching algorithms. This leads to state-of-the-art performance on the Sintel and KITTI 2012 benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The leading optical flow algorithms to date, with few exceptions, are not end-to-end deep learning. While some of
them employ deep matching scores for estimating the best
match in image I’ for every location in image I, almost all
methods employ multiple steps that do not involve learning.
With the current affinity toward end-to-end deep learning
solutions, the existence of large training datasets, and many
concurrent contributions in the field of deep optical flow and
related fields, one may wonder why this is the case.
Out of the four steps of modern optical flow pipelines:
matching, filtering, interpolation and variational refinement,
we focus on the third. In this step, a sparse list of matches
is transformed into dense optical flow maps. It is one of
the most crucial steps and without the availability of the
EpicFlow method [33], which currently dominates this step,
a large number of sparse matching techniques would not
have been competitive enough to gain attention.
EpicFlow is an extremely effective method that is based
on solid computer vision foundations. However, despite using sophisticated heuristics for improved runtime, it is still

rather slow and as a non-learning method, it is bounded in
the performance it can deliver. Replacing EpicFlow by a
deep learning method is harder than it initially seems. Feedforward neural networks excel in analyzing image information, but neuroscience tells us that in biological networks,
lateral and top-down feedback loops are involved in solving cases where the information is missing or corrupted at
random locations.
Artificial feedback networks are slower than feedforward
networks, harder to train, and have not proven themselves
in the practice of computer vision. We note that feedback
networks with a predefined number of feedback iterations
can be unrolled into deep feedforward networks with one
major caveat – while in most feedforward networks, the supervision flows from the top down, in feedback networks,
the supervision occurs at each iteration. To resolve this, we
equip our network with supervision at every layer.
Inspired by neuroscience, we also suggest a loss involving lateral dependencies. Here, too, we replace the process
of lateral feedback during run-time with additional supervision during training. In this way, the feedforward network
learns how to mimic a network with lateral feedback loops
by utilizing the training labels.
Taken together, our contributions are: (a) We propose,
for the first time, to the best of our knowledge, a neural network based sparse-to-dense interpolation for optical flow.
Our network performs better than the current state of the
art, it is robust and can be adjusted to different matching algorithms and serve as the new default interpolation method
in optical flow pipelines. (b) We introduce a new lateral dependency loss, embedding the correlations between neighbors into the learning process. (c) We define a novel architecture involving detour networks in each layer of the network. The new architecture provides a substantial increase
in performance. (d) We solidify the importance of motion
boundaries in learning dense interpolation for optical flow.

2. Related Work
Interpolation In The Visual Cortex. The visual system
often receives a noisy and missing input. However, it is

4563

