3D Menagerie: Modeling the 3D Shape and Pose of Animals
Silvia Zuffi1
Angjoo Kanazawa2
David Jacobs2
Michael J. Black3
1
IMATI-CNR, Milan, Italy, 2 University of Maryland, College Park, MD
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
silvia@mi.imati.cnr.it, {kanazawa, djacobs}@umiacs.umd.edu, black@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1: Animals from images. We learn an articulated, 3D, statistical shape model of animals using very little training
data. We fit the shape and pose of the model to 2D image cues showing how it generalizes to previously unseen shapes.

Abstract
There has been significant work on learning realistic,
articulated, 3D models of the human body. In contrast,
there are few such models of animals, despite many applications. The main challenge is that animals are much
less cooperative than humans. The best human body models are learned from thousands of 3D scans of people in
specific poses, which is infeasible with live animals. Consequently, we learn our model from a small set of 3D scans
of toy figurines in arbitrary poses. We employ a novel partbased shape model to compute an initial registration to the
scans. We then normalize their pose, learn a statistical
shape model, and refine the registrations and the model together. In this way, we accurately align animal scans from
different quadruped families with very different shapes and
poses. With the registration to a common template we learn
a shape space representing animals including lions, cats,
dogs, horses, cows and hippos. Animal shapes can be sampled from the model, posed, animated, and fit to data. We
demonstrate generalization by fitting it to images of real animals including species not seen in training.

1. Introduction
The detection, tracking, and analysis of animals has
many applications in biology, neuroscience, ecology, farming, and entertainment. Despite the wide applicability, the
computer vision community has focused more heavily on
modeling humans, estimating human pose, and analyzing
human behavior. Can we take the best practices learned
from the analysis of humans and apply these directly to animals? To address this, we take an approach for 3D human
pose and shape modeling and extend it to modeling animals.
Specifically we learn a generative model of the 3D pose
and shape of animals and then fit this model to 2D image data as illustrated in Fig. 1. We focus on a subset of four-legged mammals that all have the same number of “parts” and model members of the families Felidae,
Canidae, Equidae, Bovidae, and Hippopotamidae. Our goal
is to build a statistical shape model like SMPL [23], which
captures human body shape variation in a low-dimensional
Euclidean subspace, models the articulated structure of the
body, and can be fit to image data [7].
Animals, however, differ from humans in several important ways. First, the shape variation across species far ex16365

