Plug & Play Generative Networks:
Conditional Iterative Generation of Images in Latent Space
Jeff Clune

Anh Nguyen

Yoshua Bengio

†

†

University of Wyoming

Uber AI Labs , University of Wyoming

Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms

anh.ng8@gmail.com

jeffclune@uwyo.edu

yoshua.umontreal@gmail.com

Alexey Dosovitskiy

Jason Yosinski

University of Freiburg

Uber AI Labs†

dosovits@cs.uni-freiburg.de

yosinski@uber.com

Abstract
Generating high-resolution, photo-realistic images has
been a long-standing goal in machine learning. Recently,
Nguyen et al. [37] showed one interesting way to synthesize
novel images by performing gradient ascent in the latent
space of a generator network to maximize the activations
of one or multiple neurons in a separate classifier network.
In this paper we extend this method by introducing an additional prior on the latent code, improving both sample quality and sample diversity, leading to a state-of-the-art generative model that produces high quality images at higher
resolutions (227 × 227) than previous generative models,
and does so for all 1000 ImageNet categories. In addition,
we provide a unified probabilistic interpretation of related
activation maximization methods and call the general class
of models “Plug and Play Generative Networks.” PPGNs
are composed of 1) a generator network G that is capable
of drawing a wide range of image types and 2) a replaceable “condition” network C that tells the generator what
to draw. We demonstrate the generation of images conditioned on a class (when C is an ImageNet or MIT Places
classification network) and also conditioned on a caption
(when C is an image captioning network). Our method also
improves the state of the art of Multifaceted Feature Visualization [40], which generates the set of synthetic inputs that
activate a neuron in order to better understand how deep
neural networks operate. Finally, we show that our model
performs reasonably well at the task of image inpainting.
While image models are used in this paper, the approach is
modality-agnostic and can be applied to many types of data.

† This work was mostly performed at Geometric Intelligence, which
Uber acquired to create Uber AI Labs.

Figure 1: Images synthetically generated by Plug and Play
Generative Networks at high-resolution (227x227) for four
ImageNet classes. Not only are many images nearly photorealistic, but samples within a class are diverse.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen generative models that are increasingly capable of synthesizing diverse, realistic images
that capture both the fine-grained details and global coherence of natural images [54, 27, 9, 15, 43, 24]. However,
many important open challenges remain, including (1) producing photo-realistic images at high resolutions [30], (2)
training generators that can produce a wide variety of im14467

