Low-Rank Embedded Ensemble Semantic Dictionary for Zero-Shot Learning∗
†

Zhengming Ding ‡ Ming Shao †♯ Yun Fu
†
Department of ECE, College of Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
‡
Computer and Information Science, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, USA
♯
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
allanding@ece.neu.edu, mshao@umassd.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual recognition algorithms assume that the training
and test data share the same classes/labels/tags and feature
space, so that the learned classifier can be reused for the
test data without any change. However, it is a bottleneck to
collect a large number of well-labeled images for each class,
especially when visual recognition task is moving towards
a fine-grained scenario. In addition, labeling work for such
collections is expensive, and requires either large quantities
of attributes or expert opinions [20, 21, 34, 1, 23].
To that end, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has been developed recently which attracts great attention due to its
appealing performance. ZSL is inspired by the learn∗ This work is supported in part by the NSF IIS award 1651902, ONR

Young Investigator Award N00014-14-1-0484, U.S. Army Research Office
Young Investigator Award W911NF-14-1-0218, and NIJ Award 2016-R2CX-0013.

Seen
low-rank
embedding ‫܅‬

Zero-shot learning for visual recognition has received
much interest in the most recent years. However, the semantic gap across visual features and their underlying semantics is still the biggest obstacle in zero-shot learning.
To fight off this hurdle, we propose an effective Low-rank
Embedded Semantic Dictionary learning (LESD) through
ensemble strategy. Specifically, we formulate a novel framework to jointly seek a low-rank embedding and semantic dictionary to link visual features with their semantic representations, which manages to capture shared features across different observed classes. Moreover, ensemble strategy is adopted to learn multiple semantic dictionaries to constitute the latent basis for the unseen classes.
Consequently, our model could extract a variety of visual
characteristics within objects, which can be well generalized to unknown categories. Extensive experiments on several zero-shot benchmarks verify that the proposed model
can outperform the state-of-the-art approaches.

The same attribute has a tail
across different categories.

Unseen
visual representaions X

Tail
furred Striped
Black
Big

ଵ
ଶ
ଷ
୩

White
semantic
representaions
A

K semantic dictionaries

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed framework, where low-rank
projection W maps visual features X into a new space, thus similar features, e.g., “has a tail”, would gather together. Simultaneously, multiple semantic dictionaries Dk are learned with the constraint W X ≈ DA to connect visual features and their semantic
representations. In this way, multiple transferable semantic dictionaries could constitute the latent basis for the unseen classes.

ing mechanism of human brain and attempts to recognize
new classes which are not observed in the training stage
[30, 13, 37, 17, 3, 33, 25, 10, 24]. For example, one can
recognize a new species of animal after being told what it
looks like and how it is similar to or different from other observed animals. The reason is simple: humans can explore
the relationship across different objects through secondary
information, and adapt the knowledge from known classes
to unknown ones. Likewise, ZSL aims to uncover the intrinsic semantic relationship across seen and unseen classes. In
general, three fundamental elements are needed: (1) visual
representation conveying nontrivial yet informative visual
features; (2) semantic representation reflecting the relationship across different classes; (3) learning model properly
linking visual features with the underlying semantics.
While ZSL is promising in simulating the human learning process, it has two degenerating factors. First, the distribution of samples in visual feature space is often distinct
from that of their underlying semantic space as visual features in various forms may convey the same concept. Such

2050

