Improved Texture Networks: Maximizing Quality and Diversity in
Feed-forward Stylization and Texture Synthesis
Dmitry Ulyanov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology & Yandex

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

dmitry.ulyanov@skoltech.ru

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
The recent work of Gatys et al., who characterized the
style of an image by the statistics of convolutional neural
network filters, ignited a renewed interest in the texture generation and image stylization problems. While their image
generation technique uses a slow optimization process, recently several authors have proposed to learn generator
neural networks that can produce similar outputs in one
quick forward pass. While generator networks are promising, they are still inferior in visual quality and diversity
compared to generation-by-optimization. In this work, we
advance them in two significant ways. First, we introduce
an instance normalization module to replace batch normalization with significant improvements to the quality of image
stylization. Second, we improve diversity by introducing
a new learning formulation that encourages generators to
sample unbiasedly from the Julesz texture ensemble, which
is the equivalence class of all images characterized by certain filter responses. Together, these two improvements take
feed forward texture synthesis and image stylization much
closer to the quality of generation-via-optimization, while
retaining the speed advantage.

1. Introduction
The recent work of Gatys et al. [4, 5], which used deep
neural networks for texture synthesis and image stylization
to a great effect, has created a surge of interest in this area.
Following an eariler work by Portilla and Simoncelli [15],
they generate an image by matching the second order moments of the response of certain filters applied to a reference
texture image. The innovation of Gatys et al. is to use nonlinear convolutional neural network filters for this purpose.
The source code is available at https://github.com/
DmitryUlyanov/texture_nets

(a) Panda.

(b)

(c)

(d) Style.

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Which panda stylization seems the best to you?
Definitely not the variant (b), which has been produced
by a state-of-the-art algorithm among methods that take no
longer than a second. The (e) picture took several minutes
to generate using an optimization process, but the quality
is worth it, isn’t it? We would be particularly happy if you
chose one from the rightmost two examples, which are computed with our new method that aspires to combine the quality of the optimization-based method and the speed of the
fast one. Moreover, our method is able to produce diverse
stylizations using a single network.
Despite the excellent results, however, the matching process is based on local optimization, and generally requires
a considerable amount of time (tens of seconds to minutes)
in order to generate a single textures or stylized image.
In order to address this shortcoming, Ulyanov et al. [19]
and Johnson et al. [8] suggested to replace the optimization process with feed-forward generative convolutional
networks. In particular, [19] introduced texture networks
to generate textures of a certain kind, as in [4], or to apply
16924

