Attend to You: Personalized Image Captioning
with Context Sequence Memory Networks
Cesc Chunseong Park∗
Lunit Inc.
Seoul, Korea

Byeongchang Kim Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea

cspark@lunit.io

byeongchang.kim@vision.snu.ac.kr gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Softmax

Query Image

We address personalization issues of image captioning,
which have not been discussed yet in previous research. For
a query image, we aim to generate a descriptive sentence,
accounting for prior knowledge such as the user’s active vocabularies in previous documents. As applications of personalized image captioning, we tackle two post automation
tasks: hashtag prediction and post generation, on our newly
collected Instagram dataset, consisting of 1.1M posts from
6.3K users. We propose a novel captioning model named
Context Sequence Memory Network (CSMN). Its unique updates over previous memory network models include (i) exploiting memory as a repository for multiple types of context
information, (ii) appending previously generated words into
memory to capture long-term information without suffering from the vanishing gradient problem, and (iii) adopting
CNN memory structure to jointly represent nearby ordered
memory slots for better context understanding. With quantitative evaluation and user studies via Amazon Mechanical
Turk, we show the effectiveness of the three novel features of
CSMN and its performance enhancement for personalized
image captioning over state-of-the-art captioning models.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a task of automatically generating
a descriptive sentence of an image [3, 4, 9, 12, 20, 22, 28,
31, 33]. As this task is often regarded as one of frontierAI problems, it has been actively studied in recent vision
and language research. It requires an algorithm not only to
understand the image content in depth beyond category or
attribute levels, but also to connect its interpretation with a
language model to create a natural sentence.
This work addresses personalization issues of image
∗ This work was done while the author was at Seoul National University.

Codes: https://github.com/cesc-park/attend2u.

CNN
Context
Memory

yt
yt
Image feature User context Word output

CSMN model
User’s Active Vocabulary

Task1. Hashtag prediction

Task2. Post generation

Figure 1. Problem statement of personalized image captioning
with an Instagram example. As main applications, we address
hashtag prediction and post generation tasks. Given a query image, the former predicts a list of hashtags, while the latter generates a descriptive text to complete a post. We propose a versatile
context sequence memory network (CSMN) model.

captioning, which have not been discussed in previous research. We aim to generate a descriptive sentence for an
image, accounting for prior knowledge such as the user’s
active vocabularies or writing styles in previous documents.
Potentially, personalized image captioning is applicable to
a wide range of automation services in photo-sharing social
networks. For example, in Instagram or Facebook, users instantly take and share pictures as posts using mobile phones.
One bottleneck to complete an image post is to craft hashtags or associated text description using their own words.
Indeed, crafting text is more cumbersome than taking a picture for general users; photo-taking can be done with only a
single tab on the screen of a smartphone, whereas text writing requires more time and mental energy for selecting suitable keywords and completing a sentence to describe theme,
sentiment, and context of the image.
In this paper, as examples of personalized image captioning, we focus on two post automation tasks: hashtag

895

