On-the-Fly Adaptation of Regression Forests for Online Camera Relocalisation
Tommaso Cavallari1
Julien Valentin3
1

Stuart Golodetz2∗
Luigi Di Stefano1

Nicholas A. Lord2∗
Philip H. S. Torr2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
perceptiveio , Inc.
1

{tommaso.cavallari,luigi.distefano}@unibo.it
2
{smg,nicklord,phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk
3
julien@perceptiveio.com

Abstract
Camera relocalisation is an important problem in computer vision, with applications in simultaneous localisation and mapping, virtual/augmented reality and navigation. Common techniques either match the current image
against keyframes with known poses coming from a tracker,
or establish 2D-to-3D correspondences between keypoints
in the current image and points in the scene in order to estimate the camera pose. Recently, regression forests have
become a popular alternative to establish such correspondences. They achieve accurate results, but must be trained
offline on the target scene, preventing relocalisation in new
environments. In this paper, we show how to circumvent this
limitation by adapting a pre-trained forest to a new scene
on the fly. Our adapted forests achieve relocalisation performance that is on par with that of offline forests, and our
approach runs in under 150ms, making it desirable for realtime systems that require online relocalisation.

1. Introduction
Camera pose estimation is an important problem in computer vision, with applications in simultaneous localisation
and mapping (SLAM) [29, 28, 19], virtual and augmented
reality [1, 4, 14, 30, 31, 38] and navigation [21]. In SLAM,
the camera pose is commonly initialised upon starting reconstruction and then tracked from one frame to the next,
but tracking can easily be lost due to e.g. rapid movement or
textureless regions in the scene; when this happens, it is important to be able to relocalise the camera with respect to the
scene, rather than forcing the user to start the reconstruction
again from scratch. Camera relocalisation is also crucial for
loop closure when trying to build globally consistent maps
∗ S. Golodetz and N. Lord assert joint second authorship.

[7, 18, 40]. Traditional approaches to camera relocalisation
have been based around one of two main paradigms:
(i) Image matching methods match the current image from the camera against keyframes stored in an image database (potentially with some interpolation between
keyframes where necessary). For example, Galvez-Lopez et
al. [10] describe an approach that computes a bag of binary
words based on BRIEF descriptors for the current image
and compares it with bags of binary words for keyframes
in the database using an L1 score. Gee et al. [12] estimate
camera pose from a set of synthetic (i.e. rendered) views
of the scene. Their approach is interesting because unlike
many image matching methods, they are to some extent able
to relocalise from novel poses; however, the complexity increases linearly with the number of synthetic views needed,
which poses significant limits to practical use. Glocker et al.
[13] encode frames using Randomised Ferns, which when
evaluated on images yield binary codes that can be matched
quickly by their Hamming distance: as noted in [23], this
makes their approach much faster than [12] in practice.
(ii) Keypoint-based methods find 2D-to-3D correspondences between keypoints in the current image and 3D
scene points, so as to deploy e.g. a Perspective-n-Point
(PnP) algorithm [16] (on RGB data) or the Kabsch algorithm [17] (on RGB-D data) to generate a number of camera pose hypotheses that can be pruned to a single hypothesis using RANSAC [8]. For example, Williams et al.
[41] recognise/match keypoints using an ensemble of randomised lists, and exclude unreliable or ambiguous matches
when generating hypotheses. Their approach is fast, but
needs significant memory to store the lists. Li et al. [23]
use graph matching to help distinguish between visuallysimilar keypoints. Their method uses BRISK descriptors
for the keypoints, and runs at around 12 FPS. Sattler et al.
[32] describe a large-scale localisation approach that finds
14457

