Not Afraid of the Dark: NIR-VIS Face Recognition via Cross-spectral
Hallucination and Low-rank Embedding

1

José Lezama1∗, Qiang Qiu2∗ and Guillermo Sapiro2
IIE, Universidad de la República, Uruguay. 2 ECE, Duke University, USA.

Abstract
Surveillance cameras today often capture NIR (near infrared) images in low-light environments. However, most
face datasets accessible for training and verification are
only collected in the VIS (visible light) spectrum. It remains
a challenging problem to match NIR to VIS face images
due to the different light spectrum. Recently, breakthroughs
have been made for VIS face recognition by applying deep
learning on a huge amount of labeled VIS face samples. The
same deep learning approach cannot be simply applied to
NIR face recognition for two main reasons: First, much limited NIR face images are available for training compared
to the VIS spectrum. Second, face galleries to be matched
are mostly available only in the VIS spectrum. In this paper, we propose an approach to extend the deep learning
breakthrough for VIS face recognition to the NIR spectrum,
without retraining the underlying deep models that see only
VIS faces. Our approach consists of two core components,
cross-spectral hallucination and low-rank embedding, to
optimize respectively input and output of a VIS deep model
for cross-spectral face recognition. Cross-spectral hallucination produces VIS faces from NIR images through a deep
learning approach. Low-rank embedding restores a lowrank structure for faces deep features across both NIR and
VIS spectrum. We observe that it is often equally effective to
perform hallucination to input NIR images or low-rank embedding to output deep features for a VIS deep model for
cross-spectral recognition. When hallucination and lowrank embedding are deployed together, we observe significant further improvement; we obtain state-of-the-art accuracy on the CASIA NIR-VIS v2.0 benchmark, without the
need at all to re-train the recognition system.

1. Introduction
In a typical forensic application involving night-time
surveillance cameras, a probe image of an individual is captured in the near-infrared spectrum (NIR), and the individ∗ Denotes equal contribution.

Figure 1. Diagram of the proposed approach. A simple NIR-VIS
face recognition system consists in using a Deep Neural Network
(DNN) trained only on VIS images to extract a feature vector f
from a NIR image and use it for matching to a VIS database. We
propose two modifications to this basic system. First, we modify the input by hallucinating a VIS image from the NIR sample.
Secondly, we apply a low-rank embedding of the DNN features
at the output. Each of this modifications produces important improvements in the recognition performance, and an even greater
one when applied together.

ual must be recognized out of a gallery of visible spectrum
(VIS) images. Whilst VIS face recognition is an extensively
studied subject, face recognition in the NIR spectrum remains a relatively unexplored field.
In standard VIS face recognition, impressive progress
has been achieved recently. This is due in part to the excellent performance of deep neural networks [29, 33, 36, 40],
which benefit from the availability of very large datasets
of face photos, typically mined from the Internet [16, 40].
Such a fruitful strategy for data collection cannot be applied
to NIR images, where training data is much scarcer.
Naturally, one would like to leverage the power of stateof-the-art VIS face recognition methods and apply them to
NIR. Recent works have made significant progress in this
direction [18, 32], but the recognition rates remain much
lower than the ones achieved in the VIS spectrum. In this
16628

