Learning to predict stereo reliability enforcing
local consistency of confidence maps
Matteo Poggi, Stefano Mattoccia
University of Bologna
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
Viale del Risorgimento 2, Bologna, Italy
matteo.poggi8@unibo.it,stefano.mattoccia@unibo.it

Abstract
Confidence measures estimate unreliable disparity assignments performed by a stereo matching algorithm and,
as recently proved, can be used for several purposes. This
paper aims at increasing, by means of a deep network,
the effectiveness of state-of-the-art confidence measures exploiting the local consistency assumption. We exhaustively
evaluated our proposal on 23 confidence measures, including 5 top-performing ones based on random-forests and
CNNs, training our networks with two popular stereo algorithms and a small subset (25 out of 194 frames) of the
KITTI 2012 dataset. Experimental results show that our approach dramatically increases the effectiveness of all the 23
confidence measures on the remaining frames. Moreover,
without re-training, we report a further cross-evaluation
on KITTI 2015 and Middlebury 2014 confirming that our
proposal provides remarkable improvements for each confidence measure even when dealing with significantly different input data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
method to move beyond conventional pixel-wise confidence
estimation.

1. Introduction
Stereo is a popular technique to infer depth from two or
more images and several approaches have been proposed
to tackle this problem. However, reliability in challenging
conditions still remains an open research issue and realistic
datasets, such as KITTI [7, 17] and Middlebury 2014 [29],
clearly emphasized this fact. Although some failures such
as occlusions [5], low signal-to-noise ratio and reduced distinctiveness [14] are intrinsically related to stereo, the impact on accuracy is amplified in practical applications dealing with poor illumination conditions, reflective surfaces
and so on. Therefore, determining the degree of reliability
of each inferred depth point is crucial to obtain more mean-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Confidence prediction performed by our approach processing PKRN [11]. (a) Reference image, (b) Disparity map,
(c) Original PKRN measure, (d) Corresponding confidence map,
PKRN+ , computed by our framework. More confident points are
encoded with brighter values, disparity map with colormap jet.

ingful 3D data for later processing stages. Moreover, effective confidence measures can be used for other purposes.
For instance, to improve stereo accuracy [6, 23, 22, 25, 30]
or for depth sensor fusion [15, 18].
Confidence measures, reviewed and evaluated in [11],
are inferred according to different strategies: from the analysis of the input stereo pair, matching cost curve or disparity maps. Recently, some authors [9, 31, 22, 25] proposed
effective confidence measures based on machine learning
techniques. The common ground in these approaches is
the joint use of multiple confidence measures and/or handcrafted features, extracted from disparity map and/or cost
volume, fed to a random-forest classifier trained on a small
set of stereo pairs with ground truth. More recently, confidence measures have been inferred [26, 30] processing disparity maps with a CNN (Convolutional Neural Network).
12452

