Radiometric Calibration for Internet Photo Collections
Zhipeng Mo1 Boxin Shi2∗ Sai-Kit Yeung1 Yasuyuki Matsushita2,3
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, National Institute of AIST
3
Osaka University

Abstract
Radiometrically calibrating the images from Internet
photo collections brings photometric analysis from lab data
to big image data in the wild, but conventional calibration methods cannot be directly applied to such image data.
This paper presents a method to jointly perform radiometric
calibration for a set of images in an Internet photo collection. By incorporating the consistency of scene reflectance
for corresponding pixels in multiple images, the proposed
method estimates radiometric response functions of all the
images using a rank minimization framework. Our calibration aligns all response functions in an image set up to the
same exponential ambiguity in a robust manner. Quantitative results using both synthetic and real data show the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
For a popular landmark, millions of pictures are captured
and shared through the Internet. Such Internet images and
community photo collections provide comprehensive image
resources to computer vision research, because they contain images captured from different viewpoints, at different
time, under different illumination, and using different types
of cameras and settings. The cameras capturing these images naturally organize a “network”. By exploring such a
network, geometric analyses such as geometric camera calibration and 3D reconstruction, which are generally infeasible using a single image, become tractable by establishing correspondences for recovering 3D points using multiview observations. Recent progress on structure from motion (SfM) [32] and multi-view stereo (MVS) [9, 10] show
successful applications using Internet photos.
Photometric analysis is an important complement problem for analyzing images from Internet photo collections
organized by such a camera network, and radiometric calibration is a key prerequisite for photometric analysis. Many
∗ Corresponding author: boxin.shi@aist.go.jp.

computer vision problems, when they are to be applied to
Internet photos, e.g., intrinsic image decomposition [18]
and photometric stereo [29], require input images to be radiometrically linearized. However, a commercial camera
usually maps the scene radiance to its pixel values in a
nonlinear manner for compressing the dynamic range and
aesthetic purpose. Such a mapping is unknown in most
cases and treated as business secrets by camera manufactures. The goal of radiometric calibration is to estimate the
camera’s (inverse) radiometric response function so that the
observed pixel values linearly relate the scene radiance.
Classic radiometric calibration approaches capture a
static scene under various exposure times [25]. For outdoor scene with illumination changes, given an image sequence from a ﬁxed viewpoint, the problem could also be
solved by physically modeling the image formation and using the consistent scene albedo across images as the key
constraint [15]. Radiometrically calibrating Internet photos
shares a similar spirit to [15], but it is much more challenging due to that 1) the scenes are captured from multiple diverse viewpoints, 2) each image is captured by an unknown
camera with unknown settings (e.g., white balance and exposure time), and 3) a batch of different response functions
need to be estimated simultaneously.
In this paper, we propose a new method to jointly perform radiometric calibration to all cameras using a collection of Internet photos for the same scene. We utilize the
geometric information calculated from SfM and MVS, and
assume the scene reﬂectance (albedo) is the same for corresponding pixels in all images. Our key observation is that
the ratio of albedo values for pixels in the same image with
the same surface normal should be equal across the image
set, only when each image is applied with a correctly calibrated inverse radiometric response function. Such a ratio operation cancels the inﬂuence of different white balance settings, exposure times, and environment illumination
conditions which are usually arbitrary for each image (and
camera). The albedo ratios are stacked as a matrix whose
rank should be 1. We minimize the rank of such a matrix
to achieve robust estimation that aligns all response func14738

