Sports Field Localization via Deep Structured Models
Namdar Homayounfar

Sanja Fidler
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

Raquel Urtasun

{namdar, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel way of efficiently localizing a sports field from a single broadcast image of the
game. Related work in this area relies on manually annotating a few key frames and extending the localization to
similar images, or installing fixed specialized cameras in
the stadium from which the layout of the field can be obtained. In contrast, we formulate this problem as a branch
and bound inference in a Markov random field where an
energy function is defined in terms of semantic cues such
as the field surface, lines and circles obtained from a deep
semantic segmentation network. Moreover, our approach is
fully automatic and depends only on a single image from
the broadcast video of the game. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by applying it to soccer and hockey.

1. Introduction
Sports analytics is used to increase a team’s competitive edge by gaining insight into the different aspects of its
playing style and the performance its players. For example, sports analytics was a major component of Germany’s
successful World Cup 2014 campaign. Another important
application is to improve scouting by identifying talented
prospects in junior leagues and assessing their competitive
capabilities and potential fit in a future team’s roster. Sports
analytics is also beneficial in fantasy leagues, giving fantasy
players access to statistics that can enhance their game play.
Even more impressive is the global sports betting market,
which is worth up to trillion dollors according to Statista.
A holy grail for sports analytics is the ability to automatically extract valuable statistics from visual information
alone. Being able to identify team formations and strategies
as well as assessing the performance of individual players
is reliant upon understanding where the actions are taking
place in 3D space. This requires accurate correspondence
between the playing field seen by the camera and the metric
model of the field.
Most approaches to player detection [21, 27, 20, 16],
game event recognition [5, 22], and team tactical analysis

[18, 4, 15] perform field localization by either semi-manual
methods [13, 32, 2, 31, 30, 7, 19, 1, 12] or by obtaining
the game data from fixed and calibrated camera systems installed around the venue.
In this paper, we tackle the challenging task of field localization from a single broadcast image. We propose a
method that requires no manual initialization and is applicable to any video of the game recorded with a single camera.
Our approach bypasses the reliance on humans annotating
keyframes for each new game or installing expensive cameras around the arena. The input to our system is a single
image and the 3D model of the field, and the output is the
mapping that takes the image to the model. In particular,
we frame the field localization problem as inference in a
Markov Random Field with potentials derived from a deep
semantic segmentation network.
We parametrize the field in terms of four rays, cast from
two orthogonal vanishing points. The rays correspond to
the outer lines of the field and thus define the field’s precise localization. Our MRF energy uses several potentials
that exploit semantic segmentation clues such as the field
surface, the line and circle markings as well as geometric
agreement between the lines and circles found in the image
and those defined by the known model of the field. All of
our potentials can be efficiently computed. We perform inference with branch-and-bound, achieving on average less
than half a second running time per frame. The weights in
our MRF are learned using S-SVM [28].
For evaluation, we apply our method to the sports of soccer and hockey. A soccer game is usually held in an open
stadium exposed to different weather and lighting conditions which might create difficulties in identifying the important markings of the field. Furthermore, the texture and
pattern of the grass in a soccer field differs from one stadium
to another. A hockey rink in comparison is mostly white and
has much smaller dimensions compared to a soccer field.
On the other hand, there are usually superimposed advertisements and texts on the rink which are different from one
arena to another. Our deep semantic segmentation network
learns to filter out all these different sources of noise and
15212

