Deep Reinforcement Learning-based Image Captioning with Embedding Reward
Zhou Ren1

Xiaoyu Wang1
Ning Zhang1
Xutao Lv1
1
2
Snap Inc.
Google Inc.

{zhou.ren, xiaoyu.wang, ning.zhang, xutao.lv}@snap.com

Abstract
Image captioning is a challenging problem owing to
the complexity in understanding the image content and diverse ways of describing it in natural language. Recent
advances in deep neural networks have substantially improved the performance of this task. Most state-of-the-art
approaches follow an encoder-decoder framework, which
generates captions using a sequential recurrent prediction model. However, in this paper, we introduce a novel
decision-making framework for image captioning. We utilize a “policy network” and a “value network” to collaboratively generate captions. The policy network serves as
a local guidance by providing the confidence of predicting
the next word according to the current state. Additionally,
the value network serves as a global and lookahead guidance by evaluating all possible extensions of the current
state. In essence, it adjusts the goal of predicting the correct words towards the goal of generating captions similar
to the ground truth captions. We train both networks using
an actor-critic reinforcement learning model, with a novel
reward defined by visual-semantic embedding. Extensive
experiments and analyses on the Microsoft COCO dataset
show that the proposed framework outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches across different evaluation metrics.

1. Introduction
Image captioning, the task of automatically describing
the content of an image with natural language, has attracted
increasingly interests in computer vision. It is interesting
because it aims at endowing machines with one of the core
human intelligence to understand the huge amount of visual
information and to express it in natural language.
Recent state-of-the-art approaches [3, 44, 30, 17, 7, 46,
15, 48, 43] follow an encoder-decoder framework to generate captions for the images. They generally employ convolutional neural networks to encode the visual information
and utilize recurrent neural networks to decode that infor∗ This work was done when the author was at Snap Inc.

Li-Jia Li2∗

lijiali@cs.stanford.edu

action prediction
Next Action

Policy Network

lying
Current State

sitting
lookahead

eating

==
inference

…
holding

a

cat

a

baseball

bat

is
pretty

Value Network
reward prediction

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed decision-making framework. During our lookahead inference procedure, we utilize a
“policy network” and a “value network” to collaboratively predict the word for each time step. The policy network provides an
action prediction that locally predicts the next word according to
current state. The value network provides a reward prediction that
globally evaluates all possible extensions of the current state.

mation to coherent sentences. During training and inference, they try to maximize the probability of the next word
based on recurrent hidden state.
In this paper, we introduce a novel decision-making
framework for image captioning. Instead of learning a sequential recurrent model to greedily look for the next correct word, we utilize a “policy network” and a “value network” to jointly determine the next best word at each time
step. The policy network, which provides the confidence of
predicting the next word according to current state, serves
as a local guidance. The value network, that evaluates the
reward value of all possible extensions of the current state,
serves as a global and lookahead guidance. Such value network adjusts the goal of predicting the correct words towards the goal of generating captions that are similar to
ground truth captions. Our framework is able to include
the good words that are with low probability to be drawn by
using the policy network alone. Figure 1 shows an example
to illustrate the proposed framework. The word holding is
not among the top choices of our policy network at current
1290

