Oriented Response Networks
Yanzhao Zhou1 , Qixiang Ye1 , Qiang Qiu2 and Jianbin Jiao1
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Duke University

zhouyanzhao215@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {qxye, jiaojb}@ucas.ac.cn, qiang.qiu@duke.edu

Abstract
Deep Convolution Neural Networks (DCNNs) are capable of learning unprecedentedly effective image representations. However, their ability in handling significant local
and global image rotations remains limited. In this paper,
we propose Active Rotating Filters (ARFs) that actively
rotate during convolution and produce feature maps with
location and orientation explicitly encoded. An ARF acts
as a virtual filter bank containing the filter itself and its
multiple unmaterialised rotated versions. During backpropagation, an ARF is collectively updated using errors
from all its rotated versions. DCNNs using ARFs, referred
to as Oriented Response Networks (ORNs), can produce
within-class rotation-invariant deep features while maintaining inter-class discrimination for classification tasks.
The oriented response produced by ORNs can also be
used for image and object orientation estimation tasks.
Over multiple state-of-the-art DCNN architectures, such
as VGG, ResNet, and STN, we consistently observe that
replacing regular filters with the proposed ARFs leads to
significant reduction in the number of network parameters
and improvement in classification performance. We report
the best results on several commonly used benchmarks 1 .

1. Introduction
The problem of orientation information encoding has
been extensively investigated in hand-crafted features, e.g.,
Gabor features [15, 17], HOG [9], and SIFT [31]. In
Deep Convolution Neural Networks (DCNNs), the inherent
properties of convolution and pooling alleviate the effect of
local transitions and warps; however, lacking the capability
to handle large image rotation limits DCNN’s performance
in many visual tasks including object boundary detection
[16, 32], multi-oriented object detection [6], and image
classification [20, 23].
1 Source code is publicly available at zhouyanzhao.github.io/ORN

Figure 1. An ARF is a filter of the size W × W × N , and
viewed as N-directional points on a W × W grid. The form of
the ARF enables it to effectively define relative rotations, e.g., the
head rotation of a bird about its body. An ARF actively rotates
during convolution; thus it acts as a virtual filter bank containing
the canonical filter itself and its multiple unmaterialised rotated
versions. In this example, the location and orientation of birds in
different postures are captured by the ARF and explicitly encoded
into a feature map.

Due to the lack of ability in fully understanding rotations, the most straightforward way for DCNN to decrease
its loss is “learning by rote”. The visualization of convolutional filters [11, 46] indicates that different rotated versions
of one identical image structure are often redundantly
learned in low-level, middle-level, and relatively high-level
filters, such as those in the VGG-16 model trained on
ImageNet [10]. When object parts rotate relatively to
objects themselves, e.g., bird’s head to its body, it requires
learning multiple combinations of each orientation-distinct
component with more convolutional filters. In such cases,
the network could give up understanding the concept of the
whole object and tend to use a discriminative part of it to
make the final decisions [47]. The learning-by-rote strategy
needs a larger number of parameters to generate orientationredundant filters, significantly increasing both the training
time and the risk of network over-fitting. Besides, the
training data is not sufficiently utilized since the limited
instances are implicitly split into subsets, which could
increase the possibility of filter under-fitting. To alleviate
such a problem, data augmentation, e.g., rotating each
1519

