Predicting Salient Face in Multiple-face Videos
Yufan Liu†, Songyang Zhang†‡ , Mai Xu†∗, and Xuming He‡
†
Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
Abstract

one face to another in videos, as shown in Figure 1. Our
goal in this work is to capture both static and dynamic properties of the attention on faces in multiple-face videos.

Although the recent success of convolutional neural network (CNN) advances state-of-the-art saliency prediction in
static images, few work has addressed the problem of predicting attention in videos. On the other hand, we ﬁnd that
the attention of different subjects consistently focuses on a
single face in each frame of videos involving multiple faces.
Therefore, we propose in this paper a novel deep learning
(DL) based method to predict salient face in multiple-face
videos, which is capable of learning features and transition
of salient faces across video frames. In particular, we ﬁrst
learn a CNN for each frame to locate salient face. Taking
CNN features as input, we develop a multiple-stream long
short-term memory (M-LSTM) network to predict the temporal transition of salient faces in video sequences. To evaluate our DL-based method, we build a new eye-tracking
database of multiple-face videos. The experimental results
show that our method outperforms the prior state-of-the-art
methods in predicting visual attention on faces in multipleface videos.

Early work on image saliency prediction uses hand-craft
features to predict visual attention for images [2, 10, 20, 26,
35, 42], based on understanding of the human visual system (HVS) [29]. The representative method on predicting
image saliency is Itti’s model [20], which combines centersurround features of color, intensity and orientation together. In contrast, recent methods [4,14,21,22,24,25,28,32,40,
41, 43] propose a learning-based strategy to predict saliency. For example, Judd et al. combined high-level features
(e.g., face and text), middle-level features (e.g., gist) and
low-level features together, via learning their corresponding
weights with the support vector machine (SVM). To predict
visual attention in face images, Xu et al. [41] proposed to
precisely model saliency of face region, via learning the ﬁxation distributions of face and facial features. Besides, Jiang
et al. [21] explored several face-related features to predict
saliency in a scene with multiple faces. Most recently, several deep learning (DL) methods [14, 24, 25, 28, 32] have
been proposed to automatically learn features for saliency
prediction, instead of relying on handcrafted features. For
example, Huang et al. [14] proposed saliency in context (SALICON) method to learn features for image saliency
prediction by incorporating convolutional neural network
(CNN).

1. Introduction
Saliency prediction [1] models the deployment of attention on visual inputs in biological vision systems, and has
potential application in many computer vision tasks, such as
object detection [3] and event detection [36]. Particularly,
detecting salient objects, such as faces, plays an important role in video analytics, human-computer interface design
and event understanding. As a matter of fact, a mass of
videos, including movie, interview and variety show, contain multiple faces.
Existing literature on saliency prediction typically focuses on ﬁnding salient face in static images [21]. However, few prior work has addressed the problem of predicting
saliency in multiple-face videos. While the human subjects
generally pay attention to only a single face [21], we ﬁnd
that attention of different subjects consistently transits from

For video saliency prediction, earlier methods [6, 8, 12,
17–19] have investigated several dynamic features to model visual attention on videos, in light of the HVS. For example, the Itti’s image model was extended in [17] for
video saliency prediction, by integrating with two dynamic features: motion and ﬂicker contrast. Later, several advanced video saliency prediction methods have been
proposed, which exploits other dynamic features, such as
Bayesian surprise in [18] and motion vector in [6]. Recently, learning-based video saliency prediction methods
have also emerged [13, 31, 33, 37]. For example, Pang et
al. [33] proposed a learning-based video saliency prediction method, which explores the top-down information of
eye movement patterns, i.e., passive and active states [34],

∗ Corresponding author: Mai Xu (maixu@buaa.edu.cn).

4420

