Object Region Mining with Adversarial Erasing: A Simple Classification to
Semantic Segmentation Approach
Yunchao Wei1
1

Jiashi Feng1

National University of Singapore

{eleweiyv, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

Xiaodan Liang2
2

CMU

3

Ming-Ming Cheng3

Naikai University

xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu

4

Yao Zhao 4

Shuicheng Yan1,5

Beijing Jiaotong University

cmm@nankai.edu.cn

yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

5

360 AI Institute

yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract
We investigate a principle way to progressively mine discriminative object regions using classification networks to
address the weakly-supervised semantic segmentation problems. Classification networks are only responsive to small
and sparse discriminative regions from the object of interest, which deviates from the requirement of the segmentation task that needs to localize dense, interior and integral
regions for pixel-wise inference. To mitigate this gap, we
propose a new adversarial erasing approach for localizing
and expanding object regions progressively. Starting with
a single small object region, our proposed approach drives
the classification network to sequentially discover new and
complement object regions by erasing the current mined regions in an adversarial manner. These localized regions
eventually constitute a dense and complete object region
for learning semantic segmentation. To further enhance the
quality of the discovered regions by adversarial erasing, an
online prohibitive segmentation learning approach is developed to collaborate with adversarial erasing by providing
auxiliary segmentation supervision modulated by the more
reliable classification scores. Despite its apparent simplicity, the proposed approach achieves 55.0% and 55.7% mean
Intersection-over-Union (mIoU) scores on PASCAL VOC
2012 val and test sets, which are the new state-of-the-arts.

…
dog
Classifi atio
Net ork

dog

dog

Classifi atio
Net ork

Classifi atio
Net ork

The Mi ed
O je t Regio

O je t Regio Mi i g ith Ad ersarial Erasi g
a

I age

AE-Step

AE-Step

AE-Step

O je t Regio

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the proposed AE approach. With AE,
a classiﬁcation network ﬁrst mines the most discriminative region
for image category label “dog”. Then, AE erases the mined region
(head) from the image and the classiﬁcation network is re-trained
to discover a new object region (body) for performing classiﬁcation without performance drop. We repeat such adversarial erasing process for multiple times and merge the erased regions into
an integral foreground segmentation mask. (b) Examples of the
discriminative object regions mined by AE at different steps and
the obtained foreground segmentation masks in the end.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success on semantic segmentation tasks [2, 13, 15, 33],
arguably beneﬁting from available resources of pixel-level
annotated masks. However, collecting a large amount of accurate pixel-level annotation for training semantic segmentation networks on new image sets is labor intensive and
inevitably requires substantial ﬁnancial investments. To relieve the demand for the expensive pixel-level image annotations, weakly-supervised approaches [10, 12, 14, 16–20,
22–24, 28, 29] provide some promising solutions.
Among various levels of weak supervision information,
the simplest and most efﬁcient one that can be collected for

training semantic segmentation models is the image-level
annotation [30, 32]. However, to train a well-performing
semantic segmentation model given only such image-level
annotation is rather challenging – one obstacle is how to
accurately assign image-level labels to corresponding pixels of training images such that DNN-based approaches
can learn to segment images end-to-end. To establish the
desired label-pixel correspondence, some approaches are
developed that can be categorized as proposal-based and
classiﬁcation-based. The proposal-based methods [20, 28]
often exhaustedly examine each proposal to generate pixelwise masks, which are quite time-consuming. In contrast,

1568

