Deep Mixture of Linear Inverse Regressions Applied to Head-Pose Estimation
Stéphane Lathuilière1 , Rémi Juge1 , Pablo Mesejo1 , Rafael Muñoz-Salinas2 , Radu Horaud1
1
Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, France
2
Computing and Numerical Analysis Department, Cordoba University, Spain
stephane.lathuiliere@inria.fr

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) have become the state-of-the-art for many classification and regression problems in computer vision. When it comes to
regression, approaches such as measuring the Euclidean
distance of target and predictions are often employed as
output layer. In this paper, we propose the coupling of a
Gaussian mixture of linear inverse regressions with a ConvNet, and we describe the methodological foundations and
the associated algorithm to jointly train the deep network
and the regression function. We test our model on the headpose estimation problem. In this particular problem, we
show that inverse regression outperforms regression models
currently used by state-of-the-art computer vision methods.
Our method does not require the incorporation of additional
data, as it is often proposed in the literature, thus it is able
to work well on relatively small training datasets. Finally,
it outperforms state-of-the-art methods in head-pose estimation using a widely used head-pose dataset. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first to incorporate inverse
regression into deep learning for computer vision applications.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been playing a very important role
in the computer vision field during the last years. Many
methods have been proposed for challenging tasks, such as
image classification [17, 33] or object detection [12, 29].
State-of-the-art results in these classification tasks have
been achieved with the use of Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) trained to minimize a loss function on
the output of a softmax layer. Besides classification, ConvNets have also been employed to solve regression problems, e.g. image registration [21], organ volume estimation [37], or salient object detection [19], just to name a
few. In most cases, when dealing with regression problems, the last softmax layer used in classification tasks is

replaced with a fully connected regression layer with linear or sigmoid activations that minimizes an Euclidean loss.
This type of configuration ignores the existence of other regression techniques, like inverse regression models, that are
suitable in high-dimensional to low-dimensional settings
[6, 16, 18, 25] which are of particular interest in computer
vision. To identify the benefit of using inverse regression instead of forward (or standard) regression, let’s consider the
simple case in which we want to estimate a linear regression from x ∈ RD to y ∈ R, with N training samples such
that D ≫ N . The problem is ill-posed in the case of forward regression (y = a⊤ x, a ∈ RD ) and regularization is
required because one needs to estimate D parameters from
only N equations. Interestingly, for linear models in the inverse regression setting (x = a∗ y, a∗ ∈ RD ), the problem
is well defined since one still needs to estimate a set of D
parameters but from D × N equations.
The most common strategy when using deep learning
consists in taking an architecture that has already proven
to be competitive (in our case VGG-16 [30], the model with
the smallest localization error on the ImageNet Large-Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge 2014 [28]), download a pretrained model, slightly modify it (e.g. replacing the last
softmax layer with a regression layer), and fine-tune it on
the particular application under study. In this scenario, we
propose a new output layer designed specifically to perform
regression. This output layer is a Gaussian mixture of inverse linear regressions. Mixtures of inverse linear regressions [6] have already been successfully applied to hyperspectral image analysis [5], sound-source localization [7]
and head-pose estimation [8]. Moreover, it has been extended to mixtures of t-distributions [25] which provides an
inverse regression formulation that is robust to outliers.
We believe that inverse regression models are well-suited
in the deep learning framework because deep neural networks represent images in high-dimensional feature spaces
that must subsequently be mapped onto low-dimensional
manifolds. Interesting enough, recognizing the caveats of
high-dimensional regression and exploring inverse regres14817

