Learning to Align Semantic Segmentation and 2.5D Maps for Geolocalization
Anil Armagan, Martin Hirzer, Peter M. Roth and Vincent Lepetit
Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology, Austria
{armagan,hirzer,pmroth,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We present an efficient method for geolocalization in urban environments starting from a coarse estimate of the location provided by a GPS and using a simple untextured
2.5D model of the surrounding buildings. Our key contribution is a novel efficient and robust method to optimize the
pose: We train a Deep Network to predict the best direction
to improve a pose estimate, given a semantic segmentation
of the input image and a rendering of the buildings from this
estimate. We then iteratively apply this CNN until converging to a good pose. This approach avoids the use of reference images of the surroundings, which are difficult to acquire and match, while 2.5D models are broadly available.
We can therefore apply it to places unseen during training.

(a)

(b)

(c)

1. Introduction
As recent challenges and benchmarks such as [8, 21]
show, dealing with urban scenarios is of increasing interest, including important applications such as autonomous
driving and Augmented Reality. One of the key problems for these tasks is the accurate geolocalization of images, which is not easy to solve in practice. Even though
sufficient for navigation, GPS information is not accurate
enough for many other tasks, especially, if the exact camera
pose should be estimated.
Thus, typically image-based localization techniques including for example [22, 23] were introduced. However,
they rely on pre-registered images of the surrounding.
Therefore, we are facing two problems. First, a large
amount of images needs to be captured and registered,
which is very cumbersome. Even large collections such
as Google Street View1 are rather sparsely sampled. Second, such data only reflects a very specific appearance of
the scene, making a robust matching rather hard under different illumination conditions [30].

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. We can correct the
initial sensor pose (a) to an accurate estimate (b) in locations
unseen at training time as long as a 2.5D map (c) of the
neighborhood is available. In other words, we learn to align
the map with the input image given a coarse estimate of the
pose provided by the sensors.

To overcome these drawbacks, we propose a method
that, starting from a crude initialization provided by a GPS
and orientation sensors, estimates the camera pose from a
perspective, non-panoramic input image given 2.5D maps 2
only. This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where we show an example for the initial sensor pose and the corresponding pose
recovered with our method along with the used 2.5D map.
In contrast to pre-registered street view data, 2.5D maps
are broadly available and easy to obtain, and have been already considered for localization (e.g., [1]). However, as
these maps are reduced to the outline and the height of the
buildings, our task is getting more difficult. In fact, there
is no texture available, which could be used for matching.

1 https://maps.google.com/help/maps/streetview

2 In particular, we build on https://www.openstreetmap.org.

3425

