Video Frame Interpolation via Adaptive Convolution
Simon Niklaus∗
Portland State University

Long Mai∗
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

sniklaus@pdx.edu

mtlong@cs.pdx.edu

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Abstract
Video frame interpolation typically involves two steps:
motion estimation and pixel synthesis. Such a two-step approach heavily depends on the quality of motion estimation. This paper presents a robust video frame interpolation method that combines these two steps into a single
process. Specifically, our method considers pixel synthesis for the interpolated frame as local convolution over two
input frames. The convolution kernel captures both the local motion between the input frames and the coefficients for
pixel synthesis. Our method employs a deep fully convolutional neural network to estimate a spatially-adaptive convolution kernel for each pixel. This deep neural network
can be directly trained end to end using widely available
video data without any difficult-to-obtain ground-truth data
like optical flow. Our experiments show that the formulation of video interpolation as a single convolution process
allows our method to gracefully handle challenges like occlusion, blur, and abrupt brightness change and enables
high-quality video frame interpolation.

1. Introduction
Frame interpolation is a classic computer vision problem and is important for applications like novel view interpolation and frame rate conversion [36]. Traditional frame
interpolation methods have two steps: motion estimation,
usually optical flow, and pixel synthesis [1]. Optical flow
is often difficult to estimate in the regions suffering from
occlusion, blur, and abrupt brightness change. Flow-based
pixel synthesis cannot reliably handle the occlusion problem. Failure of any of these two steps will lead to noticeable
artifacts in interpolated video frames.
This paper presents a robust video frame interpolation
method that achieves frame interpolation using a deep convolutional neural network without explicitly dividing it into
separate steps. Our method considers pixel interpolation
as convolution over corresponding image patches in the
two input video frames, and estimates the spatially-adaptive
convolutional kernel using a deep fully convolutional neural

R1

R2

ConvNet
P1

K

x
Iˆ(

,y

)

P2

∗

Figure 1: Pixel interpolation by convolution. For each output pixel (x, y), our method estimates a convolution kernel
K and uses it to convolve with patches P1 and P2 centered
ˆ y).
at (x, y) in the input frames to produce its color I(x,
network. Specifically, for a pixel (x, y) in the interpolated
frame, this deep neural network takes two receptive field
patches R1 and R2 centered at that pixel as input and estimates a convolution kernel K. This convolution kernel is
used to convolve with the input patches P1 and P2 to synthesize the output pixel, as illustrated in Figure 1.
An important aspect of our method is the formulation of
pixel interpolation as convolution over pixel patches instead
of relying on optical flow. This convolution formulation
unifies motion estimation and pixel synthesis into a single
procedure. It enables us to design a deep fully convolutional neural network for video frame interpolation without
dividing interpolation into separate steps. This formulation
is also more flexible than those based on optical flow and
can better handle challenging scenarios for frame interpolation. Furthermore, our neural network is able to estimate
edge-aware convolution kernels that lead to sharp results.
The main contribution of this paper is a robust video
frame interpolation method that employs a fully deep convolutional neural network to produce high-quality video interpolation results. This method has a few advantages. First,
since it models video interpolation as a single process, it is
able to make proper trade-offs among competing constraints
and thus can provide a robust interpolation approach. Sec-

∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

http://graphics.cs.pdx.edu/project/adaconv

670

