Shading Annotations in the Wild
Balazs Kovacs

Sean Bell
Noah Snavely
Cornell University

Kavita Bala

Abstract
Understanding shading effects in images is critical for a
variety of vision and graphics problems, including intrinsic image decomposition, shadow removal, image relighting, and inverse rendering. As is the case with other vision
tasks, machine learning is a promising approach to understanding shading—but there is little ground truth shading
data available for real-world images. We introduce Shading Annotations in the Wild (SAW), a new large-scale, public dataset of shading annotations in indoor scenes, comprised of multiple forms of shading judgments obtained via
crowdsourcing, along with shading annotations automatically generated from RGB-D imagery. We use this data
to train a convolutional neural network to predict per-pixel
shading information in an image. We demonstrate the value
of our data and network in an application to intrinsic images, where we can reduce decomposition artifacts produced by existing algorithms. Our database is available
at http://opensurfaces.cs.cornell.edu/saw.

Figure 1: Examples of annotations in the SAW dataset.
Green indicates regions of near-constant shading (but with
possibly varying reflectance). Red indicates edges due to
discontinuities in shape (surface normal or depth). Cyan
indicates edges due to discontinuities in illumination (cast
shadows). Using these annotations, we can learn to classify
regions of an image into different shading categories.

1. Introduction
Understanding images requires reasoning about the
shapes and materials in scenes, where the appearance of objects is modulated by illumination. A large body of research
in scene understanding has focused on shape and materials,
with lighting often overlooked or discounted as a nuisance
factor. However, understanding shading and illumination
in images is critical for a variety of problems in vision and
graphics, including intrinsic image decomposition, shadow
detection and removal, image relighting, and inverse rendering. How can we make progress on understanding illumination in natural images? As with other problem domains,
we believe that data is key. Large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [10], COCO [26], Places [36], and MINC [6] have
had significant impact in advancing research in object detection, scene classification and understanding, and material
recognition. This success motivates the creation of a similar
dataset for shading information.
In this paper, we present a new, large-scale crowdsourced
dataset of Shading Annotations in the Wild (SAW). An im-

portant challenge in constructing a dataset of shading information is deciding what manner of shading information to
collect, and how to collect it. We consider several possible approaches to collecting such data, and note that a key
subproblem across many tasks is to determine whether an
image edge is due to variation in reflectance, illumination,
or some other cause (as with the Retinex algorithm for intrinsic images [24]). This observation leads us to collect two
types of shading annotations in a large set of images: (1) image regions of approximately constant shading, and (2) examples of discontinuities in illumination (i.e., cast shadow
boundaries), or shape (e.g., depth or surface normal discontinuities). These kinds of annotations are illustrated in Figure 1. We show how to collect these annotations at scale
using a combination of crowdsourcing and automatic processing. Our dataset includes 15K shadow boundary points
and 24K constant shading regions from nearly 7K photos.
Using our new dataset, we train a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to identify various types of shading in new
16998

