Semantic Segmentation via Structured Patch Prediction, Context CRF and
Guidance CRF
Falong Shen1
1
Peking University

Rui Gan1
Shuicheng Yan2,3
Gang Zeng1
2
3
360 AI Institute
National University of Singapore

{shenfalong,raygan,zeng}@pku.edu.cn, yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract
This paper describes a fast and accurate semantic image
segmentation approach that encodes not only segmentationspecified features but also high-order context compatibilities and boundary guidance constraints. We introduce a
structured patch prediction technique to make a trade-off
between classification discriminability and boundary sensibility for features. Both label and feature contexts are
embedded to ensure recognition accuracy and compatibility, while the complexity of the high order cliques is reduced by a distance-aware sampling and pooling strategy. The proposed joint model also employs a guidance CRF to further enhance the segmentation performance. The
message passing step is augmented with the guided filtering which enables an efficient and joint training of the whole system in an end-to-end fashion. Our proposed joint model outperforms the state-of-art on Pascal VOC 2012
and Cityscapes, with mIoU(%) of 82.5 and 79.2 respectively. It also reaches a leading performance on ADE20K,
which is the dataset of the scene parsing track in ILSVRC
2016. The code is available at https://github.com/
FalongShen/SegModel.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental but difficult
problem in computer vision. Compared with image classification, it provides a pixel-wise semantic understanding of
the image, through which the scene is parsed in terms of object categories, locations and shapes. Deep networks have
made a series of breakthroughs on the task of image classification [18, 14, 13]. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) controlled by varying depth and breadth provide powerful models, and the integrated multi-level hierarchical features and classifiers embed mostly correct prior knowledge
about statistics and dependencies among pixels for preventing overfitting.
Recent advances in semantic segmentation mainly re-

classiﬁca on
segmenta on

sheep
dog
void

Figure 1: The belief-frequency ambiguity when transferring
model from classification to segmentation. The right image is a
hard example and both models produce a confusing prediction.
The left image is an easy example, the segmentation model still
produces a confusing prediction in order to make spatial prediction.

ly on fully convolutional networks (FCN) and conditional random fields (CRF) [4, 33, 1, 31, 7]. FCN transfers the recognition network in image classification by finetuning position-aware feature representations for semantic
segmentation [24]. However, deeply learned features for
image classification tend to tolerate the object translation
and deformation by resolution-reducing pooling layers and
sub-sampling layers in convolutional neural networks [13],
which decreases the ability for locating and separating objects from neighboring contexts. In order to determine object positions and boundaries, a bilinear up-sampling operation is often adopted to retrieve a pixel-wise prediction in
FCN, which leads to an interpretation ambiguity between
the degrees of belief and its frequentist counterpart.
Interpretation of Local Prediction An analysis on the
end-to-end training process of FCN in Sec. 3.1 shows that
the softmax classifier produces a distribution to represent not only the degrees of belief about object categories, but
also the frequentist of the category in the patch. As shown
in Fig. 1, the interpolation routine in the up-sampling operation seems to treat the classification scores with both the
belief and the frequentist interpretation. That says, the FCN
classifier training uses a ambiguous criteria, with both image region statistics and training sample likelihood. This
4321
1953

