Multiple-Scattering Microphysics Tomography
Aviad Levis, Yoav Y. Schechner
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Anthony B. Davis
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA

aviad.levis@gmail.com ; yoav@ee.technion.ac.il

Anthony.B.Davis@jpl.nasa.gov

Abstract
Scattering effects in images, including those related to
haze, fog and appearance of clouds, are fundamentally
dictated by microphysical characteristics of the scatterers.
This work defines and derives recovery of these characteristics, in a three-dimensional (3D) heterogeneous medium.
Recovery is based on a novel tomography approach. Multiview (multi-angular) and multi-spectral data are linked to
the underlying microphysics using 3D radiative transfer, accounting for multiple-scattering. Despite the nonlinearity of
the tomography model, inversion is enabled using a few approximations that we describe. As a case study, we focus on
passive remote sensing of the atmosphere, where scatterer
retrieval can benefit modeling and forecasting of weather,
climate and pollution.

1. Introduction
Until recently, 3D inverse problems in computer vision
tended to use simple forward models, such as blur (defocus,
motion), reflection (photometric stereo), and dehazing [33,
42] based on single-scattering [5,48,49]. Other imaging
communities use different simplified models. Specifically,
tomography in medical imaging and many other applications is based on linear models [19,21,38,51]. Scattering
is often considered a nuisance, thus attempts are made to
counter or ignore it. In contrast, in atmospheric and hydrologic remote sensing, multiple scattering is a major signal
source, and the dominant light source (Sun) is uncontrolled.
Multiple-scattering models [46] are used resulting in a nonlinear inversion. However, the model of the medium degenerates to a plane parallel structure [30,36,39]: scatterers
vary essentially only in the 1D altitude [12,34].
With increasing computing power, previously intractable
problems may now be considered. Advances are made
in multiple reflections, non-line-of-sight imaging [4,29,47]
and multiple scattering [17,18,27,31,35]. In this line, this
work fits a 3D forward model involving arbitrary orders of

Figure 1. An instrument acquires multi-view images of a volumetric scattering medium. In each voxel, the scatterers have a
different size-distribution. The microphysical parameters of the
size-distribution, coupled with Mie theory, determine a voxel’s effective scattering characteristics, therefore affecting the acquired
images. Using these multi-view multi-spectral measurements we
recover spatial variations in the size-distribution parameters.

scattering, multiple viewpoints and spectral bands. We apply this approach to 3D atmospheric remote sensing, however, it could also find use in other fields such as computer
graphics, bio-medical imaging and material science.
Prior art has shown 3D scattering tomography of optical
parameters [17,18], however, it does not retrieve the physical properties of the scattering particles. The particles are
the crux, scientifically. Their microphysical parameters directly relate to physical, chemical and even biological processes in the medium. For example, in the atmosphere, microphysical properties of particles dictate pollution, cloud
formation and climate changes [9,45].
This paper seeks to recover these fundamental parame16740

