Spatially-Varying Blur Detection Based on Multiscale Fused and Sorted
Transform Coefficients of Gradient Magnitudes
S. Alireza Golestaneh
Arizona State University

Lina J. Karam
Arizona State University

sgolest1@asu.edu

karam@asu.edu

Abstract
The detection of spatially-varying blur without having
any information about the blur type is a challenging task.
In this paper, we propose a novel effective approach to address this blur detection problem from a single image without requiring any knowledge about the blur type, level, or
camera settings. Our approach computes blur detection
maps based on a novel High-frequency multiscale Fusion
and Sort Transform (HiFST) of gradient magnitudes. The
evaluations of the proposed approach on a diverse set of
blurry images with different blur types, levels, and contents
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods qualitatively and
quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Many images contain blurred regions. Blur can be
caused by different factors such as defocus, camera/object
motion, or camera shake. While it is common in photography to deliberately use a shallow focus technique to give
prominence to foreground objects based on defocus, unintentional blur due to degradation factors can decrease the
image quality. Blur detection plays an important role in
many computer vision and computer graphics applications
including but not limited to image segmentation, depth estimation, image deblurring and refocusing, and background
blur magnification.
In recent years, a variety of methods have been proposed
to address the issue of deblurring by estimating blur kernels
and performing a deconvolution [2, 5, 6, 13, 14, 16, 19, 23,
22, 34, 38, 37]. In this work, we do not aim to do kernel
estimation and deconvolution. Instead, the objective of this
work is to propose an effective blur detection method from a
single image without having any information about the blur
type, level, or the camera settings. Figure 1 shows sample
results of our proposed method.
Despite the success of existing spatially-varying blur de-

Figure 1. Example results of our proposed blur detection method.
(a) Input images. (b) Ground-truth binary blur maps, with white
corresponding to sharp and black corresponding to blurred region. (c) Grayscale blur detection maps generated by our proposed
method with higher intensities corresponding to sharper regions.

tection methods, there are only few methods focusing on
spatially-varying blur detection regardless of the blur type
[3, 20, 26, 27, 28, 32], and the rest perform well only on
defocus blur or motion blur. Moreover, the performance of
most of the existing methods degrades drastically when taking into account the effects of camera noise and distortion.
Therefore, noise-free and artifact-free assumptions could be
unsuitable when dealing with real-word images.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows. We propose a robust spatially-varying blur detection method from a single image based on a novel highfrequency multiscale fusion and sort transform (HiFST) of
gradient magnitudes to determine the level of blur at each
location in an image. We evaluate our proposed algorithm
on both defocus and motion blur types to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. We also test the robustness of
our method by adding different levels of noise as well as
different types and levels of distortions to the input image.

5800

