Perceptual Generative Adversarial Networks for Small Object Detection
Jianan Li1
1

Xiaodan Liang2

Yunchao Wei3

Beijing Institute of Technology

{20090964, ciom xtf1}@bit.edu.cn

2

CMU

3

Tingfa Xu1∗ Jiashi Feng 3

National University of Singapore

xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu

Shuicheng Yan3,4
4

{eleweiyv, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

360 AI Institute
yanshuicheng@360.cn

Abstract
Detecting small objects is notoriously challenging due
to their low resolution and noisy representation. Existing object detection pipelines usually detect small objects
through learning representations of all the objects at multiple scales. However, the performance gain of such ad hoc
architectures is usually limited to pay off the computational
cost. In this work, we address the small object detection
problem by developing a single architecture that internally
lifts representations of small objects to “super-resolved”
ones, achieving similar characteristics as large objects and
thus more discriminative for detection. For this purpose,
we propose a new Perceptual Generative Adversarial Network (Perceptual GAN) model that improves small object
detection through narrowing representation difference of
small objects from the large ones. Speciﬁcally, its generator learns to transfer perceived poor representations of
the small objects to super-resolved ones that are similar
enough to real large objects to fool a competing discriminator. Meanwhile its discriminator competes with the generator to identify the generated representation and imposes
an additional perceptual requirement – generated representations of small objects must be beneﬁcial for detection purpose – on the generator. Extensive evaluations on the challenging Tsinghua-Tencent 100K [45] and the Caltech [9]
benchmark well demonstrate the superiority of Perceptual
GAN in detecting small objects, including trafﬁc signs and
pedestrians, over well-established state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Recent great progress on object detection is stimulated
by the deep learning pipelines that learn deep representations from the region of interest (RoI) and perform classiﬁcation based on the learned representations, such as Fast
R-CNN [11] and Faster R-CNN [32]. Those pipelines indeed work well on large objects with high resolution, clear
appearance and structure from which the discriminative features can be learned. But they usually fail to detect very
small objects, as rich representations are difﬁcult to learn
∗ Corresponding author.

≈

Perceptual
GAN
Features For
Small Instance

Super-resolved
Features

Features For
Large Instance

Figure 1. Large and small objects exhibit different representations
from high-level convolutional layers of a CNN detector. The representations of large objects are discriminative while those of small
objects are of low resolution, which hurts the detection accuracy.
In this work, we introduce the Perceptual GAN model to enhance
the representations for small objects to be similar to real large objects, thus improve detection performance on the small objects.

from their poor-quality appearance and structure, as shown
in Figure 1. However, small objects are very common in
many real world applications such as trafﬁc sign detection, pedestrian detection for advanced autonomous driving.
Small object detection is much more challenging than normal object detection and good solutions are still rare so far.
Some efforts [4, 25, 18, 39, 23, 1] have been devoted
to addressing small object detection problems. One common practice [4, 25] is to increase the scale of input images to enhance the resolution of small objects and produce
high-resolution feature maps. Some others [39, 23, 1] focus
on developing network variants to generate multi-scale representation which enhances high-level small-scale features
with multiple lower-level features layers. However, all of
those approaches try to enhance the performance of small
object detection by data augmentation or naively increasing
the feature dimension. Simply increasing the scale of input
images often results in heavy time consumption for training
and testing. Besides, the multi-scale representation constructed by the low-level features just works like a blackbox and cannot guarantee the constructed features are interpretable and discriminative enough for object detection. In
this work, we argue that a preferable way to effectively represent the small objects is to discover the intrinsic structural
correlations between small-scale and large-scale objects for
each category and then use the transformed representations

1222

