The World of Fast Moving Objects
Denys Rozumnyi1,3
Jan Kotera2
Filip Šroubek2
Lukáš Novotný1
Jiřı́ Matas1
1
Center for Machine Perception, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Institute of Information Theory and Automation, Czech Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology

Abstract
The notion of a Fast Moving Object (FMO), i.e. an object that moves over a distance exceeding its size within the
exposure time, is introduced. FMOs may, and typically do,
rotate with high angular speed. FMOs are very common in
sports videos, but are not rare elsewhere. In a single frame,
such objects are often barely visible and appear as semitransparent streaks.
A method for the detection and tracking of FMOs is proposed. The method consists of three distinct algorithms,
which form an efficient localization pipeline that operates
successfully in a broad range of conditions. We show that
it is possible to recover the appearance of the object and its
axis of rotation, despite its blurred appearance. The proposed method is evaluated on a new annotated dataset. The
results show that existing trackers are inadequate for the
problem of FMO localization and a new approach is required. Two applications of localization, temporal superresolution and highlighting, are presented.

Figure 1: Fast moving objects appear as semi-transparent
streaks larger than their size. Examples (left-to-right, topto-bottom) from table tennis, archery, softball, tennis, hailstorm and fireworks.

1. Introduction
Object tracking has received enormous attention by the
computer vision community. Methods based on various
principles have been proposed and several surveys have
been compiled [2, 3, 11]. Standard benchmarks, some
comprising hundreds of videos, such as ALOV [22], VOT
[15, 16] and OTB [27] are available. Yet none of them include objects that are moving so fast that they appear as
streaks much larger than their size. This is a surprising
omission considering the fact that such objects commonly
appear in diverse real-world situations, in which sports play
undoubtedly a prominent role; see examples in Fig. 1
To develop algorithms for detection and tracking of fast
moving objects, we had to collect and annotate a new
dataset. The substantial difference of the FMO dataset and
the standard ones was confirmed by ex-post analysis of
inter-frame motion statistics. The most common overlap
of ground truth bounding boxes in two consecutive frames

is zero for the FMO set while it is close to one for ALOV,
OTB and VOT [22, 27, 15]. The speed of the tracked object
projected to image coordinates, measured as the distance
of object centers in two consecutive frames, is on average
ten times higher in the new dataset, see Fig. 2. Given the
difference in the properties of the sequences, it is not surprising that state-of-the-art trackers designed for the classical problem do not perform well on the FMO dataset. The
two “worlds” are so different that on almost all sequences
the classical state-of-the-art methods fail completely, their
output bounding boxes achieving a 50% overlap with the
ground truth in zero frames, see Tab. 3.
In the paper, we propose an efficient method for FMO
localization and a method for estimation of their extrinsic –
the trajectory and the axis and angular velocity of rotation,
and intrinsic properties – the size and color of the object.
In specific cases we can go further and estimate the full ap15203

