Nonnegative Matrix Underapproximation for Robust Multiple Model Fitting*
Mariano Tepper†
Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation

Guillermo Sapiro
ECE, Duke University

mtepper@flatironinstitute.org

guillermo.sapiro@duke.edu

SVD/NMF

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a highly efficient algorithm to address the nonnegative matrix underapproximation (NMU) problem, i.e., nonnegative matrix factorization
(NMF) with an additional underapproximation constraint.
NMU results are interesting as, compared to traditional
NMF, they present additional sparsity and part-based behavior, explaining unique data features. To show these features in practice, we first present an application to the analysis of climate data. We then present an NMU-based algorithm to robustly fit multiple parametric models to a dataset.
The proposed approach delivers state-of-the-art results for
the estimation of multiple fundamental matrices and homographies, outperforming other alternatives in the literature
and exemplifying the use of efficient NMU computations.

1. Introduction
Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [13] has been
successfully applied as a data analysis technique, mainly
because its part-based representation and sparsity. Unfortunately, the problem of finding a rank-r NMF of a nonnegative matrix A is NP-hard [20]. However, a rank-one NMF
can be obtained in polynomial time. On the one hand, the
rank-one singular value decomposition (SVD) of A is an
optimal solution to the problem
min

rank(Z)=1

2

kA − ZkF .

(1)

On the other hand, the Perron-Frobenius theorem implies
that the SVD factors with the largest singular value of a
nonnegative matrix are themselves nonnegative [12, Chapter 8]. Hence, the SVD provides an optimal rank-one NMF.
Following a standard approach in the literature [14, 21]
we might be tempted to iterate two steps until the desired
rank is reached:
1. compute the rank-one SVD suvT of A, and
2. set A = A − suvT .

NMU - LR

0

0

NMU - ADMM

0

1

Figure 1. In this example we show the histogram of the values of A −
uvT . NMF (which coincides with the SVD in the rank-one case) is not
expected to yield any particular pattern. NMU must yield nonnegative
values. Clearly, the Lagrangian relaxation method (LR), reported as the
state-of-the-art in the literature until now, does not correctly enforce the
underapproximation constraint while the here proposed ADMM method
does. Refer to Fig. 3 to see the dataset details.

However, the matrix (A−suvT ) is not necessarily nonnegative, presenting a serious obstacle to the overall approach.
Nonnegative Matrix Underapproximation (NMU) [7, 8,
9] appears as a solution to this challenge by posing the related problem
min

u∈R ,v∈R
m

2

n

A − uvT F

s.t.

u, v ≥ 0,
A ≥ uvT .

(NMU)

Now, A − uvT is constrained to be a nonnegative matrix,
rendering the previous iterative approach possible.
In this work, we first present a new efficient NMU technique, based on the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM).1 The resulting algorithm is, to the best
of our knowledge, the only NMU algorithm in the literature
to efficiently solve Problem (NMU) while enforcing all its
constraints (see Fig. 1). Additionally, it is easy to implement and delivers high-quality results.
We then present an application of the proposed NMU
technique to the problem of robustly fitting multiple parametric models in a given dataset.1 Fitting multiple instances
of a given parametric model to data corrupted by noise and
outliers is a widespread problem in computer vision. It is
encountered in a diverse set of applications such as finding

* Work partially supported by NSF, ARO, ONR, and NGA.
† M. Tepper performed almost all of this work while at Duke University.

1 Source code available at https://goo.gl/xSqKQ4.

12059

