Grassmannian Manifold Optimization Assisted Sparse Spectral Clustering
Qiong Wanga Junbin Gaob Hong Lia
a
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,Wuhan 430074, China
{wangqiong701,hongli}@hust.edu.cn
b

Discipline of Business Analytics, The University of Sydney Business School
The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
junbin.gao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Spectral Clustering is one of pioneered clustering methods. It relies on the spectral decomposition criterion to
learn a low-dimensional embedding of data for a basic clustering algorithm. The sparse spectral clustering (SSC) introduces the sparsity for the similarity in low-dimensional
space by enforcing a sparsity-induced penalty, resulting a
non-convex optimization, which is solved by a relaxed convex problem via the standard ADMM (Alternative Direction
Method of Multipliers), rather than inferring latent representation from eigen-structure. This paper provides a direct
solution as solving a new Grassmann optimization problem.
By this way calculating latent embedding becomes part of
optmization on manifolds and the recently developed manifold optimization methods can be applied. It turns out the
learned new features are not only very informative for clustering, but also more intuitive and effective in visualization
after dimensionality reduction. We conduct empirical studies on simulated datasets and several real-world benchmark
datasets to validate the proposed methods. Experimental
results exhibit the effectiveness of this new manifold-based
clustering and dimensionality reduction method.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the main unsupervised learning tasks
in exploratory data analysis, with applications ranging from
statistics, computer science, biology to social sciences or
psychology [13]. The focus of data clustering has moved
from the classic centroid-oriented clustering [4] to the subspace clustering [13, 24] in which data are clustered according to their affinity towards subspace structures. With different motivation, researchers have developed many types
of clustering algorithms. Spectral Clustering (SC) [10] is
one of pioneered clustering methods in machine learning

community. We have seen its applications for motion segmentation [13], image segmentation [22], speeach separation [3], scientific journal clustering and power load clustering [17]
Generally speaking, two major steps in the spectral clustering algorithm are, referring to Section 2 or [10, 21]
etc., (1) forming/learning a similarity/affinity matrix for the
given data sample set; and (2) performing general clustering methods to categorize data samples such as Normalized
Cuts (NCut) [22]. These two major steps determine the performance of spectral clustering methods. A large body of
work has been investigated to improve the performance of
SC method via learning a better affinity matrix and inferring new better representation of data. This paper is related
to the second paradigm aiming at learning latent representation for original data. As both paradigms are highly related
to each other, it is worthwhile reviewing the recent research
of the first paradigm.
Two classical representatives of learning similarity/affinity matrix for spectral clustering-based methods are
Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSubC) [13] and Low-Rank
Representation (LRR) [18]. Both SSubC and LRR rely
on the self-expressive property in linear space [13]: each
data point in a union of subspace can be efficiently reconstructed by a linear combination of other points in the
data set. SSubC further induces sparsity by utilizing the
l1 Subspace Detection Property in an independent manner,
while the LRR model considers the intrinsic relation among
the data objects in a holistic way via the low-rank requirement. It has been proved that, when the data set is actually composed of a union of multiple subspaces, the LRR
method can reveal this structure through subspace clustering [19, 8]. The self-expressive property builds on the linear relations among data. To exploit nonlinear information
hidden in manifold structure of data particularly manifoldvalued data, several authors have explored self-expressive in
terms of manifold geometry and extended LRR for Stiefel

5258

