Interpretable Structure-Evolving LSTM
Xiaodan Liang1,2 Liang Lin2,5 ∗ Xiaohui Shen4 Jiashi Feng3 Shuicheng Yan 3 Eric P. Xing1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 National University of Singapore
4
Adobe Research 5 SenseTime Group (Limited)
xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu, linliang@ieee.org, xshen@adobe.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg, eleyans@nus.edu.sg, epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper develops a general framework for learning interpretable data representation via Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks over hierarchal graph structures. Instead of learning LSTM models
over the pre-fixed structures, we propose to further learn
the intermediate interpretable multi-level graph structures
in a progressive and stochastic way from data during the
LSTM network optimization. We thus call this model the
structure-evolving LSTM. In particular, starting with an initial element-level graph representation where each node is a
small data element, the structure-evolving LSTM gradually
evolves the multi-level graph representations by stochastically merging the graph nodes with high compatibilities
along the stacked LSTM layers. In each LSTM layer, we estimate the compatibility of two connected nodes from their
corresponding LSTM gate outputs, which is used to generate a merging probability. The candidate graph structures
are accordingly generated where the nodes are grouped into
cliques with their merging probabilities. We then produce
the new graph structure with a Metropolis-Hasting algorithm, which alleviates the risk of getting stuck in local optimums by stochastic sampling with an acceptance probability. Once a graph structure is accepted, a higher-level
graph is then constructed by taking the partitioned cliques
as its nodes. During the evolving process, representation
becomes more abstracted in higher-levels where redundant
information is filtered out, allowing more efficient propagation of long-range data dependencies. We evaluate the effectiveness of structure-evolving LSTM in the application of
semantic object parsing and demonstrate its advantage over
state-of-the-art LSTM models on standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in developing various kinds of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
∗ Correspond author is Liang Lin. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61622214.

neural networks for modeling complex dependencies within
sequential and multi-dimensional data, due to their advantage in a wide range of applications such as speech recognition [10], image generation [29], image-to-caption generation [33] and multi-dimensional image processing [15].
Despite the remarkable success, existing LSTM models
such as chain-structured [10] [33], tree-structured LSTM
models [37, 26] and graph-structured LSTM [18] can only
process data with pre-fixed structures in terms of their internal information propagation route. They are therefore limited in dealing with the data containing complex multi-level
correlations. For example, the structure of human social
network is inherently hierarchical, where each individual
is a member of several communities, ranging from small
(e.g., families, friends) to large (e.g., organizations such as
schools and businesses). Semantic object parsing in an image, for another example, can benefit from modeling the
contextual dependencies among regions in different levels,
where the lower-level graph representation on small regions
can preserve the local and fine object boundaries while the
higher-level graph on larger coherent regions captures more
semantic interactions. Thus, to well abstract multi-level
representations of such data, it is desirable to integrate the
data structure evolving with LSTM parameter learning.
In this work, we seek a general and interpretable framework for representing the data via LSTM networks over
the dynamically learned multi-level data structures, in
which hierarchical intrinsic representations are simultaneously learned from the data along with encoding the longterm dependencies via LSTM units. Since numerous important problems can be framed as learning from graph
data (tree-structure can be treated as one specific graph),
our structure-evolving directly investigates the hierarchical representation learning over the initial arbitrary graph
structures. However, learning dynamic hierarchical graphs
is much more challenging than the convenient hierarchical convolution neural networks due to the arbitrary number of nodes, orderless node layouts and diverse probabilistic graph edges. To learn intermediate interpretable graph
structures of the data and alleviate the over-fitting problem,
11010

