Simultaneous Geometric and Radiometric Calibration
of a Projector-Camera Pair
Marjan Shahpaski1 , Luis Ricardo Sapaico2 , Gaspard Chevassus1 , and Sabine Süsstrunk1
1
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
2
Océ Print Logic Technologies S.A.
{marjan.shahpaski, gaspard.chevassus, sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch, ricardo.sapaico@oce.com

Abstract
We present a novel method that allows for simultaneous geometric and radiometric calibration of a projectorcamera pair. It is simple and does not require specialized
hardware. We prewarp and align a specially designed projection pattern onto a printed pattern of different colorimetric properties. After capturing the patterns in several orientations, we perform geometric calibration by estimating
the corner locations of the two patterns in different color
channels. We perform radiometric calibration of the projector by using the information contained inside the projected
squares. We show that our method performs on par with
current approaches that all require separate geometric and
radiometric calibration, while being more efficient and user
friendly.

1. Introduction
3D sensing is gaining momentum with the increase of
computational power and the possibility to display and fabricate the results with high fidelity. Structured light (SL)
systems are among the most commonly used for 3D object
scanning because they can be built using off-the-shelf components. A basic SL setup is made up of a single camera
and a single projector that are geometrically calibrated (see
Figure 1). The depth estimation principle is analogous to
a dual camera stereo system, where one camera is replaced
by a projector. This is possible since the geometric image
formation of the projector is equivalent to that of the camera. The role of the projector is to encode the measured
scene with a known pattern that can be easily decoded and
identified in the camera image, allowing for dense pixel correspondences.
A thorough classification and explanation of the structured light coding techniques is presented by Salvi et al.
[17]. Discrete coding methods are generally constructed
through the projection of a limited set of highly contrasting

Figure 1: A setup for our simultaneous geometric and radiometric calibration of a projector-camera pair. The underlying printed pattern is shown in the inset.

intensities. If we take binary time-multiplexing codes as an
example, the value that each pixel can take is either 0 or 1,
as these are the most contrasting values. On the other hand,
the continuous coding methods can use the full range of intensity values (e.g., sinusoidal waves), where each pixel can
take a value in the range [0, 1]. These methods require the
projection and capture of linear intensity signals, and any
non-linear shift between the input values and the decoded
values leads to shifted correspondences between the projected and captured images, illustrated in Figure 2a. Therefore, in addition to geometric calibration, the continuous
coding methods also require a radiometric calibration.
Radiometric calibration models the input to output intensity response of a device, because its true values are seldom known beforehand. While linear intensity images are
in general easy to obtain with today’s cameras, the projected
images normally undergo non-linear processing imposed by
the projector. The most common non-linear processing consists of applying a global tone-mapping power-law expression (also called gamma expansion) to the input intensities
before projection. To linearize the projected images, the input images need to be subjected to gamma compression.

4885

