Elastic Shape-from-Template with Spatially Sparse Deforming Forces
Abed Malti1 Cédric Herzet2
1
AutoMed/LAT, Université de Tlemcen, Tlemcen, Algeria
2
INRIA-Rennes, Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes, France

Abstract
Current Elastic SfT (Shape from Template) methods are
based on ℓ2 -norm minimization. None can accurately recover the spatial location of the acting forces since ℓ2 -norm
based minimization tends to find the best tradeoff among
noisy data to fit an elastic model. In this work, we study
shapes that are deformed with spatially sparse set of forces.
We propose two formulations for a new class of SfT problems dubbed here SLE-SfT (Sparse Linear Elastic-SfT). The
First ideal formulation uses an ℓ0 -norm to minimize the cardinal of non-zero components of the deforming forces. The
second relaxed formulation uses an ℓ1 -norm to minimize
the sum of absolute values of force components. These new
formulations do not use Solid Boundary Constraints (SBC)
which are usually needed to rigidly position the shape in
the frame of the deformed image. We introduce the Projective Elastic Space Property (PESP) that jointly encodes
the reprojection constraint and the elastic model. We prove
that filling this property is necessary and sufficient for the
relaxed formulation to: (i) retrieve the ground-truth 3D deformed shape, (ii) recover the right spatial domain of nonzero deforming forces. (iii) It also proves that we can rigidly
place the deformed shape in the image frame without using
SBC. Finally, we prove that when filling PESP, resolving
the relaxed formulation provides the same ground-truth solution as the ideal formulation. Results with simulated and
real data show substantial improvements in recovering the
deformed shapes as well as the spatial location of the deforming forces.

1. Introduction
SfT(Shape from Template) is one of the most critical
open problems in computer vision of the last decade. The
problem is quite challenging since with few adequate priors
one must retrieve a 3D deformed shape from a single image. Usually these priors concern the Reprojection Boundary Constraint (RBC) and the model of deformation. The
former establishes a correspondence between the template
shape (known 3D shape) and a deformed image (2D projection of the deformed shape). RBC gives the subspace
of possible deformed shapes that explains the current deformed image. The latter constrains the possible deforma-

tions of the template given the RBC. It allows us to keep
one or at most a finite set of plausible deformed shapes [4].
The model prior can differ from physics based to statistics
based.
Statistics based approaches usually represent the deformation as a linear combination of learnt shape or mode
basis [23, 27, 25, 29, 1]. Physics based approaches were
mainly instanciated for isometry [7, 25, 28, 9], conformal
[19, 4] and elasticity [14, 21, 2]. It has been theoretically
proven that in the case of isometric prior there is a unique
solution and in the case of conformal prior there is a set
of discrete number of solutions [4]. In the case of elasticity, usually it requires a set of SBC (Solid Boundary Constraints). This requirement is necessary to rigidly position
the shape in the frame of the deformed image such that we
seek only the non-rigid deformation. This constraint ensures that the SfT problem has a unique solution with an ℓ2 norm linear formulation [20]. It was experimentally shown
that a sequential approach does not require SBC [2].
Among existing SfT methods, sparsity has already been
exploited as a modal prior in the statistics based approaches.
It was used to express the deformed shape as a sparse linear combination of the basis shapes. This approach has
shown substantial improvement of the reconstruction accuracy [34, 12, 26]. Nevertheless, in this case there is no formal proof that the linear combination is indeed sparse. In
physics based SfT and to the best of our knowledge, sparsity has never been used as a spatial prior to characterize
such type of deformation. Addressing this class of deformation is important for practical as well as theoretical reasons. In practical terms there is a non-negligible number of
daily life deformed objects that might be subjected to sparse
deforming forces. For instance clothes, plastic bottles, balloons, etc. In theoretical terms, since the usage of sparsity
is here physically justified, it becomes important to formalize it, to investigate the well posedness of it and to provide
tools to solve it.
In this paper, we study the formalization and well
posedeness of elastic SfT with sparse deforming forces. It
is the first time where sparsity is used as a prior to characterize a specific type of spatial deformation. We use a linear
elastic model as a physics based prior and a linear formulation with finite element method as suggested in [20]. This
previous formulation minimizes the ℓ2 -norm of the force
which is applied to obtain the deformed shape. In the case
13337

