S2F: Slow-To-Fast Interpolator Flow
Yanchao Yang
Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{yanchao.yang, soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

mon to most variational optical flow techniques.1 This
multi-scale structure is also common in convolutional
neural network architectures, so optical flow schemes
based on them are typically subject to similar failure
modes.
We propose a novel scheme for multi-scale matching, where the scale-space variable is not the amount of
diffusion/subsampling of spatial resolution, but instead
the size of the interest region on which local matching is based, at the native resolution. Thus, like others
have done before, we perform multi-scale without multiresolution. The iteration is instead over the radius of
the region-of-interest, whereby regions with larger and
larger radii operate on smaller and smaller subsets of the
image domains. Slower objects are matched first, and
then faster and smaller ones, hence the name S2F.
Clearly, the prior or regularization model plays a key
role in optical flow. Rather than delegating it to a dataset
and a generic function approximator, we discuss the specific model assumptions made in our method, and the
topology with respect to which we consider pixels to be
“nearby.” In other words, we hand-engineer the prior,
almost anathema in the age of Deep Learning.
Despite the absence of any learning, our algorithm
achieves top performance in the most challenging optical flow benchmark, Sintel. More importantly, we can
at least try to explain the performance, which we do in
Sect. 3. Before doing so, we relate our work to the
current art in Sect. 1.1, summarize the motivations and
the actual algorithm in Sect. 1.3, and describe empirical
tests in Sect. 2

Abstract
We introduce a method to compute optical flow at
multiple scales of motion, without resorting to multiresolution or combinatorial methods. It addresses the
key problem of small objects moving fast, and resolves
the artificial binding between how large an object is and
how fast it can move before being diffused away by classical scale-space. Even with no learning, it achieves
top performance on the most challenging optical flow
benchmark. Moreover, the results are interpretable, and
indeed we list the assumptions underlying our method
explicitly. The key to our approach is the matching progression from slow to fast, as well as the choice of interpolation method, or equivalently the prior, to fill in
regions where the data allows it. We use several offthe-shelf components, with relatively low sensitivity to
parameter tuning. Computational cost is comparable to
the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Most existing optical flow algorithms struggle with
small things that move fast, even those explicitly designed for large displacement. This phenomenon does
not have a dramatic impact on the benchmarks, since
the problem being with small objects makes it such algorithms are not penalized too harshly. Nevertheless, small
objects are important: humans can effortlessly pick out
a bee flying at a distance.
In analyzing the root causes for the failure by most algorithms to capture small things moving fast, we honed
in on a fundamental problem with classical scale-space,
which trades off spatial frequencies (by blurring and
down-sampling images) with temporal anti-aliasing (to
compute temporal derivatives). This ties the size of objects to the speed at which they can move before being
blurred-away in the multi-resolution pyramid that is routinely used in multi-scale/multi-resolution stages com-

1.1. Related work
Optical flow has been a core concern in Computer Vision for over two decades, with too many contributions
to review here. It is a building block in many low-level
vision tasks, and plays a role in a large number of applications, from autonomous navigation to video post1 Combinatorial matching methods are not subject to this limitation.

2087

