Making 360° Video Watchable in 2D:
Learning Videography for Click Free Viewing
Yu-Chuan Su
Kristen Grauman
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
360° video requires human viewers to actively control
“where” to look while watching the video. Although it provides a more immersive experience of the visual content, it
also introduces additional burden for viewers; awkward interfaces to navigate the video lead to suboptimal viewing
experiences. Virtual cinematography is an appealing direction to remedy these problems, but conventional methods
are limited to virtual environments or rely on hand-crafted
heuristics. We propose a new algorithm for virtual cinematography that automatically controls a virtual camera
within a 360° video. Compared to the state of the art, our
algorithm allows more general camera control, avoids redundant outputs, and extracts its output videos substantially
more efficiently. Experimental results on over 7 hours of
real “in the wild” video show that our generalized camera
control is crucial for viewing 360° video, while the proposed
efficient algorithm is essential for making the generalized
control computationally tractable.

1. Introduction
360° cameras are becoming very popular, thanks to
emerging Virtual Reality (VR) technologies and applications. More than a dozen new 360° cameras were released
in 2016 [1], and the market is expected to grow by more
than 100% per year in the next few years [2]. Watching panoramic photos and videos is becoming a common
experience on content distribution sites like YouTube and
Facebook, and many content creators are adopting the new
medium. For example, BBC News distributes news in
360° videos online [3]. Whereas traditional cameras are restricted to a field of view (FOV) even narrower than human
perception, a 360° camera captures the entire visual world
from its optical center.
This broad capture offers new freedom to videographers
and video consumers alike. A videographer no longer has
to determine which direction to capture in the scene, freeing
her to experience the moment rather than the act of recording a video. Meanwhile, a human video consumer has the
freedom to explore the visual content based on her inter-

z

Record
x

y

Figure 1: Our goal is to control the direction and field of view of a
virtual camera within a 360° video in order to record a video that
looks as if it were captured by a human videographer.

est, without being severely restricted by choices made by
the videographer. For example, a news correspondent can
traverse a war zone without consciously considering how to
portray the scene, and subsequent viewers will still have an
immersive experience about the tragedy and witness events
in more detail than the videographer may even be able to
attend to in the moment. Similarly, a parent at his child’s
bustling birthday party can passively record 360° memories
to be perused more deliberately later.
On the other hand, the medium also introduces new challenges. The most common interface for watching 360°
videos is to display a small portion of the video as a 2D normal field of view (NFOV) video captured by a virtual camera1 . The video viewer now has to decide “where and what”
to look at by controlling the direction of the virtual camera throughout the full duration of the video. The display
can be a normal screen, a mobile device, or a VR headset,
and the control signal will come from the mouse, the pose
of the device, or the head movement respectively. These
choices determine the content seen by the viewer and thus
the user experience. Because the viewer has no information
1 For example, try clicking around on https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=aTTzKwLPqFw

16476

