Noise Robust Depth from Focus using a Ring Difference Filter
Jaeheung Surh, Hae-Gon Jeon, Yunwon Park, Sunghoon Im, Hyowon Ha, In So Kweon
Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST
{jhsurh, hgjeon, ywpark, shim, hwha, iskweon}@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Depth from focus (DfF) is a method of estimating depth
of a scene by using the information acquired through the
change of the focus of a camera. Within the framework of
DfF, the focus measure (FM) forms the foundation on which
the accuracy of the output is determined. With the result
from the FM, the role of a DfF pipeline is to determine
and recalculate unreliable measurements while enhancing
those that are reliable. In this paper, we propose a new FM
that more accurately and robustly measures focus, which
we call the “ring difference filter” (RDF). FMs can usually
be categorized as confident local methods or noise robust
non-local methods. RDF’s unique ring-and-disk structure
allows it to have the advantageous sides of both local and
non-local FMs. We then describe an efficient pipeline that
utilizes the properties that the RDF brings. Our method is
able to reproduce results that are on par with or even better
than those of the state-of-the-art, while spending less time
in computation.

1. Introduction
As the computing horsepower of hand-held devices
grows, interests into the capture of depth information for
these electronics have been increasing. The accurate computation of scene depth forms the base for a wide variety of highly sought-after applications, like synthetic focus, 3D parallax, and augmented or virtual reality (AR/VR).
In order to address these needs, many works of research
have pursued different approaches for acquiring a scene’s
depth, while minimizing the overhead involved in such
tasks. However, following the current interests in AR/VR
on mobile devices, we chose to focus on methods that may
be viable for that platform.
One method that achieves this is through the use of active sensing devices. Numerous products, such as Google’s
Project Tango [1], Occpital’s Structure Sensor [5], or Microsoft’s Kinect [4], and research [21, 14] have utilized this
method for depth measurements. This approach revolves
around the projection of light with a known pattern to de-

(a) Input focal stack

(b) Close-ups

(c) Estimated depth
(d) Stylization
Figure 1. Given a series of images for a scene with different focus
settings, or the focal stack (a), we estimate an accurate depth map
(c). Note the high noise levels and fine structures in the close-up
(b) of the focal stack. These results can then be used for image
processing applications, like stylization (d).

termine its deformation as it returns to the system. The
depth is then calculated with the assumption that the pattern’s deformation is dependent only on the structure of the
scene. However, such a system often requires expensive or
specialized equipment to work, depends on the accuracy of
its calibration, and fails outside of environments with controlled lighting conditions. Another group of approaches
for depth acquisition is the use of light-field [32, 3, 42, 20]
or stereo systems [2, 6]. These setups utilize multiple cameras or complex systems that simulate the capture of multiple cameras to estimate depth by finding correspondences
in the pixels of images with a certain amount of baseline.
Despite the abundance of works that follow these types of
procedures, they are often heavily dependent on the accurate retrieval of correspondences and are often burdensome to set up and/or calibrate. Structure from small motion [50, 19, 15] is another avenue that tries to obtain the
depth information of a scene. It consists of a single camera
taking multiple images from various locations to determine
16328

