Learning by Association
A versatile semi-supervised training method for neural networks
Philip Haeusser1,2
1

Alexander Mordvintsev2

Dept. of Informatics, TU Munich
{haeusser, cremers}@in.tum.de

Daniel Cremers1
2

Google, Inc.

moralex@google.com

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, labeled data for a specific
machine learning task is costly to obtain. Semi-supervised
training methods make use of abundantly available unlabeled data and a smaller number of labeled examples. We
propose a new framework for semi-supervised training of
deep neural networks inspired by learning in humans. “Associations” are made from embeddings of labeled samples to those of unlabeled ones and back. The optimization schedule encourages correct association cycles that
end up at the same class from which the association was
started and penalizes wrong associations ending at a different class. The implementation is easy to use and can be
added to any existing end-to-end training setup. We demonstrate the capabilities of learning by association on several
data sets and show that it can improve performance on classification tasks tremendously by making use of additionally
available unlabeled data. In particular, for cases with few
labeled data, our training scheme outperforms the current
state of the art on SVHN.

1. Introduction
A child is able to learn new concepts quickly and without
the need for millions examples that are pointed out individually. Once a child has seen one dog, she or he will be able
to recognize other dogs and becomes better at recognition
with subsequent exposure to more variety.
In terms of training computers to perform similar tasks,
deep neural networks have demonstrated superior performance among machine learning models ([20, 18, 10]).
However, these networks have been trained dramatically
differently from a learning child, requiring labels for every training example, following a purely supervised training
scheme. Neural networks are defined by huge amounts of
parameters to be optimized. Therefore, a plethora of labeled
training data is required, which might be costly and time

Figure 1. Learning by association. A network (green) is trained to
produce embeddings (blue) that have high similarities if belonging
to the same class. A differentiable association cycle (red) from
embeddings of labeled (A) to unlabeled (B) data and back is used
to evaluate the association.

consuming to obtain. It is desirable to train machine learning models without labels (unsupervisedly) or with only
some fraction of the data labeled (semi-supervisedly).
Recently, efforts have been made to train neural networks in an unsupervised or semi-supervised manner yielding promising results. However, most of these methods
require a trick to generate training data, such as sampling
patches from an image for context prediction [6] or generating surrogate classes [7, 22, 13]. In other cases, semisupervised training schemes require non trivial additional
architectures such as generative adversarial networks [9] or
a decoder part [39].
We propose a novel training method that follows an intuitive approach: learning by association (Figure 1). We feed
a batch of labeled and a batch of unlabeled data through a
network, producing embeddings for both batches. Then, an
imaginary walker is sent from samples in the labeled batch
to samples in the unlabeled batch. The transition follows a
probability distribution obtained from the similarity of the
respective embeddings which we refer to as an association.
In order to evaluate whether the association makes sense, a
second step is taken back to the labeled batch - again guided
by the similarity between the embeddings. It is now easy to

89

