Deep Multi-scale Convolutional Neural Network for Dynamic Scene Deblurring
Seungjun Nah

Tae Hyun Kim

Kyoung Mu Lee

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University, 151-742, Seoul, Korea
{seungjun.nah, lliger9}@gmail.com, kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Non-uniform blind deblurring for general dynamic
scenes is a challenging computer vision problem as blurs
arise not only from multiple object motions but also from
camera shake, scene depth variation. To remove these
complicated motion blurs, conventional energy optimization based methods rely on simple assumptions such that
blur kernel is partially uniform or locally linear. Moreover, recent machine learning based methods also depend
on synthetic blur datasets generated under these assumptions. This makes conventional deblurring methods fail to
remove blurs where blur kernel is difficult to approximate or
parameterize (e.g. object motion boundaries). In this work,
we propose a multi-scale convolutional neural network that
restores sharp images in an end-to-end manner where blur
is caused by various sources. Together, we present multiscale loss function that mimics conventional coarse-to-fine
approaches. Furthermore, we propose a new large-scale
dataset that provides pairs of realistic blurry image and the
corresponding ground truth sharp image that are obtained
by a high-speed camera. With the proposed model trained
on this dataset, we demonstrate empirically that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art performance in dynamic scene
deblurring not only qualitatively, but also quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Motion blur is one of the most commonly arising types
of artifacts when taking photos. Shakes of camera and fast
object motions degrade image quality to undesired blurry
images. Furthermore, various causes such as depth variation, occlusion in motion boundaries make blurs even more
complex. Single image deblurring problem is to estimate
the unknown sharp image given a blurry image. Earlier
studies focused on removing blurs caused by simple translational or rotational camera motions. More recent works try
to handle general non-uniform blurs caused by depth variation, camera shakes and object motions in dynamic environments. Most of these approaches are based on following

blur model [28, 10, 13, 11].
B = KS + n,

(1)

where B, S and n are vectorized blurry image, latent
sharp image, and noise, respectively. K is a large sparse
matrix whose rows each contain a local blur kernel acting
on S to generate a blurry pixel. In practice, blur kernel is
unknown. Thus, blind deblurring methods try to estimate
latent sharp image S and blur kernel K simultaneously.
Finding blur kernel for every pixel is a severely ill-posed
problem. Thus, some approaches tried to parametrize blur
models with simple assumptions on the sources of blurs. In
[28, 10], they assumed that blur is caused by 3D camera
motion only. However, in dynamic scenes, the kernel estimation is more challenging as there are multiple moving
objects as well as camera motion. Thus, Kim et al. [14] proposed a dynamic scene deblurring method that jointly segments and deblurs a non-uniformly blurred image, allowing
the estimation of complex (non-linear) kernel within a segment. In addition, Kim and Lee [15] approximated the blur
kernel to be locally linear and proposed an approach that estimates both the latent image and the locally linear motions
jointly. However, these blur kernel approximations are still
inaccurate, especially in the cases of abrupt motion discontinuities and occlusions. Note that such erroneous kernel
estimation directly affects the quality of the latent image,
resulting in undesired ringing artifacts.
Recently, CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks) have
been applied in numerous computer vision problems including deblurring problem and showed promising results
[29, 25, 26, 1]. Since no pairs of real blurry image and
ground truth sharp image are available for supervised learning, they commonly used blurry images generated by convolving synthetic blur kernels. In [29, 25, 1], synthesized
blur images with uniform blur kernel are used for training.
And, in [26], classiﬁcation CNN is trained to estimate locally linear blur kernels. Thus, CNN-based models are still
suited only to some speciﬁc types of blurs, and there are
restrictions on more common spatially varying blurs.
13883

