Lip Reading Sentences in the Wild
Joon Son Chung1

Andrew Senior2

Oriol Vinyals2

Andrew Zisserman1,2

joon@robots.ox.ac.uk

andrewsenior@google.com

vinyals@google.com

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
The goal of this work is to recognise phrases and sentences being spoken by a talking face, with or without the
audio. Unlike previous works that have focussed on recognising a limited number of words or phrases, we tackle lip
reading as an open-world problem – unconstrained natural
language sentences, and in the wild videos.
Our key contributions are: (1) a ‘Watch, Listen, Attend
and Spell’ (WLAS) network that learns to transcribe videos
of mouth motion to characters; (2) a curriculum learning
strategy to accelerate training and to reduce overfitting; (3)
a ‘Lip Reading Sentences’ (LRS) dataset for visual speech
recognition, consisting of over 100,000 natural sentences
from British television.
The WLAS model trained on the LRS dataset surpasses
the performance of all previous work on standard lip reading benchmark datasets, often by a significant margin. This
lip reading performance beats a professional lip reader on
videos from BBC television, and we also demonstrate that if
audio is available, then visual information helps to improve
speech recognition performance.

1. Introduction
Lip reading, the ability to recognize what is being said
from visual information alone, is an impressive skill, and
very challenging for a novice. It is inherently ambiguous
at the word level due to homophemes – different characters
that produce exactly the same lip sequence (e.g. ‘p’ and ‘b’).
However, such ambiguities can be resolved to an extent using the context of neighboring words in a sentence, and/or
a language model.
A machine that can lip read opens up a host of applications: ‘dictating’ instructions or messages to a phone in
a noisy environment; transcribing and re-dubbing archival
silent films; resolving multi-talker simultaneous speech;
and, improving the performance of automated speech
recogition in general.
That such automation is now possible is due to two developments that are well known across computer vision

2

DeepMind

tasks: the use of deep neural network models [22, 33, 35];
and, the availability of a large scale dataset for training [31].
In this case the model is based on the recent sequence-tosequence (encoder-decoder with attention) translater architectures that have been developed for speech recognition
and machine translation [3, 5, 15, 16, 34]. The dataset developed in this paper is based on thousands of hours of BBC
television broadcasts that have talking faces together with
subtitles of what is being said.
We also investigate how lip reading can contribute to audio based speech recognition. There is a large literature on
this contribution, particularly in noisy environments, as well
as the converse where some derived measure of audio can
contribute to lip reading for the deaf or hard of hearing. To
investigate this aspect we train a model to recognize characters from both audio and visual input, and then systematically disturb the audio channel or remove the visual channel.
Our model (Section 2) outputs at the character level, is
able to learn a language model, and has a novel dual attention mechanism that can operate over visual input only,
audio input only, or both. We show (Section 3) that training can be accelerated by a form of curriculum learning.
We also describe (Section 4) the generation and statistics
of a new large scale Lip Reading Sentences (LRS) dataset,
based on BBC broadcasts containing talking faces together
with subtitles of what is said. The broadcasts contain faces
‘in the wild’ with a significant variety of pose, expressions,
lighting, backgrounds, and ethnic origin.
The performance of the model is assessed on a test set of
the LRS dataset, as well as on public benchmarks datasets
for lip reading including LRW [9] and GRID [11]. We
demonstrate open world (unconstrained sentences) lip reading on the LRS dataset, and in all cases on public benchmarks the performance exceeds that of prior work.

1.1. Related works
Lip reading. There is a large body of work on lip reading
using pre-deep learning methods. These methods are thoroughly reviewed in [40], and we will not repeat this here.
A number of papers have used Convolutional Neural Net16447

