Connecting Look and Feel: Associating the visual and tactile properties of
physical materials
Wenzhen Yuan1∗, Shaoxiong Wang2,1∗, Siyuan Dong1 , Edward Adelson1
1
MIT, 2 Tsinghua University
{yuan wz, wang sx, sydong, eadelson}@mit.edu

Abstract
For machines to interact with the physical world, they
must understand the physical properties of objects and materials they encounter. We use fabrics as an example of a
deformable material with a rich set of mechanical properties. A thin flexible fabric, when draped, tends to look different from a heavy stiff fabric. It also feels different when
touched. Using a collection of 118 fabric samples, we captured color and depth images of draped fabrics along with
tactile data from a high-resolution touch sensor. We then
sought to associate the information from vision and touch by
jointly training CNNs across the three modalities. Through
the CNN, each input, regardless of the modality, generates an embedding vector that records the fabric’s physical
property. By comparing the embedding vectors, our system
is able to look at a fabric image and predict how it will feel,
and vice versa. We also show that a system jointly trained
on vision and touch data can outperform a similar system
trained only on visual data when tested purely with visual
inputs.

1. Introduction
The success of computer vision has been greatly accelerated through the use of deep learning and convolutional
neural networks (CNN). However, the main successes have
been with passive tasks; for example, the computer is given
an image and in response it provides categories or descriptors. For a machine to more actively interact with objects
in the physical world, it must understand something about
their physical properties. Vision can be used, for example,
to predict how an object will feel when touched.
Figure 1(a) shows a silk scarf, and a wool scarf in a
similar configuration. The silk scarf is lighter, thinner, and
more flexible, while the wool scarf is heavier, thicker, and
stiffer. A human observer, viewing the images, can easily
see the difference. In addition, one can imagine touching
∗ Equal Contribution

Figure 1. Humans can infer fabric properties from draperies. (a) A
silk scarf and a wool scarf in similar configurations. (b) pictures
of different fabrics draping from a cylinder post; (c) tactile images
from GelSight when pressing on the fabrics in natural states.

and grasping the two scarves; they will feel different when
touched and will deform differently when grasped.
A piece of fabric has certain mechanical parameters. At
the macro level, these can include, for example, the Kawabata values that describe bending, stretching, compression,
roughness, and so on. The fabrics mechanical parameters
cause it to take on certain shapes in response to manipulation. Those shapes lead to the observed images. At the same
time, the fabrics mechanical parameters engender a certain
range of tactile interactions. When touched, the silk scarf
will feel smooth and easily deformed; the wool scarf will
feel quite different.
We can think of the fabrics physical parameters as latent
variables that influence the processes leading to both the visual and tactile signals. To humans, this quantified set of
physical parameters better represents a fabric– a human seldom infers to a fabric as a particular individual, but the parameter set, like “the light, thin and flexible silk”. The same
piece of fabric, may make different appearances or feelings
to touch, but is still considered the same one, because they
share the same set of parameters. On the other hand, some
fabrics may be considered similar because their parameters
15580

