Hallucinating Very Low-Resolution Unaligned and Noisy Face Images by
Transformative Discriminative Autoencoders∗
Xin Yu, Fatih Porikli
Australian National University
{xin.yu, fatih.porikli}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Most of the conventional face hallucination methods assume the input image is sufficiently large and aligned, and
all require the input image to be noise-free. Their performance degrades drastically if the input image is tiny, unaligned, and contaminated by noise.
In this paper, we introduce a novel transformative discriminative autoencoder to 8× super-resolve unaligned
noisy and tiny (16×16) low-resolution face images. In contrast to encoder-decoder based autoencoders, our method
uses decoder-encoder-decoder networks. We first employ
a transformative discriminative decoder network to upsample and denoise simultaneously. Then we use a transformative encoder network to project the intermediate HR faces
to aligned and noise-free LR faces. Finally, we use the second decoder to generate hallucinated HR images. Our extensive evaluations on a very large face dataset show that
our method achieves superior hallucination results and outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large margin of 1.82 dB
PSNR.

1. Introduction
Face images provide critical information for visual perception and identity analysis. However, when they are noisy
and their resolutions are inadequately small (e.g.as in some
surveillance videos), there is little information available to
be inferred reliably from them. Very low-resolution and
noisy face images not only impede human perception but
also impair computer analysis.
To tackle this challenge, face hallucination techniques
aim at recovering high-resolution (HR) counterparts from
low-resolution (LR) face images and have received significant attention in recent years. Previous state-of-the-art
methods mainly focus on recovering HR faces from aligned
and noise-free LR face images. More specifically, face
∗ This work was supported under the Australian Research Council‘s
Discovery Projects funding scheme (project DP150104645)

(a) LR

(e) Bicubic

(b) HR

(c) Denoised/Aligned LR

(d) NN

(f) URDGN [25] (g) encoded LR

(h) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of our method with the CNN based face
hallucination URDGN [25]. (a) 16 × 16 LR input image. (b)
128 × 128 HR original image. (c) Denoised and aligned LR image. We firstly apply BM3D [4] and then STN [10]. (d) The corresponding most similar face in the training dataset. (e) Bicubic
interpolation of (c). (f) Image generated by URDGN. Note that,
URDGN super-resolves the denoised and aligned LR image, not
the original LR input (in favor of URDGN). (g) The denoised and
aligned LR image by our decoder-encoder as an intermediate output. (h) The final hallucinated face by our TDAE method.

hallucination methods based on holistic appearance models [1, 2, 14, 20, 15, 8, 22, 24, 13, 12, 19, 25] require LR
faces to be precisely aligned beforehand. However, when
the LR images are contaminated by noise, the accuracy of
face alignment degrades dramatically. Besides, due to the
wide range of pose and expression variations, it is difficult
to learn a comprehensive, holistic appearance model for LR
images not aligned appropriately. As a result, these methods often produce ghosting artifacts for noisy unaligned LR
inputs.
Rather than learning holistic appearance models, facial
components based face hallucination methods have been
proposed [18, 23, 28, 29]. They transfer HR facial components from the training dataset to the input LR images
without requiring alignment of LR input images in advance.
These methods heavily rely on the successful localization of
13760

