Top-down Visual Saliency Guided by Captions
Vasili Ramanishka
Boston University

Abir Das
Boston University

Jianming Zhang
Adobe Research

Kate Saenko
Boston University

vram@bu.edu

dasabir@bu.edu

jianmzha@adobe.com

saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
Neural image/video captioning models can generate accurate descriptions, but their internal process of mapping
regions to words is a black box and therefore difficult to
explain. Top-down neural saliency methods can find important regions given a high-level semantic task such as object
classification, but cannot use a natural language sentence
as the top-down input for the task. In this paper, we propose Caption-Guided Visual Saliency to expose the regionto-word mapping in modern encoder-decoder networks and
demonstrate that it is learned implicitly from caption training data, without any pixel-level annotations. Our approach
can produce spatial or spatiotemporal heatmaps for both
predicted captions, and for arbitrary query sentences. It
recovers saliency without the overhead of introducing explicit attention layers, and can be used to analyze a variety of existing model architectures and improve their design. Evaluation on large-scale video and image datasets
demonstrates that our approach achieves comparable captioning performance with existing methods while providing
more accurate saliency heatmaps. Our code is available at
visionlearninggroup.github.io/caption-guided-saliency/.

(a) Input: A man in a jacket is standing at the slot machine
1

...

woman

1. Introduction
Neural saliency methods have recently emerged as
an effective mechanism for top-down task-driven visual
search [4, 31]. They can efficiently extract saliency
heatmaps given a high-level semantic input, e.g., highlighting regions corresponding to an object category, without
any per-pixel supervision at training time. They can also explain the internal representations learned by CNNs [19, 30].
However, suppose we wanted to search a visual scene for
salient elements described by a natural language sentence
(Fig. 1(a)), or, given the description of an action, localize
the most salient temporal and spatial regions corresponding to the subject, verb and other components (Fig. 1(b)).
Classification-based saliency methods are insufficient for
such language-driven tasks as they are limited to isolated
object labels and cannot handle textual queries.

m−1 m

2

cutting

piece

meat

(b) Input: A woman is cutting a piece of meat

Figure 1: Top-down Caption-Guided Visual Saliency approach
that generates, for each word in a sentence, (a) spatial saliency in
image and (b) spatiotemporal saliency in videos. For the video,
we show temporally most important frames corresponding to the
words at the bottom (arrows show positions of frames in the video)
and spatial heatmaps indicating salient regions for these words.
Deep image and video captioning models [6, 23, 24, 28]
excel at learning representations that translate visual input
into language potentially discovering a mapping between
visual concepts and words. However, despite the good captioning performance, they can be very hard to understand
and are often criticized for being highly non-transparent
“black boxes.” They hardly provide any clear insight of
the mapping learned internally between the image and the
produced words. Consider for example, the video shown
in Fig. 1(b). Which region in the model is used to predict

7206

