Understanding Traffic Density from Large-Scale Web Camera Data
Shanghang Zhang†,‡ , Guanhang Wu† , João P. Costeira‡ , José M. F. Moura†
†
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
‡
ISR - IST, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
{shanghaz, guanhanw}@andrew.cmu.edu, jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt, moura@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Understanding traffic density from large-scale web camera (webcam) videos is a challenging problem because such
videos have low spatial and temporal resolution, high occlusion and large perspective. To deeply understand traffic
density, we explore both optimization based and deep learning based methods. To avoid individual vehicle detection or
tracking, both methods map the dense image feature into
vehicle density, one based on rank constrained regression
and the other based on fully convolutional networks (FCN).
The regression based method learns different weights for
different blocks of the image to embed road geometry and
significantly reduce the error induced by camera perspective. The FCN based method jointly estimates vehicle density and vehicle count with a residual learning framework
to perform end-to-end dense prediction, allowing arbitrary
image resolution, and adapting to different vehicle scales
and perspectives. We analyze and compare both methods,
and get insights from optimization based method to improve
deep model. Since existing datasets do not cover all the
challenges in our work, we collected and labelled a largescale traffic video dataset, containing 60 million frames
from 212 webcams. Both methods are extensively evaluated and compared on different counting tasks and datasets.
FCN based method significantly reduces the mean absolute
error (MAE) from 10.99 to 5.31 on the public dataset TRANCOS compared with the state-of-the-art baseline.

1. Introduction
Traffic congestion leads to the need for a deep understanding of traffic density, which together with average vehicle speed, form the major building blocks of traffic flow
analysis [27]. Traffic density is the number of vehicles per
unit length of a road (e.g., vehicles per km) [19]. This paper
focuses on traffic density estimation from webcam videos,
which are of low resolution, low frame rate, high occlusion
and large perspective. As illustrated in Figure 1, we select a region of interest (yellow dotted rectangle) in a video
stream, and count the number of vehicles in the region for

Figure 1. Problem Statement

each frame. Then the traffic density is calculated by dividing that number by the region length.
Nowadays, many cities are being instrumented with
surveillance cameras. However, due to network bandwidth
limitations, lack of persistent storage, and privacy concerns
[11], these videos present several challenges for analysis
(illustrated in Figure 1): (i) Low frame rate. The time interval between two successive frames of a webcam video
typically ranges from 1s to 3s, resulting in large vehicle
displacement. (ii) Low resolution. The resolution of webcam videos is 352 × 240. Vehicle at the top of a frame can
be as small as 5 × 5 pixels. Image compression also induces
artifacts. (iii) High occlusion. Cameras installed at urban
intersections often capture videos with high traffic congestion, especially during rush hours. (iv) Large perspective.
Cameras are installed at high points to capture more video
content, resulting in videos with large perspective. Vehicle scales vary dramatically based on their distance to the
camera. These challenges make the existing work for traffic
density estimation has many limitations.

1.1. Limitation of Related Works
Several traffic density estimation techniques have been
developed in the literature, but they perform less accurately
on the webcam data due to the above challenges:
Detection based methods. These methods [38, 29] try to
identify and localize vehicles in each frame. They perform
poorly in low resolution and high occlusion videos. Figure 1
15898

