Dual Attention Networks for Multimodal Reasoning and Matching
Hyeonseob Nam
Search Solutions Inc.

Jung-Woo Ha
NAVER Corp.

Jeonghee Kim
NAVER LABS Corp.

hyeonseob.nam@navercorp.com

jungwoo.ha@navercorp.com

jeonghee.kim@naverlabs.com

Abstract
We propose Dual Attention Networks (DANs) which
jointly leverage visual and textual attention mechanisms
to capture fine-grained interplay between vision and language. DANs attend to specific regions in images and words
in text through multiple steps and gather essential information from both modalities. Based on this framework, we
introduce two types of DANs for multimodal reasoning and
matching, respectively. The reasoning model allows visual
and textual attentions to steer each other during collaborative inference, which is useful for tasks such as Visual Question Answering (VQA). In addition, the matching model exploits the two attention mechanisms to estimate the similarity between images and sentences by focusing on their
shared semantics. Our extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of DANs in combining vision and language,
achieving the state-of-the-art performance on public benchmarks for VQA and image-text matching.

(a) DAN for multimodal reasoning. (r-DAN)

(b) DAN for multimodal matching. (m-DAN)

1. Introduction
Vision and language are two central parts of human intelligence to understand the real world. They are also fundamental components in achieving artificial intelligence, and
a tremendous amount of research has been done for decades
in each area. Recently, dramatic advances in deep learning
have broken the boundaries between vision and language,
drawing growing interest in their intersection, such as visual question answering (VQA) [3, 37, 23, 35], image captioning [33, 2], image-text matching [8, 11, 20, 30], visual
grounding [24, 9], etc.
One of the recent advances in neural networks is the attention mechanism [21, 4, 33]. It aims to focus on certain
aspects of data sequentially and aggregate essential information over time to infer the results, and has been successfully applied to both areas of vision and language. In
computer vision, attention based methods adaptively select a sequence of image regions to extract necessary features [21, 6, 33]. Similarly, attention models for natural
language processing highlight specific words or sentences

Figure 1: Overview of Dual Attention Networks (DANs)
for multimodal reasoning and matching. The brightness of
image regions and darkness of words indicate their attention
weights predicted by DANs.
to distill information from input text [4, 25, 15]. These
approaches have improved the performance of wide applications in conjunction with deep architectures including
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural
networks (RNNs).
Despite the effectiveness of attention in handling both
visual and textual data, it has been hardly attempted to establish a connection between visual and textual attention
models which can be highly beneficial in various scenarios. For example, the VQA problem in Figure 1a with
the question What color is the umbrella? can
be efficiently solved by simultaneously focusing on the region of umbrella and the word color. In the example
of image-text matching in Figure 1b, the similarity between
the image and sentence can be effectively measured by at1299

