Action Unit Detection with Region Adaptation, Multi-labeling Learning and
Optimal Temporal Fusing
Wei Li

Farnaz Abtahi

Zhigang Zhu

Dept of Electrical Engineering
CUNY City College
New York, USA

Dept of Computer Science
CUNY Graduate Center
New York, USA

Dept of Computer Science
CUNY Graduate Center and City College
New York, USA

wli3@ccny.cuny.edu

fabtahi@gradcenter.cuny.edu

zhu@cs.ccny.cuny.edu

Abstract
Action Unit (AU) detection becomes essential for facial analysis. Many proposed approaches face challenging
problems in dealing with the alignments of different face regions, in the effective fusion of temporal information, and in
training a model for multiple AU labels. To better address
these problems, we propose a deep learning framework for
AU detection with region of interest (ROI) adaptation, integrated multi-label learning, and optimal LSTM-based temporal fusing. First, ROI cropping nets (ROI Nets) are designed to make sure specifically interested regions of faces
are learned independently; each sub-region has a local convolutional neural network (CNN) - an ROI Net, whose convolutional filters will only be trained for the corresponding region. Second, multi-label learning is employed to integrate the outputs of those individual ROI cropping nets,
which learns the inter-relationships of various AUs and acquires global features across sub-regions for AU detection.
Finally, the optimal selection of multiple LSTM layers to
form the best LSTM Net is carried out to best fuse temporal
features, in order to make the AU prediction the most accurate. The proposed approach is evaluated on two popular
AU detection datasets, BP4D and DISFA, outperforming the
state of the art significantly, with an average improvement
of around 13% on BP4D and 25% on DISFA, respectively.

1. Introduction
Action Units (AUs) are the basic facial movements that
work as the building blocks in formularizing multiple facial
expressions. The successful detection of AUs will greatly
facilitate the analysis of the complicated facial actions or
expressions. AU detection has been studied for decades
as one of the basic facial computing problems and many
interesting approaches have been proposed. Classical approaches in AU detection either focus on facial landmark-

based local features or appearance-based global features. A
number of deep learning approaches have also been proposed to learn deeper facial representations that result in
better AU detection.
However, some essential problems are still not solved
completely. Due to different features for different facial
components, individual AUs may need to be considered
separately. One image may include multiple AUs, therefore
whether training single AU or multi-label AUs has to be analyzed. Since all actions appear in a temporal instead of
just static mode, fusing temporal information becomes necessary. So, to achieve the best AU detection performance,
all the three aspects need to be considered.
Since CNNs have proved to be a powerful tool in solving many image-based tasks and several novel deep structures and frameworks have been proposed, we choose these
deep learning models to tackle the AU detection problems.
Recently, region-based processing is used in the fast/faster
RCNN for prediction of object’s bounding box or objectiveness probability in [9, 19]. This inspired us to design
separate networks to learn features for different regions of
interest. The success in applying LSTM (long and short
term memory) in image caption generation [26] and human
action recognition [5, 18] led us to believe that it is a good
temporal information fusing kernel which may be also useful for facial AU detection.
After identifying the three problems and being inspired
by these RCNN and LSTM approaches, we designed an
adaptive region cropping based multi-label learning deep
recurrent net. The structure of the proposed neural network
is shown in Figure 1. There are some unique features of
the proposed network. Unlike conventional CNNs where
the same convolutional filters are shared within the same
convolutional layers, we crop individual regions of interest(ROIs) based on facial landmarks from all the feature
maps. The red circle, for instance, represents an area of interest. So, these ROIs are learned individually and therefore
11841

