Deep Feature Interpolation for Image Content Changes
Paul Upchurch1,* Jacob Gardner1,* Geoff Pleiss1 Robert Pless2 Noah Snavely1 Kavita Bala1
Kilian Weinberger1
1

2

Cornell University
George Washington University
*
Authors contributed equally

Abstract
We propose Deep Feature Interpolation (DFI), a new datadriven baseline for automatic high-resolution image transformation. As the name suggests, DFI relies only on simple linear interpolation of deep convolutional features from
pre-trained convnets. We show that despite its simplicity,
DFI can perform high-level semantic transformations like
“make older/younger”, “make bespectacled”, “add smile”,
among others, surprisingly well—sometimes even matching
or outperforming the state-of-the-art. This is particularly
unexpected as DFI requires no specialized network architecture or even any deep network to be trained for these tasks.
DFI therefore can be used as a new baseline to evaluate
more complex algorithms and provides a practical answer
to the question of which image transformation tasks are still
challenging after the advent of deep learning.

1. Introduction
Generating believable changes in images is an active and
challenging research area in computer vision and graphics.
Until recently, algorithms were typically hand-designed for
individual transformation tasks and exploited task-specific
expert knowledge. Examples include transformations of
human faces [41, 17], materials [2, 1], color [50], or seasons in outdoor images [23]. However, recent innovations in
deep convolutional auto-encoders [33] have produced a succession of more versatile approaches. Instead of designing
each algorithm for a specific task, a conditional (or adversarial) generator [21, 13] can be trained to produce a set of
possible image transformations through supervised learning [48, 43, 52]. Although these approaches can perform a
variety of seemingly impressive tasks, in this paper we show
that a surprisingly large set of them can be solved via linear interpolation in deep feature space and may not require

Input

Older

Figure 1. Aging a face with DFI.

specialized deep architectures.
How can linear interpolation be effective? In pixel space,
natural images lie on an (approximate) non-linear manifold [44]. Non-linear manifolds are locally Euclidean, but
globally curved and non-Euclidean. It is well known that in
pixel space linear interpolation between images introduces
ghosting artifacts, a sign of departure from the underlying
manifold, and linear classifiers between image categories
perform poorly.
On the other hand, deep convolutional neural networks
(convnets) are known to excel at classification tasks such as
visual object categorization [38, 14, 15]—while relying on a
simple linear layer at the end of the network for classification.
These linear classifiers perform well because networks map
images into new representations in which image classes
are linearly separable. In fact, previous work has shown
that neural networks that are trained on sufficiently diverse
object recognition classes, such as VGG [38] trained on
ImageNet [22], learn surprisingly versatile feature spaces
and can be used to train linear classifiers for additional image
classes. Bengio et al. [3] hypothesize that convnets linearize
the manifold of natural images into a (globally) Euclidean
subspace of deep features.
Inspired by this hypothesis, we argue that, in such deep
17064

