HSfM: Hybrid Structure-from-Motion
Hainan Cui1 , Xiang Gao1, 2 , Shuhan Shen1, 2 , and Zhanyi Hu1, 2, 3
1

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing , China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{hncui, xiang.gao, shshen, huzy}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methods can be broadly
categorized as incremental or global according to their
ways to estimate initial camera poses. While incremental
system has advanced in robustness and accuracy, the efficiency remains its key challenge. To solve this problem,
global reconstruction system simultaneously estimates all camera poses from the epipolar geometry graph, but it
is usually sensitive to outliers. In this work, we propose
a new hybrid SfM method to tackle the issues of efficiency, accuracy and robustness in a unified framework. More
specifically, we propose an adaptive community-based rotation averaging method first to estimate camera rotations
in a global manner. Then, based on these estimated camera
rotations, camera centers are computed in an incremental
way. Extensive experiments show that our hybrid method
performs similarly or better than many of the state-of-theart global SfM approaches, in terms of computational efficiency, while achieves similar reconstruction accuracy and
robustness with two other state-of-the-art incremental SfM
approaches.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) technique is to estimate
the 3D scene structure and camera poses from a collection
of images [2, 38]. It usually consists of three modules: features extraction and matching, initial camera poses estimation, and bundle adjustment. According to the difference of
initial camera poses estimation manner, SfM can be broadly
divided into two classes: incremental and global.
For incremental SfM approaches, one way [34, 38] is
to start from selecting a few seed images for initial reconstruction, then repeatedly add new images. Another
way [21, 41] is to cluster the images into atomic models

first, then reconstruct each atomic model and incrementally
merge them after. Arguably, incremental manner is the most
popular strategy for 3D reconstruction [22, 39]. However,
it is sensitive to the initial seed model reconstruction and
the manner of model growing. In addition, the reconstruction error is accumulated with the iterations going on. For
large-scale scene reconstruction, the reconstructed structure
may suffer from scene drift [24]. Furthermore, the timeconsuming bundle adjustment (BA) [42] is repeatedly performed, which dramatically decreases the system scalability and efficiency. To tackle these weaknesses, global SfM
approaches become popular in the past few years.
For global SfM approaches [31, 13], initial camera poses are estimated simultaneously from the epipolar geometry
graph (EG), whose vertices correspond to images and edges
link matched image pairs, and the bundle adjustment is performed only once, which brings a better potential in system
efficiency and scalability. The generic pipeline for global
camera poses estimation consists of two steps: rotation averaging and translation averaging. For the rotation averaging, its accuracy mainly depends on two factors: the structure of EG and the accuracy of pairwise epipolar geometries [43]. Currently many literatures [5, 17] only minimize
the residuals on the epipolar edges. As a result, when the
cameras are not well distributed, for example the Internet
data [44], those methods sometimes perform poorly. For the
translation averaging, since epipolar geometry only encodes
the direction of pairwise translation, it is difficult to determine camera positions. Moreover, the translation estimation is more sensitive to feature match outliers. In comparison, incremental SfM approaches benefit from RANSAC
technique to discard bad epipolar geometries. Thus, it is
desirable to take the advantages of both incremental and
global manners.
Contribution: (1) we propose a new hybrid SfM approach
to tackle the issues of efficiency, robustness and accuracy in
a unified framework; (2) a community-based rotation aver-

1212

