Fast Person Re-identification via Cross-camera Semantic Binary Transformation
Jiaxin Chen†‡ , Yunhong Wang†‡∗ , Jie Qin†‡ , Li Liu§ and Ling Shao
†
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, China
‡
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, China
§
Malong Technologies Co., Ltd,  School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, U.K.
chenjiaxinX@gmail.com, yhwang@buaa.edu.cn, qinjiebuaa@gmail.com
li.liu@malongtech.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Numerous methods have been proposed for person reidentification, most of which however neglect the matching
efficiency. Recently, several hashing based approaches have
been developed to make re-identification more scalable for
large-scale gallery sets. Despite their efficiency, these
works ignore cross-camera variations, which severely deteriorate the final matching accuracy. To address the above
issues, we propose a novel hashing based method for fast
person re-identification, namely Cross-camera Semantic Binary Transformation (CSBT). CSBT aims to transform original high-dimensional feature vectors into compact identitypreserving binary codes. To this end, CSBT first employs a
subspace projection to mitigate cross-camera variations, by
maximizing intra-person similarities and inter-person discrepancies. Subsequently, a binary coding scheme is proposed via seamlessly incorporating both the semantic pairwise relationships and local affinity information. Finally, a
joint learning framework is proposed for simultaneous subspace projection learning and binary coding based on discrete alternating optimization. Experimental results on four
benchmarks clearly demonstrate the superiority of CSBT
over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, person re-identification (ReID)
has attracted more and more research interest, due to its
wide range of applications such as long-term tracking [44],
searching people of interest (e.g. criminals or terrorists) and
activity analysis [48]. This task aims to match a certain person across multiple non-overlapped cameras, which is very
challenging due to the cluttered backgrounds, severe occlusions, illumination changes and pose variations.
A variety of approaches have been proposed to address
*Yunhong Wang is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed framework. Different colors
(shapes) indicate different person identities (cameras).

the above problem [10, 20, 24, 46, 51, 53, 59, 62], by representation learning or building robust signature matching.
However, most of them focused on improving the matching accuracy, but neglected to consider the re-identification
efficiency. As a consequence, high computation costs and
memory load are required by conventional methods, making
them unable to provide timely responses, especially when
dealing with large-scale gallery sets. Meanwhile, recently,
there has been an explosive growth of wearable and mobile devices with limited computation capability. It is therefore highly desirable to develop a re-identification system
that can quickly retrieve the target person from numerous
gallery images with low memory load and fast speed.
Recently, hashing has emerged as a promising way for
large-scale data processing [9, 38], and has a wide range of
applications such as action recognition [27, 36] and image
retrieval [26, 27, 28]. Inspired by this, several supervised
hashing based approaches have been developed for efficient
person re-identification [4, 54, 60]. These methods attempt
to build discriminative binary vectors, and subsequently
construct identity-preserving hash functions. By virtue of
the learned hash functions, original high-dimensional feature vectors are transformed into short binary codes, which
can be stored efficiently. More importantly, very fast matching could be accomplished by calculating the Hamming dis-

3873

