Deep Image Harmonization
Yi-Hsuan Tsai1
1

Xiaohui Shen2 Zhe Lin2 Kalyan Sunkavalli2 Xin Lu2 Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
2
University of California, Merced
Adobe Research

{ytsai2, mhyang}@ucmerced.edu

2

{xshen, zlin, sunkaval, xinl}@adobe.com

Abstract
Compositing is one of the most common operations in
photo editing. To generate realistic composites, the appearances of foreground and background need to be adjusted
to make them compatible. Previous approaches to harmonize composites have focused on learning statistical relationships between hand-crafted appearance features of the
foreground and background, which is unreliable especially
when the contents in the two layers are vastly different. In
this work, we propose an end-to-end deep convolutional
neural network for image harmonization, which can capture both the context and semantic information of the composite images during harmonization. We also introduce an
efficient way to collect large-scale and high-quality training data that can facilitate the training process. Experiments on the synthesized dataset and real composite images
show that the proposed network outperforms previous stateof- the-art methods.

Composite image

Xue [28]

Zhu [32]

Our harmonization result

Figure 1. Our method can adjust the appearances of the composite foreground to make it compatible with the background region.
Given a composite image, we show the harmonized images generated by [28], [32] and our deep harmonization network.

1. Introduction
Compositing is one of the most common operations in
image editing. To generate a composite image, a foreground
region in one image is extracted and combined with the
background of another image. However, the appearances
of the extracted foreground region may not be consistent
with the new background, making the composite image unrealistic. Therefore, it is essential to adjust the appearances
of the foreground region to make it compatible with the new
background (Figure 1). Previous techniques improve the realism of composite images by transferring statistics of handcrafted features, including color [13, 28] and texture [25],
between the foreground and background regions. However,
these techniques do not take the contents of the composite images into account, leading to unreliable results when
appearances of the foreground and background regions are
vastly different.
In this work, we propose a learning-based method by
training an end-to-end deep convolutional neural network

(CNN) for image harmonization, which can capture both
the context and semantic information of the composite images during harmonization. Given a composite image and
a foreground mask as the input, our model directly outputs
a harmonized image, where the contents are the same as
the input but with adjusted appearances on the foreground
region. Context information has been utilized in several image editing tasks, such as image enhancement [6, 29], image
editing [27] and image inpainting [20]. For image harmonization, it is critical to understand what it looks like in the
surrounding background region near the foreground region.
Hence foreground appearances can be adjusted accordingly
to generate a realistic composite image. Toward this end,
we train a deep CNN model that consists of an encoder to
capture the context of the input image and a decoder to reconstruct the harmonized image using the learned representations from the encoder.
In addition, semantic information is of great importance
13789

