Hidden Layers in Perceptual Learning
Gad Cohen
Daphna Weinshall
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
Email: gad.a.cohen@gmail.com,daphna@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Studies in visual perceptual learning investigate the way
human performance improves with practice, in the context
of relatively simple (and therefore more manageable) visual
tasks. Building on the powerful tools currently available for
the training of Convolution Neural Networks (CNN), networks whose original architecture was inspired by the visual system, we revisited some of the open computational
questions in perceptual learning. We first replicated two
representative sets of perceptual learning experiments by
training a shallow CNN to perform the relevant tasks. These
networks qualitatively showed most of the characteristic behavior observed in perceptual learning, including the hallmark phenomena of specificity and its various manifestations in the forms of transfer or partial transfer, and learning enabling. We next analyzed the dynamics of weight
modifications in the networks, identifying patterns which
appeared to be instrumental for the transfer (or generalization) of learned skills from one task to another in the simulated networks. These patterns may identify ways by which
the domain of search in the parameter space during network re-training can be significantly reduced, thereby accomplishing knowledge transfer.

1. Introduction
Performance in relatively simple perceptual tasks is
known to be affected by practice. The study of this process
revealed some surprising results [16], providing a window
into human learning mechanisms. One of the most striking results has been the repeated observation that many of
the acquired skills are specific to low level properties of the
stimuli (e.g., orientation), and do not transfer (e.g., do not
generalize to other orientations). These and other results
were used to constrain computational modeling of human
perceptual learning, as briefly reviewed Section 2.1.
In this paper we revisit these computational studies in the
context of recent advances in deep learning, and specifically

model the learner by a Convolution Neural Network (CNN).
This modeling choice is justified by the resemblance between the CNN architecture and the organization of low
level visual areas in the brain. In Section 3 we describe
the simulations of representative perceptual learning experiments, where the learner is a shallow CNN, and investigate
its emerging properties. These properties are directly compared with the actual perceptual learning results in a qualitative manner. In Section 4 we analyze the learning process.
We track the dynamics of weight modifications as learning
proceeds, and identify patterns of change which facilitate
subsequent learning sessions, i.e. enable learning transfer.
This facilitation is likely achieved by reducing the search
space when re-training the network.
The model we investigate here is a relatively shallow
Convolution Neural Network (CNN) with two hidden convpool layers (effectively the learned features), and one output layer that integrates the responses of the features using
modifiable weights. The main difference with respect to
previous modeling attempts, reviewed below, is that this is
a generic model, which resembles the visual system in its
pipeline hierarchical structure (although it is not a physiologically accurate model of the visual processing areas).
It is a general learning machine that learns visual features
from scratch, as well as decision classifiers. Thus it can be
used to investigate the relative contribution of features and
classification weights to the learning process.

2. Background
2.1. Generalization in perceptual learning
Extraordinary cognitive learning abilities, arguably superior to any other living creature, have allowed human beings to achieve incredible things. Here we focus on the less
glamorous but related ability of perceptual learning, where
learners improve their perceptual skills (and specifically visual skills) as a result of practice and training. Perceptual
learning studies usually measure the effect of practice on
the performance of simple visual tasks, such as motion direction discrimination or line orientation detection. Typi-

4554

