An Empirical Evaluation of Visual Question Answering for Novel Objects
Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan1,2
1

Ambar Pal1

IIT Kanpur∗

2

Abstract
We study the problem of answering questions about images in the harder setting, where the test questions and corresponding images contain novel objects, which were not
queried about in the training data. Such setting is inevitable
in real world—owing to the heavy tailed distribution of the
visual categories, there would be some objects which would
not be annotated in the train set. We show that the performance of two popular existing methods drop significantly
(up to 28%) when evaluated on novel objects cf. known objects. We propose methods which use large existing external corpora of (i) unlabeled text, i.e. books, and (ii) images
tagged with classes, to achieve novel object based visual
question answering. We do systematic empirical studies,
for both an oracle case where the novel objects are known
textually, as well as a fully automatic case without any explicit knowledge of the novel objects, but with the minimal
assumption that the novel objects are semantically related
to the existing objects in training. The proposed methods
for novel object based visual question answering are modular and can potentially be used with many visual question answering architectures. We show consistent improvements with the two popular architectures and give qualitative analysis of the cases where the model does well and of
those where it fails to bring improvements.

1. Introduction
Humans seamlessly combine multiple modalities of
stimulus, e.g. audio, vision, language, touch, smell, to make
decisions. Hence, as a next step for artificial intelligence,
tasks involving such multiple modalities, in particular language and vision, have attracted substantial attention recently. Visual question answering (VQA), i.e. the task of
answering a question about an image, has been recently introduced in a supervised learning setting [21, 3]. In the currently studied setup, like in other supervised learning settings, the objects in the training data and the test data over∗ The project started when Santhosh Ramakrishnan and Ambar Pal were
summer interns at IIT Kanpur. Ambar Pal is a student at IIIT Delhi.
ambar14012@iiitd.ac.in, grv@cse.iitk.ac.in
† {ee12b101@ee, amittal@cse}.iitm.ac.in

Gaurav Sharma1

Anurag Mittal2

IIT Madras†

Train on known objects

Test on unknown objects

Is the cat black and white ?
Yes

Is the dog black and white ?

Figure 1: We are interested in answering questions about
images containing objects not seen at training.
lap almost completely, i.e. all the objects that appear during testing have been seen annotated in the training. This
setting is limited as this requires having training data for
all possible objects in the world—this is an impractical requirement owing to the heavy tailed distribution of the visual categories. There are many objects, on the tail of the
distribution, which are rare and annotations for them might
not be available. While humans are easily able to generalize to novel objects, e.g. make predictions and answer
questions about a wolf, when only a cat and/or a dog were
seen during training, automatic methods struggle to do so.
In the general supervised classification, such a setting has
been studied as zero shot learning [15], and has been applied for image recognition as well [11, 14, 36, 40]. While
the zero shot setup works with the constraint that the test
classes or objects were never seen during training, it also
assumes some form of auxiliary information to connect the
novel test classes with the seen train classes. Such information could be in the form of manually specified attributes
[11, 14, 40] or in the form of relations captured between the
classes with learnt distributed embeddings like, Word2Vec
[23] or GloVe [25], of the words from an unannotated text
corpus [36]. In the present paper, we are interested in a similar setting, but for the more unconstrained and challenging
task of answering questions about novel objects present in
an image. Such a setting, while being natural, has not been
studied so far, to the best of our knowledge.
We start studying the problem by first proposing a novel
split (§4.1), into train and test sets, of the large-scale pub14392

