What’s in a Question: Using Visual Questions as a Form of Supervision
Siddha Ganju

Olga Russakovsky
Carnegie Mellon University

Abhinav Gupta

Abstract
Collecting fully annotated image datasets is challenging and expensive. Many types of weak supervision have
been explored: weak manual annotations, web search results, temporal continuity, ambient sound and others. We
focus on one particular unexplored mode: visual questions
that are asked about images. The key observation that inspires our work is that the question itself provides useful information about the image (even without the answer being
available). For instance, the question “what is the breed
of the dog?” informs the AI that the animal in the scene
is a dog and that there is only one dog present. We make
three contributions: (1) providing an extensive qualitative
and quantitative analysis of the information contained in
human visual questions, (2) proposing two simple but surprisingly effective modifications to the standard visual question answering models that allow them to make use of weak
supervision in the form of unanswered questions associated
with images and (3) demonstrating that a simple data augmentation strategy inspired by our insights results in a 7.1%
improvement on the standard VQA benchmark.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has shown great promise in developing visual AI. However, collecting manually annotated visual datasets is both challenging and expensive [36, 14, 28].
Using cheaper and weaker supervision is a growing research
direction [46, 42, 8, 12, 35, 7, 34, 4]. As AI is increasingly integrated into our daily lives, computer vision systems will have access to increasingly diverse sources of information by constantly observing human-human, humanobject, human-environment and human-AI interactions. Efficiently utilizing all this information will become increasingly critical as we aim to develop large-scale, accurate and
adaptable visual systems.
Visual Question Answering (VQA) has become a new
mode of interaction between humans and AI [3]. Presently,
VQA is mostly used as means for evaluating visual reasoning capabilities of computers. However, going forward
this is likely to become a natural human-AI interaction

Figure 1: We examine how much information is contained
in a visual question, and demonstrate that this information
can be effectively used in training computer vision models.

paradigm. It will become commonplace for humans to ask
computers visual questions, such as, “Where did I leave my
keys?”, “What breed of dog is this?”, “Have I met this person before?” or “Why is she doing that?”. Instead of viewing this as single-sided interaction with humans soliciting
information from AI systems, we consider how visual questions themselves can serve as a form of supervision to improve computer vision systems (Figure 1).
In contrast to existing works that focus on improving
AI’s VQA capabilities [16, 26, 33], we strive to understand
how much information is contained within the question itself, even when the answer is not provided (as would be the
case of human-AI conversations). E.g., the question “What
breed of dog is this?” provides information that the animal
in the scene is a dog and suggests that there is a single dog
present. The question “Why is he doing that?” suggests
that the depicted behavior is unusual or unexpected. This
type of free, natural and open-ended supervision can pave
the way to developing richer cognitive AI.
We set out to investigate this hypothesis that human
questions can be effectively used to improve computer vision capabilities. We begin by providing extensive qualitative and quantitative analysis of the information contained
in a visual question using the large-scale VQA dataset [3].
We propose two simple but surprisingly effective modifications to the iBOWIMG [48] VQA model that allows it to
make use of weak supervision in the form of images associated with unanswered questions. This proves our hypothesis that unanswered questions can be effectively used as a
form of visual supervision.
Inspired by the insights from our initial experiments,
1241

