End-to-end 3D face reconstruction with deep neural networks
Pengfei Dou, Shishir K. Shah, and Ioannis A. Kakadiaris
Computational Biomedicine Lab
University of Houston
4800 Calhoun Road, Houston, TX 77004
{pdou,sshah,ikakadia}@central.uh.edu

Abstract
Monocular 3D facial shape reconstruction from a single
2D facial image has been an active research area due to its
wide applications. Inspired by the success of deep neural
networks (DNN), we propose a DNN-based approach for
End-to-End 3D FAce Reconstruction (UH-E2FAR) from a
single 2D image. Different from recent works that reconstruct and refine the 3D face in an iterative manner using
both an RGB image and an initial 3D facial shape rendering, our DNN model is end-to-end, and thus the complicated 3D rendering process can be avoided. Moreover, we
integrate in the DNN architecture two components, namely
a multi-task loss function and a fusion convolutional neural
network (CNN) to improve facial expression reconstruction.
With the multi-task loss function, 3D face reconstruction is
divided into neutral 3D facial shape reconstruction and expressive 3D facial shape reconstruction. The neutral 3D
facial shape is class-specific. Therefore, higher layer features are useful. In comparison, the expressive 3D facial
shape favors lower or intermediate layer features. With the
fusion-CNN, features from different intermediate layers are
fused and transformed for predicting the 3D expressive facial shape. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate
the superiority of our end-to-end framework in improving
the accuracy of 3D face reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional information, being a strong prior invariant to view perspectives, has been demonstrated beneficial in different computer vision applications [29, 9, 11,
17, 18, 15]. Among these applications, 3D data has been
widely employed in face recognition research to address
pose, expression, and illumination variations in facial images, resulting in many publications with state-of-the-art
performance [11, 17, 15, 34, 8, 10, 5, 6]. In these methods, one crucial step is acquiring the personalized 3D face
model which, ideally, can be captured with a 3D camera

system. However, the high cost and limited effective sensing range of 3D cameras have constrained their applicability
in practice. An alternative approach is reconstructing the 3D
facial shape using 2D facial images, which has found wide
applications in both the computer vision and the computer
graphics communities.
Three-dimensional facial shape reconstruction from 2D
image(s) is very challenging by its nature if no prior knowledge is provided. This is mainly due to the large solution
space of the problem and the loss of depth information in
the image acquisition process. Given prior knowledge about
the camera intrinsic parameters or multi-view images of the
same subject, a number of methods including multi-view
stereo, photometric stereo, or structure-from-motion can be
applied to reconstruct the 3D face. However, in most scenarios, camera intrinsic parameters are unknown and usually only a single 2D image is available, making the problem, referred to as monocular 3D facial shape reconstruction (MFSR), even harder.
A common prior employed in solving the monocular 3D
facial shape reconstruction problem is the subspace or morphable model [3] that captures shape variations in human
face with a set of basis shapes. By using a morphable
model, a 3D human face can be parameterized as a vector of weights for the shape basis. As a result, the solution
space becomes numerically constrained, thus is solvable by
common optimization techniques. To retrieve the optimal
model parameters that best reconstruct the 3D facial shape
of the input 2D image, Blanz and Vetter [3] proposed to
minimize the discrepancy between the input 2D image and
the 3D face rendering in an analysis-by-synthesis manner.
Though interesting results have been achieved, this method
cannot handle complex illumination conditions and suffers
from high computation cost. To solve its limitation, Blanz
et al. [2] proposed to predict the model parameters via linear
regression from facial feature point locations. Though efficient, this method abandons most of the useful information
in the image and learns very simple regressor functions. As
a result, the reconstruction is usually very coarse and sensi-

15908

