Template Matching with Deformable Diversity Similarity
Itamar Talmi∗
Technion

Roey Mechrez∗
Technion

Lihi Zelnik-Manor
Technion

titamar@campus.technion.ac.il

roey@tx.technion.ac.il

lihi@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We propose a novel measure for template matching
named Deformable Diversity Similarity – based on the diversity of feature matches between a target image window
and the template. We rely on both local appearance and
geometric information that jointly lead to a powerful approach for matching. Our key contribution is a similarity
measure, that is robust to complex deformations, significant
background clutter, and occlusions. Empirical evaluation
on the most up-to-date benchmark shows that our method
outperforms the current state-of-the-art in its detection accuracy while improving computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Template Matching is a key component in many computer vision applications such as object detection, tracking,
surveillance, medical imaging and image stitching. Our interest is in Template Matching “in the wild” [4], i.e., when
no prior information is available on the target image. An
example application is to identify the same object in different cameras of a surveillance system [1]. Another use case
is in video tracking, where Template Matching is used to
detect drifts and relocate the object after losing it [9]. This
is a challenging task when the transformation between the
template and the target in the image is complex, non-rigid,
or contains occlusions, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Traditional template matching approaches, such as Sumof-Squared-Distances or Normalized Cross-Correlation, do
not handle well these complex cases. This is largely because they penalize all pixels of the template, which results in false detections when occlusions or large deformations occur. To overcome this limitation the Best-BuddiesSimilarity (BBS) measure was proposed in [4, 18]. BBS is
based on properties of the Nearest-Neighbor (NN) matches
beween features of the target and features of the template.
It relies only on a subset of the points in the template, thus
hoping to latch on to the relevant features that correspond
between the template and the target. This makes BBS more
robust than previous methods.
∗ Authors contributed equally

Figure 1: Template Matching challenges: Template
Matching results of the proposed Deformable Diversity
Similarity (DDIS). (Top) The Miami Heats logo on Lebron
James’s shirt, is marked as template (in green). (Bottom)
Best matches found by DDIS in four target images (in magenta). Different challenges are evident: the ball occludes
the logo, Lebron moves non-rigidly with out-of-plane rotation and complex deformation of the shirt.
In this paper we adopt the feature-based, parameter-free,
approach of BBS and propose a novel similarity measure
for template matching named DDIS: Deformable Diversity
Similarity. DDIS is based on two properties of the Nearest Neighbor field of matches between points of a target
window and the template. The first is that the diversity
of NN matches forms a strong cue for template matching.
This idea is supported by observations in [11], where patch
diversity was used to match objects for texture synthesis.
We propose formulas for measuring the NN field diversity
and further provide theoretical analysis as well as empirical
evaluations that show the strength of these measures.
The second key idea behind DDIS is to explicitly consider the deformation implied by the NN field. As was
shown by the seminal work of [7] on Deformable Part Models, allowing deformations while accounting for them in the
1175

