Transformation-Grounded Image Generation Network
for Novel 3D View Synthesis
Eunbyung Park1 Jimei Yang2 Ersin Yumer2 Duygu Ceylan2 Alexander C. Berg1
1 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2 Adobe Research
eunbyung@cs.unc.edu

{jimyang,yumer,ceylan}@adobe.com

Abstract
We present a transformation-grounded image generation
network for novel 3D view synthesis from a single image.
Our approach first explicitly infers the parts of the geometry
visible both in the input and novel views and then casts the
remaining synthesis problem as image completion. Specifically, we both predict a flow to move the pixels from the
input to the novel view along with a novel visibility map
that helps deal with occulsion/disocculsion. Next, conditioned on those intermediate results, we hallucinate (infer)
parts of the object invisible in the input image. In addition
to the new network structure, training with a combination
of adversarial and perceptual loss results in a reduction in
common artifacts of novel view synthesis such as distortions
and holes, while successfully generating high frequency details and preserving visual aspects of the input image. We
evaluate our approach on a wide range of synthetic and real
examples. Both qualitative and quantitative results show
our method achieves significantly better results compared
to existing methods.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of novel 3D view synthesis—
given a single view of an object in an arbitrary pose, the
goal is to synthesize an image of the object after a specified
transformation of viewpoint. It has a variety of practical applications in computer vision, graphics, and robotics. As an
image-based rendering technique [21], it allows placing a
virtual object on a background with a desired pose or manipulating virtual objects in the scene [22]. Also, multiple
generated 2D views form an efficient representation for 3D
reconstruction [37]. In robotics, synthesized novel views
give the robot a better understanding of unseen parts of the
object through 3D reconstruction, which will be helpful for
grasp planning [41].
This problem is generally challenging due to unspecified
input viewing angle and the ambiguities of 3D shape obProject page: http://www.cs.unc.edu/˜eunbyung/tvsn

aberg@cs.unc.edu

served in only a single view. In particular inferring the appearances of unobserved parts of the object that are not visible in the input view is necessary for novel view synthesis.
Our approach attacks all of these challenges, but our contributions focus on the later aspect, dealing with disoccluded
appearance in novel views and outputting highly-detailed
synthetic images.
Given the eventual approach we will take, using a carefully constructed deep network, we can consider related
work on dense prediction with encoder-decoder methods to
see what makes the structure of the novel 3D view synthesis
problem different. In particular, there is a lack of pixel-topixel correspondences between the input and output view.
This, combined with large chunks of missing data due to occlusion, makes novel view synthesis fundamentally different than other dense prediction or generation tasks that have
shown promising results with deep networks [31, 7, 20]. Although the input and desired output views may have similar low-level image statistics, enforcing such constraints directly is difficult. For example, skip or residual connections,
are not immediately applicable as the input and output have
significantly different global shapes. Hence, previous 3D
novel view synthesis approaches [49, 37] have not been able
to match the visual quality of geometry-based methods that
exploit strong correspondence.
The geometry-based methods are an alternative to pure
generation, and have been demonstrated in [17, 22, 34].
Such approaches estimate the underlying 3D structure of
the object and apply geometric transformation to pixels in
the input (e.g. performing depth-estimation followed by
3D transformation of each pixel [13]). When successful,
geometric transformation approaches can very accurately
transfer original colors, textures, and local features to corresponding new locations in the target view. However, such
approaches are fundamentally unable to hallucinate where
new parts are revealed due to disocclusion. Furthermore,
even for the visible geometry precisely estimating the 3D
shape or equivalently the precise pixel-to-pixel correspondence between input and synthesized view is still challenging and failures can result in distorted output images.
13500

