SCC: Semantic Context Cascade for Efficient Action Detection
Fabian Caba Heilbron, Wayner Barrios, Victor Escorcia and Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
http://www.cabaf.net/scc

Abstract

Playing Beach Volleyball
Ball

Despite the recent advances in large-scale video analysis, action detection remains as one of the most challenging unsolved problems in computer vision. This snag is in
part due to the large volume of data that needs to be analyzed to detect actions in videos. Existing approaches have
mitigated the computational cost, but still, these methods
lack rich high-level semantics that helps them to localize
the actions quickly. In this paper, we introduce a Semantic Cascade Context (SCC) model that aims to detect action in long video sequences. By embracing semantic priors associated with human activities, SCC produces highquality class-specific action proposals and prune unrelated
activities in a cascade fashion. Experimental results in ActivityNet unveils that SCC achieves state-of-the-art performance for action detection while operating at real time.

1. Introduction
Imagine you would like to find and share videos in your
digital archives about the remarkable moments you had
playing beach volleyball in Hawaii (refer to Figure 1). To
do this, you have to scan every video and determine whether
or not the moments you are looking for are present in each
video. To optimize your search time, you would probably
scroll through the archives quickly and stop to check time
instances, where you saw a beach, volleyball net, or volleyball. At those times, you would scroll or play the video
slower to determine whether this part of the video is one of
the special moments you are looking for. If it is not, you resume the coarse-to-fine temporal search through the videos,
until you have exhausted them all.
This particular search problem not only afflicts people
looking for memorable moments, but it also hinders various real-world tasks ranging from consumer video summarization to surveillance, crowd monitoring, and elderly
care. There is obviously a need for efficient and accurate
automated methods that can search and retrieves events and
activities in video collections, formally known in the vision
community as action/activity detection in long untrimmed
videos. Despite the great research efforts that have been

Net

Dynamics
Beach
0:00

3:17

Figure 1. Playing beach volleyball is more than the sum of people running, jumping, and hitting a ball. It inherently implies an
outdoors beach, a volleyball net, a volleyball and humans interacting in a particular way. Our approach leverages this rich and
discriminative semantic information (namely objects and places)
to determine when activities of interest occur in long, untrimmed
videos in an efficient and effective way.

made on the topic of action recognition and detection, the
goal of accurate and fast detection remains elusive in our
automated visual systems.
First attempts in action detection apply activity classifiers exhaustively over the video at each time location and
at multiple temporal scales [8, 10, 32]. Despite the good
detection performance they achieve in small-scale and controlled scenarios, this computationally expensive approach
is infeasible for large-scale video analysis applications. To
overcome the computational demand of these traditional
methods and inspired by progress in the object detection
domain [18, 35, 36], recent approaches [5, 9, 37] develop
methods that quickly scan a video to generate temporal segments, where general activities are likely to exist. In doing
so, activity classifiers are only applied to few candidate segments, thus, significantly reducing the computational overhead. However, these detection approaches ignore semantic
context priors (e.g. objects and scenes) in localizing actions,
even though they have been shown to be quite effective in

1454

