Human Shape from Silhouettes using Generative HKS Descriptors and
Cross-Modal Neural Networks
Endri Dibra1 , Himanshu Jain1 , Cengiz Öztireli1 , Remo Ziegler2 , Markus Gross1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, 2 Vizrt
{edibra,cengizo,grossm}@inf.ethz.ch, jainh@student.ethz.ch, rziegler@vizrt.com

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel method for capturing
human body shape from a single scaled silhouette. We combine deep correlated features capturing different 2D views,
and embedding spaces based on 3D cues in a novel convolutional neural network (CNN) based architecture. We
first train a CNN to find a richer body shape representation space from pose invariant 3D human shape descriptors.
Then, we learn a mapping from silhouettes to this representation space, with the help of a novel architecture that exploits correlation of multi-view data during training time, to
improve prediction at test time. We extensively validate our
results on synthetic and real data, demonstrating significant
improvements in accuracy as compared to the state-of-theart, and providing a practical system for detailed human
body measurements from a single image.

1. Introduction
Human body shape estimation has recently received a
lot of interest. This partially relates to the growth in demand of applications such as tele-presence, virtual and augmented reality, virtual try-on, and body health monitoring.
For such applications, having an accurate and practical system that estimates the 3D human body shape is of crucial
importance. It needs to be accurate such that automated
body measurements agree with the real ones, and needs
to be practical such that it is fast and utilizes as few sensors as possible. With respect to the sensors utilized, in
increasing order of simplicity, we can distinguish multiple cameras [10, 46], RGB and Depth [25] or a single image [20, 67, 29, 23, 5, 17].
In this work we tackle the problem of shape estimation
from a single or multiple silhouettes of a human body with
poses compliant with two main applications: virtual garment fitting assuming a neutral pose [13, 6, 16], and shape
from individually taken pictures or “Selfies” (e.g. through
a mirror or a long selfie stick), assuming poses that exhibit

mild self occlusion [17]. Compared to state-of-the-art in
this domain, we achieve significantly higher accuracy on
the reconstructed body shapes and simultaneously improve
in speed if a GPU implementation is considered (or obtain
similar run-times as previous works [17] on the CPU). This
is achieved thanks to a novel Neural Network architecture
(Fig.1) consisting of various components that (a) are able to
learn a body shape representation from 3D shape descriptors and map this representation to 3D shapes, (b) can successfully reconstruct a 3D body mesh from one or two given
body silhouettes, and (c) can leverage multi-view data at
training time, to boost predictions for a single view at test
time through cross-modality learning.
Previous methods attempt to find a mapping from silhouettes to the parameters of a statistical body shape model [2],
utilizing handcrafted features [17], silhouette PCA representations [13] possibly with local fine tuning [6], or CNNs [16]. Based on the obtained parameters, a least squares
system is solved to obtain the final mesh. We also use CNNs to learn silhouette features, but unlike [16], we first map
them to a shape representation space that is generated from
3D shape descriptors (Heat Kernel Signature (HKS) [57])
invariant to isometric deformations and maximizing intrahuman-class variation, and then decode them to full body
vertex positions. Regressing to this space improves the predictions and speeds up the computation.
Recently, Dibra et al. [17] demonstrated how to boost
features coming from one view (scaled frontal) during test
time, utilizing information from two views (front and side)
at training time, by projecting features with Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [26] for a regression task. CCA
comes with shortcomings though as (1) it computes a linear
projection, (2) it is hard in practice to extend it to more than
two views, and (3) suffers from lack of scalability to large
datasets as it has to “memorize” the whole training data set.
As part of this work, we propose an architecture (which
we call Cross-Modal Neural Network (CMNN)) that is able
to overcome the mentioned challenges, by first generating
features from various views separately, and then combining
them through shared layers. This leads to improvements in
14826

