Convolutional neural network architecture for geometric matching
Ignacio Rocco1,2
1
DI ENS

Relja Arandjelović 1,2,∗
Josef Sivic1,2,3
2
3
INRIA
CIIRC

Abstract
We address the problem of determining correspondences
between two images in agreement with a geometric model
such as an affine or thin-plate spline transformation, and
estimating its parameters. The contributions of this work
are three-fold. First, we propose a convolutional neural network architecture for geometric matching. The architecture
is based on three main components that mimic the standard
steps of feature extraction, matching and simultaneous inlier detection and model parameter estimation, while being
trainable end-to-end. Second, we demonstrate that the network parameters can be trained from synthetically generated imagery without the need for manual annotation and
that our matching layer significantly increases generalization capabilities to never seen before images. Finally, we
show that the same model can perform both instance-level
and category-level matching giving state-of-the-art results
on the challenging Proposal Flow dataset.

1. Introduction
Estimating correspondences between images is one of
the fundamental problems in computer vision [19, 25] with
applications ranging from large-scale 3D reconstruction [3]
to image manipulation [21] and semantic segmentation
[42]. Traditionally, correspondences consistent with a geometric model such as epipolar geometry or planar affine
transformation, are computed by detecting and matching
local features (such as SIFT [38] or HOG [12, 22]), followed by pruning incorrect matches using local geometric
constraints [43, 47] and robust estimation of a global geometric transformation using algorithms such as RANSAC
[18] or Hough transform [32, 34, 38]. This approach works
well in many cases but fails in situations that exhibit (i) large
changes of depicted appearance due to e.g. intra-class variation [22], or (ii) large changes of scene layout or non-rigid
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague.
∗ Now at DeepMind.

Figure 1: Our trained geometry estimation network automatically
aligns two images with substantial appearance differences. It is
able to estimate large deformable transformations robustly in the
presence of clutter.

deformations that require complex geometric models with
many parameters which are hard to estimate in a manner
robust to outliers.
In this work we build on the traditional approach and
develop a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture
that mimics the standard matching process. First, we replace the standard local features with powerful trainable
convolutional neural network features [31, 46], which allows us to handle large changes of appearance between
the matched images. Second, we develop trainable matching and transformation estimation layers that can cope with
noisy and incorrect matches in a robust way, mimicking the
good practices in feature matching such as the second nearest neighbor test [38], neighborhood consensus [43, 47] and
Hough transform-like estimation [32, 34, 38].
The outcome is a convolutional neural network architecture trainable for the end task of geometric matching,
which can handle large appearance changes, and is therefore
suitable for both instance-level and category-level matching
problems.

2. Related work
The classical approach for finding correspondences involves identifying interest points and computing local descriptors around these points [10, 11, 24, 37, 38, 39, 43].

6148

