Learning Barycentric Representations of 3D Shapes for Sketch-based 3D Shape
Retrieval

Jin Xie, Guoxian Dai, Fan Zhu, and Yi Fang
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering
{jin.xie, guoxian.dai, fan.zhu, yfang}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Retrieving 3D shapes with sketches is a challenging
problem since 2D sketches and 3D shapes are from two
heterogeneous domains, which results in large discrepancy
between them. In this paper, we propose to learn barycenters of 2D projections of 3D shapes for sketch-based 3D
shape retrieval. Specifically, we first use two deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to extract deep features of
sketches and 2D projections of 3D shapes. For 3D shapes,
we then compute the Wasserstein barycenters of deep features of multiple projections to form a barycentric representation. Finally, by constructing a metric network, a discriminative loss is formulated on the Wasserstein barycenters of 3D shapes and sketches in the deep feature space
to learn discriminative and compact 3D shape and sketch
features for retrieval. The proposed method is evaluated
on the SHREC’13 and SHREC’14 sketch track benchmark
datasets. Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, our
proposed method can significantly improve the retrieval
performance.

1. Introduction
With the development of touch-screen technology,
sketching has became much easier as a way to interact
with computer systems such as tablet computers and smart
phones. Sketch-based 3D shape retrieval has been receiving more and more attention in the community of computer
graphics and computer vision [15, 13, 27, 28]. In comparison to text and 3D shapes as queries, sketches are intuitive
and convenient for users to search 3D models.
Compared to 3D shape retrieval using 3D shapes as
queries, sketch-based 3D shape retrieval is much more chal-

lenging. Since sketches are highly abstract and subjectively
drawn, there are usually large variations with them. Moreover, due to the discrepancy between the sketch and 3D
shape domains, there are also large cross-domain variations
between 2D sketches and 3D shapes, which usually degenerates the performance of the learning model.
In recent years, extensive research efforts have been dedicated to sketch-based 3D shape retrieval. In [13], an integrated descriptor ZFEC is proposed, including the regionbased Zernike moments, contour-based Fourier descriptor, eccentricity feature and circularity feature, to describe
sketches and projections of 3D shapes. Then, in order to
align sketches and 3D shapes, the representative views of
3D shapes are selected with the defined view context. The
shape context matching is used to compare the sketch to
each selected view with the ZFEC feature for retrieval. In
[12], silhouettes of 3D shapes from the defined views are
used to represent 3D shapes. Then, three kinds of descriptors, histogram of edge local orientations (HELO), histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) and Fourier descriptors, are extracted to describe sketches and 3D shapes. The
KD-tree with the Manhattan distance is used for matching
sketches to 2D projections of 3D shapes.
Besides the hand-crafted features, learning-based features are also extracted to represent sketches and 3D shapes
for sketch-based 3D shape retrieval. In [15], followed by
the Gabor local line-based features (GALIFs), the bagof-feature (BOF) histograms are extracted to represent
sketches and 2D projections of 3D shapes. Then the minimum distance between the BOF histograms of the sketch
and 2D projections is used as similarity for retrieval. Furuya et al. [10] proposed the BF-SIFT feature to describe
sketches and 2D projections, which is the dense SIFT with
the BOF method. By constructing a Laplacian graph in
the feature space of the sketches and 2D projections of 3D

5068

