End-to-End Instance Segmentation with Recurrent Attention
Mengye Ren1 , Richard S. Zemel1,2
University of Toronto1 , Canadian Institute for Advanced Research2
{mren,zemel}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
While convolutional neural networks have gained impressive
success recently in solving structured prediction problems
such as semantic segmentation, it remains a challenge to differentiate individual object instances in the scene. Instance
segmentation is very important in a variety of applications,
such as autonomous driving, image captioning, and visual
question answering. Techniques that combine large graphical models with low-level vision have been proposed to
address this problem; however, we propose an end-to-end recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture with an attention
mechanism to model a human-like counting process, and produce detailed instance segmentations. The network is jointly
trained to sequentially produce regions of interest as well
as a dominant object segmentation within each region. The
proposed model achieves competitive results on the CVPPP
[27], KITTI [12], and Cityscapes [8] datasets.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
problem, which aims to assign pixel-level instance labeling
to a given image. While the standard semantic segmentation problem entails assigning class labels to each pixel in
an image, it says nothing about the number of instances of
each class in the image. Instance segmentation is considerably more difficult than semantic segmentation because
it necessitates distinguishing nearby and occluded object
instances. Segmenting at the instance level is useful for
many tasks, such as highlighting the outline of objects for
improved recognition and allowing robots to delineate and
grasp individual objects; it plays a key role in autonomous
driving as well. Obtaining instance level pixel labels is also
an important step towards general machine understanding of
images.
Instance segmentation has been rapidly gaining in popularity, with a spurt of research papers in the past two years,
and a new benchmark competition, based on the Cityscapes
dataset [8].
A sensible approach to instance segmentation is to formu-

late it as a structured output problem. A key challenge here is
the dimensionality of the structured output, which can be on
the order of the number of pixels times the number of objects.
Standard fully convolutional networks (FCN) [26] will have
trouble directly outputting all instance labels in a single shot.
Recent work on instance segmentation [38, 45, 44] proposes
complex graphical models, which results in a complex and
time-consuming pipeline. Furthermore, these models cannot
be trained in an end-to-end fashion.
One of the main challenges in instance segmentation, as
in many other computer vision tasks such as object detection,
is occlusion. For a bottom-up approach to handle occlusion,
it must sometimes merge two regions that are not connected,
which becomes very challenging at a local scale. Many approaches to handle occlusion utilize a form of non-maximal
suppression (NMS), which is typically difficult to tune. In
cluttered scenes, NMS may suppress the detection results for
a heavily occluded object because it has too much overlap
with foreground objects. One motivation of this work is to
introduce an iterative procedure to perform dynamic NMS,
reasoning about occlusion in a top-down manner.
A related problem of interest entails counting the instances of an object class in an image. On its own this
problem is also of practical value. For instance, counting
provides useful population estimates in medical imaging and
aerial imaging. General object counting is fundamental to
image understanding, and our basic arithmetic intelligence.
Studies in applications such as image question answering
[1, 34] reveal that counting, especially on everyday objects,
is a very challenging task on its own [7]. Counting has been
formulated in a task-specific setting, either by detection followed by regression, or by learning discriminatively with a
counting error metric [22].
To tackle these challenges, we propose a new model based
on a recurrent neural network (RNN) that utilizes visual
attention, to perform instance segmentation. We consider
the problem of counting jointly with instance segmentation.
Our system addresses the dimensionality issue by using a
temporal chain that outputs a single instance at a time. It
also performs dynamic NMS, using an object that is already
segmented to aid in the discovery of an occluded object later
16656

