Real-Time 3D Model Tracking in Color and Depth on a Single CPU Core
Wadim Kehl 1,2
Federico Tombari 2
Slobodan Ilic 2,3
Nassir Navab 2
1
2
3
Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos
TUM, Munich
Siemens R&D, Munich
wadim.kehl@tri.global

Abstract
We present a novel method to track 3D models in color
and depth data. To this end, we introduce approximations
that accelerate the state-of-the-art in region-based tracking
by an order of magnitude while retaining similar accuracy.
Furthermore, we show how the method can be made more
robust in the presence of depth data and consequently formulate a new joint contour and ICP tracking energy. We
present better results than the state-of-the-art while being
much faster then most other methods and achieving all of
the above on a single CPU core.

1. Introduction
Tracking objects in image sequences is a relevant problem in computer vision with significant applications in several fields, such as robotics, augmented reality, medical navigation and surveillance. For most of these applications,
object tracking has to be carried out in 3D, i.e. an algorithm has to retrieve the full 6D pose of each model in every frame. This is quite challenging since objects can be
ambiguous in their pose and can undergo occlusions as well
as appearance changes. Furthermore, trackers must also be
fast enough in order to cover larger inter-frame motions.
In the case of 3D object tracking from color images,
the related work can be roughly divided into sparse methods that try to establish and track local correspondences
between frames [30, 15], and region-based methods that
exploit more holistic information about the object such as
shape, contour or color [18, 5], although mixtures of both
do exist [22, 2, 23]. While both directions have their respective advantages and disadvantages, the latter performs
better for texture-less objects, which is our focus here. One
popular methodology for texture-less object tracking relies
on the idea of aligning the projected object contours to a
segmentation in each frame. While initially shown for arbitrary shapes [4, 1], more recent works put emphasis on
tracking 3D colored models [5, 18, 31, 29].
With the advent of commodity RGB-D sensors, these
methods have then been further extended to depth images

Figure 1. We can perform reliable tracking for multiple objects
while being robust towards partial occlusions as well drastic
changes in scale. To this end, we employ contour cues and interior object information to drive the 6D pose alignment jointly.
All of the above is achieved on a single CPU core in real-time.

for simultaneous tracking and reconstruction [20, 19]. Indeed, exploiting RGB-D is beneficial since image-based
contour information and depth maps are complimentary
cues, one being focused on object borders, the other on
object-internal regions. This has been exploited for 3D object detection and tracking [16, 9, 13, 12], as well as to improve camera tracking in planar indoor environments [32].
From a computational perspective, several state-of-theart trackers leverage the GPU for real-time performance
[20, 19, 29]. Nevertheless, there is a strong interest towards
decreasing the computational burden and generally avoiding GPU usage, motivated by the fact that many relevant
applications require trackers to be light-weight [11, 17].
Taking this all into consideration, we propose a framework that allows accurate tracking of multiple 3D models in color and depth. Unlike related works [18, 29] our
method is lightweight, both in computation (requiring only
one CPU core) and in memory footprint. To achieve this,
we propose to pre-render a given target 3D model from various viewpoints and extract occluding contour and interior
information in an offline step. This avoids time consuming

745

