Multi-task Correlation Particle Filter for Robust Object Tracking
Tianzhu Zhang1,2 Changsheng Xu1,2 Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

3

University of California at Merced

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a multi-task correlation particle filter (MCPF) for robust visual tracking. We first present
the multi-task correlation filter (MCF) that takes the interdependencies among different features into account to learn
correlation filters jointly. The proposed MCPF is designed
to exploit and complement the strength of a MCF and a
particle filter. Compared with existing tracking methods
based on correlation filters and particle filters, the proposed
tracker has several advantages. First, it can shepherd the
sampled particles toward the modes of the target state distribution via the MCF, thereby resulting in robust tracking
performance. Second, it can effectively handle large-scale
variation via a particle sampling strategy. Third, it can
effectively maintain multiple modes in the posterior density using fewer particles than conventional particle filters,
thereby lowering the computational cost. Extensive experimental results on three benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed MCPF performs favorably against the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the most important tasks in
computer vision that finds numerous applications such as
video surveillance, motion analysis, and autonomous driving, to name a few [38, 13, 36, 46, 35, 31, 14]. The main
challenge for robust visual tracking is to account for large
appearance changes of target objects over time. Despite significant progress in recent years, it remains a difficult task to
develop robust algorithms to estimate object states in tracking scenarios with challenging factors such as illumination
changes, fast motions, pose variations, partial occlusions
and background clutters.
Correlation filters have recently been introduced into visual tracking and shown to achieve high speed as well as robust performance [4, 9, 16, 15, 18, 26, 24, 21, 25, 29]. Recognizing the success of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) on a wide range of visual recognition tasks, several
tracking methods based on deep features and correlation fil-

Figure 1. Comparisons of the proposed MCPF tracker with the
state-of-the-art correlation filter trackers (DSST [9], KCF [16],
CF2 [25], and HDT [29]) on the motorRolling, KiteSurf, and car4
sequences [36]. These trackers perform differently as various features and scale handling strategies are used. The proposed algorithm performs favorably against these trackers.

ters have been developed [25, 29]. Empirical studies using
large object tracking benchmark datasets show that these CNN based trackers [25, 29] perform favorably against methods based on hand-crafted features. Figure 1 shows some
tracking results where the CF2 [25] and HDT [29] perform well against the DSST [9] and KCF [16] schemes which
achieve the state-of-the-art results in the VOT challenge.
Despite achieving the state-of-the-art performance, existing CNN based correlation filter trackers [25, 29] have
several limitations. (1) These trackers learn correlation filter for each layer independently without considering their
relationship. In [25, 29], adaptive linear correlation filters
rather than the outputs of each convolutional layer are used.
Since features from different layers can enhance and complement each other, existing CNN based correlation trackers
(CF2 [25] and HDT [29]) perform well. Nevertheless, these
methods assume that correlation filters of different features
are independent. Ignoring the relationships between correlation filters tends to make the tracker more prone to drift
away from target objects in cases of significant changes in
appearance. To deal with this issue, we propose a multi-task
correlation filter (MCF) to exploit interdependencies among
different features to obtain their correlation filters jointly.
Here, learning the correlation filter of each type of feature
is viewed as an individual task. As shown in Figure 1, the
14335

