ChestX-ray8: Hospital-scale Chest X-ray Database and Benchmarks on
Weakly-Supervised Classification and Localization of Common Thorax Diseases
Xiaosong Wang1 , Yifan Peng 2 , Le Lu 1 , Zhiyong Lu 2 , Mohammadhadi Bagheri 1 , Ronald M. Summers 1
1
Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Clinical Center,
2
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
{xiaosong.wang,yifan.peng,le.lu,luzh,mohammad.bagheri,rms}@nih.gov

Abstract
The chest X-ray is one of the most commonly accessible radiological examinations for screening and diagnosis
of many lung diseases. A tremendous number of X-ray
imaging studies accompanied by radiological reports are
accumulated and stored in many modern hospitals’ Picture Archiving and Communication Systems (PACS). On
the other side, it is still an open question how this type
of hospital-size knowledge database containing invaluable
imaging informatics (i.e., loosely labeled) can be used to facilitate the data-hungry deep learning paradigms in building truly large-scale high precision computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems.
In this paper, we present a new chest X-ray database,
namely “ChestX-ray8”, which comprises 108,948 frontalview X-ray images of 32,717 unique patients with the textmined eight disease image labels (where each image can
have multi-labels), from the associated radiological reports
using natural language processing. Importantly, we demonstrate that these commonly occurring thoracic diseases can
be detected and even spatially-located via a unified weaklysupervised multi-label image classification and disease localization framework, which is validated using our proposed
dataset. Although the initial quantitative results are promising as reported, deep convolutional neural network based
“reading chest X-rays” (i.e., recognizing and locating the
common disease patterns trained with only image-level labels) remains a strenuous task for fully-automated high precision CAD systems.

1

Introduction

The rapid and tremendous progress has been evidenced
in a range of computer vision problems via deep learning
and large-scale annotated image datasets [25, 37, 13, 27].
Drastically improved quantitative performances in object
recognition, detection and segmentation are demonstrated in

Figure 1. Eight common thoracic diseases observed in chest X-rays
that validate a challenging task of fully-automated diagnosis.

comparison to previous shallow methodologies built upon
hand-crafted image features. Deep neural network representations further make the joint language and vision
learning tasks more feasible to solve, in image captioning
[47, 23, 32, 46, 22], visual question answering [2, 45, 49, 53]
and knowledge-guided transfer learning [4, 33], and so
on. However, the intriguing and strongly observable performance gaps of the current state-of-the-art object detection and segmentation methods, evaluated between using
PASCAL VOC [13] and employing Microsoft (MS) COCO
[27], demonstrate that there is still significant room for performance improvement when underlying challenges (represented by different datasets) become greater. For example, MS COCO is composed of 80 object categories from
200k images, with 1.2M instances (350k are people) where
every instance is segmented and many instances are small
objects. Comparing to PASCAL VOC of only 20 classes
and 11,530 images containing 27,450 annotated objects with
bounding-boxes (BBox), the top competing object detection
approaches achieve in 0.413 in MS COCO versus 0.884 in
PASCAL VOC under mean Average Precision (mAP).
Deep learning yields similar rises in performance in the
medical image analysis domain for object (often human
anatomical or pathological structures in radiology imaging)
12097

