CDC: Convolutional-De-Convolutional Networks for Precise Temporal Action
Localization in Untrimmed Videos
Zheng Shou† , Jonathan Chan† , Alireza Zareian† , Kazuyuki Miyazawa‡ , and Shih-Fu Chang†
†

Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; ‡ Mitsubishi Electric, Japan

{zs2262,jc4659,az2407,sc250}@columbia.edu, Miyazawa.Kazuyuki@cw.mitsubishielectric.co.jp

Abstract
Temporal action localization is an important yet challenging problem. Given a long, untrimmed video consisting of multiple action instances and complex background
contents, we need not only to recognize their action categories, but also to localize the start time and end time of
each instance. Many state-of-the-art systems use segmentlevel classifiers to select and rank proposal segments of predetermined boundaries. However, a desirable model should
move beyond segment-level and make dense predictions at
a fine granularity in time to determine precise temporal
boundaries. To this end, we design a novel ConvolutionalDe-Convolutional (CDC) network that places CDC filters
on top of 3D ConvNets, which have been shown to be effective for abstracting action semantics but reduce the temporal length of the input data. The proposed CDC filter performs the required temporal upsampling and spatial downsampling operations simultaneously to predict actions at
the frame-level granularity. It is unique in jointly modeling action semantics in space-time and fine-grained temporal dynamics. We train the CDC network in an end-toend manner efficiently. Our model not only achieves superior performance in detecting actions in every frame, but
also significantly boosts the precision of localizing temporal
boundaries. Finally, the CDC network demonstrates a very
high efficiency with the ability to process 500 frames per
second on a single GPU server. Source code and trained
models are available online at https://bitbucket.
org/columbiadvmm/cdc.

specific actions (such as diving, jump, etc.) and (2) identifying temporal boundaries (start time and end time) of each
action instance.
A typical framework used by many state-of-the-art systems [67, 53, 39, 65, 26] is fusing a large set of features
and training classifiers that operate on sliding windows or
segment proposals. Recently, an end-to-end deep learning framework called Segment-CNN (S-CNN) [47] based
on 3D ConvNets [60] demonstrated superior performances
both in efficiency and accuracy on standard benchmarks
such as THUMOS’14 [25]. S-CNN consists of a proposal

CDC Action
Localization
Network

Recently, temporal action localization has drawn considerable interest in the computer vision community [25, 15,
39, 65, 26, 67, 53, 47, 43, 73, 9, 18, 36]. This task involves
two components: (1) determining whether a video contains

CricketShot

Segment
Proposal
...

...
CricketShot

3D ConvNets

L/8

Per-frame
Confidence
Scores

CliffDiving

LongJump

...

...

Conv-De-Conv

L

1. Introduction

Input
video

Precise
Localization

CricketShot

Figure 1. Our framework for precise temporal action localization. Given an input raw video, it is fed into our CDC localization
network, which consists of 3D ConvNets for semantic abstraction
and a novel CDC network for dense score prediction at the framelevel. Such fine-granular score sequences are combined with segment proposals to detect action instances with precise boundaries.

5734

