Conditional Similarity Networks
Andreas Veit1 Serge Belongie1 Theofanis Karaletsos2,3
{av443, sjb344}@cornell.edu, theofanis.karaletsos@gmail.com
1
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech, Cornell University
2
Uber AI Labs, 3 Computational Biology, Sloan Kettering Institute

Abstract
What makes images similar? To measure the similarity
between images, they are typically embedded in a featurevector space, in which their distance preserve the relative
dissimilarity. However, when learning such similarity embeddings the simplifying assumption is commonly made that
images are only compared to one unique measure of similarity. A main reason for this is that contradicting notions
of similarities cannot be captured in a single space. To address this shortcoming, we propose Conditional Similarity
Networks (CSNs) that learn embeddings differentiated into
semantically distinct subspaces that capture the different
notions of similarities. CSNs jointly learn a disentangled
embedding where features for different similarities are encoded in separate dimensions as well as masks that select
and reweight relevant dimensions to induce a subspace that
encodes a specific similarity notion. We show that our approach learns interpretable image representations with visually relevant semantic subspaces. Further, when evaluating on triplet questions from multiple similarity notions our
model even outperforms the accuracy obtained by training
individual specialized networks for each notion separately.

1. Introduction
Understanding visual similarities between images is a
key problem in computer vision. To measure the similarity between images, they are embedded in a feature-vector
space, in which their distances preserve the relative dissimilarity. Commonly, convolutional neural networks are
trained to transform images into respective feature-vectors.
We refer to these as Similarity Networks. When learning
such networks from pairwise or triplet (dis-)similarity constraints, the simplifying assumption is commonly made that
objects are compared according to one unique measure of
similarity. However, objects have various attributes and can
be compared according to a multitude of semantic aspects.

similar
color

similar
occasion

similar
category
Figure 1. Example illustrating how objects can be compared according to multiple notions of similarity. Here, we demonstrate
three intuitive concepts, which are challenging to combine for a
machine vision algorithm that has to embed objects in a feature
space where distances preserve the relative dissimilarity: shoes
are of the same category; red objects are more similar in terms of
color; sneakers and t-shirts are stylistically closer.

An illustrative example to consider is the comparison of
coloured geometric shapes, a task toddlers are regularly exposed to with benefits to concept learning. Consider, that
a red triangle and a red circle are very similar in terms of
color, more so than a red triangle and a blue triangle. However, the triangles are more similar to one another in terms
of shape than the triangle and the circle.
An optimal embedding should minimize distances between perceptually similar objects. In the example above
and also in the practical example in Figure 1 this creates a
situation where the same two objects are semantically repelled and drawn to each other at the same time. A standard
triplet embedding ignores the sources of similarity and cannot jointly satisfy the competing semantic aspects. Thus, a
successful embedding necessarily needs to take the visual
concept into account that objects are compared to.
One way to address this issue is to learn separate triplet
networks for each aspect of similarity. However, the idea
is wasteful in terms of parameters needed, redundancy of
parameters, as well as the associated need for training data.

830

