Image-to-Image Translation with Conditional Adversarial Networks
Phillip Isola

Jun-Yan Zhu

Tinghui Zhou

Alexei A. Efros

Berkeley AI Research (BAIR) Laboratory, UC Berkeley
Labels to Street Scene

input

Aerial to Map

Labels to Facade

BW to Color

output
output

input

input

Day to Night

input

output

input

output

Edges to Photo

output

input

output

Figure 1: Many problems in image processing, graphics, and vision involve translating an input image into a corresponding output image.
These problems are often treated with application-specific algorithms, even though the setting is always the same: map pixels to pixels.
Conditional adversarial nets are a general-purpose solution that appears to work well on a wide variety of these problems. Here we show
results of the method on several. In each case we use the same architecture and objective, and simply train on different data.

Abstract
We investigate conditional adversarial networks as a
general-purpose solution to image-to-image translation
problems. These networks not only learn the mapping from
input image to output image, but also learn a loss function to train this mapping. This makes it possible to apply
the same generic approach to problems that traditionally
would require very different loss formulations. We demonstrate that this approach is effective at synthesizing photos
from label maps, reconstructing objects from edge maps,
and colorizing images, among other tasks. Moreover, since
the release of the pix2pix software associated with this
paper, hundreds of twitter users have posted their own artistic experiments using our system. As a community, we no
longer hand-engineer our mapping functions, and this work
suggests we can achieve reasonable results without handengineering our loss functions either.

1. Introduction
Many problems in image processing, computer graphics,
and computer vision can be posed as “translating” an input
image into a corresponding output image. Just as a con-

cept may be expressed in either English or French, a scene
may be rendered as an RGB image, a gradient field, an edge
map, a semantic label map, etc. In analogy to automatic
language translation, we define automatic image-to-image
translation as the problem of translating one possible representation of a scene into another, given sufficient training data (see Figure 1). Traditionally, each of these tasks
has been tackled with separate, special-purpose machinery
(e.g., [14, 23, 18, 8, 10, 50, 30, 36, 16, 55, 58]), despite
the fact that the setting is always the same: predict pixels
from pixels. Our goal in this paper is to develop a common
framework for all these problems.
The community has already taken significant steps in this
direction, with convolutional neural nets (CNNs) becoming
the common workhorse behind a wide variety of image prediction problems. CNNs learn to minimize a loss function –
an objective that scores the quality of results – and although
the learning process is automatic, a lot of manual effort still
goes into designing effective losses. In other words, we still
have to tell the CNN what we wish it to minimize. But, just
like King Midas, we must be careful what we wish for! If
we take a naive approach, and ask the CNN to minimize
Euclidean distance between predicted and ground truth pix11125

