Truncated Max-of-Convex Models
Pankaj Pansari
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute

pankaj@robots.ox.ac.uk

pawan@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Truncated convex models (TCM) are a special case of
pairwise random fields that have been widely used in computer vision. However, by restricting the order of the potentials to be at most two, they fail to capture useful image statistics. We propose a natural generalization of TCM
to high-order random fields, which we call truncated maxof-convex models (TMCM). The energy function of TMCM
consists of two types of potentials: (i) unary potential,
which has no restriction on its form; and (ii) clique potential, which is the sum of the m largest truncated convex distances over all label pairs in a clique. The use of
a convex distance function encourages smoothness, while
truncation permits discontinuities in the labeling. By using m > 1, TMCM provides robustness towards errors in
the definition of the cliques. To minimize the energy function of a TMCM over all possible labelings, we design an
efficient st-MINCUT based range expansion algorithm. We
prove the accuracy of our algorithm by establishing strong
multiplicative bounds for several special cases of interest.
Using standard real data sets, we demonstrate the benefit
of our high-order TMCM over pairwise TCM, as well as
the benefit of our range expansion algorithm over other stMINCUT based approaches.

1. Introduction
Truncated convex models (TCM) are a special case of
pairwise random fields that have been widely used for lowlevel vision applications. A TCM is defined over a set of
random variables, each of which can be assigned a value
from a finite, discrete and ordered label set. In addition,
a TCM also specifies a neighborhood relationship over the
random variables. An assignment of values to all the variables is referred to as a labeling. In order to quantitatively
distinguish the labelings, a TCM specifies an energy function that consists of unary and pairwise potentials.
Given an input, the output is obtained by minimizing the
energy function of a TCM over all possible labelings. While
this is an NP-hard problem, several approximate algorithms
have been proposed in the literature [3, 4, 12, 17, 20, 22, 24,

(a) Truncated convex model

(b) Truncated max-of-convex model
Figure 1: TMCM as generalization of TCM. In (a), given an image,
TCM considers pairwise 4-neighborhood relationships and uses truncated
convex distance function for pairwise potential. In (b), TMCM considers
superpixels as cliques. The clique potential for m =2 is the sum of the
first and second maximum over all the pairwise truncated convex distances
such that no variable is used more than once.

27, 30], which provide accurate solutions in practice [28].
Since we cannot reasonably expect to improve the optimization of TCM, any failure cases must be addressed by
modifying the model itself to better capture image statistics. To this end, we propose to address one of the main
deficiencies of TCM, namely, the restriction to potentials of
order at most two. Specifically, we propose a natural generalization of TCM to high-order random fields, which we
refer to as truncated max-of-convex models (TMCM). Similar to TCM, our model places no restrictions on the unary
potentials. Furthermore, unlike TCM, it allows us to define
clique potentials over an arbitrary number of random variables. The value of the clique potential is proportional to
the sum of the m largest truncated convex distances computed over disjoint pairs of random variables in the clique.
Here, disjoint pairs imply that the label of no random variable is used more than once to compute the value of the
clique potential. Figure 1 demonstrates how TMCM differs
from TCM. The exact mathematical form of the TMCM energy function will be presented in section 4. The term m is
a positive integer that is less than or equal to half the number
of variables in the smallest clique. Importantly, the constant
12368

