A Joint Speaker-Listener-Reinforcer Model for Referring Expressions
Licheng Yu, Hao Tan, Mohit Bansal, Tamara L. Berg
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{licheng, airsplay, mbansal, tlberg}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Referring expressions are natural language constructions used to identify particular objects within a scene. In
this paper, we propose a unified framework for the tasks of
referring expression comprehension and generation. Our
model is composed of three modules: speaker, listener, and
reinforcer. The speaker generates referring expressions, the
listener comprehends referring expressions, and the reinforcer introduces a reward function to guide sampling of
more discriminative expressions. The listener-speaker modules are trained jointly in an end-to-end learning framework, allowing the modules to be aware of one another
during learning while also benefiting from the discriminative reinforcer’s feedback. We demonstrate that this unified
framework and training achieves state-of-the-art results for
both comprehension and generation on three referring expression datasets. 1

1. Introduction
People often use referring expressions in their everyday
discourse to unambiguously identify or indicate particular
objects within their physical environment. For example, one
might point out a person in the crowd by referring to them
as “the man in the blue shirt” or you might ask someone
to “pass me the red pen on the table.” In both of these examples, we have a pragmatic interaction between two people (or between a person and an intelligent agent such as
a robot). First, we have a speaker who must generate an
expression given a target object and its surrounding world
context. Second, we have a listener who must interpret and
comprehend the expression and map it to an object in the
environment. Therefore, in this paper we propose an endto-end trained listener-speaker framework that models these
behaviors jointly.
In addition to the listener and speaker, we also introduce a new reinforcer module that learns a discriminative
reward model to help generate less ambiguous expressions
(expressions that apply to the target object but not to other
1 Project and demo page: https://vision.cs.unc.edu/refer.

objects in the image). This goal corresponds to the Gricean
Maxim [8] of manner, where one tries to be as clear, brief,
and orderly as possible while avoiding obscurity and ambiguity. Avoiding ambiguity is important because the generated expression should be easily and uniquely mapped to
the target object. For example, if there were two pens on
the table one “long and red” and the other “short and red”,
asking for the “red pen” would be ambiguous while asking
for the “long pen” would be better. The reinforcer module is
incorporated using reinforcement learning, inspired by behavioral psychology that says that agents operating in an environment should take actions that maximize their expected
cumulative reward. In our case, the reward takes the form
of a discriminative classifier trained to reward the speaker
for generating less ambiguous expressions.
Within the realm of referring expressions, there are two
tasks that can be computationally modeled, mimicking the
listener and speaker roles. Referring Expression Generation (speaker) requires an algorithm to generate a referring
expression for a given target object in a visual scene, as in
Fig. 2. Referring Expression Comprehension (listener) requires an algorithm to localize the object/region in an image
described by a given referring expression, as in Fig. 3.
The Referring Expression Generation (REG) task has
been studied since the 1970s [29]. Many of the early
works in this space focused on relatively limited datasets,
using synthesized images of objects in artificial scenes
or limited sets of real-world objects in simplified environments [20, 7, 15]. Recently, the research focus has
shifted to more complex natural image datasets and has expanded to include the Referring Expression Comprehension
task [13, 19, 31] as well as to real-world interactions with
robotics [4, 3]. One reason this has become feasible is that
several large-scale REG datasets [13, 31, 19] have been collected where deep learning models can be applied.
Recent neural approaches to the referring expression
generation and comprehension tasks can be roughly split
into two types. The first type uses a CNN-LSTM encoderdecoder generative model [25] to generate (decode) sentences given the encoded target object. With careful de17282

