Attention-Aware Face Hallucination via Deep Reinforcement Learning
Qingxing Cao,

Liang Lin∗,

Yukai Shi,

Xiaodan Liang,

Guanbin Li

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
caoqx@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org, shiyk3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

in the complex real-world scenarios in which the face images are often of very low quality.

Face hallucination is a domain-specific super-resolution
problem with the goal to generate high-resolution (HR)
faces from low-resolution (LR) input images. In contrast
to existing methods that often learn a single patch-to-patch
mapping from LR to HR images and are regardless of the
contextual interdependency between patches, we propose a
novel Attention-aware Face Hallucination (Attention-FH)
framework which resorts to deep reinforcement learning
for sequentially discovering attended patches and then performing the facial part enhancement by fully exploiting the
global interdependency of the image. Specifically, in each
time step, the recurrent policy network is proposed to dynamically specify a new attended region by incorporating
what happened in the past. The state (i.e., face hallucination result for the whole image) can thus be exploited and
updated by the local enhancement network on the selected
region. The Attention-FH approach jointly learns the recurrent policy network and local enhancement network through
maximizing the long-term reward that reflects the hallucination performance over the whole image. Therefore, our proposed Attention-FH is capable of adaptively personalizing
an optimal searching path for each face image according
to its own characteristic. Extensive experiments show our
approach significantly surpasses the state-of-the-arts on inthe-wild faces with large pose and illumination variations.

Existing face hallucination methods [32, 31, 17, 23] usually focus on how to learn a discriminative patch-to-patch
mapping from LR images to HR images. Particularly, recent great progresses are made by employing the advanced
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [36] and multiple
cascaded CNNs [37]. The face structure priors and spatial
configurations [15, 3] are often treated as external information for enhancing faces / facial parts. However, the contextual dependencies among the facial parts are usually ignored during the hallucination processing. According to the
studies of human perception process [19], humans start with
perceiving the whole images and successively explore a sequence of regions with the attention shifting mechanism,
rather than separately processing the local regions. This
finding enlightens us to explore a new pipeline of face hallucination by sequentially searching for the attentional local
regions and considering their contextual dependency from a
global perspective.

1. Introduction
Face hallucination refers to generating a high-resolution
face image from a low-resolution input image, which is a
very fundamental problem in face analysis field and can
facilitate several face-related tasks such as face attribute
recognition [16], face alignment [34], face recognition [35]
∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was supported in part
by the State Key Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004,
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61622214. This work was also supported by Special Program for Applied
Research on Super Computation of the NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund (the
second phase).

Inspired by the recent successes of attention and recurrent models on a variety of computer vision tasks [22,
1, 6], we propose an Attention-aware face hallucination
(Attention-FH) framework that recurrently discovers facial
parts and enhance them by fully exploiting the global interdependency of the image, as shown in Fig. 1. In particular,
accounting for the diverse characteristics of face images on
blurriness, pose, illumination and face appearance, we explore to search for an optimal accommodated enhancement
route for each face hallucination. And we resort to the deep
reinforcement learning (RL) method [21] to harness the
model learning since this technique has been demonstrated
its effectiveness on globally optimizing the sequential models without supervision for every step.
Specifically, our Attention-FH framework jointly optimizes a recurrent policy network that learns the policies to
select a preferable facial part in each step and a local enhancement network for facial parts hallucination, through
considering the previous enhancement results of the whole
face. In this way, rich correlation cues among different
facial parts can be explicitly incorporated in the local en-

690

