Reflection Removal Using Low-Rank Matrix Completion
Byeong-Ju Han
Jae-Young Sim
School of Electrical Engineering
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Korea
{bjhan, jysim}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
The images taken through glass often capture a target
transmitted scene as well as undesired reflected scenes. In
this paper, we propose a low-rank matrix completion algorithm to remove reflection artifacts automatically from multiple glass images taken at slightly different camera locations. We assume that the transmitted scenes are more dominant than the reflected scenes in typical glass images. We
first warp the multiple glass images to a reference image,
where the gradients are consistent in the transmission images while the gradients are varying across the reflection
images. Based on this observation, we compute a gradient reliability such that the pixels belonging to the salient
edges of the transmission image are assigned high reliability. Then we suppress the gradients of the reflection images
and recover the gradients of the transmission images only,
by solving a low-rank matrix completion problem in gradient domain. We reconstruct an original transmission image
using the resulting optimal gradient map. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm removes the reflection artifacts from glass images faithfully and outperforms
the existing algorithms on typical glass images.

1. Introduction
We often capture images of a target scene through glass.
For example, we take photographs of the products displayed
in the show window. The captured glass image includes the
target scene behind the glass as well as undesired reflected
scene in front of the glass, since light passes through and
is reflected on a pane of glass simultaneously. Reflection
removal is the process of removing such unwanted reflection artifacts from the glass images. Most existing methods
model the glass image as a linear combination of a transmission image and a reflection image and reconstruct the transmission image only while suppressing the reflection image.
Several attempts have been made to remove reflection
from a single glass image by exploiting prior knowledge
or assumptions on the characteristics of glass images, such

as gradient sparsity [8], relative smoothness [11] or ghosting cue [15]. Levin and Weiss [8] reconstructed an optimal transmission image that minimizes a cost function designed by using a distribution model of gradient in natural
images. Li and Brown [11] assumed that a reflection image is smoother and thus exhibits thinner tails of gradient
distribution than a transmission image. However, this assumption may not hold when strong light is reflected on a
pane of glass. Shih et al. [15] considered double-pane windows and employed the shifted reflection images appeared
in both of the front and the back surfaces of the window.
However, this method may not work on glass images where
the ghosted reflection is not clearly observed.
On the other hands, multiple glass images were used for
reflection removal. A set of several glass images taken from
a fixed camera position were used [1, 6, 13, 14]. Polarized
glass images were obtained by using different angular filters, and the angle of incidence to the glass surface is computed to estimate an optimal transmission image [6, 14].
Schechner et al. [13] also used multiple glass images focused on different distances for reflection removal. Agrawal
et al. [1] used two glass images taken with and without
flash, respectively, to recognize reflection artifacts. Moreover, multiple images taken from different camera positions
were also used [2, 3, 7, 10, 17, 18, 20]. Li and Brown [10]
warped a set of multiple glass images taken at slightly different camera locations into a reference image, and separated the gradients between the transmission image and the
reflection images by analyzing the occurrence characteristics of gradients across multiple images. Xue et al. [20]
estimated dense motion fields for both of the transmitted
and reflected scenes, respectively, and recovered an optimal
transmission image as well as a reflection image. Reflection removal using multiple glass images is more practical,
since it achieves better performance than that of using a single glass image and it does not require strong constraints on
the characteristics of glass images.
In this paper, we propose a novel reflection removal algorithm using a set of multiple glass images. We first warp
input multiple glass images to a reference image to align

5438

