Learning Dynamic Guidance for Depth Image Enhancement
Shuhang Gu1 , Wangmeng Zuo2 , Shi Guo2 , Yunjin Chen3 , Chongyu Chen4,1 , Lei Zhang1,∗
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology,
3
ULSee Inc., 4 Sun Yat-sen University.
{shuhanggu@gmail.com, cswmzuo@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk}
Abstract
The depth images acquired by consumer depth sensors
(e.g., Kinect and ToF) usually are of low resolution and insufficient quality. One natural solution is to incorporate
with high resolution RGB camera for exploiting their statistical correlation. However, most existing methods are intuitive and limited in characterizing the complex and dynamic dependency between intensity and depth images. To
address these limitations, we propose a weighted analysis
representation model for guided depth image enhancement,
which advances the conventional methods in two aspects:
(i) task driven learning and (ii) dynamic guidance. First,
we generalize the analysis representation model by including a guided weight function for dependency modeling. The
task-driven learning formulation is introduced to obtain the
optimized guidance tailored to specific enhancement tasks.
Second, the depth image is gradually enhanced along with
the iterations, and thus the guidance should also be dynamically adjusted to account for the updating of depth image.
To this end, stage-wise parameters are learned for dynamic
guidance. Experiments on guided depth image upsampling
and noisy depth image restoration validate the effectiveness
of our method.

1. Introduction
High quality and dense depth image plays a fundamental role in many real world applications, such as robotics,
human-computer interaction, and augmented reality. Traditional depth sensing is mainly based on stereo or laser
measurement, which in general is of high computational
burden or expensive price. Recently, the wide availability
of consumer depth sensing products, e.g., RGB-D cameras
and Time of Flight (ToF) range sensors, offers an economic alternative for dense depth measurements. However, the
depth image generated by consumer depth sensors usually
∗ This work is supported by HK RGC General Research Fund (PolyU
152124/15E) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no.
61672446).

is of insufficient quality, resulting in depth image with low
resolution, noise or missing values.
Depth image enhancement have received considerable
recent research interests [38, 15, 4, 28, 6, 20, 24]. One
representative solution is to utilize multiple depth images
from the same scene to reconstruct a high quality depth image [38, 15]. These methods, however, relies heavily on
accurate calibration, and may fail when applied to dynamic
environment. Another popular solution is to incorporate a
high quality color camera with a depth sensor for depth image enhancement [4, 1, 28, 6, 24]. For most consumer depth
sensors, high quality RGB image generally can be simultaneously acquired with the depth image, making it very appealing and natural to exploit color images for guided depth
image enhancement.
Modeling dependency between intensity and depth images plays a key role in guided depth image enhancement.
Based on the structural co-occurrence between intensity and
depth images, filtering methods have been used to transfer
the salient structure from intensity image to the enhanced
depth map [13, 34]. Certain forms of objective functions have also been adopted for interdependency modeling,
resulting several Markov Random Fields (MRF) [4], nonlocal mean [28]), and variational (e.g., Total Generalized
Variation [6] models. The filter-based and model-based approaches, however, usually are ad hoc and limited in characterizing the complex dependency.
Recently, learning-based methods have been studied.
Under the sparse representation framework, analysis and
synthesis dictionary learning models have been exploited
for modeling the statistical relation of intensity and depth
images [36, 20]. Motivated by the success of deep learning,
deep CNNs [7, 22] are also developed. However, the existing dictionary learning methods simply packed intensity
and the associated depth patches to learn dictionaries in a
group learning manner. Moreover, along with the enhancement, more details of the depth image will be recovered.
Therefore, the guidance should also be dynamically adjusted to cope with the updating of depth image, but few studies
have been given to address this issue in the dictionary learn-

3769

