Seeing Invisible Poses: Estimating 3D Body Pose from Egocentric Video
Hao Jiang
Boston College, USA

Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin, USA

hjiang@cs.bc.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Understanding the camera wearer’s activity is central to
egocentric vision, yet one key facet of that activity is inherently invisible to the camera—the wearer’s body pose.
Prior work focuses on estimating the pose of hands and
arms when they come into view, but this 1) gives an incomplete view of the full body posture, and 2) prevents any pose
estimate at all in many frames, since the hands are only
visible in a fraction of daily life activities. We propose to
infer the “invisible pose” of a person behind the egocentric camera. Given a single video, our efﬁcient learningbased approach returns the full body 3D joint positions for
each frame. Our method exploits cues from the dynamic
motion signatures of the surrounding scene—which change
predictably as a function of body pose—as well as static
scene structures that reveal the viewpoint (e.g., sitting vs.
standing). We further introduce a novel energy minimization scheme to infer the pose sequence. It uses soft predictions of the poses per time instant together with a nonparametric model of human pose dynamics over longer windows. Our method outperforms an array of possible alternatives, including typical deep learning approaches for direct pose regression from images.

1. Introduction
Wearable “egocentric” cameras are steadily gaining
traction—thanks not only to smaller devices, but also the
increasing promise of vision and learning technology to
transform applications. Head- or chest-mounted cameras,
initially perceived as the purview of hard-core life loggers,
are now valuable tools for many others. Law enforcement
agencies across the US are using bodycams in an effort to
promote transparency with the public. Psychologists leverage wearable cameras on infants to gain insights into motor and linguistic development [27]. In healthcare, egocentric vision could move daily-living activity monitoring
required for motor rehabilitation from the hospital to the
home [16, 21].
For many applications, the important vision problems

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Our goal is to infer the full 3D body pose of a person
using the video captured from a single chest-mounted camera. (a):
Person with a chest-mounted camera. (b): Egocentric view. (c):
Predicted body pose using only video from view (b).

center around inferring the camera wearer’s behavior, i.e.,
his activity and interactions with people and objects. As
such, the ability to infer the camera wearer’s 3D body pose
is of great interest. However, doing so is challenging because most body parts are invisible to the egocentric camera!
Existing work estimates a person’s pose by analyzing
the body parts visible in his ﬁrst-person camera. Naturally,
this makes them restricted to the arms and hands [4, 11,
12, 13, 20]. However, from the view of a chest-mounted
wide-angle camera, arms and legs are often not visible in
daily life activity. For example, in our ground truth videos
in which people perform normal activities in public places
such as labs and ofﬁces, the chance to view arms and legs
is less than 10%. To estimate full body pose, one creative
approach [1] is to fasten multiple cameras to all the person’s
joints, then use structure from motion (SfM) to localize the
cameras and hence the joints. However, this comes with the
disadvantages of requiring 1) obtrusive multi-camera equipment not amenable to everyday casual use and 2) intensive
computational requirements (hours to days of processing to
infer pose for a minute of video [1]).
We ask the question: Is it possible to estimate the “invisible” human body pose behind a single egocentric camera?
(See Fig. 1). Despite the fact that we cannot see the person behind the body-mounted camera, the video seen from
his point of view provides clues that may well be learnable.
In particular, we expect clues from two sources: dynamic
motion signatures and static scene structure. First, there
exist motion signatures for pose changes that are resistant
to scene changes. For example, the act of standing up has a
certain motion pattern as seen by the ego-camera, no mat-

3976

