Generative Hierarchical Learning of Sparse FRAME Models
Jianwen Xie1 , Yifei Xu2 , Erik Nijkamp1 , Ying Nian Wu1 , and Song-Chun Zhu1
1
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
jianwen@ucla.edu, fei960922@sjtu.edu.cn, enijkamp@ucla.edu, {ywu,sczhu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a method for generative learning
of hierarchical random field models. The resulting model,
which we call the hierarchical sparse FRAME (Filters, Random field, And Maximum Entropy) model, is a generalization of the original sparse FRAME model by decomposing
it into multiple parts that are allowed to shift their locations, scales and rotations, so that the resulting model becomes a hierarchical deformable template. The model can
be trained by an EM-type algorithm that alternates the following two steps: (1) Inference: Given the current model,
we match it to each training image by inferring the unknown
locations, scales, and rotations of the object and its parts by
recursive sum-max maps, and (2) Re-learning: Given the
inferred geometric configurations of the objects and their
parts, we re-learn the model parameters by maximum likelihood estimation via stochastic gradient algorithm. Experiments show that the proposed method is capable of learning
meaningful and interpretable templates that can be used for
object detection, classification and clustering.

variations of objects. These models can be paired with
either discriminative learning method or generative learning method. Discriminative learning seeks to identify and
weigh the most discriminant features and structures for explaining the object categories, while generative learning enables us to learn the parameters and interpretable patterns
for explaining the image data instead of predicting the image categories. Moreover, generative learning is not only
important for making the model explainable, it can also be
used for unsupervised learning from unlabeled images.

1. Introduction

Recently, Xie et al. proposed a sparse FRAME (Filters,
Random field, And Maximum Entropy) model [16, 17] as
a generative model for image patterns. It can be considered a template consisting of a small number of perturbable
Gabor wavelets (sketches) at selected locations, scales and
orientations. The learned knowledge in the model can be
visualized by sampling from the model. However, the
sparse FRAME models can only deal with small deformations (e.g., edge perturbations), and may fail when there exist large geometric changes (e.g., part deformations). To
address this limitation, we propose to extend the original
sparse FRAME model to a hierarchical version, which we
call the hierarchical sparse FRAME model, by explicitly involving part-level representations and deformations.

Motivation and objective. We are entering a new age
of computer vision applications, where machine learning
technology plays a critical role in achieving a high level
of prediction performance, e.g., [7, 8, 12, 13]. However,
some machine learning models are opaque and difficult for
people to understand. Explainable models are highly desirable, if users are to understand, interpret and effectively
manage the behaviors of the models. Therefore, discovering
explainable models for visual data is an important problem
in computer vision and artificial intelligence.
Models with hierarchical and compositional representations, such as deformable part-based models [5] and
stochastic And-Or templates [11], have been shown to be
a powerful basis for achieving both prediction accuracy and
explainability. They are capable of learning reconfigurable
representations to deal with both structural and appearance

Method overview. (1) Representation: The hierarchical
sparse FRAME model is a hierarchical compositional deformable template, which is composed of a group of part
templates that are allowed to shift their locations and rotations relative to each other. Each part template is in turn
composed of a group of Gabor wavelets that are allowed to
shift their locations and orientations relative to each other.
(2) Inference: The model inference is to determine a certain geometric configuration of the template for a given object such that the log-likelihood is maximized. This can
be efficiently achieved by a bottom-up/top-down dynamic
programming, which is implemented by recursive sum-max
maps. (3) Generative learning: The model is learned in a
generative manner in the sense that the learning is carried
out by maximum likelihood estimation and also it involves
synthesizing image patterns via Markov chain Monte Carlo
17399

