Deep TEN: Texture Encoding Network

Hang Zhang Jia Xue Kristin Dana
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, USA
{zhang.hang,jia.xue}@rutgers.edu, kdana@ece.rutgers.edu

Abstract

BoWs

FV-CNN

Deep-TEN

We propose a Deep Texture Encoding Network (DeepTEN) with a novel Encoding Layer integrated on top of convolutional layers, which ports the entire dictionary learning
and encoding pipeline into a single model. Current methods
build from distinct components, using standard encoders
with separate off-the-shelf features such as SIFT descriptors or pre-trained CNN features for material recognition.
Our new approach provides an end-to-end learning framework, where the inherent visual vocabularies are learned
directly from the loss function. The features, dictionaries,
encoding representation and the classifier are all learned simultaneously. The representation is orderless and therefore
is particularly useful for material and texture recognition.
The Encoding Layer generalizes robust residual encoders
such as VLAD and Fisher Vectors, and has the property
of discarding domain specific information which makes the
learned convolutional features easier to transfer. Additionally, joint training using multiple datasets of varied sizes
and class labels is supported resulting in increased recognition performance. The experimental results show superior
performance as compared to state-of-the-art methods using
gold-standard databases such as MINC-2500, Flickr Material Database, KTH-TIPS-2b, and two recent databases
4D-Light-Field-Material and GTOS. The source code for
the complete system are publicly available1 .

SVM

SVM

FC Layer

Histogram
Encoding

Fisher Vector

Encoding Layer

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of deep learning, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) has become the de facto standard
in many object recognition algorithms. The goals of material and texture recognition algorithms, while similar to
object recognition, have the distinct challenge of capturing an orderless measure encompassing some spatial repetition. For example, distributions or histograms of fea1 http://ece.rutgers.edu/vision

Residual Encoding

Dictionary

Dictionary

SIFT / Filter Bank
Responses

Pre-trained CNNs
Off-the-Shelf

Dictionary

Convolu onal Layers
End-to-End

Figure 1: A comparison of classic approaches and the proposed Deep Texture Encoding Network. Traditional methods such as bag-of-words BoW (left) have a structural similarity to more recent FV-CNN methods (center). Each component is optimized in separate steps as illustrated with different colors. In our approach (right) the entire pipeline is
learned in an integrated manner, tuning each component for
the task at hand (end-to-end texture/material/pattern recognition).

tures provide an orderless encoding for recognition. In classic computer vision approaches for material/texture recognition, hand-engineered features are extracted using interest point detectors such as SIFT [31] or filter bank responses [10,11,26,43]. A dictionary is typically learned offline and then the feature distributions are encoded by Bagof-Words (BoWs) [9,17,23,39], In the final step, a classifier
such as SVM is learned for classification. In recent work,
hand-engineered features and filter banks are replaced by
pre-trained CNNs and BoWs are replaced by the robust
residual encoders such as VLAD [22] and its probabilistic version Fisher Vector (FV) [32]. For example, Cimpoi
et al. [5] assembles different features (SIFT, CNNs) with
different encoders (VLAD, FV) and have achieved stateof-the-art results. These existing approaches have the advantage of accepting arbitrary input image sizes and have

708

