Exploiting 2D Floorplan for Building-scale Panorama RGBD Alignment
Erik Wijmans
Yasutaka Furukawa
Washington University in St. Louis
{erikwijmans, furukawa}@wustl.edu

Figure 1: The paper tackles building-scale panorama RGBD image alignment. Our approach utilizes a floorplan image to
significantly reduce the number of necessary scans and hence human operating costs.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel algorithm that utilizes a 2D
floorplan to align panorama RGBD scans. While effective
panorama RGBD alignment techniques exist, such a system requires extremely dense RGBD image sampling. Our
approach can significantly reduce the number of necessary
scans with the aid of a floorplan image. We formulate a
novel Markov Random Field inference problem as a scan
placement over the floorplan, as opposed to the conventional scan-to-scan alignment. The technical contributions
lie in multi-modal image correspondence cues (between
scans and schematic floorplan) as well as a novel coverage
potential avoiding an inherent stacking bias. The proposed
approach has been evaluated on five challenging large indoor spaces. To the best of our knowledge, we present the
first effective system that utilizes a 2D floorplan image for
building-scale 3D pointcloud alignment. The source code
and the data are shared with the community to further enhance indoor mapping research.

1. Introduction
3D scanning hardware has made remarkable progress in
recent years, where successful products exist in industry for
commercial applications. In particular, Panorama RGBD

scanners have found real-world applications as the system
produces both 3D geometry and immersive panorama images. For instance, Faro 3D [10] is a professional grade
panorama RGBD scanner, which can reach more than 100
meters and produce 100 million points per scan within a
millimeter accuracy. The device is perfect for 3D measurement, documentation, or surveillance in indoor mapping,
civil engineering or GIS applications. Matterport [2, 5] is
an emerging low-end solution that can reach only 5 meters,
but is much quicker (i.e., 1 to 2 minutes per scan), and has
demonstrated compelling results for Real Estate markets.
Given the success on the 3D scanning hardware, automated panorama RGBD alignment has become a crucial
technology. The Matterport system provides a robust solution but requires extremely dense scanning (e.g., one scan
every 2 to 3 meters). Dense scanning becomes infeasible for
high-end scanners (e.g., Faro 3D [10]), whose single scan
could take thirty minutes or an hour depending on the resolution. However, these scanners are the only option for
large buildings such as department stores, airport terminals,
or hotel lobbies, simply due to the required operating ranges
(e.g., 20 to 30 meters). Furthermore, the precision of these
high-end scanners is necessary for quantitative recovery of
metric information for scientific and engineering data analysis. In practice, with high-end 3D scanning devices, people
use calibration objects such as big bright balls and/or utilize
1308

