A Hierarchical Approach for Generating Descriptive Image Paragraphs
Jonathan Krause

Justin Johnson Ranjay Krishna
Stanford University

Li Fei-Fei

{jkrause,jcjohns,ranjaykrishna,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent progress on image captioning has made it possible
to generate novel sentences describing images in natural
language, but compressing an image into a single sentence
can describe visual content in only coarse detail. While one
new captioning approach, dense captioning, can potentially
describe images in finer levels of detail by captioning many
regions within an image, it in turn is unable to produce a
coherent story for an image. In this paper we overcome these
limitations by generating entire paragraphs for describing
images, which can tell detailed, unified stories. We develop
a model that decomposes both images and paragraphs into
their constituent parts, detecting semantic regions in images
and using a hierarchical recurrent neural network to reason
about language. Linguistic analysis confirms the complexity
of the paragraph generation task, and thorough experiments
on a new dataset of image and paragraph pairs demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach.

Sentences
1) A girl is eating donuts with a boy in a restaurant
2) A boy and girl sitting at a table with doughnuts.
3) Two kids sitting a coffee shop eating some frosted donuts
4) Two children sitting at a table eating donuts.
5) Two children eat doughnuts at a restaurant table.

Paragraph
Two children are sitting at a table in a restaurant. The
children are one little girl and one little boy. The little girl is
eating a pink frosted donut with white icing lines on top of it.
The girl has blonde hair and is wearing a green jacket with a
black long sleeve shirt underneath. The little boy is wearing a
black zip up jacket and is holding his finger to his lip but is
not eating. A metal napkin dispenser is in between them at
the table. The wall next to them is white brick. Two adults are
on the other side of the short white brick wall. The room has
white circular lights on the ceiling and a large window in the
front of the restaurant. It is daylight outside.

1. Introduction
Vision is the primary sensory modality for human perception, and language is our most powerful tool for communicating with the world. Building systems that can simultaneously understand visual stimuli and describe them in natural
language is therefore a core problem in both computer vision and artificial intelligence as a whole. With the advent
of large datasets pairing images with natural language descriptions [20, 34, 10, 16] it has recently become possible to
generate novel sentences describing images [4, 6, 12, 22, 30].
While the success of these methods is encouraging, they all
share one key limitation: detail. By only describing images
with a single high-level sentence, there is a fundamental
upper-bound on the quantity and quality of information approaches can produce.
One recent alternative to sentence-level captioning is the
task of dense captioning [11], which overcomes this limitation by detecting many regions of interest in an image and
describing each with a short phrase. By extending the task
of object detection to include natural language description,

Figure 1. Paragraphs are longer, more informative, and more
linguistically complex than sentence-level captions. Here we show
an image with its sentence-level captions from MS COCO [20]
(top) and the paragraph used in this work (bottom).

dense captioning describes images in considerably more detail than standard image captioning. However, this comes at
a cost: descriptions generated for dense captioning are not
coherent, i.e. they do not form a cohesive whole describing
the entire image.
In this paper we address the shortcomings of both traditional image captioning and the recently-proposed dense

317

