SPFTN: A Self-Paced Fine-Tuning Network for Segmenting Objects
in Weakly Labelled Videos

1

Dingwen Zhang1 , Le Yang1 , Deyu Meng2 , Dong Xu3 , Junwei Han1∗
Northwestern Polytechincal University, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 University of Sydney
zdw2006yyy@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, nwpuyangle@gmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
dong.xu@sydney.edu.au, junweihan2010@gmail.com

Abstract
Object segmentation in weakly labelled videos is an interesting yet challenging task, which aims at learning to
perform category-specific video object segmentation by only using video-level tags. Existing works in this research
area might still have some limitations, e.g., lack of effective DNN-based learning frameworks, under-exploring the
context information, and requiring to leverage the unstable
negative video collection, which prevent them from obtaining more promising performance. To this end, we propose a
novel self-paced fine-tuning network (SPFTN)-based framework, which could learn to explore the context information
within the video frames and capture adequate object semantics without using the negative videos. To perform weakly
supervised learning based on the deep neural network, we
make the earliest effort to integrate the self-paced learning regime and the deep neural network into a unified and
compatible framework, leading to the self-paced fine-tuning
network. Comprehensive experiments on the large-scale
YouTube-Objects and DAVIS datasets demonstrate that the
proposed approach achieves superior performance as compared with other state-of-the-art methods as well as the
baseline networks and models.

1. Introduction
With the rapidly growing popularity of the video sharing
social media (e.g., YouTube), a massive amount of videos
can be easily accessed online. This offers the vision community an exciting opportunity to learn visual concepts and
object models from the real-world online videos [27]. However, it is hard to directly exploit these online videos in traditional ways because most of online videos are weakly labelled [30, 10]. These videos are only associated with semantic tags to indicate the main objects or concepts within
them, whereas the detailed spatial-temporal segmentation
∗ Corresponding author.

masks are not provided due to the heavy burden of manual annotation. Thus, in this paper, we focus on the task of
segmenting objects in weakly labelled videos. This task is
of great significance in two-fold reasons. On one hand, it
could help automatically provide the spatial-temporal segmentation annotations for the online videos so that these online resources can be utilized to help other tasks like training classifiers for image classification [24, 26]. On the other
hand, it could act as an essential step towards video content
understanding and thus improve the performances of other
tasks like video summarization [33] and event detection [3].
In order to segment objects in weakly labelled videos, the
most pioneering attempt by Hartmann et al. [8] formulated
it as learning weakly supervised classifiers for a set of independent spatial-temporal segments and utilized the graph
cuts to refine the obtained object seeds to generate the final
object masks. Afterwards, Tang et al. [27] presented a Concept Ranking According to Negative Exemplars (CRANE)
algorithm, which is robust to label noise and highly parallelizable and thus could effectively handle large amounts of
video data and spatial-temporal segments. Liu et al. [18]
presented a nearest neighbor-based label transfer scheme
for weakly supervised video segmentation, which mainly focused on the challenging multi-class video segmentation problem. More recently, Zhang et al. [39] proposed
a segmentation-by-detection framework, where object and
region detectors pre-trained on still images were used to
generate the detection and segmentation proposals. Then,
object trackers were refined by inferring shape likelihoods
to suppress background noise while preserving the spatialtemporal consistency of foreground objects.
As can be seen, the existing works usually first decompose the positive and negative videos into a number
of spatial-temporal segments. Then the segmentation-level
classifiers or inference models are trained under the weak
supervision to identify the segments related to the given object categories in videos. Finally, post-processing methods
are applied to refine the object segmentation masks. Although approaches along this pipeline have achieved good
4321
4429

