Detecting Oriented Text in Natural Images by Linking Segments
Baoguang Shi1 Xiang Bai1∗ Serge Belongie2
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, Cornell Tech
shibaoguang@gmail.com

xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art text detection methods are specific
to horizontal Latin text and are not fast enough for real-time
applications. We introduce Segment Linking (SegLink), an
oriented text detection method. The main idea is to decompose text into two locally detectable elements, namely segments and links. A segment is an oriented box covering a
part of a word or text line; A link connects two adjacent
segments, indicating that they belong to the same word or
text line. Both elements are detected densely at multiple
scales by an end-to-end trained, fully-convolutional neural
network. Final detections are produced by combining segments connected by links. Compared with previous methods, SegLink improves along the dimensions of accuracy,
speed, and ease of training. It achieves an f-measure of
75.0% on the standard ICDAR 2015 Incidental (Challenge
4) benchmark, outperforming the previous best by a large
margin. It runs at over 20 FPS on 512×512 images. Moreover, without modification, SegLink is able to detect long
lines of non-Latin text, such as Chinese.

1. Introduction
Reading text in natural images is a challenging task under active research. It is driven by many real-world applications, such as Photo OCR [2], geo-location, and image
retrieval [9]. In a text reading system, text detection, i.e.
localizing text with bounding boxes of words or text lines,
is usually the first step of great significance. In a sense, text
detection can be seen as object detection applied to text,
where words/characters/text lines are taken as the detection
targets. Owing to this, a new trend has emerged recently
that state-of-the-art text detection methods [9, 6, 22, 30] are
heavily based on the advanced general object detection or
segmentation techniques, e.g. [4, 5, 15].
Despite the great success of the previous work, we argue that the general detection methods are not well suited
∗ Corresponding author.

sjb344@cornell.edu

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. SegLink Overview. The upper row shows an image
with two words of different scales and orientations. (a) Segments
(yellow boxes) are detected on the image. (b) Links (green lines)
are detected between pairs of adjacent segments. (c) Segments
connected by links are combined into whole words. (d-f) SegLink
is able to detect long lines of Latin and non-Latin text, such as
Chinese.

for text detection, for two main reasons. First, word/text
line bounding boxes have much larger aspect ratios than
those of general objects. An (fast/faster) R-CNN [5, 4, 19]or SSD [14]-style detector may suffer from the difficulty
of producing such boxes, owing to its proposal or anchor
box design. In addition, some non-Latin text does not have
blank spaces between words, hence the even larger bounding box aspect ratios, which make the problem worse. Second, unlike general objects, text usually has a clear definition of orientation [25]. It is important for a text detector to
produce oriented boxes. However, most general object detection methods are not designed to produce oriented boxes.
To overcome the above challenges, we tackle the text detection problem in a new perspective. We propose to decompose long text into two smaller and locally-detectable
elements, namely segment and link. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
a segment is an oriented box that covers a part of a word

2550

