Non-Uniform Subset Selection for Active Learning in Structured Data
Sujoy Paul, Jawadul H. Bappy and Amit Roy-Chowdhury
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521
{supaul, mbappy, amitrc}@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract

labeling, without compromising recognition performance.

Several works have shown that relationships between
data points (i.e., context) in structured data can be exploited
to obtain better recognition performance. In this paper, we
explore a different, but related, problem: how can these interrelationships be used to efficiently learn and continuously
update a recognition model, with minimal human labeling
effort. Towards this goal, we propose an active learning
framework to select an optimal subset of data points for manual labeling by exploiting the relationships between them.
We construct a graph from the unlabeled data to represent
the underlying structure, such that each node represents a
data point, and edges represent the inter-relationships between them. Thereafter, considering the flow of beliefs in this
graph, we choose those samples for labeling which minimize
the joint entropy of the nodes of the graph. This results in
significant reduction in manual labeling effort without compromising recognition performance. Our method chooses
non-uniform number of samples from each batch of streaming data depending on its information content. Also, the
submodular property of our objective function makes it computationally efficient to optimize. The proposed framework
is demonstrated in various applications, including document
analysis, scene-object recognition, and activity recognition.

1. Introduction
Over the years, due to advances in technology, huge
amount of unlabeled visual and text data is generated daily.
Also, machine learning algorithms are becoming more commonplace in human life. A large proportion of these algorithms are based on supervised learning which requires a
large quantity of data to be labeled. Moreover, these models
need to be updated over time as new data becomes available
in order to dynamically adapt to the concepts of different
classes which may drift with time. Manually labeling this
continuous flow of data is not only a tedious task for humans
but also prone to wrong labeling. Active Learning [39] can
be a solution to this problem to reduce the amount of manual

The ability of active learning to reduce manual labeling
effort is due to the fact that not all training samples are valuable for building the recognition model [28]. Most active
learning approaches formulate a utility score for each unlabeled sample, based on which they are chosen for manual
labeling. Classifier uncertainty [31], information density
[30], expected change in gradient [39], expected error rate
[11, 30], expected model output change [23] and their combinations are some popular techniques for designing the utility
score. But, most of these techniques fail to consider the
inter-relationships that may occur in data points belonging
to the same or different recognition tasks.
Several works have shown that in many applications such
as activity recognition [49, 46], object recognition [16, 9],
text classification [36, 40], etc, that relationships between
data points can be exploited to get better recognition performance. These relationships may also be exploited in
active learning to significantly reduce the effort of manual
labeling. Although there have been some works which consider relationships between data points in active learning
[4, 32, 18, 20], they do not consider flow of beliefs between
samples to have a better joint understanding of the samples,
which may be helpful for choosing the most informative
ones. Moreover, most of them are problem-specific algorithms and deal with active learning of a single recognition
task. A general approach for active learning that considers the inter-relationships between data samples, and which
can be used across a variety of application domains, is lacking. Joint learning of tasks such as scene-object [50, 45] or
activity-object [21, 24] classification can be actively learned
to reduce the manual labeling effort. In such scenarios, it is
challenging to choose the informative samples for manual
labeling as they may belong to different recognition tasks.
In this paper, we propose a generalized active learning
framework, which has the ability to determine the optimal
number of informative samples and thus choose them for
both single, as well as multiple, recognition tasks learned
jointly, by exploiting the structure of the data, i.e., the relationships between the samples. The relationship information
can not only help to update the beliefs of the classifier for

3138
6846

