CLKN: Cascaded Lucas-Kanade Networks for Image Alignment
Che-Han Chang

Chun-Nan Chou
HTC Research

Edward Y. Chang

{CheHan Chang,Jason.CN Chou,Edward Chang}@htc.com

Abstract
CNN

This paper proposes a data-driven approach for image
alignment. Our main contribution is a novel network architecture that combines the strengths of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and the Lucas-Kanade algorithm. The
main component of this architecture is a Lucas-Kanade
layer that performs the inverse compositional algorithm on
convolutional feature maps. To train our network, we develop a cascaded feature learning method that incorporates
the coarse-to-fine strategy into the training process. This
method learns a pyramid representation of convolutional
features in a cascaded manner and yields a cascaded network that performs coarse-to-fine alignment on the feature
pyramids. We apply our model to the task of homography
estimation, and perform training and evaluation on a large
labeled dataset generated from the MS-COCO dataset. Experimental results show that the proposed approach significantly outperforms the other methods.

1. Introduction
Image alignment, or estimating a parametric motion
model between two images, is essential for tasks like
panoramic image stitching [5], optical flow [6], simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [11], visual odometry (VO) [12], and many others. A robust image alignment algorithm should cope with photometric variations
and large motion variations while giving a sub-pixel accurate alignment. Most image alignment approaches can be
classified into two categories [26]: feature-based methods
and pixel-based methods.
Feature-based methods extract distinct features, match
them, and then estimate the motion model from point correspondences. These methods are robust to large differences
in scales, orientations, and lighting because feature descriptors such as SIFT [21] and HOG [9] are invariant to these
variations. However, achieving a sub-pixel accurate alignment heavily relies on accurate localization and an even distribution of features, which is challenging in low-textured
scenes. In contrast, pixel-based (or direct) methods, mostly

Template
feature
map

Template image
shared

CNN

Input
feature map

Input image

Lucas-Kanade
layer
Estimated motion

Initial motion

Figure 1. Our network takes a template image, an input image and
an initial motion as inputs. The two CNNs with shared weights
transform the two images into two multi-channel feature maps.
Then, the Lucas-Kanade layer takes these two feature maps and an
initial motion as inputs, performs the inverse compositional LucasKanade algorithm [3] to obtain the estimated motion.

based on the Lucas-Kanade algorithm [22], estimate the
motion model directly from raw pixel intensities. These
methods often perform better on low-textured images since
all the pixels are used to estimate a small number of parameters. Pixel-based methods have received great attention in
SLAM [11] and VO [12] lately due to their effectiveness.
Nonetheless, pixel-based methods are not robust to lighting
changes and large motions.
Recently, several methods [1][2][8] were proposed to
combine the Lucas-Kanade algorithm with feature descriptors. We refer to these methods as FBLK standing for the
feature-based Lucas-Kanade methods. The central idea of
FBLK is to perform image alignment on densely-sampled
feature descriptors. FBLK combine the strengths of both
feature-based and pixel-based methods, and are robust to
both lighting variations and low-textured scenes. However, FBLK still suffer from two shortcomings. First, commonly used feature descriptors are hand-designed for finding sparse correspondences, which may be suboptimal on
some scenes. Second, FBLK are prone to fail in the presence of large motions.
12213

