Real-Time Neural Style Transfer for Videos
Haozhi Huang†‡∗ Hao Wang‡ Wenhan Luo‡ Lin Ma‡
Wenhao Jiang‡ Xiaolong Zhu‡ Zhifeng Li‡ Wei Liu‡∗
†

∗

Tsinghua University ‡ Tencent AI Lab
Correspondence: huanghz08@gmail.com wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Recent research endeavors have shown the potential of
using feed-forward convolutional neural networks to accomplish fast style transfer for images. In this work, we
take one step further to explore the possibility of exploiting
a feed-forward network to perform style transfer for videos
and simultaneously maintain temporal consistency among
stylized video frames. Our feed-forward network is trained
by enforcing the outputs of consecutive frames to be both
well stylized and temporally consistent. More specifically,
a hybrid loss is proposed to capitalize on the content information of input frames, the style information of a given
style image, and the temporal information of consecutive
frames. To calculate the temporal loss during the training stage, a novel two-frame synergic training mechanism
is proposed. Compared with directly applying an existing
image style transfer method to videos, our proposed method
employs the trained network to yield temporally consistent
stylized videos which are much more visually pleasant. In
contrast to the prior video style transfer method which relies
on time-consuming optimization on the fly, our method runs
in real time while generating competitive visual results.

1. Introduction
Recently, great progress has been achieved by applying deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to image
transformation tasks, where a feed-forward CNN receives
an input image, possibly equipped with some auxiliary information, and transforms it into a desired output image.
This kind of tasks includes style transfer [12, 27], semantic segmentation [19], super-resolution [12, 7], colorization [11, 31], etc.
A natural way to extend image processing techniques to
videos is to perform a certain image transformation frame
by frame. However, this scheme inevitably brings temporal
inconsistencies and thus causes severe flicker artifacts. The
second row in Fig. 1 shows an example of directly applying
the feed-forward network based image style transfer method

Style Image

Figure 1: Video style transfer without and with temporal
consistency. The first row displays two consecutive input
frames and a given style image. The second row shows
the stylized results generated by the method of Johnson
et al. [12]. The zoom-in regions in the middle show that
the stylized patterns are of different appearances between
the consecutive frames, which creates flicker artifacts. The
third row shows the stylized results of our method, where
the stylized patterns maintain the same appearance.
of Johnson et al. [12] to videos. It can be observed that the
zoom-in content marked by white rectangles is stylized into different appearances between two consecutive frames,
therefore creating flicker artifacts. The reason is that slight
variations between adjacent video frames may be amplified
by the frame-based feed-forward network and thus result in
obviously different stylized frames. In the literature, one
solution to retain temporal coherence after video transformation is to explicitly consider temporal consistency during
the frame generation or optimization process [18, 1, 14, 22].
While effective, they are case-specific methods and thus
cannot be easily generalized to other problems. Among
them, the method of Ruder et al. [22] is specifically designed for video style transfer. However, it relies on timeconsuming optimization on the fly, and takes about three
minutes to process a single frame even with pre-computed
optical flows. Another solution to maintaining temporal
consistency is to apply post-processing [15, 2]. A draw-

783

