Computational Imaging on the Electric Grid
Mark Sheinin, Yoav Y. Schechner
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

Kiriakos N. Kutulakos
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Toronto

marksheinin@gmail.com, yoav@ee.technion.ac.il

kyros@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Night beats with alternating current (AC) illumination.
By passively sensing this beat, we reveal new scene information which includes: the type of bulbs in the scene,
the phases of the electric grid up to city scale, and the
light transport matrix. This information yields unmixing
of reflections and semi-reflections, nocturnal high dynamic
range, and scene rendering with bulbs not observed during
acquisition. The latter is facilitated by a database of bulb
response functions for a range of sources, which we collected and provide. To do all this, we built a novel codedexposure high-dynamic-range imaging technique, specifically designed to operate on the grid’s AC lighting.

City image

Grid phases

Phase

33.4%
36.3%
30.3%

1. Introduction
For more than a century we have been living in a world
that literally pulses with artificial light. Whether outdoors
at night or indoors at all hours, most of the light reaching our eyes—and our cameras—originates from artificial
sources powered by the electric grid. These light sources
change their intensity and spectral power distribution in response to the grid’s alternating current (AC) [3, 43] but their
flicker is usually too subtle and too fast to notice with the
naked eye (100Hz or more) [22]. Artificial lighting produces unnatural-looking colors in photos [13] and temporal
aliasing in video [39]. As a result, it is broadly considered
undesirable [16, 21, 40, 48].
In this paper we argue that rather than being a mere nuisance, ubiquitous AC-induced lighting variations are a very
powerful visual cue—about our indoor and outdoor environments, about the light sources they contain, and the electrical grid itself (Figure 1). To this end, we derive a model
of time-varying appearance under AC lighting and describe
a novel coded-exposure imaging technique to acquire it.
Our approach yields several never-seen-before capabilities that we demonstrate experimentally with our “ACam”
camera prototype: (1) acquiring a scene’s transport matrix
by passive observation only, (2) computing what a scene
would look like if some of its lights were turned off or
changed to a different bulb type, (3) recognizing bulb types
from their temporal profiles, (4) analyzing city-scale grid
phases in the electric grid, and (5) doing all the above

Distribution

Light 1

Light 2

INPUT
SEQUENCE

Unmixing

Light 3

Light 4

Figure 1. Top and middle: City-scale scene. From the AC bulb
response function, we can recognize which bulbs are used and the
electric-grid phase of each (color coded). This enables statistical
analysis of the grid. Inset is magnified in Figure 3. Bottom: Unmixing a scene to single-light-source component images.

under very challenging conditions—nocturnal imaging, an
off-the-shelf (30Hz) camera, dimly-lit scenes, uncontrolled
environments, distances of meters to kilometers, and operation in two continents using both 110V and 220V AC standards. To enable all this, we compiled a database [35, 36]
of temporal lighting response functions (DELIGHT) for a
range of bulb types, the first of its kind in computer vision.
The only essential constraints in our approach are access to
a power outlet and a largely stationary scene.
Our work draws inspiration from the large body of research on actively-controlled light sources. These techniques illuminate a scene with a variety of sources (e.g.,
projectors [18, 24, 32], lasers [11, 25], computer dis16437

