FFTLasso: Large-Scale LASSO in the Fourier Domain
Adel Bibi, Hani Itani, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
adel.bibi@kaust.edu.sa, hmi10@mail.aub.edu, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the LASSO sparse representation problem, which has been studied and used in a variety
of different areas, ranging from signal processing and information theory to computer vision and machine learning.
In the vision community, it found its way into many important applications, including face recognition, tracking, super resolution, image denoising, to name a few. Despite
advances in efficient sparse algorithms, solving large-scale
LASSO problems remains a challenge. To circumvent this
difficulty, people tend to downsample and subsample the
problem (e.g. via dimensionality reduction) to maintain a
manageable sized LASSO, which usually comes at the cost
of losing solution accuracy. This paper proposes a novel
circulant reformulation of the LASSO that lifts the problem
to a higher dimension, where ADMM can be efficiently applied to its dual form. Because of this lifting, all optimization variables are updated using only basic element-wise
operations, the most computationally expensive of which is
a 1D FFT. In this way, there is no need for a linear system
solver nor matrix-vector multiplication. Since all operations in our FFTLasso method are element-wise, the subproblems are completely independent and can be trivially
parallelized (e.g. on a GPU). The attractive computational properties of FFTLasso are verified by extensive experiments on synthetic and real data and on the face recognition
task. They demonstrate that FFTLasso scales much more
effectively than a state-of-the-art solver.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in efficiently solving the
popular LASSO problem, defined as follows:
min }Ac
´ b}22 ` λ lo}c}
mo1n,
looooomooooon
c
f pcq

(1)

gpcq

where A P Rmˆn is the sparsifying dictionary and λ is a
positive parameter that trades off between sparsity and data fitting fidelity. Problem (1) is strongly convex but non-

smooth. Problem (1) describes many applications of interest in both computer vision and machine learning, including
(but not limited to) face recognition [32, 28, 33], face alignment [25, 24], tracking [20, 35, 37, 38, 15, 36, 3], super
resolution [34, 27], convolutional sparse coding [6, 14, 17],
image inpainting [30], sparse subspace clustering [11, 10],
image debluring [2, 16, 26], just to name a few.
In many applications (e.g. face recognition and face
alignment), it is important to solve problem (1) for a very
large overcomplete dictionary A (e.g. when m, n " 105 ).
In face recognition, face alignment, and in tracking, each
m-sized column of A is a vectorized image or image patch
and n is the number of training examples. In some particular models of face recognition and tracking, the number of training examples is even larger. For instance, in
[35, 32, 20], the identity matrix Im is concatenated with
the original dictionary (i.e. n Ð n ` m) to handle partial
occlusions at the price of solving a larger LASSO . Also, in
sparse subspace clustering [10, 23], the dimensionality of
the data points (m) is naturally very large and the task is to
cluster the high dimensional data into a set of lower dimensional subspaces. Other applications, such as super resolution [34], tend to have a large number of dictionary elements
(n) generated from natural images. Moreover, A can also
have specific structure that can be exploited for faster solutions. For example, in image denoising/restoration [2, 16]
and inpainting [30, 26], A is usually based on a 2D convolutional operator/kernel, thus, resulting in a Block Circulant with Circulant Blocks (BCCB) or Block Topelitz
with Topelitz Blocks (BTTB) matrices, where each handles
boundary conditions differently. In these cases, A P Rnˆn
is square and n is the number of pixels in the kernel or filter.
Matrix A gets even “fatter” when multiple kernels or filters
are used at the same time, as is the case, in convolutional
sparse coding [6, 14, 17].
Solving problem (1) for large-scale A (especially when
m is large) is usually directly coupled with a performance
gain for the particular application. This idea has been clearly raised and discussed in face recognition [28, 25]. Despite
this gain, these large LASSO problems tend not to be solved
because of their significant computational burden. Instead,

1716

