A Linear Extrinsic Calibration of Kaleidoscopic Imaging System
from Single 3D Point
Kosuke Takahashi

Akihiro Miyata∗ Shohei Nobuhara
Kyoto University

Takashi Matsuyama

{takahasi,miyata,nob,tm}@vision.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper proposes a new extrinsic calibration of kaleidoscopic imaging system by estimating normals and distances of the mirrors. The problem to be solved in this paper
is a simultaneous estimation of all mirror parameters consistent throughout multiple reflections. Unlike conventional
methods utilizing a pair of direct and mirrored images of
a reference 3D object to estimate the parameters on a permirror basis, our method renders the simultaneous estimation problem into solving a linear set of equations. The key
contribution of this paper is to introduce a linear estimation
of multiple mirror parameters from kaleidoscopic 2D projections of a single 3D point of unknown geometry. Evaluations with synthesized and real images demonstrate the
performance of the proposed algorithm in comparison with
conventional methods.

1. Introduction
Virtual multiple-view system with planar mirrors is
a practical approach to realize a multi-view capture of a
target by synchronized cameras with an identical intrinsic parameter, and it has been widely used for 3D shape
reconstruction by stereo [5, 6, 17], shape-from-silhouette
[2, 9, 22], structure-from-motion [19], structured-lighting
[13, 27], ToF [18], and also for reflectance analysis [10, 11,
26], for light-field imaging [3, 15, 24], etc.
This paper is aimed at proposing a new extrinsic calibration of kaleidoscopic system with planar mirrors to provide
an accurate and robust estimate of the mirror geometry for
such applications (Figure 1).
The problem addressed in this paper is to estimate all
mirror parameters, i.e. their normals and the distances from
the camera, consistent throughout multiple reflections simultaneously in a linear manner. While conventional meth∗ Present affiliation: Nara Institute of Science and Technology.

A reference implementation is available at http://vision.
kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/˜nob/proj/kaleidoscope/.

Figure 1: Kaleidoscopic imaging system. Left: kaleidoscopic projection of a 3D cat object. Right: a 3D reconstruction result.
ods utilize a reference object of known geometry to estimate
the mirror parameters on a per-mirror basis, the proposed
method provides a linear solution of the mirror parameters
from kaleidoscopic projections of a single 3D point without
knowing its 3D geometry beforehand.
The key idea is to utilize the 2D projections of multiple
reflections to form a linear system on the mirror parameters.
While the 3D positions of multiple reflections of a 3D point
is defined as a nonlinear function of the mirror parameters
as described later in Eq (6), their 2D projections can be used
as a linear constraint on the mirror parameters.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 reviews related studies on kaleidoscopic mirror calibrations. Section 3 defines the measurement model and Section 4 introduces a single mirror calibration algorithm from
two pairs of projections based on the mirror-based binocular epipolar geometry [29]. Section 5 introduces our key
contribution, a linear estimation of multiple mirror parameters from kaleidoscopic 2D projections of a single 3D point
of unknown geometry. Section 6 evaluates the proposed
method quantitatively and qualitatively in comparison with
conventional methods, and Section 7 concludes the paper
and outlines future work.

2. Related work
In the context of kaleidoscopic imaging, Ihrke et al. [10]
and Reshetouski and Ihrke [20, 21] have proposed a theory
on modeling the chamber detection, segmentation, bounce
1567

