Saliency Revisited: Analysis of Mouse Movements versus Fixations
Hamed R. Tavakoli† Fawad Ahmed‡ Ali Borji‡ Jorma Laaksonen†
†
Dept. of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
‡
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando

Abstract
This paper revisits visual saliency prediction by evaluating the recent advancements in this field such as crowdsourced mouse tracking-based databases and contextual
annotations. We pursue a critical and quantitative approach towards some of the new challenges including the
quality of mouse tracking versus eye tracking for model
training and evaluation. We extend quantitative evaluation
of models in order to incorporate contextual information
by proposing an evaluation methodology that allows accounting for contextual factors such as text, faces, and object attributes. The proposed contextual evaluation scheme
facilitates detailed analysis of models and helps identify
their pros and cons. Through several experiments, we find
that (1) mouse tracking data has lower inter-participant visual congruency and higher dispersion, compared to the
eye tracking data, (2) mouse tracking data does not totally
agree with eye tracking in general and in terms of different
contextual regions in specific, and (3) mouse tracking data
leads to acceptable results in training current existing models, and (4) mouse tracking data is less reliable for model
selection and evaluation. The contextual evaluation also
reveals that, among the studied models, there is no single
model that performs best on all the tested annotations.

1. Introduction
There has been a significant recent progress in the field
of visual saliency. Numerous models and datasets have been
introduced. The new databases have been expanded along
two dimensions: (1) increasing the number of images and
viewers, and (2) introducing richer contextual annotations
(e.g., image categories [2], and regional attributes [33],
etc.). To accomplish these objectives, researchers have been
relying on crowd sourcing schemes for recording eye movements (e.g., using webcams [34]) or alternative signals such
as mouse movements and clicks (e.g. [14]), and annotations.
Along with these advances, however, new challenges have
surfaced that need to be addressed. For example, it remains
to be answered whether and to what degree different at-

Figure 1. Visual comparison of fixation maps using eye and mouse
tracking, overlaid on images. From left to right: image, eye tracking, mouse tracking using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), and
mouse tracking in controlled laboratory (LAB) from [33]. The red
and green ellipses indicate over and under estimation, respectively.

tentional proxies agree with each other? Is it possible to
reach human level accuracy by utilizing large scale mouse
data? and how should these new types of data be used for
saliency model evaluation and construction? Fig. 1 visually
compares density maps from eye and mouse tracking. It depicts a noticeable difference between maps encouraging a
detailed quantitative study.
Our contributions. This paper presents 2 main contributions: (1) assessing the quality of crowd sourced mouse
tracking as an alternative to eye tracking and the effect of
such data on model training and evaluation, and (2) introducing a contextual evaluation scheme for evaluating models in a fine-grained manner. The contextual evaluation
is applicable to both model assessment and comparison of
mouse tracking with eye tracking. Further, this study will be
addressing some of the questions that have surfaced by introduction of mouse tracking based databases and help better understand saliency models’ performance.
Is this another benchmark? No. We are not carrying out
yet another benchmark. The literature is already replete
with benchmarks [3, 17, 4, 6], metric discussions [21, 26,
32, 7], review papers [28, 1], and analytical model comparisons [8]. Alternatively, we seek to answer some important
questions pertaining to mouse tracking as a substitute to eye

1774

