Attentional Correlation Filter Network for Adaptive Visual Tracking
Jongwon Choi1

Hyung Jin Chang2 Sangdoo Yun1 Tobias Fischer2
Yiannis Demiris2 Jin Young Choi1
1
ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng., Seoul National University, South Korea
2
Personal Robotics Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
jwchoi.pil@gmail.com {hj.chang,t.fischer,y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk {yunsd101,jychoi}@snu.ac.kr

Shrinking Target
Colour

Colour

HOG

HOG

Color

Colour

Colour

HOG

HOG

HOG

HOG

Humans rely on various cues when observing and tracking
objects, and the selection of attentional cues highly depends
on knowledge-based expectation according to the dynamics
of the current scene [13, 14, 28]. Similarly, in order to infer
the accurate location of the target object, a tracker needs
to take changes of several appearance (illumination change,
blurriness, occlusion) and dynamic (expanding, shrinking,
aspect ratio change) properties into account. Although visual
tracking research has achieved remarkable advances in the
past decades [21–23, 32, 38–40], and thanks to deep learning
especially in the recent years [6, 8, 29, 35, 36, 41], most methods employ only a subset of these properties, or are too slow
to perform in real-time.
The deep learning based approaches can be divided into
two large groups. Firstly, online deep learning based track-

Shape-deformed Target
Colour

1. Introduction

HOG

We propose a new tracking framework with an attentional
mechanism that chooses a subset of the associated correlation filters for increased robustness and computational
efficiency. The subset of filters is adaptively selected by a
deep attentional network according to the dynamic properties of the tracking target. Our contributions are manifold,
and are summarised as follows: (i) Introducing the Attentional Correlation Filter Network which allows adaptive
tracking of dynamic targets. (ii) Utilising an attentional network which shifts the attention to the best candidate modules,
as well as predicting the estimated accuracy of currently inactive modules. (iii) Enlarging the variety of correlation
filters which cover target drift, blurriness, occlusion, scale
changes, and flexible aspect ratio. (iv) Validating the robustness and efficiency of the attentional mechanism for visual
tracking through a number of experiments. Our method
achieves similar performance to non real-time trackers, and
state-of-the-art performance amongst real-time trackers.

Colour

Abstract

Figure 1. Attentional Mechanism for Visual Tracking. The
tracking results of the proposed framework (red) are shown along
with the ground truth (cyan). The circles represent the attention at
that time, where one region represents one tracking module. When
the target shrinks as in the first row, the attention is on modules
with scale-down changes in the left-top region of the circles. If
the target suffers from shape deformation as in the second row,
modules with colour features are chosen because they are robust to
shape deformation.

ers [29, 33, 35, 36, 41] which require frequent fine-tuning of
the network to learn the appearance of the target. These approaches show high robustness and accuracy, but are too slow
to be applied in real-world settings. Secondly, correlation
filter based trackers [6, 8, 26, 30] utilising deep convolutional
features have also shown state-of-the-art performance. Each
correlation filter distinguishes the target from nearby outliers
in the Fourier domain, which leads to high robustness even
with small computational time. However, in order to cover
more features and dynamics, more diverse correlation filters
need to be added, which slows the overall tracker.
As previous deep-learning based trackers focus on the
changes in the appearance properties of the target, only limited dynamic properties can be considered. Furthermore,
updating the entire network for online deep learning based
trackers is computationally demanding, although the deep
network is only sparsely activated at any time [29, 33, 35, 36,

4807

