Episodic CAMN: Contextual Attention-based Memory Networks
With Iterative Feedback For Scene Labeling
Abrar H. Abdulnabi1,2

Bing Shuai1

Stefan Winkler2

Gang Wang3

1

2

School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Advanced Digital Sciences Center (ADSC), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Singapore
3
Alibaba Group

Abstract
Scene labeling can be seen as a sequence-sequence prediction task (pixels-labels), and it is quite important to
leverage relevant context to enhance the performance of
pixel classification. In this paper, we introduce an episodic
attention-based memory network to achieve the goal. We
present a unified framework that mainly consists of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), specifically, Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) and an attention-based memory
module with feedback connections to perform context selection and refinement. The full model produces contextaware representation for each target patch by aggregating
the activated context and its original local representation
produced by the convolution layers. We evaluate our model
on PASCAL Context, SIFT Flow and PASCAL VOC 2011
datasets and achieve competitive results to other state-ofthe-art methods in scene labeling.

1. Introduction
This paper deals with the problem of scene labeling (or
semantic segmentation), which typically aims to relate a
unique semantic class label to each pixel in an image. It
is a challenging task in computer vision, as different scenes
may be full of complex and occluded objects, and the images can be captured under various lighting conditions and
viewpoints. Also, objects in an image may appear at any
location and scale. In order to classify each pixel in a typical scene labeling pipeline, a feature vector is first extracted
from a patch of adequate size containing that pixel. The
patch contains the surrounding context to locally discriminate the pixel during labeling. But these local feature representations can be ambiguous, e.g. a sofa patch can be
visually indistinguishable from a bed patch. As a natural
solution, many papers utilize context to distinguish locally
ambiguous patches [27,50,53]. However in their works, the

long-range context is not effectively leveraged. Besides, the
surrounding contextual information is incorporated without
selection. We believe that different contextual information
is not always equally important or useful to one local region.
For example, when recognizing a local region belonging to
computer monitor, it is more helpful to leverage contextual
information from desk rather than from other regions such
as window. Hence, special attention should be paid to certain context conditioned on the target region.
In this paper we propose a unified framework that includes FCN and episodic attention-based memory network
layers to address the problem. In details, it consists of three
major components: (1) a basic FCN to generate local convolutional patch-level feature representations; (2) a Contextual
Attention-based Network (CAN) that adaptively selects the
relevant contextual patches for each referenced patch; (3)
an ‘episodic’ recurrent memory module that accumulates
and records the selected context over multiple episodes,
where its recurrent feedback connections allow the CAN
module to refine the activated/selected context over multiple iterations. CAN alongside the recurrent memory network (CAMN) appears to be an effective contextual modeling method that can easily activate useful long-range context. However, CAMN may falsely activate irrelevant context and wrongly inhibit the relevant context in one shot;
therefore we propose to refine the selected context in an iterative framework with the recurrent feedback mechanism.
We instantiate the episodic memory as the hidden representation of a recurrent neural network [19], which is able
to efficiently memorize local information over a short time
(several iterations). Then, we add the feedback connections
from the episodic memory to CAN, so that the CAN module can refine the context selection in the next iteration. The
episodic memory converges over only few early iterations.
We describe our method as ‘episodic’ because it accumulates and refines the selected context over a series of consecutive iterations. Either all of the generated context of
these episodes or only the last episode can be utilized.

5561

