DeMoN: Depth and Motion Network for Learning Monocular Stereo
Benjamin Ummenhofer*,1

Huizhong Zhou*,1

{ummenhof, zhouh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Jonas Uhrig1,2

Nikolaus Mayer1 Eddy Ilg1
1
University of Freiburg

Alexey Dosovitskiy1
2
Daimler AG R&D

Thomas Brox1

{uhrigj, mayern, ilg, dosovits, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
In this paper we formulate structure from motion as a
learning problem. We train a convolutional network endto-end to compute depth and camera motion from successive, unconstrained image pairs. The architecture is composed of multiple stacked encoder-decoder networks, the
core part being an iterative network that is able to improve
its own predictions. The network estimates not only depth
and motion, but additionally surface normals, optical flow
between the images and confidence of the matching. A crucial component of the approach is a training loss based on
spatial relative differences. Compared to traditional twoframe structure from motion methods, results are more accurate and more robust. In contrast to the popular depthfrom-single-image networks, DeMoN learns the concept of
matching and, thus, better generalizes to structures not seen
during training.

1. Introduction
Structure from motion (SfM) is a long standing task in
computer vision. Most existing systems, which represent
the state of the art, are carefully engineered pipelines consisting of several consecutive processing steps. A fundamental building block of these pipelines is the computation
of the structure and motion for two images. Present implementations of this step have some inherent limitations. For
instance, it is common to start with the estimation of the
camera motion before inferring the structure of the scene by
dense correspondence search. Thus, an incorrect estimate of
the camera motion leads to wrong depth predictions. Moreover, the camera motion is estimated from sparse correspondences computed via keypoint detection and descriptor
matching. This low-level process is prone to outliers and
does not work in non-textured regions. Finally, all exist∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1. Illustration of DeMoN. The input to the network is two
successive images from a monocular camera. The network estimates the depth in the first image and the camera motion.

ing SfM approaches fail in case of small camera translation.
This is because it is hard to integrate priors that could provide reasonable solutions in those degenerate cases.
In this paper, we succeed for the first time in training a
convolutional network to jointly estimate the depth and the
camera motion from an unconstrained pair of images. This
approach is very different from the typical SfM pipeline in
that it solves the problems of motion and dense depth estimation jointly. We cannot yet provide a full learning-based
system for large-scale SfM, but the two-frame case is a crucial first step towards this goal. In the longer term, the learning approach has large potential, since it integrates naturally
all the shape from X approaches: multi-view, silhouettes,
texture, shading, defocus, haze. Moreover, strong priors on
objects and structure can be learned efficiently from data
and regularize the problem in degenerate cases; see Fig. 6
for example. This potential is indicated by our results for
the two-frame scenario, where the learning approach clearly
outperforms traditional methods.
Convolutional networks recently have shown to excel at
depth prediction from a single image [7, 8, 24]. By learning
priors about objects and their shapes these networks reach
remarkably good performance in restricted evaluation sce15038

