Fast-AT: Fast Automatic Thumbnail Generation using Deep Neural Networks
Seyed A. Esmaeili
Bharat Singh
Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{sesmaeil@umd.edu, bharat@cs.umd.edu, lsd@umiacs.umd.edu}

Abstract
Fast-AT is an automatic thumbnail generation system
based on deep neural networks. It is a fully-convolutional
deep neural network, which learns specific filters for thumbnails of different sizes and aspect ratios. During inference,
the appropriate filter is selected depending on the dimensions of the target thumbnail. Unlike most previous work,
Fast-AT does not utilize saliency but addresses the problem
directly. In addition, it eliminates the need to conduct region search on the saliency map. The model generalizes to
thumbnails of different sizes including those with extreme
aspect ratios and can generate thumbnails in real time. A
data set of more than 70,000 thumbnail annotations was
collected to train Fast-AT. We show competitive results in
comparison to existing techniques.

1. Introduction
Thumbnails are used to facilitate browsing of a collection of images, make economic use of display space, and reduce the transmission time. A thumbnail image is a smaller
version of an original images that is meant to effectively
portray the original image (Figure 1). Social media websites such as Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, etc have content
from multiple user accounts which needs to be displayed on
a fixed resolution display. A normal web page on Facebook
contains hundreds of images, which are essentially thumbnails of larger images. Therefore, it is important to ensure
that each thumbnail displays the most useful information
present in the original image. Since images displayed on a
web page vary significantly in size and aspect ratio, any
thumbnail generation algorithm must be able to generate
thumbnails over a range of scales and aspect ratios.
The standard operations used for creating thumbnails
are cropping and scaling. Since thumbnails are ubiquitous
and the manual generation of thumbnails is time consuming, significant research has been devoted for automatic
thumbnail generation. Most methods [20, 3, 2] utilize a
saliency map to identify regions in the image that could
serve as good crops to create thumbnails. This leads to a

Figure 1. Illustration of the thumbnail problem. The original image is shown on the left with thumbnails of different aspect ratios
on the right.

two step solution where saliency is first computed and then
an optimization problem is solved to find the optimum crop.
Whereas a recent method addresses [9] the problem directly,
it involves hand crafted features and uses SVMs to score
candidate crops. Moreover, the implementation requires 60
seconds to produce a single thumbnail.
We propose Fast-AT, a deep learning based approach for
thumbnail generation that addresses the problem directly, in
an end-to-end learning framework. Our work involves the
following contributions:
• Fast-AT is based on an object detection framework,
which takes dimensions of the target thumbnail into
account for generating crops. Since it produces thumbnails using a feed-forward network, it can process 9
images per second on a GPU.
• By vector quantizing aspect ratios, Fast-AT learns different filters for different aspect ratios during training.
During inference, the appropriate filter is selected depending on dimensions of the target thumbnail.
• 70,048 thumbnail annotations were created on 28,064
images through Amazon Mechanical Turk. The annotated thumbnail data set will be released with this
paper.

2. Related Work
Since thumbnail creation involves reducing the image
size, retargetting methods [17] such as seam carving and
14622

