Generating the Future with Adversarial Transformers
Carl Vondrick and Antonio Torralba
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{vondrick,torralba}@mit.edu
Abstract
We learn models to generate the immediate future in
video. This problem has two main challenges. Firstly,
since the future is uncertain, models should be multi-modal,
which can be difficult to learn. Secondly, since the future is similar to the past, models store low-level details,
which complicates learning of high-level semantics. We
propose a framework to tackle both of these challenges. We
present a model that generates the future by transforming
pixels in the past. Our approach explicitly disentangles the
model’s memory from the prediction, which helps the model
learn desirable invariances. Experiments suggest that this
model can generate short videos of plausible futures. We believe predictive models have many applications in robotics,
health-care, and video understanding.

1. Introduction
Can you predict what the scene in Figure 1a will look
like in the immediate future? The capability for machines
to anticipate the future would enable several applications in
robotics, health-care, and video understanding [13, 14]. Unfortunately, despite the availability of large video datasets
and advances in data-driven learning methods, robust visual
prediction models have been elusive.
We believe there are two primary obstacles in the future generation problem. Firstly, the future is uncertain
[18, 35, 36]. In order to produce sharp generations, models
must account for uncertainty, but multi-modal losses can be
difficult to optimize. Secondly, the future is often similar
to the past [5, 45], which models consequently must store.
However, memorizing the past may complicate the learning of high-level semantics necessary for prediction. In this
paper, we propose a framework to tackle both challenges.
We present an adversarial network that generates the future by transforming the pixels in the past. Rather than generating pixel intensities [28, 18, 35] (which may be too unconstrained) or generating fixed representations [47, 34, 36]
(which may be too constrained), we propose a model that
learns to transform the past pixels. This formulation un-

Convolutional
Network
Differentiable
Transformer

a) Input Video Clip
b) Extrapolated Video

Figure 1: Generating the Future: We develop a largescale model for generating the immediate future in unconstrained scenes. Our model uses adversarial learning to predict a transformation from the past into the future by learning from unlabeled video.

tangles the memory of the past with the prediction of the
future. We believe this formulation helps the network learn
desirable invariances because each layer in the network is
no longer required to store low-level details. Instead, the
network only needs to store sufficient information to transform the input. Our experiments and visualizations suggest
that generating transformations produces more realistic predictions and also helps learn some semantics.
Since the future is uncertain, we instead train our model
to generate a plausible future. We leverage recent advances
in adversarial learning [7, 26] to train our model to generate one possible video of the future. Although the model
is not guaranteed to generate the “correct” future, instead
our approach hallucinates transformations for a future that
is plausible. Experiments suggest that humans prefer predictions from our model better than simple baselines.
We capitalize on large amounts of unlabeled video downloaded from the web for learning. Although unlabeled video
lacks labels, it contains rich signals about how objects behave and is abundantly available. Our model is trained endto-end without supervision using unconstrained, in-the-wild
data from consumer video footage.
The main contribution of this paper is the development
of a large-scale approach for generating videos of the future by learning transformations with adversarial learning
and unconstrained unlabeled video. The remainder of this
11020

