Learning Residual Images for Face Attribute Manipulation
Wei Shen
Rujie Liu
Fujitsu Research & Development Center, Beijing, China.
{shenwei, rjliu}@cn.fujitsu.com

Abstract
Face attributes are interesting due to their detailed description of human faces. Unlike prior researches working on attribute prediction, we address an inverse and
more challenging problem called face attribute manipulation which aims at modifying a face image according to a
given attribute value. Instead of manipulating the whole
image, we propose to learn the corresponding residual image defined as the difference between images before and
after the manipulation. In this way, the manipulation can
be operated efficiently with modest pixel modification. The
framework of our approach is based on the Generative Adversarial Network. It consists of two image transformation
networks and a discriminative network. The transformation
networks are responsible for the attribute manipulation and
its dual operation and the discriminative network is used
to distinguish the generated images from real images. We
also apply dual learning to allow transformation networks
to learn from each other. Experiments show that residual
images can be effectively learned and used for attribute manipulations. The generated images remain most of the details in attribute-irrelevant areas.

1. Introduction
Considerable progresses have been made on face image
processing, such as age analysis [22][26], emotion detection [1][5] and attribute classification [4][20][15][18]. Most
of these studies concentrate on inferring attributes from images. However, we raise an inverse question on whether
we can manipulate a face image towards a desired attribute
value (i.e. face attribute manipulation). Some examples are
shown in Fig. 1.
Generative models such as generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [7] and variational autoencoders
(VAEs) [14] are powerful models capable of generating
images. Images generated from GAN models are sharp
and realistic. However, they can not encode images since
it is the random noise that is used for image generation.
Compared to GAN models, VAE models are able to encode

(a) Glasses: remove and add the glasses

(b) Mouth open: close and open the mouth

(c) No beard: add and remove the beard

Figure 1: Illustration of face attribute manipulation. From
top to bottom are the manipulations of glasses, mouth open
and no beard.

the given image to a latent representation. Nevertheless,
passing images through the encoder-decoder pipeline often
harms the quality of the reconstruction. In the scenario of
face attribute manipulation, those details can be identityrelated and the loss of those details will cause undesired
changes. Thus, it is difficult to directly employ GAN
models or VAE models to face attribute manipulation.
An alternative way is to view face attribute manipulation
as a transformation process which takes in original images
as input and then outputs transformed images without explicit embedding. Such a transformation process can be efficiently implemented by a feed-forward convolutional neural network (CNN). When manipulating face attributes, the
feed-forward network is required to modify the attributespecific area and keep irrelevant areas unchanged, both of
which are challenging.
In this paper, we propose a novel method based on resid-

4030

