Beyond triplet loss: a deep quadruplet network for person re-identification
Weihua Chen1,2 , Xiaotang Chen1,2 , Jianguo Zhang3 , Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1
CRIPAC&NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Computing, School of Science and Engineering, University of Dundee, United Kingdom
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Email:{weihua.chen, xtchen, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, j.n.zhang@dundee.ac.uk

Abstract
Person re-identification (ReID) is an important task in
wide area video surveillance which focuses on identifying
people across different cameras. Recently, deep learning
networks with a triplet loss become a common framework
for person ReID. However, the triplet loss pays main attentions on obtaining correct orders on the training set. It
still suffers from a weaker generalization capability from
the training set to the testing set, thus resulting in inferior
performance. In this paper, we design a quadruplet loss,
which can lead to the model output with a larger inter-class
variation and a smaller intra-class variation compared to
the triplet loss. As a result, our model has a better generalization ability and can achieve a higher performance on the
testing set. In particular, a quadruplet deep network using
a margin-based online hard negative mining is proposed
based on the quadruplet loss for the person ReID. In
extensive experiments, the proposed network outperforms
most of the state-of-the-art algorithms on representative
datasets which clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of our
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is an important task in
wide area video surveillance. The key challenge is the large
appearance variations, usually caused by the significant
changes in human body poses, illumination and views.
As person ReID commonly uses the Cumulative Matching Characteristic curve [11, 13, 45] for performance evaluation which follows rank-n criteria, recently deep learning
approaches [7, 2, 29, 32, 4] usually treat the person ReID
as a ranking task and apply a triplet loss to address the
problem. The main purpose of the triplet loss is to obtain a
correct order for each probe image and distinguish identities
in the projected space. However, in person ReID the categories (i.e. person identities) in the testing set are unseen
and have no overlap with the training categories. As shown

Figure 1. (a) and (b) illustrate the effects of two models (e.g. with
triplet loss vs. quadruplet loss) learned on the same training set
(left) when applied on the same test set (right). We can see that the
model trained in case (b) has output a small intra-class variation
and a large inter-class variation, thus tends to perform better on
the testing set than the model trained in case (a).

in Fig. 1 (a), a model learned (e.g. typically by a triplet
loss) in the training set is specific to the training identities,
and performs well in distinguishing these identities. When
it is applied on the unseen testing identities, the trained
model struggles to be a good performer, showing a weaker
generalization capability from training to testing. The
underlying reason is that the model trained by a triplet loss
would still cause a relatively large intra-class variation1 ,
which was also observed in [4]. It is noted that reducing
intra-class variations and enlarging inter-class variations
can decrease the generalization error of trained models [34].
1 The category for the intra- and inter- class variations refers to person
identities in person ReID.

403

