Improving Interpretability of Deep Neural Networks with Semantic Information ∗
Yinpeng Dong
Hang Su
Jun Zhu
Bo Zhang
Tsinghua National Lab for Information Science and Technology
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Center for Bio-Inspired Computing Research
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
dongyinpeng@gmail.com

{suhangss, dcszj, dcszb}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Interpretability of deep neural networks (DNNs) is essential since it enables users to understand the overall
strengths and weaknesses of the models, conveys an understanding of how the models will behave in the future,
and how to diagnose and correct potential problems. However, it is challenging to reason about what a DNN actually
does due to its opaque or black-box nature. To address this
issue, we propose a novel technique to improve the interpretability of DNNs by leveraging the rich semantic information embedded in human descriptions. By concentrating
on the video captioning task, we first extract a set of semantically meaningful topics from the human descriptions
that cover a wide range of visual concepts, and integrate
them into the model with an interpretive loss. We then propose a prediction difference maximization algorithm to interpret the learned features of each neuron. Experimental
results demonstrate its effectiveness in video captioning using the interpretable features, which can also be transferred
to video action recognition. By clearly understanding the
learned features, users can easily revise false predictions
via a human-in-the-loop procedure.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated stateof-the-art and sometimes human-competitive performance
in numerous vision-related tasks [19], including image
classification [18, 30], object detection [14, 28] and image/video captioning [33, 34]. With such success, DNNs
have been integrated into various intelligent systems as a
key component, e.g., autonomous car [16, 5], medical im∗ The work was supported by the National Basic Research Program (973
Program) of China (No. 2013CB329403), National NSF of China Projects
(Nos. 61571261, 61620106010, 61621136008), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2015M580099), Tiangong Institute for Intelligent
Computing, and the Collaborative Projects with Tencent.

Figure 1. An overview of our interpretation system (bottom) compared with an opaque system (top). An opaque system often learns
abstract and incomprehensible features. Human users have to accept the decisions from the system passively, but are unable to
understand the rationale of the decisions and interact with it. To
address this issue, we incorporate topics embedded in human descriptions as semantic information, to improve interpretability of
DNNs during the learning process. The learned features of each
neuron can be associated with a topic (e.g., topic “road” with top
related words like road, street, and drive can interpret the learned
features of the blue neuron). With the aids of these interpretable
features, human users can easily visualize and interact with the
system, which allows a human-in-the-loop learning procedure.

age analysis [15], financial investment [1], etc. The highperformance of DNNs highly lies on the fact that they often
stack tens of or even hundreds of nonlinear layers, and encode knowledge as numerical weights of various node-tonode connections.
Although DNNs offer tremendous benefits to various applications, they are often treated as “black box” models because of their highly nonlinear functions and unclear working mechanism [3]. Without a clear understanding of what
a given neuron in the complex models has learned and how
it interacts with others, the development of better models
typically relies on trial-and-error [37]. Furthermore, the effectiveness of DNNs is partly limited by its inabilities to ex-

4306

