Learning Category-Specific 3D Shape Models from Weakly Labeled 2D Images
Dingwen Zhang1,2 , Junwei Han1∗, Yang Yang1 , Dong Huang2
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{zhangdingwen2006yyy,junweihan2010,Tp030ny}@gmail.com,dghuang@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently, researchers have made great processes to build
category-specific 3D shape models from 2D images with
manual annotations consisting of class labels, keypoints,
and ground truth figure-ground segmentations. However,
the annotation of figure-ground segmentations is still laborintensive and time-consuming. To further alleviate the burden of providing such manual annotations, we make the earliest effort to learn category-specific 3D shape models by
only using weakly labeled 2D images. By revealing the underlying relationship between the tasks of common object
segmentation and category-specific 3D shape reconstruction, we propose a novel framework to jointly solve these
two problems along a cluster-level learning curriculum.
Comprehensive experiments on the challenging PASCAL
VOC benchmark demonstrate that the category-specific 3D
shape models trained using our weakly supervised learning
framework could, to some extent, approach the performance
of the state-of-the-art methods using expensive manual segmentation annotations. In addition, the experiments also
demonstrate the effectiveness of using 3D shape models for
helping common object segmentation.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, learning object models to recognize object
categories, discover object locations, and segment object masks from given images has been widely studied and
could almost achieve performance that approaches the human expectation. However, another interesting and meaningful problem—constructing rich internal representation,
such as the depth information and 3D poses, of the presented objects—still remains to be challenging and understudied. To address this problem, one promising solution is
to build 3D shape models of the objects appearing in the given images, which could be potentially utilized to generate
the depth maps [28], perform pose correspondence [39], and
construct the specific instances in each single image [17].
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the most recent progress [20, 7] in learning 3D shape models from 2D images, which could infer 3D shape
models by using the 2D annotations, including the class labels,
ground truth figure-ground segmentations, and a small set of keypoints, while the extra 3D shape training data are not required.
Compared with these methods, this paper aims to learning 3D
shape models even without using the ground truth figure-ground
segmentations, which could significantly alleviate the manual annotation efforts for learning 3D shape models.

So how to construct the 3D shape models? In some early
approaches, such as [22, 26], a precise 3D shape model of
the target object is manually provided in advance. In other
words, the 3D shape models used by these approaches to
reconstruct the instances in each given image are obtained
directly by the human design. Another group of approaches
were proposed to leverage the 3D shape training data (e.g.
those obtained by 3D scanning) to reconstruct the object4321
4573

