Fast Video Classification via Adaptive Cascading of Deep Models
Haichen Shen, Seungyeop Han∗ , Matthai Philipose† , Arvind Krishnamurthy
University of Washington, Rubrik, Inc.∗ , Microsoft Research†
{haichen, arvind}@cs.washington.edu, seungyeop.han@rubrik.com∗ , matthaip@microsoft.com†

Abstract
Recent advances have enabled “oracle” classifiers that
can classify across many classes and input distributions
with high accuracy without retraining. However, these
classifiers are relatively heavyweight, so that applying
them to classify video is costly. We show that day-to-day
video exhibits highly skewed class distributions over the
short term, and that these distributions can be classified
by much simpler models. We formulate the problem
of detecting the short-term skews online and exploiting
models based on it as a new sequential decision making
problem dubbed the Online Bandit Problem, and present
a new algorithm to solve it. When applied to recognizing faces in TV shows and movies, we realize end-toend classification speedups of 2.4-7.8×/2.6-11.2× (on
GPU/CPU) relative to a state-of-the-art convolutional
neural network, at competitive accuracy.

1. Introduction
Consider recognizing entities such as objects, people,
scenes and activities in every frame of video footage of
day-to-day life. Such footage may come, for instance,
from the media, wearable cameras, movies, or surveillance cameras. In principle, these entities could be
drawn from thousands of classes: many of us encounter
hundreds to thousands of distinct people, objects, scenes
and activities through our life. Over short intervals
such as minutes, however, we tend to encounter a very
small subset of classes of entities. For instance, a wearable camera may see the same set of objects from our
desk at work for an hour, a movie may focus only on
cooking-related activities through a five-minute kitchen
sequence, and media footage of an event may focus on
only those celebrities participating in the event. In this
paper, we characterize and exploit such short-term class
skew to significantly reduce the latency of classifying
video using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
Since the seminal work of Viola and Jones [23] on face
detection, one of the best-known techniques to speed

up classification has been to structure the classifier as a
cascade (or tree [27]) of simple classifiers such that “easy”
examples lead to early exits and are therefore classified
faster. Cascaded classifiers require that training and
test data are strongly (and identically) biased toward a
small number of easy to detect classes. In the (binary)
face detection task, for example, the class “not a face” is
both (i) by far more common than “face”, and (ii) often
quite easy to classify via a small number of comparisons
of inexpensive Haar-style features. In fact, traditional
cascades are most applicable in detection tasks [4], where
the background is both much more common and easier
to classify than the foreground.
Distinct from the (two-class) detection setting in
traditional cascading, recent advances in convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [15, 21, 30] have opened up the
possibility of using a single, pre-trained “oracle” classifier
to recognize thousands of classes such as people, objects
and scenes. When training such oracle classifiers, such
as GoogLeNet [21] of VGGFace [15]), a small number
of classes do not usually dominate the training set: for
broad applicability, the classifier is trained assuming
that all classes are more or less equally likely. Even if
such a skew toward such small classes existed, there is
no a priori reason that these dominant classes are fast
to classify. It may seem therefore that cascading is not
a promising optimization for improving the speed of
entity recognition in video via CNNs.
We demonstrate, however, that for many recognition
tasks, day-to-day video often exhibits significant shortterm skews in class distribution. We present measurements on a diverse set of videos that show, for instance,
that in over 90% of 1-minute windows, at least 90% of
objects interacted with by humans belong to a set of
25 or fewer objects. The underlying ImageNet-based
recognizer, on the other hand, can recognize up to 1000
objects. We show that similar skews hold for faces and
scenes in videos.
Even if such skew exists, to our knowledge, it has
not been shown that distributions skewed toward small
sets of classes can be classified accurately by simpler

3646

