Neural Aggregation Network for Video Face Recognition

Jiaolong Yang∗ 1,2,3 , Peiran Ren1 , Dongqing Zhang1 , Dong Chen1 , Fang Wen1 , Hongdong Li2 , Gang Hua1
1

Microsoft Research

2

The Australian National University

3

Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
This paper presents a Neural Aggregation Network
(NAN) for video face recognition. The network takes a face
video or face image set of a person with a variable number of face images as its input, and produces a compact,
fixed-dimension feature representation for recognition. The
whole network is composed of two modules. The feature
embedding module is a deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) which maps each face image to a feature vector. The
aggregation module consists of two attention blocks which
adaptively aggregate the feature vectors to form a single
feature inside the convex hull spanned by them. Due to the
attention mechanism, the aggregation is invariant to the image order. Our NAN is trained with a standard classification or verification loss without any extra supervision signal, and we found that it automatically learns to advocate
high-quality face images while repelling low-quality ones
such as blurred, occluded and improperly exposed faces.
The experiments on IJB-A, YouTube Face, Celebrity-1000
video face recognition benchmarks show that it consistently
outperforms naive aggregation methods and achieves the
state-of-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
Video face recognition has caught more and more attention from the community in recent years [42, 20, 43, 11,
25, 21, 22, 27, 14, 35, 31, 10]. Compared to image-based
face recognition, more information of the subjects can be
exploited from the input videos, which naturally incorporate faces of the same subject in varying poses and illumination conditions. The key issue in video face recognition
is to build an appropriate representation of the video face,
such that it can effectively integrate the information across
different frames together, maintaining beneficial while discarding noisy information.
∗ Part of this work was done when J. Yang was an intern at MSR supervised by G. Hua.

Feature embedding module

{xk}

Input: Fa e i age set

{fk }

Aggregation module

r1
Output:

CNN

Atte tio
lo k

q1

ψ

r0

Atte tio
lo k

q0

8-d feature

Figure 1. Our network architecture for video face recognition. All
input face images {xk } are processed by a feature embedding
module with a deep CNN, yielding a set of feature vectors {fk }.
These features are passed to the aggregation module, producing a
single 128-dimensional vector r1 to represent the input faces images. This compact representation is used for recognition.

One naive approach would be representing a video face
as a set of frame-level face features such as those extracted
from deep neural networks [35, 31], which have dominated
face recognition recently [35, 28, 33, 31, 23, 41]. Such a
representation comprehensively maintains the information
across all frames. However, to compare two video faces,
one needs to fuse the matching results across all pairs of
frames between the two face videos. Let n be the average
number of video frames, then the computational complexity is O(n2 ) per match operation, which is not desirable
especially for large-scale recognition. Besides, such a setbased representation would incur O(n) space complexity
per video face example, which demands a lot of memory
storage and confronts efficient indexing.
We argue that it is more desirable to come with a compact, fixed-size feature representation at the video level, irrespective of the varied length of the videos. Such a representation would allow direct, constant-time computation of the
similarity or distance without the need for frame-to-frame
matching. A straightforward solution might be extracting
a feature at each frame and then conducting a certain type
of pooling to aggregate the frame-level features together to
form a video-level representation.
14362

