Deep Structured Learning for Facial Action Unit Intensity Estimation
Robert Walecki1 , Ognjen (Oggi) Rudovic2 ,
Vladimir Pavlovic3 , Bjöern Schuller1 and Maja Pantic1,4
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
2
MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, USA
4
EEMCS, University of Twente, The Netherlands

Abstract

nearly any anatomically possible facial expression can be
described as a combination of AUs and their intensities.

We consider the task of automated estimation of facial expression intensity. This involves estimation of multiple output variables (facial action units — AUs) that are
structurally dependent. Their structure arises from statistically induced co-occurrence patterns of AU intensity levels.
Modeling this structure is critical for improving the estimation performance; however, this performance is bounded
by the quality of the input features extracted from face images. The goal of this paper is to model these structures and
estimate complex feature representations simultaneously by
combining conditional random field (CRF) encoded AU dependencies with deep learning. To this end, we propose
a novel Copula CNN deep learning approach for modeling multivariate ordinal variables. Our model accounts for
ordinal structure in output variables and their non-linear
dependencies via copula functions modeled as cliques of a
CRF. These are jointly optimized with deep CNN feature
encoding layers using a newly introduced balanced batch
iterative training algorithm. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the task of AU intensity estimation
on two benchmark datasets. We show that joint learning
of the deep features and the target output structure results
in significant performance gains compared to existing deep
structured models for analysis of facial expressions.

Recent advances in deep neural networks (DNN), and,
in particular, convolutional models (CNNs) [14], have allowed to completely remove or highly reduce the dependence on physics-based models and/or other pre-processing
techniques, by enabling the “end-to-end” learning in the
pipeline directly from input images. While the effectiveness of these models has been demonstrated on many general vision problems [19, 40, 38], only baseline tasks such
as expression recognition and AU detection [23, 44, 17] and
AU intensity estimation [14] have been investigated. All of
them, however, follow the traditional “blind deep learning”
paradigm that relies on large labeled training datasets (e.g.,
100K+ samples in [32]). Yet, in the facial data domain obtaining accurate and comprehensive labels is typically prohibitive. For instance, it takes more than an hour for an
expert annotator to code AUs’ intensity for 1 sec of face
video. Even then, the annotations are highly biased and
have low inter-annotator agreement. Coupled with large
variability in imaging conditions, facial morphology, dynamics of expressions, this has resulted in the lack of suitable large datasets for effective deep model learning.

1. Introduction
Automated analysis of human facial expressions aims to
make inference about affective states, emotion expressions,
pain levels, etc., from face images of the target person. Facial expressions are typically described in terms of configuration and intensity of facial muscle actions using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [11]. FACS defines a
unique set of 30+ atomic non-overlapping facial muscle actions named Action Units (AUs) [27], with rules for scoring
their intensity on a six-point ordinal scale. Using FACS,

To improve deep learning for facial expression analysis and, in particular, intensity estimation of facial AUs,
from available (annotated) facial images, we exploit and
combine two modeling approaches: structured learning and
data-sharing (e.g., between multiple datasets). We focus on
the AU intensity estimation as the intensities are very difficult to annotate manually (high number of AUs and their
intensity levels) but are of critical importance for high level
interpretation of facial expressions. This, inevitably, entails
a scarcity in available annotated data. Furthermore, the AU
intensities are highly imbalanced due to the highest intensity levels occurring rarely and varying considerably among
subjects. Finally, the dynamics of AUs also vary across contexts (e.g., in facial expressions of pain vs expressions of
basic emotions).
13405

