Look into Person: Self-supervised Structure-sensitive Learning and A New
Benchmark for Human Parsing
Ke Gong1 , Xiaodan Liang1,2 , Dongyu Zhang1∗, Xiaohui Shen3 , Liang Lin1,4
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Adobe Research 4 SenseTime Group (Limited)
gongk3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xiaodan1@cs.cmu.edu, {zhangdy27,linlng}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xshen@adobe.com
1

Abstract
Human parsing has recently attracted a lot of research
interests due to its huge application potentials. However
existing datasets have limited number of images and annotations, and lack the variety of human appearances and
the coverage of challenging cases in unconstrained environment. In this paper, we introduce a new benchmark1 “Look
into Person (LIP)” that makes a significant advance in
terms of scalability, diversity and difficulty, a contribution
that we feel is crucial for future developments in humancentric analysis. This comprehensive dataset contains over
50,000 elaborately annotated images with 19 semantic part
labels, which are captured from a wider range of viewpoints, occlusions and background complexity. Given these
rich annotations we perform detailed analyses of the leading human parsing approaches, gaining insights into the
success and failures of these methods. Furthermore, in contrast to the existing efforts on improving the feature discriminative capability, we solve human parsing by exploring a novel self-supervised structure-sensitive learning approach, which imposes human pose structures into parsing results without resorting to extra supervision (i.e., no
need for specifically labeling human joints in model training). Our self-supervised learning framework can be injected into any advanced neural networks to help incorporate rich high-level knowledge regarding human joints from
a global perspective and improve the parsing results. Extensive evaluations on our LIP and the public PASCAL-PersonPart dataset demonstrate the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Human parsing aims to segment a human image into
multiple parts with fine-grained semantics and provide more
detailed understanding of image contents. It can stimulate
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this paper. Corresponding
author is Dongyu Zhang. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 61401125 and 61671182.
1 The dataset is available at http://hcp.sysu.edu.cn/lip

many higher-level computer vision applications [33], such
as person re-identification [34] and human behavior analysis [11, 16].
Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved exciting success in human parsing [13, 17, 15].
Nevertheless, as demonstrated in many other problems such
as object detection [14] and semantic segmentation [35], the
performance of those CNN-based approaches heavily rely
on the availability of annotated images for training. In order to train a human parsing network with potentially practical value in real-word applications, it is highly desired to
have a large-scale dataset composed of representative instances with varied clothing appearances, strong articulation, partial (self-)occlusions, truncation at image borders,
diverse viewpoints and background clutters. Although there
exist training sets for special scenarios such as fashion pictures [30, 9, 13, 17] and people in constrained situations
(e.g., upright) [6], these datasets are limited in their coverage and scalability, as shown in Fig. 1. The largest public
human parsing dataset [17] so far only contains 17,000 fashion images while others only include thousands of images.
Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, no attempt has
been made to establish a standard representative benchmark aiming to cover a wide pallet of challenges for the
human parsing task. The existing datasets did not provide
an evaluation server with a secret test set to avoid potential
dataset over-fitting, which hinders further development on
this topic. Therefore we propose a new benchmark “Look
into Person (LIP)” and a public server for automatically reporting evaluation results. Our benchmark significantly advances the state-of-the-arts in terms of appearance variability and complexity, which includes 50,462 human images
with pixel-wise annotations of 19 semantic parts.
The recent progress on human parsing [5, 28, 31, 30, 9,
25, 19, 17] has been achieved by improving the feature representations using convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks. To capture rich structure information,
they combine CNNs and the graphical models (e.g., Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)), similar to the general object
segmentation approaches [35, 4, 27]. However, evaluated
1932

