Feedback Networks
Amir R. Zamir1,3∗ Te-Lin Wu1∗ Lin Sun1,2 William B. Shen1
Jitendra Malik3 Silvio Savarese1
1

Bertram E. Shi2

Stanford University 2 HKUST 3 University of California, Berkeley
http://feedbacknet.stanford.edu/
Abstract

1. Introduction
Feedback is defined to occur when the (full or partial)
output of a system is routed back into the input as part of an
iterative cause-and-effect process [13]. Utilizing feedback
is a strong way of making predictions in various fields, ranging from control theory to psychology [34, 44, 2]. Employing feedback connections is also heavily exercised by the
brain [22, 47, 47, 8, 35] suggesting a core role for it in complex cognition. In this paper, we establish that a feedback
based learning approach has several core advantages over
the commonly employed feedforward paradigm making it
a worthwhile alternative. These advantages (elaborated below) are mainly attributed to the fact that the final prediction
is made in an iterative, rather than one-time, manner along
with an explicit notion of the thus-far output per iteration.
Early Predictions: One advantage is providing early
∗ Authors contributed equally.

road bike

T/4

2T/4

3T/4

early
prediction

unroll

4T/4

wheeled vehicle
vehicle
object

…

vessel

bike
car

road bike
tandem bike

taxonomic
prediction

time

time
curriculum
learning

Currently, the most successful learning models in computer vision are based on learning successive representations followed by a decision layer. This is usually actualized through feedforward multilayer neural networks, e.g.
ConvNets, where each layer forms one of such successive
representations. However, an alternative that can achieve
the same goal is a feedback based approach in which the
representation is formed in an iterative manner based on a
feedback received from previous iteration’s output.
We establish that a feedback based approach has several
core advantages over feedforward: it enables making early
predictions at the query time, its output naturally conforms
to a hierarchical structure in the label space (e.g. a taxonomy), and it provides a new basis for Curriculum Learning.
We observe that feedback develops a considerably different representation compared to feedforward counterparts,
in line with the aforementioned advantages. We provide a
general feedback based learning architecture, instantiated
using existing RNNs, with the endpoint results on par or
better than existing feedforward networks and the addition
of the above advantages.

objective func. 1

objective func. 2

objective func. 3

objective func. 4

Figure 1. A feedback based learning model. The basic idea is to make
predictions in an iterative manner based on a notion of the thus-far outcome. This provides several core advantages: I. enabling early predictions
(given total inference time T , early predictions are made in fractions of T );
II. naturally conforming to a taxonomy in the output space; and III. better
grounds for curriculum learning.

predictions, meaning that estimations of the output can
be provided in a fraction of total inference time. This is
schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. This property is a result of iterative inference and is in contrast to feedforward
where a one-time output is provided only when the signal
reaches the end of the network. This is of particular importance in practical scenarios, such as robotics or autonomous
driving; e.g. imagine a self driving car that receives a cautionary heads up about possibly approaching a pedestrian on
a highway, without needing to wait for the final definite output. Such scenarios are abundant in practice as usually time
is crucial and limited computation resources can be reallocated based on early predictions on-the-fly, given a proper
uncertainty measure, such as Minimum Bayes Risk [33].
Taxonomy Compliance: Another advantage is making
predictions that naturally conform to a hierarchical structure in the output space, e.g. a taxonomy, even when not
trained using the taxonomy. The early predictions of the
feedback model conform to a coarse classification, while
11308

