Spatio-Temporal Alignment of Non-Overlapping Sequences from Independently
Panning Cameras
S. Morteza Safdarnejad
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, USA

Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, USA

safdarne@egr.msu.edu

liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal alignment of multiple videos [7–9, 11,
14, 21, 24, 28, 31] is a well-studied vision problem with
a wide range of applications, e.g., human action recognition [25, 29], video editing [31], markerless motion capture [14], video mosaicing, change detection [8], and abandoned object detection [16]. Previous works study different aspects and scenarios of the spatio-temporal alignment.
Some works target sequences from the same scene but different viewpoints [14, 21]. Some can handle sequences
recorded at different times by independent moving cameras
that follow a similar trajectory [9,11,31]. The seminal work
of Caspi and Irani [7] studies spatially non-overlapping sequences when two ﬁxed cameras move jointly in space.
Our work covers a novel unexplored aspect of spatiotemporal alignment of sequences, for non-overlapping se-

7HPSRUDORYHUODS

This paper addresses the problem of spatio-temporal
alignment of multiple video sequences. We identify and
tackle a novel scenario of this problem referred to as Nonoverlapping Sequences (NOS). NOS are captured by multiple freely panning handheld cameras whose field of views
(FOV) might have no direct spatial overlap. With the popularity of mobile sensors, NOS rise when multiple cooperative users capture a public event to create a panoramic
video, or when consolidating multiple footages of an incident into a single video. To tackle this novel scenario,
we first spatially align the sequences by reconstructing
the background of each sequence and registering these
backgrounds, even if the backgrounds are not overlapping.
Given the spatial alignment, we temporally synchronize the
sequences, such that the trajectories of moving objects (e.g.,
cars or pedestrians) are consistent across sequences. Experimental results demonstrate the performance of our algorithm in this novel and challenging scenario, quantitatively and qualitatively.

6

6
a
6
b

6

t

(a)

f = 540

f = 571

6SDWLR
WHPSRUDO
RYHUODS

x 1RPLQLPDORYHUDOO
VSDWLDORYHUODS

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Top view of spatio-temporal FOV of two moving
cameras capturing sequences S1 and S2 ; Non-overlapping sequences (NOS) may not even cover a common spatial region over
the progression of time, i.e, no overall spatial overlap exists. (b)
Spatio-temporal alignment of NOS results in displaying sequences
in a common coordinate and at the correct time shift.

quences (NOS). Targeted NOS are captured by freely
and independently panning cameras, from nearby viewpoints, with limited translation, especially in the optical axis
direction. In NOS, sequences might not have any pair of
frames that have spatial overlap and belong to the same
world time instant. More interestingly, sequences might
even not cover some common regions of the same scene
over the progression of time. In other words, if we reconstruct the observed background by these sequences, the
backgrounds may be non-overlapping, i.e., in Fig. 1 (a), the
overall spatial overlap does not exist.
Given the ubiquitousness of smartphones and wearcams,
NOS are increasingly common. When amateur users unsynchronizedly shoot videos of an event, aligning these videos
leads to a single comprehensive video, with greater spatial
and temporal spans (Fig. 1 (b)). This resultant video is essentially a panoramic video, shot by smartphones, without
the need to ﬁx the cameras to each other or use tripods.
Further, when many witnesses capture videos during crime
actions or violations, each sequence may cover part of the
story. Aligning these videos into a uniﬁed large-scale 3D
volume provides a better grasp of the full picture.
The existing spatio-temporal alignment algorithms fail
in the case of NOS, since even if there is some overall
13808

