Superpixels and Polygons using Simple Non-Iterative Clustering
Radhakrishna Achanta and Sabine Süsstrunk
School of Computer and Communication Sciences (IC)
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Switzerland
{radhakrishna.achanta,sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch

Abstract
We present an improved version of the Simple Linear Iterative Clustering (SLIC) superpixel segmentation. Unlike
SLIC, our algorithm is non-iterative, enforces connectivity
from the start, requires lesser memory, and is faster. Relying on the superpixel boundaries obtained using our algorithm, we also present a polygonal partitioning algorithm.
We demonstrate that our superpixels as well as the polygonal partitioning are superior to the respective state-of-theart algorithms on quantitative benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation continues to be a challenge that attracts both domain specific and generic solutions. To avoid
the struggle with semantics when using traditional segmentation algorithms, researchers lately diverted their attention
to a much simpler and achievable task, namely that of simplifying an image into small clusters of connected pixels
called superpixels. Superpixel segmentation has quickly become a potent pre-processing tool that simplifies an image
from, potentially, millions of pixels to about two orders of
magnitude fewer, clusters of similar pixels.
After their introduction [27], several applications such
as object localization [14], multi-class segmentation [15],
optical flow [22], body model estimation [24], object tracking [35], and depth estimation [37] took advantage of superpixels. For these applications, superpixels are commonly
expected to have the following properties [7, 18]:
• Tight region boundary adherence.
• Containing a small cluster of similar pixels.
• Uniformity; roughly equally sized clusters.
• Compactness; limiting the degree of adjacency.
• Computational efficiency.
One of the most promiment superpixel segmentation algorithms is the Simple Linear Iterative Clustering algorithm

Figure 1. Images on the left show SNIC segmentation for three
different superpixel sizes. Images on the right show the corresponding SNICPOLY polygonal partitioning.

(SLIC) [7], which satisfies these criteria and is very efficient
in terms of computation and memory requirements. Despite
its widespread use, SLIC suffers from a few shortcomings.
It requires several iterations for the centroids to converge. It
uses a distance map of the same size as the number of input
pixels, which amounts to significant memory consumption
for image stacks or video volumes. Lastly, SLIC enforces
connectivity only as a post-processing step.
In this paper, we first present an improved version of the
SLIC algorithm that overcomes the above-mentioned limitations: (1) our algorithm runs in a single iteration; (2)
it does not use a distance map and therefore requires less
memory; and, (3) our algorithm enforces connectivity explicitly from the start. In addition, our algorithm improves
(4) the computational efficiency, (5) memory consumption,

4651

