Learning Diverse Image Colorization
Aditya Deshpande, Jiajun Lu, Mao-Chuang Yeh, Min Jin Chong and David Forsyth
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
{ardeshp2, jlu23, myeh2, mchong6, daf} @illinois.edu

Abstract
Colorization is an ambiguous problem, with multiple viable colorizations for a single grey-level image. However,
previous methods only produce the single most probable
colorization. Our goal is to model the diversity intrinsic
to the problem of colorization and produce multiple colorizations that display long-scale spatial co-ordination. We
learn a low dimensional embedding of color fields using a
variational autoencoder (VAE). We construct loss terms for
the VAE decoder that avoid blurry outputs and take into account the uneven distribution of pixel colors. Finally, we
build a conditional model for the multi-modal distribution
between grey-level image and the color field embeddings.
Samples from this conditional model result in diverse colorization. We demonstrate that our method obtains better diverse colorizations than a standard conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) model, as well as a recently proposed conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN).

1. Introduction
In colorization, we predict the 2-channel color field for
an input grey-level image. It is an inherently ill-posed and
an ambiguous problem. Multiple different colorizations are
possible for a single grey-level image. For example, different shades of blue for sky, different colors for a building,
different skin tones for a person and other stark or subtle
color changes are all acceptable colorizations. In this paper,
our goal is to generate multiple colorizations for a single
grey-level image that are diverse and at the same time, each
realistic. This is a demanding task, because color fields are
not only cued to the local appearance but also have a longscale spatial structure. Sampling colors independently from
per-pixel distributions makes the output spatially incoherent and it does not generate a realistic color field (See Figure 2). Therefore, we need a method that generates multiple
colorizations while balancing per-pixel color estimates and
long-scale spatial co-ordination. This paradigm is common
to many ambiguous vision tasks where multiple predictions

are desired viz. generating motion-fields from static image [25], synthesizing future frames [27], time-lapse videos
[31], interactive segmentation and pose-estimation [1] etc.
A natural approach to solve the problem is to learn a conditional model P (C|G) for a color field C conditioned on
the input grey-level image G. We can then draw samples
from this conditional model {Ck }N
k=1 ∼ P (C|G) to obtain diverse colorizations. To build this explicit conditional
model is difficult. The difficulty being C and G are highdimensional spaces. The distribution of natural color fields
and grey-level features in these high-dimensional spaces is
therefore scattered. This does not expose the sharing required to learn a multi-modal conditional model. Therefore,
we seek feature representations of C and G that allow us to
build a conditional model.
Our strategy is to represent C by its low-dimensional
latent variable embedding z. This embedding is learned
by a generative model such as the Variational Autoencoder
(VAE) [14] (See Step 1 of Figure 1). Next, we leverage a Mixture Density Network (MDN) to learn a multimodal conditional model P (z|G) (See Step 2 of Figure
1). Our feature representation for grey-level image G comprises the features from conv-7 layer of a colorization CNN
[30]. These features encode spatial structure and per-pixel
affinity to colors. Finally, at test time we sample multiple
{zk }N
k=1 ∼ P (z|G) and use the VAE decoder to obtain the
corresponding colorizations Ck for each zk (See Figure 1).
Note that, our low-dimensional embedding encodes the spatial structure of color fields and we obtain spatially coherent
diverse colorizations by sampling the conditional model.
The contributions of our work are as follows. First, we
learn a smooth low-dimensional embedding along with a
device to generate corresponding color fields with high fidelity (Section 3, 7.2). Second, we a learn multi-modal
conditional model between the grey-level features and the
low-dimensional embedding capable of producing diverse
colorizations (Section 4). Third, we show that our method
outperforms the strong baseline of conditional variational
autoencoders (CVAE) and conditional generative adversarial networks (cGAN) [10] for obtaining diverse colorizations (Section 7.3, Figure 7).
16837

