Efficient Diffusion on Region Manifolds:
Recovering Small Objects with Compact CNN Representations
Ahmet Iscen1

Giorgos Tolias2
1 Inria Rennes

Yannis Avrithis1

Teddy Furon1

Ondřej Chum2

2 VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague

{ahmet.iscen,ioannis.avrithis,teddy.furon}@inria.fr
{giorgos.tolias,chum}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
Query expansion is a popular method to improve the
quality of image retrieval with both conventional and CNN
representations. It has been so far limited to global image similarity. This work focuses on diffusion, a mechanism
that captures the image manifold in the feature space. The
diffusion is carried out on descriptors of overlapping image regions rather than on a global image descriptor like
in previous approaches. An efficient off-line stage allows
optional reduction in the number of stored regions. In the
on-line stage, the proposed handling of unseen queries in
the indexing stage removes additional computation to adjust the precomputed data. We perform diffusion through a
sparse linear system solver, yielding practical query times
well below one second.
Experimentally, we observe a significant boost in performance of image retrieval with compact CNN descriptors
on standard benchmarks, especially when the query object
covers only a small part of the image. Small objects have
been a common failure case of CNN-based retrieval.

1. Introduction
Object search is a key tool behind a number of applications like content based image collection browsing [56, 34],
visual localization [46, 1], and 3D reconstruction [22, 47].
Many applications benefit from retrieving images taken
from various viewing angles and under different illumination, e.g. more information for the user while browsing, localization in day and night, and complete 3D models. Each
image is represented by one or more descriptors designed or
learned to exhibit a certain degree of invariance to imaging
conditions. Retrieval is formulated as a nearest neighbor
search in the descriptor space, performed by approximate
methods [36, 25, 29, 5].
While collections of local descriptors provide good invariance, global descriptors like VLAD [26] have smaller
memory footprint, but are more prone to locking onto the

(a) single query

(b) multiple queries
Figure 1. Diffusion on a synthetic dataset in R2 . Dataset points,
query points and their k-nearest neighbors are shown in blue, red,
and green respectively. Contour lines correspond to ranking scores
after diffusion. In this work, points are region descriptors.

clutter. This mainly holds when the queried object covers
only a small part of the image. In case of global CNN
descriptors, the invariance is partially designed by global
max [3, 52] or sum [30, 4] pooling layers or multi-scale
querying [19], and partially learned by the choice of the
training data. Robustness to background clutter is improved
by computing descriptors over object proposals [35, 18, 57]
or over a fixed grid of regions [52]. Better performance is
observed at a cost of increased memory footprint [44].
In image collections, objects are depicted in various conditions. As a consequence, query and relevant images are
often connected by a sequence of images, where consecutive images are similar. The descriptors of these images
form a manifold in the descriptor space. Even though the
images of the sequence contain the same object, the descriptors may be completely unrelated after a certain point.
This idea has been first exploited by Chum et al. [8] who
introduce query expansion. The average query expansion
12077

