Quad-networks: unsupervised learning to rank for interest point detection
Nikolay Savinov1 , Akihito Seki2 , L’ubor Ladický1 , Torsten Sattler1 and Marc Pollefeys1,3
1
Department of Computer Science at ETH Zurich, 2 Toshiba Corporation, 3 Microsoft
{nikolay.savinov,ladickyl,sattlert,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch, akihito.seki@toshiba.co.jp

Abstract
Several machine learning tasks require to represent the
data using only a sparse set of interest points. An ideal detector is able to find the corresponding interest points even
if the data undergo a transformation typical for a given domain. Since the task is of high practical interest in computer
vision, many hand-crafted solutions were proposed. In this
paper, we ask a fundamental question: can we learn such
detectors from scratch? Since it is often unclear what points
are "interesting", human labelling cannot be used to find a
truly unbiased solution. Therefore, the task requires an unsupervised formulation. We are the first to propose such
a formulation: training a neural network to rank points
in a transformation-invariant manner. Interest points are
then extracted from the top/bottom quantiles of this ranking. We validate our approach on two tasks: standard RGB
image interest point detection and challenging cross-modal
interest point detection between RGB and depth images. We
quantitatively show that our unsupervised method performs
better or on-par with baselines.

1. Introduction
Machine learning tasks are typically subdivided into two
groups: supervised (when labels for data are provided by
human annotators) and unsupervised (no data labelled). Recently, more labelled data with millions of examples have
become available (for example, Imagenet [30], Microsoft
COCO [17]), which led to significant progress in supervised
learning research. This progress is partly due to the emergence of convenient labelling systems like Amazon Mechanical Turk. Still, the human labelling process is expensive and does not scale well. Moreover, it often requires a
substantial effort to explain human annotators how to label
data.
Learning an interest point detector is a task where labelling ambiguity goes to extremes. In images, for example,
we are interested in a sparse set of image locations which
can be detected repeatably even if the image undergoes a
significant viewpoint or illumination change. These points

can further be matched for correspondences in related images and used for estimating the sparse 3D structure of the
scene or camera positions. Although we have some intuition about what properties interest points should possess,
it is unclear how to design an optimal detector that satisfies
them. As a result, if we give this task to a human assessor,
he would probably select whatever catches his eye (maybe
corners or blobs), but that might not be repeatable.
In some cases, humans have no intuition what points
could be "interesting".
Let’s assume one wants to
match new images to untextured parts of an existing 3D
model [27]. The first step could be an interest point detection in two different modalities: RGB and depth map,
representing the 3D model. The goal would be to have the
same points detected in both. It is particularly challenging
to design such a detector since depth maps look very different from natural images. That means simple heuristics will
fail: the strongest corners/blobs in RGB might come from
texture which is missing in depth maps.
Aiming at being independent of human assessment, we
propose a novel approach to interest point detection via unsupervised learning. Up to our knowledge, unsupervised
learning for this task has not yet been explored in previous work. Some earlier works hand-crafted detectors like
DoG [18]. More recent works used supervised learning to
select a "good" subset of detections from a hand-crafted detector. For example, LIFT [38] aims to extract a subset of
DoG detections that are matched correctly in the later stages
of the sparse 3D reconstruction. However, relying on existing detectors is not an option in complicated cases like a
cross-modal one. Our method, by contrast, learns the solution from scratch.
The idea of our method is to train a neural network that
maps an object point to a single real-valued response and
then rank points according to this response. This ranking
is optimized to be repeatable under the desired transformation classes: if one point is higher in the ranking than another one, it should still be higher after a transformation.
Consequently, the top/bottom quantiles of the response are
repeatable and can be used as interest points. This idea is
illustrated in Fig. 1.

1822

