Deep View Morphing
Dinghuang Ji∗
UNC at Chapel Hill

Junghyun Kwon†
Ricoh Innovations

Max McFarland
Ricoh Innovations

Silvio Savarese
Stanford University

jdh@cs.unc.edu

junghyunkwon@gmail.com

max@ric.ricoh.com

ssilvio@stanford.edu

Abstract

R1

I1

C

Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
been successfully applied to view synthesis problems. However, such CNN-based methods can suffer from lack of texture details, shape distortions, or high computational complexity. In this paper, we propose a novel CNN architecture for view synthesis called “Deep View Morphing” that
does not suffer from these issues. To synthesize a middle
view of two input images, a rectification network first rectifies the two input images. An encoder-decoder network
then generates dense correspondences between the rectified
images and blending masks to predict the visibility of pixels of the rectified images in the middle view. A view morphing network finally synthesizes the middle view using the
dense correspondences and blending masks. We experimentally show the proposed method significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art CNN-based view synthesis method.

1. Introduction
View synthesis is to create unseen novel views based
on a set of available existing views. It has many appealing applications in computer vision and graphics such
as virtual 3D tour from 2D images and photo editing
with 3D object manipulation capabilities. Traditionally,
view synthesis has been solved by image-based rendering
[1, 19, 20, 28, 22, 9, 27, 30] and 3D model-based rendering
[15, 25, 33, 14, 7, 31, 12] .
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNN) have
been successfully applied to various view synthesis problems, e.g., multi-view synthesis from a single view [32, 29],
view interpolation [6], or both [36]. While their results are
impressive and promising, they still have limitations. Direct
pixel generation methods such as [32] and [29] have a main
advantage that the overall geometric shapes are well predicted but their synthesis results usually lack detailed textures. On the other hand, the pixel sampling methods such
∗ The majoriy of the work has been done during this author’s 2016 summer internship at Ricoh Innovations.
† This author is currently at SAIC Innovation Center.

I2

Rectification
Network
(Fig. 2)

R2

EncoderDecoder
Network
(Fig. 3)

M1

View
Morphing
Network
(Fig. 6)

R "#$.&

M2

Figure 1. Overall pipeline of Deep View Morphing. A rectification network (orange, Section 3.1) takes in I1 and I2 and outputs
a rectified pair R1 and R2 . Then an encoder-decoder network
(blue, Section 3.2) takes in R1 and R2 and outputs the dense correspondences C and blending masks M1 and M2 . Finally, a view
morphing network(green, Section 3.3) synthesizes a middle view
Rα=0.5 from R1 , R2 , M1 , M2 , and C.

as [6] and [36] can synthesize novel views with detailed textures but they suffer from high computational complexity
[6] or geometric shape distortions [36].
In this paper, we propose a novel CNN architecture that
can efficiently synthesize novel views with detailed textures as well as well-preserved geometric shapes under the
view interpolation setting . We are mainly inspired by View
Morphing, the classic work by Seitz and Dyer [27], which
showed it is possible to synthesize shape-preserving novel
views by simple linear interpolation of the corresponding
pixels of a rectified image pair. Following the spirit of View
Morphing, our approach introduces a novel deep CNN architecture to generalize the procedure in [27]—for that reason, we named it Deep View Morphing (DVM).
Figure 1 shows the overall pipeline of DVM. A rectification network (orange in Fig. 1) takes in a pair of input images and outputs a rectified pair. Then an encoder-decoder
network (blue in Fig. 1) takes in the rectified pair and outputs dense correspondences between them and blending
masks. A view morphing network (green in Fig. 1) finally
synthesizes a middle view using the dense correspondences
and blending masks. The novel aspects of DVM are:
• The idea of adding a rectification network before the
view synthesis phase—this is critical in that rectification guarantees the correspondences should be 1D,
which makes the correspondence search by the encoder12155

