Learning Detection with Diverse Proposals
Samaneh Azadi1 , Jiashi Feng2 , and Trevor Darrell1
1

University of California, Berkeley, 2 National University of Singapore

{sazadi,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
To predict a set of diverse and informative proposals with
enriched representations, this paper introduces a differentiable Determinantal Point Process (DPP) layer that is able
to augment the object detection architectures. Most modern
object detection architectures, such as Faster R-CNN, learn
to localize objects by minimizing deviations from the ground
truth, but ignore correlation “between” multiple proposals
and object categories. Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) as
a widely used proposal pruning scheme ignores label- and
instance-level relations between object candidates resulting
in multi-labeled detections. In the multi-class case, NMS
selects boxes with the largest prediction scores ignoring the
semantic relation between categories of potential election.
In contrast, our trainable DPP layer, allowing for Learning
Detection with Diverse Proposals (LDDP), considers both
label-level contextual information and spatial layout relationships between proposals without increasing the number
of parameters of the network, and thus improves location
and category specifications of final detected bounding boxes
substantially during both training and inference schemes.
Furthermore, we show that LDDP keeps it superiority over
Faster R-CNN even if the number of proposals generated by
LDPP is only ∼30% as many as those for Faster R-CNN.

1. Introduction
Image classification [9] and object detection [17, 7] have
been improved significantly by development of deep convolutional networks [9, 11]. However, object detection is still
more challenging than image classification as it aims at both
localizing and classifying objects. Accurate localization of
objects in each image requires both well-processed “candidate” object locations and “selected refined” boxes with
precise locations. Looking at the object detection problem as
an extractive image summarization and representation task,
the set of all predicted bounding boxes per image should be
as informative and non-repetitive as possible.

Figure 1: Potential proposals as output from the region proposal network. There are many overlapping boxes on each
object of the image whose prediction scores and location
offsets are updated similarly in the Faster R-CNN network:
the deviation of “all” proposals from their corresponding
ground truth should be minimized. However, the overlapping correlation between these proposals is ignored while
training the model. We increase the probability of selecting
the most representative boxes, shown in red, resulting in
more diverse final detections.

The Region-based Convolutional Network methods such
as Fast and Faster R-CNN [7, 6, 16] proposed an efficient
approach for object proposal classification and localization
with a multi-task loss function during training. The training
process in such methods contains a fine-tuning stage, which
jointly optimizes a softmax classifier and a bounding-box
regressor. Such a bounding box regressor tries to minimize
the distance between the candidate object proposals with
their corresponding ground-truth boxes for each category of
objects. However, it does not consider relation “between”
boxes in terms of location and context while learning a representation model. In this paper, we propose a new loss layer
added to the other two softmax classifier and bounding-box
regressor layers (all included in the multi-task loss for training the deep model) which formulates the discriminative
17149

