Light Field Reconstruction Using Deep Convolutional Network on EPI
Gaochang Wu1,2 , Mandan Zhao2 , Liangyong Wang1 , Qionghai Dai2 , Tianyou Chai1 , and Yebin Liu2
1

State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern University,
Shenyang, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we take advantage of the clear texture
structure of the epipolar plane image (EPI) in the light field
data and model the problem of light field reconstruction
from a sparse set of views as a CNN-based angular detail restoration on EPI. We indicate that one of the main
challenges in sparsely sampled light field reconstruction is
the information asymmetry between the spatial and angular
domain, where the detail portion in the angular domain is
damaged by undersampling. To balance the spatial and angular information, the spatial high frequency components
of an EPI is removed using EPI blur, before feeding to the
network. Finally, a non-blind deblur operation is used to
recover the spatial detail suppressed by the EPI blur. We evaluate our approach on several datasets including synthetic scenes, real-world scenes and challenging microscope
light field data. We demonstrate the high performance and
robustness of the proposed framework compared with the
state-of-the-arts algorithms. We also show a further application for depth enhancement by using the reconstructed
light field.

1. Introduction
Light field imaging [20, 13] is one of the most extensively used method for capturing the 3D appearance of a scene.
Early light field cameras such as multi-camera arrays and
light field gantries [33], required expensive custom-made
hardware. In recent years, the introduction of commercial and industrial light field cameras such as Lytro [1] and
RayTrix [2] have taken light field imaging into a new era.
Unfortunately, due to restricted sensor resolution, they must
make a trade-off between spatial and angular resolution.
To solve this problem, many studies have focused on
novel view synthesis or angular super-resolution using a s-

Figure 1. Comparison of light field reconstruction results on Stanford microscope light field data Neurons 20× [21] using 3 × 3
input views. The proposed learning-based EPI reconstruction produces better results in this challenging case.

mall set of views [25, 26, 28, 35, 37] with high spatial resolution. Recently, Kalantari et al. [16] proposed a learningbased approach to synthesize novel. views from a sparse
set of views that performed better than other state-of-theart approaches [14, 27, 29, 31, 36]. They employed two
sequential convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to estimate the depth of the scene and predict the color of each
pixel. Then, they trained the network by directly minimizing the error between the synthetic view and the ground
truth image. However, due to the depth estimation-based
method they introduced, their networks still resulted in artifacts such as tearing and ghosting, especially in the occluded regions and non-Lambertian surfaces. Fig. 1 shows the
reconstruction results obtained by Kalantari et al. [16] and
our proposed approach on the Neurons 20× case from the
Stanford microscope light fields data [21]. The method by
Kalantari et al. [16] results in blur in the occluded regions, while the proposed approach produces reasonable result
16319

