Consistent-Aware Deep Learning for Person Re-identification in a Camera
Network
Ji Lin1,4 , Liangliang Ren1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,3∗, Jianjiang Feng1,2,3 , Jie Zhou1,2,3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems, Beijing, China
3
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Beijing, China
4
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
lin-j14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; renll16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn;
jfeng@tsinghua.edu.cn; jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

%&

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a consistent-aware deep learning (CADL) approach for person re-identification in a camera network. Unlike most existing person re-identification
methods which identify whether two pedestrian images are
from the same person or not, our approach aims to obtain
the maximal correct matches for the whole camera network.
Different from recently proposed camera network based reidentification methods which only consider the consistent
information in the matching stage to obtain a globally optimal association, we exploit such consistent-aware information under a deep learning framework where both feature representation and image matching are automatically
learned. Specifically, we reach the globally optimal solution and balance the performance between different cameras by optimizing the similarity and data association iteratively with certain consistent constraints. Experimental results show that our method obtains significant performance
improvement and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
by large margins.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification aims to match pedestrians across
multiple camera views. It is a challenging problem due to
the changes of scale, illumination, viewing angle, pose, etc.,
and has numerous application including visual surveillance,
robotics, multimedia and forensics.
Most current approaches focus on pairwise reidentification, which distinguish whether two images captured from different cameras are from the
same person or not. Existing person re-identification
∗ Corresponding author.

%'

!"# #

!"# !

%)

%(

!"# "

%*

!"# $

Figure 1. An illustration of person re-identification in a camera
network. The green lines refers to correct matches and the red
lines indicates wrong matches. If P1 is considered to be the same
person as both P2 and P3, then P2 and P3 must be the same person.
Otherwise, the inconsistency will arise. This constraints results
in the upper left green triangle. Similarly, P2 and P5 cannot be
considered as the same person, as P3 and P5 are different persons
in the same camera view (best viewed in the color pdf file).

methods can be roughly divided into two categories:
image-based and video-based.
Image-based methods [19, 24, 36, 40, 41, 45–47] focus on seeking effective
feature descriptors which are robust to the changes of
light, pose, viewing angle, etc., or designing discriminative
similarity metrics for person matching.
Video-based
methods [13, 23] focus on promising video modeling and
matching techniques to reduce the influences of occlusion
and illumination changes.
One key application of pairwise re-identification is visu15771

