Semi-Supervised Deep Learning for Monocular Depth Map Prediction
Yevhen Kuznietsov
Jörg Stückler
Bastian Leibe
Computer Vision Group, Visual Computing Institute, RWTH Aachen University
yevhen.kuznietsov@rwth-aachen.de, { stueckler | leibe }@vision.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Supervised deep learning often suffers from the lack of
sufficient training data. Specifically in the context of monocular depth map prediction, it is barely possible to determine dense ground truth depth images in realistic dynamic
outdoor environments. When using LiDAR sensors, for instance, noise is present in the distance measurements, the
calibration between sensors cannot be perfect, and the measurements are typically much sparser than the camera images. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to depth
map prediction from monocular images that learns in a
semi-supervised way. While we use sparse ground-truth
depth for supervised learning, we also enforce our deep
network to produce photoconsistent dense depth maps in a
stereo setup using a direct image alignment loss. In experiments we demonstrate superior performance in depth map
prediction from single images compared to the state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth from single images is an ill-posed
problem which cannot be solved directly from bottom-up
geometric cues in general. Instead, a-priori knowledge
about the typical appearance, layout and size of objects
needs to be used, or further cues such as shape from shading
or focus have to be employed which are difficult to model in
realistic settings. In recent years, supervised deep learning
approaches have demonstrated promising results for single
image depth prediction. These learning approaches appear
to capture the statistical relationship between appearance
and distance to objects well.
Supervised deep learning, however, requires vast
amounts of training data in order to achieve high accuracy and to generalize well to novel scenes. Supplementary
depth sensors are typically used to capture ground truth.
In the indoor setting, active RGB-D cameras can be used.
Outdoors, 3D laser scanners are a popular choice to capture
depth measurements. However, using such sensing devices
bears several shortcomings. Firstly, the sensors have their

Figure 1. We concurrently train a CNN from unsupervised and
supervised depth cues to achieve state-of-the-art performance in
single image depth prediction. For supervised training we use
(sparse) ground-truth depth readings from a supplementary sensing cue such as a 3D laser. Unsupervised direct image alignment
complements the ground-truth measurements with a training signal that is purely based on the stereo images and the predicted
depth map for an image.

own error and noise characteristics, which will be learned
by the network. In addition, when using 3D lasers, the
measurements are typically much sparser than the images
and do not capture high detail depth variations visible in
the images well. Finally, accurate extrinsic and intrinsic
calibration of the sensors is required. Ground truth data
could alternatively be generated through synthetic rendering of depth maps. The rendered images, however, do not
fully realistically display the scene and do not incorporate
real image noise characteristics.
Very recently, unsupervised methods have been introduced [6, 9] that learn to predict depth maps directly from
the intensity images in a stereo setup–without the need
for an additional supplementary modality for capturing the
ground truth. One drawback of these approaches is the wellknown fact that stereo depth reconstruction based on image matching is an ill-posed problem on its own. To this

6647

