Order-preserving Wasserstein Distance for Sequence Matching
Bing Su1 , Gang Hua2
1
Science & Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
Microsoft Research
{subingats, ganghua}@gmail.com
Abstract
We present a new distance measure between sequences
that can tackle local temporal distortion and periodic sequences with arbitrary starting points. Through viewing
the instances of sequences as empirical samples of an unknown distribution, we cast the calculation of the distance
between sequences as the optimal transport problem. To preserve the inherent temporal relationships of the instances
in sequences, we smooth the optimal transport problem with
two novel temporal regularization terms. The inverse difference moment regularization enforces transport with local homogeneous structures, and the KL-divergence with
a prior distribution regularization prevents transport between instances with far temporal positions. We show that
this problem can be efficiently optimized through the matrix scaling algorithm. Extensive experiments on different datasets with different classifiers show that the proposed
distance outperforms the traditional DTW variants and the
smoothed optimal transport distance without temporal regularization.

(a)

(b)

(c)

1. Introduction
Effectively measuring the distance between sequences
plays a fundamental role in a wide range of sequence pattern
analysis problems. Due to the inherent complexity of sequence data, defining distance measures for sequences can
be much more difficult than for vectors. First of all, the
evolution speed of instances in different sequences may be
quite different. For example, different subjects may perform the same action with different speeds. The sampling rate
for different sequences may also be different. As a result,
although the instances in sequences have a fixed dimensionality, different sequences generally have different numbers
of instances. Therefore, conventional distance measures for
vectors such as Euclidean distance, Lp norms, and Mahalanobis distance cannot be directly applied to sequences.
Secondly, the evolutions of instances in sequences are

Figure 1. The two stroke sequences of the same online character differ in local orders at the first and last three positions. (a)
The alignments generated by DTW are disturbed by such local order reversal since DTW preserves the temporal positions strictly,
where the misalignments are shown in bold. (b) If only the stroke
shape is considered, Sinkhorn (smoothed OT) aligns the same
stroke “dot” appeared in different temporal positions. (c) The proposed OPW is able to generate proper alignments that can tackle
local order distortion by jointly considering the shape matching
and temporal orders. The alignments shown in (b) and (c) are the
largest transports associated with instances of the second sequence
in the learned OT.

not uniform. For example, when performing the same action of “kicking a ball”, one person may spend more time on
the run-up and the other may keep the leg raised longer. As
a result, instances of different sequences in the same tempo-

1049

