Shape Completion using 3D-Encoder-Predictor CNNs and Shape Synthesis
Angela Dai1
1

Charles Ruizhongtai Qi1

Stanford University

2

Matthias Nießner1,2

Technical University of Munich

Our method completes a partial 3D scan using a 3D Encoder-Predictor network that leverages semantic features from a 3D
classification network. The predictions are correlated with a shape database, which we use in a multi-resolution 3D shape
synthesis step. We obtain completed high-resolution meshes that are inferred from partial, low-resolution input scans.

Abstract
We introduce a data-driven approach to complete partial
3D shapes through a combination of volumetric deep neural
networks and 3D shape synthesis. From a partially-scanned
input shape, our method first infers a low-resolution – but
complete – output. To this end, we introduce a 3D-EncoderPredictor Network (3D-EPN) which is composed of 3D convolutional layers. The network is trained to predict and fill
in missing data, and operates on an implicit surface representation that encodes both known and unknown space.
This allows us to predict global structure in unknown areas at high accuracy. We then correlate these intermediary results with 3D geometry from a shape database at test
time. In a final pass, we propose a patch-based 3D shape
synthesis method that imposes the 3D geometry from these
retrieved shapes as constraints on the coarsely-completed
mesh. This synthesis process enables us to reconstruct finescale detail and generate high-resolution output while respecting the global mesh structure obtained by the 3D-EPN.
Although our 3D-EPN outperforms state-of-the-art completion method, the main contribution in our work lies in the
combination of a data-driven shape predictor and analytic
3D shape synthesis. In our results, we show extensive evaluations on a newly-introduced shape completion benchmark
for both real-world and synthetic data.

∗ This research is funded by Google Tango.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of commodity range sensors such
as the Microsoft Kinect, RGB-D scanning has gained a
huge momentum in both offline and real-time contexts
[26, 3, 28, 43, 4, 7]. While state-of-the-art reconstruction results from commodity RGB-D sensors are visually appealing, they are far from usable in practical computer graphics applications since they do not match the high quality
of artist-modeled 3D graphics content. One of the biggest
challenges in this context is that obtained 3D scans suffer
from occlusions, thus resulting in incomplete 3D models.
In practice, it is physically infeasible to ensure that all surface points are covered in a scanning session, for instance
due to the physical sensor restrictions (e.g., scan behind a
shelf, or obtain the fine structure of chair model).
Even when reducing the scope to isolated objects, the
problem remains challenging. While traditional methods
can fill in small holes via plane fitting, Laplacian hole filling [39, 25, 48], or Poisson Surface reconstruction [14, 15],
completing high-level structures, such as chair legs or airplane wings, is impractical with these geometry processing
algorithms.
One possible avenue is based on recent advances in machine learning, which suggests that data-driven approaches
may be suitable for this task. For instance, assuming a partial 3D scan, one would want to complete the 3D shape geometry based on a previously learned prior.
In this paper, we explore the feasibility of directly applying deep learning as a strategy to predict missing structures
15868

