L2-Net: Deep Learning of Discriminative Patch Descriptor in Euclidean Space
Yurun Tian1,2 Bin Fan1 Fuchao Wu1
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
{yurun.tian,bfan,fcwu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The research focus of designing local patch descriptors
has gradually shifted from handcrafted ones (e.g., SIFT) to
learned ones. In this paper, we propose to learn high performance descriptor in Euclidean space via the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Our method is distinctive in
four aspects: (i) We propose a progressive sampling strategy which enables the network to access billions of training samples in a few epochs. (ii) Derived from the basic concept of local patch matching problem, we emphasize the relative distance between descriptors. (iii) Extra
supervision is imposed on the intermediate feature maps.
(iv) Compactness of the descriptor is taken into account.
The proposed network is named as L2-Net since the output descriptor can be matched in Euclidean space by L2
distance. L2-Net achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the Brown datasets [16], Oxford dataset [18] and the newly proposed Hpatches dataset [11]. The good generalization ability shown by experiments indicates that L2-Net can
serve as a direct substitution of the existing handcrafted descriptors. The pre-trained L2-Net is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Comparing local patches across images is at the base of
various computer vision problems, such as wide-baseline
matching [17], image retrieval [19] and object recognition
[8]. Ever since the advent of the famous SIFT [15] descriptor, encoding local image patches into representative
vectors, i.e., descriptors, has been the dominating method.
Desired descriptors should be invariant (e.g., robust to view
point change, illumination change, or other photometric and
geometric changes) for matching patches and distinctive for
non-matching patches.
Along with the booming of handcrafted descriptors in
the past decade, more and more learning based descriptors
1 https://github.com/yuruntian/L2-Net

appear [12, 24, 20, 16, 21, 7]. Different from handcrafted descriptors which are mostly driven by intuition or researcher’s expertise, learning based methods are driven by
data. Deep learning has revolutionized many research areas
[6, 14], and the public available of large scale dataset with
ground truth correspondences [16, 18] makes deep learning
possible for local patch matching. The application of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for local patch matching can be divided into two categories by whether there are
metric learning layers. CNNs with metric learning layers
[10, 25, 9] typically treat the matching of local patch pairs
as binary classification, so there does not exist the concept
of descriptor. An obvious drawback of these models is that
they can not perform nearest neighbor search (NNS). On the
other hand, CNNs without metric learning layers [2, 5, 9]
(i.e., the output descriptors can be matched by L2 distance)
can be used as a direct replacement to previous handcrafted
descriptors in many applications, such as the fast approximate nearest neighbor matching (e.g., KD-tree) for large
scale structure from motion and the bag of visual words related applications. On the widely used Brown dataset [16],
however, models with metric learning generally perform
better, and the gap is non-ignorable. Moreover, the generalization of the CNN based descriptors to other datasets(e.g.,
Oxford dataset [18]) does not show overwhelming superiority to handcrafted descriptors.
As most matching tasks require NNS, we aim at learning
high performance descriptor that can be matched by L2 distance. The proposed L2-Net is a CNN based model without
metric learning layers, and it outputs 128 dimensional descriptors, which can be directly matched by L2 distance.
In this paper, we draw inspiration from the basic concept
of matching: for a certain local patch, to find its matching
counterpart is to do NNS in the descriptor space. Thus, all
we need to do is to make sure that the descriptors of matching pairs to be the nearest neighbor (under specific metric
like L2 distance in this paper) of each other, while the magnitude of distance does not really matters. The essence behind this inspiration is relative distance. Although the con1661

