Learning From Noisy Large-Scale Datasets With Minimal Supervision
Andreas Veit1,

∗

Neil Alldrin2 Gal Chechik2 Ivan Krasin2 Abhinav Gupta2,3 Serge Belongie1
1
Department of Computer Science & Cornell Tech, Cornell University
2
Google Inc, 3 The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Samples from Open Images validation set

Abstract
We present an approach to effectively use millions of images with noisy annotations in conjunction with a small
subset of cleanly-annotated images to learn powerful image
representations. One common approach to combine clean
and noisy data is to first pre-train a network using the large
noisy dataset and then fine-tune with the clean dataset. We
show this approach does not fully leverage the information
contained in the clean set. Thus, we demonstrate how to
use the clean annotations to reduce the noise in the large
dataset before fine-tuning the network using both the clean
set and the full set with reduced noise. The approach comprises a multi-task network that jointly learns to clean noisy
annotations and to accurately classify images. We evaluate
our approach on the recently released Open Images dataset,
containing ∼9 million images, multiple annotations per image and over 6000 unique classes. For the small clean set
of annotations we use a quarter of the validation set with
∼40k images. Our results demonstrate that the proposed
approach clearly outperforms direct fine-tuning across all
major categories of classes in the Open Image dataset. Further, our approach is particularly effective for a large number of classes with wide range of noise in annotations (2080% false positive annotations).

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) proliferate in current machine vision. One of the biggest bottlenecks in scaling their learning is the need for massive and
clean collections of semantic annotations for images. Today, even after five years of success of ImageNet [8], there
is still no publicly available dataset containing an order of
magnitude more clean labeled data. To tackle this bottleneck, other training paradigms have been explored aiming
to bypass the need of training with expensive manually collected annotations. Examples include unsupervised learn∗ Work done during internship at Google Research.

image

Subset of noisy annotations.
The structure is implicitly
learned by our method.

vegetable
tomato
caprese salad
mozzarella
meat
sausage
prosciutto
transport

vehicle

war

tank

soldier
violence
black-and-white

modern art
art
vehicle
sea

painting

Predicting visual presence
for each class in the Open
Images dataset.

sausage ?

caprese salad ?

tank ?

vehicle ?

boat ?

ship
shipwreck

modern art ?

Figure 1. Sample images and annotations from the Open Images
validation set illustrating the variety of images and the noise in the
annotations. We are concerned with the task of training a robust
multi-label image classifier from the noisy annotations. While the
image annotations are simple lists of classes, our model implicitly
learns the structure in the label space. For illustrative purposes, the
structure is sketched as a graph with green and red edges denoting strong positive and negative relations. Our proposed approach
produces both a cleaned version of the dataset as well as a robust
image classifier.

ing [17], self-supervised learning [9, 24, 25, 31] and learning from noisy annotations [6, 23].
Most of these approaches make a strong assumption that
all annotations are noisy, and no clean data is available.
In reality, typical learning scenarios are closer to semisupervised learning: images have noisy or missing annotations, and a small fraction of images also have clean annotations. This is the case for example, when images with
noisy annotations are mined from the web, and then a small
fraction gets sent to costly human verification.

839

