Bidirectional Beam Search: Forward-Backward Inference in
Neural Sequence Models for Fill-in-the-Blank Image Captioning
Qing Sun
Virginia Tech

Stefan Lee
Virginia Tech

Dhruv Batra
Georgia Tech

sunqing@vt.edu

steflee@vt.edu

dbatra@gatech.edu

B) BiRNN

We develop the first approximate inference algorithm for
1-Best (and M-Best) decoding in bidirectional neural sequence models by extending Beam Search (BS) to reason
about both forward and backward time dependencies.
Beam Search (BS) is a widely used approximate inference
algorithm for decoding sequences from unidirectional neural sequence models. Interestingly, approximate inference
in bidirectional models remains an open problem, despite
their significant advantage in modeling information from
both the past and future. To enable the use of bidirectional
models, we present Bidirectional Beam Search (BiBS), an
efficient algorithm for approximate bidirectional inference.
To evaluate our method and as an interesting problem in
its own right, we introduce a novel Fill-in-the-Blank Image
Captioning task which requires reasoning about both past
and future sentence structure to reconstruct sensible image
descriptions. We use this task as well as the Visual Madlibs
dataset to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach,
consistently outperforming all baseline methods.

A) URNN

Abstract

A man on skis showing a young child how to ski
A) Unidirectional RNN + Left-to-Right Beam Search (BS)

A man on a ski slope with a how to ski
B) Bidirectional RNN + Bidirectional Beam Search (BiBS)

A man on skis is teaching a child how to ski

1. Introduction

Figure 1: We develop a novel Bidirectional Beam Search (BiBS)
algorithm for neural sequence models and propose a new fill-inthe-blank image captioning task as a challenging testbed for sequence completion. Unidirectional RNNs fail to reason about both
past and future outputs and produce nonsensical outputs for this
task – note the jarring “with a how to” transition produced by classical beam search in (A). In contrast, our BiBS algorithm on a
Bidirectional RNN produces significantly better completions (B)
by considering context on either side of the blank.

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and their generalizations (LSTMs, GRUs, etc.) have emerged as a popular and
effective framework for modeling sequential data across
varied domains. The application of these models has led to
significantly improved performance on a variety of tasks –
speech recognition [1,2], machine translation [3–5], conversation modeling [6], image captioning [7–11], visual question answering (VQA) [12–16], and visual dialog [17, 18].
Broadly speaking, in these applications RNNs are typically
used in two distinct roles – (1) as encoders that convert
sequential data into vectors, and (2) as decoders that convert encoded vectors into sequential output. Models for
image caption retrieval and VQA (with classification over
answers) [12, 13] consist of encoder RNNs but not decoders. Image caption generation models [7] consist of decoder RNNs but not encoders (image encoding is performed

via Convolutional Neural Networks). Visual dialog models use encoders to embed dialog history and model state,
while using decoders to generate dialog responses. Regardless of the setting, the task of decoding a sequence from
an an RNN consists of finding the most likely sequence
Y = (y1 , ..., yT ) given some input x.
Unidirectional RNNs model this probability by estimating
the likelihood of outputting a symbol at time t (say yt ) given
the history of previous outputs (y1 , . . . , yt−1 ) by “compressing” the history into a hidden state vector ht−1 such
that P(yt | y1 , . . . , yt−1 , x) ≃ P(yt | ht−1 ). Since each
output symbol is conditioned on all previous outputs, the
search space of possible sequences is exponential in the sequence length and exact inference is intractable. As a result,
approximate inference algorithm are applied, with the Beam

6961

