UltraStereo: Efficient Learning-based Matching for Active Stereo Systems
Sean Ryan Fanello∗ Julien Valentin∗ Christoph Rhemann∗
Adarsh Kowdle∗ Vladimir Tankovich∗ Philip Davidson Shahram Izadi
perceptiveIO
Abstract
Efficient estimation of depth from pairs of stereo images
is one of the core problems in computer vision. We efficiently
solve the specialized problem of stereo matching under active illumination using a new learning-based algorithm. This
type of ‘active’ stereo i.e. stereo matching where scene texture is augmented by an active light projector is proving compelling for designing depth cameras, largely due to improved
robustness when compared to time of flight or traditional
structured light techniques. Our algorithm uses an unsupervised greedy optimization scheme that learns features
that are discriminative for estimating correspondences in
infrared images. The proposed method optimizes a series of
sparse hyperplanes that are used at test time to remap all the
image patches into a compact binary representation in O(1).
The proposed algorithm is cast in a PatchMatch Stereo-like
framework, producing depth maps at 500Hz. In contrast to
standard structured light methods, our approach generalizes to different scenes, does not require tedious per camera
calibration procedures and is not adversely affected by interference from overlapping sensors. Extensive evaluations
show we surpass the quality and overcome the limitations of
current depth sensing technologies.

1. Introduction
Depth cameras have become key in tackling challenging computer vision tasks including human capture [10],
3D scene reconstruction [28], object recognition [51] and
robotics [13]. Many different depth sensing techniques and
technologies have been proposed: from gated [12, 2] or
continous wave (e.g. Kinect V2) time-of-flight (ToF), to
triangulation-based spatial [19, 52] or temporal [21] structured light (SL) systems.
ToF cameras have recently gained a lot of attention due to
wide spread commercial availability (e.g. products from Intel, Microsoft, PMD and Sony). ToF sensors capture multiple
images of the same scene under different active illumination.
∗ Authors equally contributed to this work.

Using these images, a single depth map is estimated. For
instance, the Kinect V2 sensor captures raw infrared (IR)
frames at 300Hz in order to produce depth maps at 30Hz
[48]. This requires custom high-speed image sensors that
are expensive and low-resolution. The produced depth maps
can suffer from motion artifacts, as they are constructed over
a temporal window. Another significant limitation of ToF
cameras is multipath interference (MPI). This occurs when,
during a single camera exposure, emitted light is scattered
and reflected from multiple surfaces, and collected as a single convolved sensor measurement. Despite the significant
efforts on MPI [29, 20, 5, 37], there are no commerciallyviable solutions for this problem if precise depth is required
for general scenes.
SL systems [43, 21], fall into two groups: spatial or temporal. Temporal systems (e.g. Intel SR300) are computationally efficient but require multiple captures across a temporal
window, causing motion artifacts. Moreover the maximum
range is very short (up to 120cm). Most systems also require custom MEMs-based illuminators to produce dynamic
rather than static patterns which can be costly and require
more power. Spatial SL systems are simpler and either
use a diffractive optical element (DOE) [19] or mask-based
[22] illuminators to generate pseudo-random patterns, and
off-the-shelf imaging sensors. These however suffer from
robustness concerns: the pattern needs to be known a-priori,
so any modifications of the pattern will cause issues. This
can be caused if the wavelength of the emitted light drifts,
e.g. if the laser is not thermally stabilized or if two or more
projectors overlap onto the same scene, causing interference
between sensors.
One way to overcome these challenges is to use an active
stereo setup [31]. These systems use two calibrated cameras
and project a pattern into the scene to provide texture for
matching. Although the technique has been described in
seminal work from the 1980s [38], widely available commercial products leveraging this approach only recently emerged
[1]. Active stereo systems are compelling since: (1) they can
operate in texture-less regions, which is a major shortcoming of passive stereo techniques [7]; (2) they mitigate the
challenge of multi-path reflections, inherent in ToF [20]; and

2691

