Synthesizing Normalized Faces from Facial Identity Features
Forrester Cole1 David Belanger1,2 Dilip Krishnan1 Aaron Sarna1 Inbar Mosseri1 William T. Freeman1,3
1
Google, Inc. 2 University of Massachusetts Amherst 3 MIT CSAIL
{fcole, dbelanger, dilipkay, sarna, inbarm, wfreeman}@google.com

Abstract
We present a method for synthesizing a frontal, neutralexpression image of a person’s face given an input face
photograph. This is achieved by learning to generate facial landmarks and textures from features extracted from a
facial-recognition network. Unlike previous generative approaches, our encoding feature vector is largely invariant
to lighting, pose, and facial expression. Exploiting this invariance, we train our decoder network using only frontal,
neutral-expression photographs. Since these photographs
are well aligned, we can decompose them into a sparse
set of landmark points and aligned texture maps. The decoder then predicts landmarks and textures independently
and combines them using a differentiable image warping
operation. The resulting images can be used for a number of
applications, such as analyzing facial attributes, exposure
and white balance adjustment, or creating a 3-D avatar.

⇓
1024-D features
⇓

⇓
1024-D features
⇓

⇓
1024-D features
⇓

1. Introduction
Recent work in computer vision has produced deep neural networks that are extremely effective at face recognition, achieving high accuracy over millions of identities [3].
These networks embed an input photograph in a highdimensional feature space, where photos of the same person map to nearby points. The feature vectors produced
by a network such as FaceNet [1] are remarkably consistent
across changes in pose, lighting, and expression. As is common with neural networks, however, the features are opaque
to human interpretation. There is no obvious way to reverse
the embedding and produce an image of a face from a given
feature vector.
We present a method for mapping from facial identity
features back to images of faces. This problem is hugely
underconstrained: the output image has 150× more dimensions than a FaceNet feature vector. Our key idea is to exploit the invariance of the facial identity features to pose,
lighting, and expression by posing the problem as mapping
from a feature vector to an evenly-lit, front-facing, neutralexpression face, which we call a normalized face image.

Figure 1. Input photos (top) are encoded using a face recognition network [1] into 1024-D feature vectors, then decoded into
an image of the face using our decoder network (middle). The invariance of the encoder network to pose, lighting, and expression
allows the decoder to produce a normalized face image. The resulting images can be easily fit to a 3-D model [2] (bottom). Our
method can even produce plausible reconstructions from blackand-white photographs and paintings of faces.

Intuitively, the mapping from identity to normalized face
image is nearly one-to-one, so we can train a decoder network to learn it (Fig. 1). We train the decoder network
on carefully-constructed pairs of features and normalized
face images. Our best results use FaceNet features, but the
method produces similar results from features generated by
the publicly-available VGG-Face network [4].
Because the facial identity features are so reliable, the
trained decoder network is robust to a broad range of nuisance factors such as occlusion, lighting, and pose variation,
13703

