Residual Attention Network for Image Classification
Fei Wang1 , Mengqing Jiang2 , Chen Qian1 , Shuo Yang3 , Cheng Li1 ,
Honggang Zhang4 , Xiaogang Wang3 , Xiaoou Tang3
1
SenseTime Group Limited, 2 Tsinghua University,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
1

{wangfei, qianchen, chengli}@sensetime.com, 2 jmq14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

3

{ys014, xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, 4 zhhg@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we propose “Residual Attention Network”,
a convolutional neural network using attention mechanism
which can incorporate with state-of-art feed forward network architecture in an end-to-end training fashion. Our
Residual Attention Network is built by stacking Attention
Modules which generate attention-aware features. The
attention-aware features from different modules change
adaptively as layers going deeper. Inside each Attention
Module, bottom-up top-down feedforward structure is used
to unfold the feedforward and feedback attention process
into a single feedforward process. Importantly, we propose
attention residual learning to train very deep Residual Attention Networks which can be easily scaled up to hundreds
of layers.
Extensive analyses are conducted on CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100 datasets to verify the effectiveness of every module mentioned above. Our Residual Attention Network
achieves state-of-the-art object recognition performance on
three benchmark datasets including CIFAR-10 (3.90% error), CIFAR-100 (20.45% error) and ImageNet (4.8% single
model and single crop, top-5 error). Note that, our method
achieves 0.6% top-1 accuracy improvement with 46% trunk
depth and 69% forward FLOPs comparing to ResNet-200.
The experiment also demonstrates that our network is robust against noisy labels.

1. Introduction
Not only a friendly face but also red color will draw our
attention. The mixed nature of attention has been studied
extensively in the previous literatures [34, 16, 23, 40]. Attention not only serves to select a focused location but also
enhances different representations of objects at that location. Previous works formulate attention drift as a sequential process to capture different attended aspects. However,

as far as we know, no attention mechanism has been applied
to feedforward network structure to achieve state-of-art results in image classification task. Recent advances of image
classification focus on training feedforward convolutional
neural networks using “very deep” structure [27, 33, 10].
Inspired by the attention mechanism and recent advances
in the deep neural network, we propose Residual Attention
Network, a convolutional network that adopts mixed attention mechanism in “very deep” structure. The Residual Attention Network is composed of multiple Attention Modules which generate attention-aware features. The attentionaware features from different modules change adaptively as
layers going deeper.
Apart from more discriminative feature representation
brought by the attention mechanism, our model also exhibits following appealing properties:
(1) Increasing Attention Modules lead to consistent performance improvement, as different types of attention are captured extensively. Fig.1 shows an example of different types
of attentions for a hot air balloon image. The sky attention
mask diminishes background responses while the balloon
instance mask highlighting the bottom part of the balloon.
(2) It is able to incorporate with state-of-the-art deep network structures in an end-to-end training fashion. Specifically, the depth of our network can be easily extended to
hundreds of layers. Our Residual Attention Network outperforms state-of-the-art residual networks on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100 and challenging ImageNet [5] image classification dataset with significant reduction of computation (69%
forward FLOPs).
All of the aforementioned properties, which are challenging to achieve with previous approaches, are made possible with following contributions:
(1) Stacked network structure: Our Residual Attention Network is constructed by stacking multiple Attention Modules. The stacked structure is the basic application of mixed
attention mechanism. Thus, different types of attention are
able to be captured in different Attention Modules.

3156

