A-Fast-RCNN: Hard Positive Generation via Adversary for Object Detection
Xiaolong Wang
Abhinav Shrivastava
Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Real World Occlusions

Abstract
How do we learn an object detector that is invariant to
occlusions and deformations? Our current solution is to use
a data-driven strategy – collect large-scale datasets which
have object instances under different conditions. The hope
is that the final classifier can use these examples to learn
invariances. But is it really possible to see all the occlusions in a dataset? We argue that like categories, occlusions and object deformations also follow a long-tail. Some
occlusions and deformations are so rare that they hardly
happen; yet we want to learn a model invariant to such occurrences. In this paper, we propose an alternative solution.
We propose to learn an adversarial network that generates
examples with occlusions and deformations. The goal of
the adversary is to generate examples that are difficult for
the object detector to classify. In our framework both the
original detector and adversary are learned in a joint manner. Our experimental results indicate a 2.3% mAP boost
on VOC07 and a 2.6% mAP boost on VOC2012 object detection challenge compared to the Fast-RCNN pipeline.

1. Introduction
The goal of object detection is to learn a visual model
for concepts such as cars and use this model to localize
these concepts in an image. This requires the ability to
robustly model invariances to illuminations, deformations,
occlusions and other intra-class variations. The standard
paradigm to handle these invariances is to collect large-scale
datasets which have object instances under different conditions. For example, the COCO dataset [18] has more than
10K examples of cars under different occlusions and deformations. The hope is that these examples capture all possible variations of a visual concept and the classifier can then
effectively model invariances to them. We believe this has
been one of the prime reasons why ConvNets have been so
successful at the task of object detection: they are able to
use all this data to learn invariances.
However, like object categories, we believe even occlusions and deformations follow a long-tail distribution. That
is, some of the occlusions and deformations are so rare that
there is a low chance that they will occur in large-scale

…
Often

Rare

Real World Deformations

…
Often

Rare

Occlusions Created by Adversarial Networks

Figure 1: We argue that both occlusions and deformations
follow a long-tail distribution. Some occlusions and deformations are rare. In this paper, we propose to use an adversarial network to generate examples with occlusions and
deformations that will be hard for an object detector to classify. Our adversarial network adapts as the object detector
becomes better and better. We show boost in detection accuracy with this adversarial learning strategy empirically.
datasets. For example, consider the occlusions shown in
Figure 1. We notice that some occlusions occur more often than others (e.g., occlusion from other cars in a parking
garage is more frequent than from an air conditioner). Similarly, some deformations in animals are common (e.g., sitting/standing poses) while other deformations are very rare.
So, how can we learn invariances to such rare/uncommon
occlusions and deformations? While collecting even larger
datasets is one possible solution, it is not likely to scale due
to the long-tail statistics.
Recently, there has been a lot of work on generating
images (or pixels) [3, 8, 26]. One possible way to learn
about these rare occurrences is to generate realistic images
12606

