Attentional Push: A Deep Convolutional Network for Augmenting Image
Salience with Shared Attention Modeling in Social Scenes
Siavash Gorji
James J. Clark
Centre for Intelligent Machines, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
siagorji@cim.mcgill.ca clark@cim.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We present a novel visual attention tracking technique
based on Shared Attention modeling. By considering the
viewer as a participant in the activity occurring in the
scene, our model learns the loci of attention of the scene actors and use it to augment image salience. We go beyond image salience and instead of only computing the power of image regions to pull attention, we also consider the strength
with which the scene actors push attention to the region in
question, thus the term Attentional Push. We present a convolutional neural network (CNN) which augments standard
saliency models with Attentional Push. Our model contains
two pathways: an Attentional Push pathway which learns
the gaze location of the scene actors and a saliency pathway. These are followed by a shallow augmented saliency
CNN which combines them and generates the augmented
saliency. For training, we use transfer learning to initialize and train the Attentional Push CNN by minimizing the
classification error of following the actors’ gaze location on
a 2-D grid using a large-scale gaze-following dataset. The
Attentional Push CNN is then fine-tuned along with the augmented saliency CNN to minimize the Euclidean distance
between the augmented saliency and ground truth fixations
using an eye-tracking dataset, annotated with the head and
the gaze location of the scene actors. We evaluate our model
on three challenging eye fixation datasets, SALICON, iSUN
and CAT2000, and illustrate significant improvements in
predicting viewers’ fixations in social scenes.

1. Introduction
Modeling visual attention has attracted much interest recently and there are several frameworks and computational
approaches available. The current state-of-the-art of attention prediction techniques are based on computing image
salience maps, which provide, for each pixel, its probability of attracting viewers’ attention and have often been

Figure 1: Input Image (top left) and ground-truth fixation heat
map (top right), eDN saliency [35] (bottom left) and BMS saliency
[37] (bottom right).

characterized by how well they predict eye movements. Almost all attention models are directly or indirectly inspired
by cognitive findings and traditionally, they are based on
hand-crafted features emerging from neuroscience studies.
The basis of many attention models dates back to Treisman
and Gelade’s feature integration theory [34], Koch and Ullman’s [18] feed-forward neural model and Clark and Ferrier’s [9] computational demonstration of the link between
image salience and eye movements. The first complete implementation of the Koch and Ullman model was proposed
in the pioneering work of Itti et al. [13] which inspired
many later models and has been the standard benchmark
for comparison.
The recent publication of large-scale fixation datasets
has motivated many saliency models based on convolutional
neural networks (convnets), which have made quite significant improvements over traditional saliency models which
are mostly designed using hand-crafted features. This
trending increase in performance improvement of convnetbased saliency models seems to have saturated the prediction performance to the extent that further improvements re-

2510

