Neural Face Editing with Intrinsic Image Disentangling
Zhixin Shu1 Ersin Yumer2 Sunil Hadap2 Kalyan Sunkavalli2 Eli Shechtman 2 Dimitris Samaras1,3
1

Stony Brook University
1

2

Adobe Research

{zhshu,samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

2

3

CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay

{yumer,hadap,sunkaval,elishe}@adobe.com

Abstract
Traditional face editing methods often require a number of sophisticated and task specific algorithms to be applied one after the other — a process that is tedious, fragile, and computationally intensive. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end generative adversarial network that infers a face-specific disentangled representation of intrinsic
face properties, including shape (i.e. normals), albedo, and
lighting, and an alpha matte. We show that this network
can be trained on “in-the-wild” images by incorporating an
in-network physically-based image formation module and
appropriate loss functions. Our disentangling latent representation allows for semantically relevant edits, where one
aspect of facial appearance can be manipulated while keeping orthogonal properties fixed, and we demonstrate its use
for a number of facial editing applications.

1. Introduction
Understanding and manipulating face images in-the-wild
is of great interest to the vision and graphics community,
and as a result, has been extensively studied in previous
work. This ranges from techniques to relight portraits [34],
to edit or exaggerate expressions [36], and even drive facial performance [31]. Many of these methods start by
explicitly reconstructing face attributes like geometry, texture, and illumination, and then edit these attributes to edit
the image. However, reconstructing these attributes is a
challenging and often ill-posed task; previous techniques
deal with this by either assuming richer data (e.g., RGBD
video streams) or a strong prior on the reconstruction that
is adapted to the particular editing task that they seek to
solve (e.g., low-dimensional geometry [6]). As a result,
these techniques tend to be both costly and not generalize
well to the large variations in facial identity and appearance
that exist in images-in-the-wild.
In this work, our goal is to learn a compact, meaningful manifold of facial appearance, and enable face edits by
walking along paths on this manifold. The remarkable suc-

(a) input (b) recon (c) albedo (d) normal (e) shading

(f) relit

(g) smile (h) beard (i) eyewear (j) older

Figure 1. Given a face image (a), our network reconstructs the image (b) with in-network learned albedo (c), normal (d), and shading(e). Using this network, we can manipulate face through lighting (f), expression (g), appearance (h), eyewear (i), and time (j).

cess of morphable face models [6] – where face geometry
and texture are represented using low-dimensional linear
manifolds – indicates that this is possible for facial appearance. However, we would like to handle a much wider range
of manipulations including changes in viewpoint, lighting,
expression, and even higher-level attributes like facial hair
and age – aspects that cannot be represented using previous models. In addition, we would like to learn this model
without the need for expensive data capture [7].
To this end, we build on the success of deep learning – especially unsupervised autoencoder networks – to
learn “good” representations from large amounts of data [4].
Trivially applying such approaches to our problem leads to
representations that are not meaningful, making the subsequent editing challenging. However, we have (approximate)
models for facial appearance in terms of intrinsic face properties like geometry (surface normals), material properties
(diffuse albedo), and illumination. We leverage this by designing the network to explicitly infer these properties and
introducing an in-network forward rendering model that reconstructs the image from them. Merely introducing these
factors into the network is not sufficient; because of the illposed nature of the inverse rendering problem, the learnt intrinsic properties can be arbitrary. We guide the network by
imposing priors on each of these intrinsic properties; these
include a morphable model-driven prior on the geometry,
15541

