Creativity: Generating Diverse Questions using Variational Autoencoders
Unnat Jain∗
UIUC

Ziyu Zhang∗
Northwestern University

Alexander Schwing
UIUC

uj2@illinois.edu

zzhang@u.northwestern.edu

aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Generating diverse questions for given images is an important task for computational education, entertainment
and AI assistants. Different from many conventional prediction techniques is the need for algorithms to generate a
diverse set of plausible questions, which we refer to as “creativity”. In this paper we propose a creative algorithm for
visual question generation which combines the advantages
of variational autoencoders with long short-term memory
networks. We demonstrate that our framework is able to
generate a large set of varying questions given a single input image.

1. Introduction
Creativity is a mindset that can be cultivated, and ingenuity is not a gift but a skill that can be trained. Pushing this
line of thought one step further, in this paper, we ask: why
are machines and in particular computers not creative? Is it
due to the fact that our environment is oftentimes perfectly
predictable at the large scale? Is it because the patterns of
our life provide convenient shortcuts, and creativity is not a
necessity to excel in such an environment?
Replicating human traits on machines is a long-standing
goal, and remarkable recent steps to effectively extract representations from data [7, 41] have closed the gap between
human-level performance and ‘computer-level’ accuracy on
a large variety of tasks such as object classification [39],
speech-based translation [61], and language-modeling [28].
There seems no need for computers to be creative. However, creativity is crucial if existing knowledge structures
fail to yield the desired outcome. We cannot hope to encode
all logical rules into algorithms, or all observations into features, or all data into representations. Hence, we need novel
frameworks to automatically mine and implicitly characterize knowledge databases, and we need algorithms which are
creative at combining those database entries.
Generative modeling tools can be used for those tasks
∗ indicates equal contributions.

Figure 1: Questions generated by our approach - literal
to inferential, i.e., questions following visual content and
questions requiring scene understanding and prior information about objects.
since they aim at characterizing the distribution from which
datapoints are sampled. Classical generative models such as
restricted Boltzmann machines [27], probabilistic semantic
indexing [30] or latent Dirichlet allocation [8] sample from
complex distributions. Instead, in recent years, significant
progress in generative modeling suggests to sample from
simple distributions and to subsequently transform the sample via function approximators to yield the desired output.
Variational autoencoders [36, 35] and adversarial nets [25]
are among algorithms which follow this paradigm. Both,
variational autoencoders and adversarial nets have successfully been applied to a variety of tasks such as image generation, sentence generation etc.
In this work we will use those algorithms for the novel
task of visual question generation as opposed to visual question answering. Visual question generation is useful in a
variety of areas where it is important to engage the user,
e.g., in computational education, for AI assistants, or for
entertainment. Retaining continued interest and curiosity
is crucial in all those domains, and can only be achieved
if the developed system is continuously exposing novel aspects rather than repeating a set of handcrafted traits. Visual
question generation closes the loop to question-answering
and diverse questions enable engaging conversation, helping AI systems such as driving assistants, chatbots, etc., to
perform better on Turing tests. Concretely, consider a program that aims at teaching kids to describe images. Even if

6485

