Learning an Invariant Hilbert Space for Domain Adaptation
Samitha Herath1,2 , Mehrtash Harandi1,2 and Fatih Porikli1
1
Australian National University, 2 DATA61-CSIRO
Canberra, Australia
{samitha.herath, mehrtash.harandi}@data61.csiro.au, fatih.porikli@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper introduces a learning scheme to construct a
Hilbert space (i.e., a vector space along its inner product)
to address both unsupervised and semi-supervised domain
adaptation problems. This is achieved by learning projections from each domain to a latent space along the Mahalanobis metric of the latent space to simultaneously minimizing a notion of domain variance while maximizing a
measure of discriminatory power. In particular, we make
use of the Riemannian optimization techniques to match statistical properties (e.g., first and second order statistics) between samples projected into the latent space from different domains. Upon availability of class labels, we further
deem samples sharing the same label to form more compact
clusters while pulling away samples coming from different
classes.We extensively evaluate and contrast our proposal
against state-of-the-art methods for the task of visual domain adaptation using both handcrafted and deep-net features. Our experiments show that even with a simple nearest neighbor classifier, the proposed method can outperform
several state-of-the-art methods benefiting from more involved classification schemes.

1. Introduction
This paper presents a learning algorithm to address both
unsupervised [21, 16, 49] and semi-supervised [27, 14, 29]
domain adaptation problems. Our goal here is to learn a latent space in which domain disparities are minimized. We
show such a space can be learned by first matching the statistical properties of the projected domains (e.g., covariance matrices), and then adapting the Mahalanobis metric of the latent space to the labeled data, i.e., minimizing the distances between pairs sharing the same class label
while pulling away samples with different class labels. We
develop a geometrical solution to jointly learn projections
onto the latent space and the Mahalanobis metric there by
making use of the concepts of Riemannian geometry.
Thanks to deep learning, we are witnessing rapid growth
in classification accuracy of the imaging techniques if sub-

stantial amount of labeled data is provided [35, 48, 25, 26].
However, harnessing the attained knowledge into a new application with limited labeled data (or even without having
labels) is far beyond clear [33, 37, 19, 8, 51]. To make
things even more complicated, due to the inherit bias of
datasets [50, 47], straightforward use of large amount of
auxiliary data does not necessarily assure improved performances. For example, the ImageNet [43] data is hardly useful for an application designed to classify images captured
by a mobile phone camera. Domain Adaptation (DA) is the
science of reducing such undesired effects in transferring
knowledge from the available auxiliary resources to a new
problem.
The most natural solution to the problem of DA is by
identifying the structure of a common space that minimizes
a notion of domain mismatch. Once such a space is obtained, one can design a classifier in it, hoping that the classifier will perform equally well across the domains as the
domain mismatched is minimized. Towards this end, several studies assume that either 1. a subspace of the target1 domain is the right space to perform DA and learn
how the source domain should be mapped onto it [45, 29],
or 2. subspaces obtained from both source and target domains are equally important for classification, hence trying
to either learn their evolution [22, 21] or similarity measure [46, 52, 14].
Objectively speaking, a common practice in many solutions including the aforementioned methods, is to simplify
the learning problem by separating the two elements of it.
That is, the algorithm starts by fixing a space (e.g., source
subspace in [16, 29]), and learns how to transfer the knowledge from domains accordingly. A curious mind may ask
why should we resort to a predefined and fixed space in the
first place.
In this paper, we propose a learning scheme that avoids
such a separation. That is, we do not assume that a space
or a transformation, apriori is known and fixed for DA. In
1 In DA terminology target domain refers to the data directly related to
the task. Source domain data is used as the auxiliary data for knowledge
transferring.

3845

