AMC: Attention guided Multi-modal Correlation Learning for Image Search
Kan Chen1

Trung Bui2
Chen Fang2
Zhaowen Wang2
Ram Nevatia1
1
2
University of Southern California
Adobe Research

kanchen@usc.edu, {bui, cfang, zhawang}@adobe.com, nevatia@usc.edu

Abstract
Given a user’s query, traditional image search systems
rank images according to its relevance to a single modality (e.g., image content or surrounding text). Nowadays,
an increasing number of images on the Internet are available with associated meta data in rich modalities (e.g., titles, keywords, tags, etc.), which can be exploited for better
similarity measure with queries. In this paper, we leverage
visual and textual modalities for image search by learning
their correlation with input query. According to the intent
of query, attention mechanism can be introduced to adaptively balance the importance of different modalities. We
propose a novel Attention guided Multi-modal Correlation
(AMC) learning method which consists of a jointly learned
hierarchy of intra and inter-attention networks. Conditioned on query’s intent, intra-attention networks (i.e., visual intra-attention network and language intra-attention
network) attend on informative parts within each modality;
a multi-modal inter-attention network promotes the importance of the most query-relevant modalities. In experiments,
we evaluate AMC models on the search logs from two real
world image search engines and show a significant boost on
the ranking of user-clicked images in search results. Additionally, we extend AMC models to caption ranking task on
COCO dataset and achieve competitive results compared
with recent state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Image search by text is widely used in everyday life
(e.g., search engines, security surveillance, mobile phones).
Given a textual query, image search systems retrieve a set
of related images by the rank of their relevance. Learning
this relevance, i.e., correlation between query and image, is
key to the system’s utility.
To measure the correlation between query and image,
typically a shared latent subspace is learned for query’s text
modality and a single image-related modality (e.g., visual
contents, surrounding text). Traditional image search engines [2, 33] match queries with text or tags associated
with images. DSSM [11] learns an embedding subspace

Query1:

Barack Obama

Query2:

Christmas

Keyword: US president,
Christmas Tree, ceremony,
family …

Keyword: President
Obama, Christmas holiday,
Ice-cream, Happy Malia …

Figure 1. For different queries, it is helpful to select querydependent information within and cross rich image-related modalities available on the Internet. Bounding boxes and highlighted
keywords correspond to different queries’ intent by their colors.

to measure the correlation between document-related text
modality and query’s text modality using deep learning. On
the other hand, cross-modal methods [39, 7, 32, 5] learn a
subspace to better measure correlation between query’s text
modality and image’s visual modality. In recent years, multiple image-related modalities are becoming widely available online (e.g., images on social networks are typically
posted with captions and tags, followed by friends’ comments). Text matching and cross-modal methods are suboptimal due to their focus on only single image-related modality. As shown in Fig 1, image content can provide detailed
visual information (e.g., color, texture) of objects while keywords can offer abstract concepts (e.g., scene description)
or external background information (e.g., people’s identities). Different modalities describe images from different
views, which together provide information in a more comprehensive way. It benefits to learn a subspace to measure
the correlation between query’s text modality and imagerelated modalities, i.e., multi-modal correlation.
There is a major challenge in learning this subspace: not
all modalities are equally informative due to the variation
in query’s intent. To overcome this problem, we introduce
an attention mechanism to adaptively evaluate the relevance
between a modality and query’s intent. For the image search
task, we consider two kinds of attention mechanisms. First,
12644

