IM2CAD
Hamid Izadinia
University of Washington

Qi Shan
Zillow Group

Steven M. Seitz
University of Washington

Figure 1: IM2CAD takes a single photo of a real scene (left), and automatically reconstructs its 3D CAD model (right).

Abstract
Given a single photo of a room and a large database
of furniture CAD models, our goal is to reconstruct a
scene that is as similar as possible to the scene depicted
in the photograph, and composed of objects drawn from the
database. We present a completely automatic system to address this IM2CAD problem that produces high quality results on challenging imagery from interior home design and
remodeling websites. Our approach iteratively optimizes
the placement and scale of objects in the room to best match
scene renderings to the input photo, using image comparison metrics trained via deep convolutional neural nets. By
operating jointly on the full scene at once, we account for
inter-object occlusions. We also show the applicability of
our method in standard scene understanding benchmarks
where we obtain significant improvement.

1. Introduction
In his 1963 Ph.D. thesis, Lawrence Roberts [34] demonstrated a system that infers a 3D scene from a single photo
(Figure 2). Leveraging a database of known 3D objects,
his system analyzed edges in the image to infer the locations and orientations of these objects in the scene. Unlike
the vast majority of modern 3D reconstruction techniques,
which capture only visible surfaces, Robert’s method was
capable of inferring back-facing and occluded surfaces, object segments, and recognized which objects are present.
While Robert’s method was visionary, more than a half

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Lawrence Roberts’s (a) 1963 system took an input
photo (b) and computed a 3D scene, rendered to a novel
viewpoint (c).
century of subsequent research in computer vision has still
not yet led to practical extensions of his approach that work
reliably on realistic images and scenes. One major limitation is the need for an accurate, a priori 3D model of each
object in the scene. While a chair model, e.g., is not hard
to come by, obtaining exact 3D models of every chair in the
world is not presently feasible. A further challenge is the
need to reliably match between features in photographs and
CAD models, particularly when the model does not exactly
match the object photographed.
We therefore introduce a variant of Robert’s original
problem, that we call IM2CAD, in which the goal is to reconstruct a scene that is as similar as possible to the scene
depicted in a photograph, where the reconstruction is composed of objects drawn from a database of available 3D object models. For example, the bed in Fig. 1 resembles but
does not exactly match the one in the input photograph at

5134

