Asymmetric Feature Maps with Application to Sketch Based Retrieval
Giorgos Tolias
Ondřej Chum
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{giorgos.tolias,chum}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
We propose a novel concept of asymmetric feature maps
(AFM), which allows to evaluate multiple kernels between a
query and database entries without increasing the memory
requirements. To demonstrate the advantages of the AFM
method, we derive a short vector image representation that,
due to asymmetric feature maps, supports efficient scale and
translation invariant sketch-based image retrieval. Unlike
most of the short-code based retrieval systems, the proposed
method provides the query localization in the retrieved image. The efficiency of the search is boosted by approximating a 2D translation search via trigonometric polynomial
of scores by 1D projections. The projections are a special
case of AFM. An order of magnitude speed-up is achieved
compared to traditional trigonometric polynomials. The results are boosted by an image-based average query expansion, exceeding significantly the state of the art on standard
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Efficient match kernel [3] is a popular choice in applications evaluating complex similarity measures on large collections of objects, where an object is a set of elements. This
includes local feature descriptors [3, 5] and image retrieval
with short descriptors [38]1 .
In efficient match kernel, all elements of the sets are
mapped to a finite feature map [27, 39]. An inner product of
the feature maps approximates evaluation of a specific kernel, defining similarity of the set elements. We propose an
extension to this concept. In the asymmetric feature map,
the query uses a different embedding than the database objects. The query embedding defines the kernel that is evaluated between the query and the database entries. Thus, multiple kernels can be evaluated while the memory requirements for the database remains the same (up to a scalar per
kernel) as for a single kernel to be evaluated. The embeddings are obtained via joint kernel feature map optimization,
which significantly improves the quality of kernel approximation for a fixed dimensionality of the feature map.
1 The authors were supported by the MSMT LL1303 ERC-CZ grant.

The application domain of AFM is wide, in particular any method using efficient match kernel benefits from
AFM. We evaluate the AFM on a sketch-based retrieval application. Sketch-based retrieval has received less attention
than image retrieval and still remains challenging. Instead
of a real image, the query consists of an abstract binary
sketch. This allows the user to quickly outline an object,
e.g. by a finger on a tablet or smart phone, and search for
relevant images (see Figure 1). The progress in this area
has more or less followed the footsteps of traditional image retrieval. The first systems employed global descriptors [8]. Then, the Bag-of-Words paradigm with local descriptors and feature quantization [17, 16, 30] was adopted.
Due to the absence of textural cues on the query side, the
image representations are shape based. Bridging the representation gap between hand-drawn sketches and real images
is one of the challenges making the task difficult. Matching
based on shape information has been addressed previously.
For instance, in object recognition and detection [2, 17, 23],
a costly online matching is performed, which prevented the
methods to scale to large image collections. Recent methods manage to index million [7] to billion [36] images for
sketch-based retrieval, at the cost of sacrificed invariance to
geometric transformations.
To demonstrate the impact of the AFM, we propose a
short vector image representation allowing to index large
image collections for sketch-based search. Scale and translation invariant real-time search allows to process an order of millions of images per one processor thread. The
AFM based method achieves state-of-the-art results on standard benchmarks. The method runs at speed comparable
to previously published approaches tailored to sketch-based

Figure 1. Scale and translation invariant query-by-sketch retrieval.
An example of sketch queries and top-retrieved images with the
sketch localization overlaid in green color.

12377

