Lean Crowdsourcing: Combining Humans and Machines in an Online System
Steve Branson
Caltech

Grant Van Horn
Caltech

Pietro Perona
Caltech

sbranson@caltech.edu

gvanhorn@caltech.edu

perona@caltech.edu

Abstract
We introduce a method to greatly reduce the amount of
redundant annotations required when crowdsourcing annotations such as bounding boxes, parts, and class labels.
For example, if two Mechanical Turkers happen to click on
the same pixel location when annotating a part in a given
image–an event that is very unlikely to occur by random
chance–, it is a strong indication that the location is correct. A similar type of confidence can be obtained if a single Turker happened to agree with a computer vision estimate. We thus incrementally collect a variable number of
worker annotations per image based on online estimates of
confidence. This is done using a sequential estimation of
risk over a probabilistic model that combines worker skill,
image difficulty, and an incrementally trained computer vision model. We develop specialized models and algorithms
for binary annotation, part keypoint annotation, and sets of
bounding box annotations. We show that our method can
reduce annotation time by a factor of 4-11 for binary filtering of websearch results, 2-4 for annotation of boxes of
pedestrians in images, while in many cases also reducing
annotation error. We will make an end-to-end version of
our system publicly available.

1. Introduction
Availability of large labeled datasets like ImageNet [5,
21] is one of the main catalysts for recent dramatic performance improvement in computer vision [19, 12, 31, 32].
While sophisticated crowdsourcing algorithms have been
developed for classification [46, 44, 45], there is a relative
lack of methods and publicly available tools that use smarter
crowdsourcing algorithms for other types of annotation.
We have developed a simple to use publicly available
tool that incorporates and extends many recent advances in
crowdsourcing methods to different types of annotation like
part annotation and multi-object bounding box annotation,
and also interfaces directly with Mechanical Turk.
Our main contributions are: 1) An online algorithm and
stopping criterion for binary, part, and object crowdsourcing, 2) A worker skill and image difficulty crowdsourcing

Computer
Vision

Amazon
Mechanical
Turk

3

2

4

Online Model of
Worker Skill
and Crowdsourcing
6

Dataset
1

Human
Annotations

5

Figure 1: A schematic of our proposed method. 1) The system is initialized with a dataset of images. Each global step of the method will add
annotations to this dataset. 2) The computer vision system incrementally
retrains using current worker labels. 3) The crowdsourcing model updates
its predictions of worker skills and image labels and decides which images
are finished based on a risk-based quality assurance threshold. Unfinished
images are sent to Amazon Mechanical Turk. 4-5) Workers on AMT annotate the images. 6) The crowdsourcing model continues to update its
predictions of worker skills and image labels, and the cycle is repeated
until all images are marked as complete.

model for binary, part, and object annotations, 3) Incorporation of online learning of computer vision algorithms to
speedup crowdsourcing, 4) A publicly available tool that
interfaces with Mechanical Turk and incorporates these algorithms. We show that contributions 1–3 lead to significant
improvements in annotation time and/or annotation quality
for each type of annotation. For binary classification, annotation error with 1.37 workers per image is lower using
our method than when using majority vote and 15 workers per image. For bounding boxes, our method produces
lower error with 1.97 workers per image, compared to majority vote using 7 workers per image. For parts, a variation
of our system without computer vision was used to annotate
accurately a dataset of 11 semantic parts on 55,000 images,
averaging 2.3 workers per part.
We note that while incorporating computer vision in
the loop speeds up annotation time, computer vision re17474

