Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks
for Continuous Sign Language Recognition by Staged Optimization
Runpeng Cui∗
Hu Liu∗
Changshui Zhang
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList), Beijing, China
{crp16@mails, liuhu15@mails, zcs@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This work presents a weakly supervised framework with
deep neural networks for vision-based continuous sign language recognition, where the ordered gloss labels but no exact temporal locations are available with the video of sign
sentence, and the amount of labeled sentences for training
is limited. Our approach addresses the mapping of video
segments to glosses by introducing recurrent convolutional
neural network for spatio-temporal feature extraction and
sequence learning. We design a three-stage optimization
process for our architecture. First, we develop an end-toend sequence learning scheme and employ connectionist
temporal classification (CTC) as the objective function for
alignment proposal. Second, we take the alignment proposal as stronger supervision to tune our feature extractor. Finally, we optimize the sequence learning model with
the improved feature representations, and design a weakly supervised detection network for regularization. We apply the proposed approach to a real-world continuous sign
language recognition benchmark, and our method, with no
extra supervision, achieves results comparable to the stateof-the-art.

1. Introduction
Sign language is regarded as the most grammatically
structured category of gestural communications. This nature of sign language makes it an ideal test bed for developing methods to solve problems such as motion analysis and
human-computer interaction.
Continuous sign language recognition is different from
isolated gesture classification [7, 20] or sign spotting [8, 23,
30], which is to detect predefined signs from video stream
and the supervision contains exact temporal locations for
each sign. In the problem of continuous sign language
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

recognition, each video of sign language sentence is provided with its ordered gloss labels but no time boundaries
for each gloss. (We usually use “gloss” to represent sign
with its closest meaning in natural languages [24].) Therefore, continuous sign language recognition can be cast as
one of the weakly supervised problems, and the main issue
is to learn the corresponding relations between the image
time series and the sequences of glosses.
Recently, methods using deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved breakthroughs in gesture
recognition [20] and sign spotting [23, 30], and recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) has shown significant results while
learning the dynamic temporal dependencies in sign spotting [21, 26].
However, continuous sign language recognition with
deep neural networks remains challenging and non-trivial.
In this problem, the recognition system is required to
achieve representation and sequence learning from the
weakly supervised unsegmented video stream. Since video
sequences and gloss labels are given in sentence-level, the
amount of training data would increase drastically to make
the model align the gestures and gloss labels correctly without overfitting. Although RNNs have shown superior performance to hidden Markov models (HMMs) on handling
complex dynamic variations in sign recognition [21, 26],
with limited amount of training data RNNs are more inclined to end in overfitting.
Furthermore, although deep CNN has been proved to
outperform hand-crafted features in almost all computer vision tasks, there is no direct, precise frame-level supervision for CNN’s training in this problem. A complex end-toend model with CNN as visual feature extractor may lead
to overfitting as well. This presents the challenge of constructing suitable semantic learning objectives to guide the
training process of the feature extractor.
In this paper, we contribute a novel method for realworld sign language recognition from continuous image

7361

