Semantically Consistent Regularization for Zero-Shot Recognition
Pedro Morgado
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{pmaravil,nuno}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The role of semantics in zero-shot learning is considered. The effectiveness of previous approaches is analyzed
according to the form of supervision provided. While some
learn semantics independently, others only supervise the semantic subspace explained by training classes. Thus, the
former is able to constrain the whole space but lacks the
ability to model semantic correlations. The latter addresses
this issue but leaves part of the semantic space unsupervised. This complementarity is exploited in a new convolutional neural network (CNN) framework, which proposes
the use of semantics as constraints for recognition.Although
a CNN trained for classification has no transfer ability, this
can be encouraged by learning an hidden semantic layer
together with a semantic code for classification. Two forms
of semantic constraints are then introduced. The first is a
loss-based regularizer that introduces a generalization constraint on each semantic predictor. The second is a codeword regularizer that favors semantic-to-class mappings
consistent with prior semantic knowledge while allowing
these to be learned from data. Significant improvements
over the state-of-the-art are achieved on several datasets.

1. Introduction
Significant advances in object recognition have been recently achieved with the introduction of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). The main limitation of this approach is the effort required to 1) collect and annotate millions of images necessary to train these models, and 2) the
complexity of training a CNN from scratch. In fact, most recent computer vision papers use or adapt a small set of popular models, such as AlexNet [28], GoogLeNet [54], and
VGG [51], learned from the Imagenet dataset [13]. Hence,
there is an interest in techniques for transfer learning, where
This work was funded by graduate fellowship SFRH/BD/109135/2015
from the Portuguese Ministry of Sciences and Education and NRI Grants
IIS-1208522 and IIS-1637941 from the National Science Foundation.

a model learned on a dataset is used to recognize object
classes that are not represented in it. Ideally, transfer learning methods would replicate the human ability to recognize
objects from a few example images or even from a description in terms of concepts in some semantic vocabulary.
This has motivated the introduction of semantic representations for object recognition [34, 44, 45, 55, 56], which
rely on a predefined vocabulary of visual concepts to define
a semantic space S and a set of classifiers to map each image into that space. The scores of these classifiers can then
be used as semantic features for object classification. Furthermore, because simple rules of thumb can be designed,
a priori, to describe new object classes in terms of these
semantics, the image mapping into S can be exploited to
recognize previously unseen objects. This is known as zeroshot learning (ZSL) [2, 4, 14, 31, 48, 49].
The fundamental difficulty of ZSL is that training cannot be guided by the end goal of the classifier. While the
recognizer is learned from a set of training classes, it must
provide accurate predictions for image classification into
a non-overlapping set of unseen or zero-shot (ZS) classes.
Historically, early efforts were devoted to the identification
of good semantics for ZSL. This motivated the collection
of datasets containing images annotated with respect to semantics such as visual attributes [14,31]. Subsequent works
addressed the design of the semantic space S, using one of
two strategies previously proposed in the semantic representation literature. The first, recognition using independent semantics (RIS), consists of learning an independent
classifier per semantic [34, 55, 56]. Due to its simplicity,
RIS became widely popular in the attribute recognition literature [14,31,42,48,53,58]. Notwithstanding efforts in discriminant attribute discovery [9, 14, 30, 42, 46] or modeling
of uncertainty [25,31,58], learning semantics independently
proved too weak to guarantee reliable ZS predictions.
This motivated a shift to the second strategy, which ties
the design of S to the goal of recognition, by learning a
single multi-class classifier that optimally discriminates between all training classes [44, 45]. The difficulty of extending this approach to ZSL is that the semantics of interest

6060

