3D Point Cloud Registration for Localization using a
Deep Neural Network Auto-Encoder
Gil Elbaz
Tamar Avraham
Anath Fischer
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
gil.elbaz@alumni.technion.ac.il

tammya@cs.technion.ac.il

meranath@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We present an algorithm for registration between a
large-scale point cloud and a close-proximity scanned point
cloud, providing a localization solution that is fully independent of prior information about the initial positions
of the two point cloud coordinate systems. The algorithm, denoted LORAX, selects super-points—local subsets
of points—and describes the geometric structure of each
with a low-dimensional descriptor. These descriptors are
then used to infer potential matching regions for an efficient coarse registration process, followed by a fine-tuning
stage. The set of super-points is selected by covering the
point clouds with overlapping spheres, and then filtering out
those of low-quality or nonsalient regions. The descriptors
are computed using state-of-the-art unsupervised machine
learning, utilizing the technology of deep neural network
based auto-encoders.
This novel framework provides a strong alternative to
the common practice of using manually designed key-point
descriptors for coarse point cloud registration. Utilizing
super-points instead of key-points allows the available geometrical data to be better exploited to find the correct transformation. Encoding local 3D geometric structures using
a deep neural network auto-encoder instead of traditional
descriptors continues the trend seen in other computer vision applications and indeed leads to superior results. The
algorithm is tested on challenging point cloud registration
datasets, and its advantages over previous approaches as
well as its robustness to density changes, noise and missing
data are shown.

1. Introduction
1.1. Overview
Point clouds, similarly to images, capture semantic information describing the objects in the world around us. In
contrast to image data, which holds a two-dimensional projection of the scene in a fixed grid, a point cloud is a set of

Figure 1: Registration between a close-proximity point
cloud (colored) and a large-scale point cloud (grayscale)

unorganized three-dimensional points in a unified coordinate system, capturing 3D spatial information. Methods for
point cloud data analysis have been developed throughout
the past few decades [1], and the significance of research in
this field is trending upwards due to advances in affordable
high-quality 3D scanning technology [2], machine learning
breakthroughs, and new interesting applications.
Point cloud registration is defined as finding the transformation between two separate point cloud coordinate systems. It is key for Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [3, 4], 3D reconstruction of scenes [5], and it
has become central in vision-based autonomous driving [6].
Much progress has been achieved, yet there are still major
challenges, such as registration of large-scale point clouds,
with low scene overlap and without prior positional information.
Outdoor localization today relies heavily on GPS technology, accompanied by ground based augmentation systems to improve accuracy. This localization requires receiving signals from multiple satellites simultaneously with an
accuracy that varies greatly with the number of satellites
available, the weather, and physical obstructions blocking
or altering the signal path. The technology is inaccurate and
unreliable in areas around the world with little to no ground
infrastructure [7].
In this paper we focus on a localization technique that

4631

