Adversarial Discriminative Domain Adaptation
Eric Tzeng
University of California, Berkeley
etzeng@eecs.berkeley.edu
Kate Saenko
Boston University
saenko@bu.edu

Judy Hoffman
Stanford University
jhoffman@cs.stanford.edu

Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley
trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Adversarial learning methods are a promising approach
to training robust deep networks, and can generate complex
samples across diverse domains. They can also improve
recognition despite the presence of domain shift or dataset
bias: recent adversarial approaches to unsupervised domain
adaptation reduce the difference between the training and
test domain distributions and thus improve generalization
performance. However, while generative adversarial networks (GANs) show compelling visualizations, they are not
optimal on discriminative tasks and can be limited to smaller
shifts. On the other hand, discriminative approaches can
handle larger domain shifts, but impose tied weights on the
model and do not exploit a GAN-based loss. In this work,
we first outline a novel generalized framework for adversarial adaptation, which subsumes recent state-of-the-art
approaches as special cases, and use this generalized view
to better relate prior approaches. We then propose a previously unexplored instance of our general framework which
combines discriminative modeling, untied weight sharing,
and a GAN loss, which we call Adversarial Discriminative
Domain Adaptation (ADDA). We show that ADDA is more
effective yet considerably simpler than competing domainadversarial methods, and demonstrate the promise of our
approach by exceeding state-of-the-art unsupervised adaptation results on standard domain adaptation tasks as well as
a difficult cross-modality object classification task.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks, when trained on large-scale
datasets, can learn representations which are generically usefull across a variety of tasks and visual domains [1, 2]. However, due to a phenomenon known as dataset bias or domain
shift [3], recognition models trained along with these representations on one large dataset do not generalize well to

target*encoder

source

target

domain*discriminator

Figure 1: We propose an improved unsupervised domain
adaptation method that combines adversarial learning with
discriminative feature learning. Specifically, we learn a discriminative mapping of target images to the source feature
space (target encoder) by fooling a domain discriminator that
tries to distinguish the encoded target images from source
examples.

novel datasets and tasks [4, 1]. The typical solution is to
further fine-tune these networks on task-specific datasets—
however, it is often prohibitively difficult and expensive to
obtain enough labeled data to properly fine-tune the large
number of parameters employed by deep multilayer networks.
Domain adaptation methods attempt to mitigate the harmful effects of domain shift. Recent domain adaptation methods learn deep neural transformations that map both domains
17167

