Zero-Shot Learning - The Good, the Bad and the Ugly
Yongqin Xian1
1

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
Due to the importance of zero-shot learning, the number
of proposed approaches has increased steadily recently. We
argue that it is time to take a step back and to analyze the
status quo of the area. The purpose of this paper is threefold. First, given the fact that there is no agreed upon zeroshot learning benchmark, we first define a new benchmark
by unifying both the evaluation protocols and data splits.
This is an important contribution as published results are
often not comparable and sometimes even flawed due to,
e.g. pre-training on zero-shot test classes. Second, we compare and analyze a significant number of the state-of-theart methods in depth, both in the classic zero-shot setting
but also in the more realistic generalized zero-shot setting.
Finally, we discuss limitations of the current status of the
area which can be taken as a basis for advancing it.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning aims to recognize objects whose instances may not have been seen during training [17, 22,
23, 30, 40]. The number of new zero-shot learning methods proposed every year has been increasing rapidly, i.e.
the good aspects as our title suggests. Although each new
method has been shown to make progress over the previous
one, it is difficult to quantify this progress without an established evaluation protocol, i.e. the bad aspects. In fact, the
quest for improving numbers has lead to even flawed evaluation protocols, i.e. the ugly aspects. Therefore, in this
work, we propose to extensively evaluate a significant number of recent zero-shot learning methods in depth on several
small to large-scale datasets using the same evaluation protocol both in zero-shot, i.e. training and test classes are disjoint, and the more realistic generalized zero-shot learning
settings, i.e. training classes are present at test time.
We benchmark and systematically evaluate zero-shot
learning w.r.t. three aspects, i.e. methods, datasets and
evaluation protocol. The crux of the matter for all zeroshot learning methods is to associate observed and non

2

Zeynep Akata1,2

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam

observed classes through some form of auxiliary information which encodes visually distinguishing properties of objects. Different flavors of zero-shot learning methods that
we evaluate in this work are linear [11, 2, 4, 32] and nonlinear [39, 34] compatibility learning frameworks whereas an
orthogonal direction is learning independent attribute [22]
classifiers and finally others [42, 7, 26] propose a hybrid
model between independent classifier learning and compatibility learning frameworks.
We thoroughly evaluate the second aspect of zero-shot
learning, by using multiple splits of several small to largescale datasets [28, 38, 22, 10, 9]. We emphasize that it is
hard to obtain labeled training data for fine-grained classes
of rare objects recognizing which requires expert opinion.
Therefore, we argue that zero-shot learning methods should
be evaluated mainly on least populated or rare classes.
We propose a unified evaluation protocol to address the
third aspect of zero-shot learning which is arguably the most
important one. We emphasize the necessity of tuning hyperparameters of the methods on a validation class split that is
disjoint from training classes as improving zero-shot learning performance via tuning parameters on test classes violates the zero-shot assumption. We argue that per-class
averaged top-1 accuracy is an important evaluation metric
when the dataset is not well balanced with respect to the
number of images per class. We point out that extracting
image features via a pre-trained deep neural network (DNN)
on a large dataset that contains zero-shot test classes also
violates the zero-shot learning idea as image feature extraction is a part of the training procedure. Moreover, we
argue that demonstrating zero-shot performance on smallscale and coarse grained datasets, i.e. aPY [10] is not conclusive. We recommend to abstract away from the restricted
nature of zero-shot evaluation and make the task more practical by including training classes in the search space, i.e.
generalized zero-shot learning setting. Therefore, we argue
that our work plays an important role in advancing the zeroshot learning field by analyzing the good and bad aspects
of the zero-shot learning task as well as proposing ways to
eliminate the ugly ones.
14582

