DUST: Dual Union of Spatio-Temporal Subspaces for Monocular
Multiple Object 3D Reconstruction
Antonio Agudo
Francesc Moreno-Noguer
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC), 08028, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract

Poin t id

3D Reconst ruct ion
Spat ial Clust ering

Poin t id

Tem poral Sim ilarit y
Fr a m e id

We present an approach to reconstruct the 3D shape of
multiple deforming objects from incomplete 2D trajectories
acquired by a single camera. Additionally, we simultaneously provide spatial segmentation (i.e., we identify each of
the objects in every frame) and temporal clustering (i.e., we
split the sequence into primitive actions). This advances existing work, which only tackled the problem for one single
object and non-occluded tracks. In order to handle several
objects at a time from partial observations, we model point
trajectories as a union of spatial and temporal subspaces,
and optimize the parameters of both modalities, the nonobserved point tracks and the 3D shape via augmented Lagrange multipliers. The algorithm is fully unsupervised and
results in a formulation which does not need initialization.
We thoroughly validate the method on challenging scenarios with several human subjects performing different activities which involve complex motions and close interaction.
We show our approach achieves state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction results, while it also provides spatial and temporal
segmentation.

Spat ial Sim ilarit y

I nput : 2D t raj ect ories

Jum p in

Jum p out
Tem poral Clust ering

Jum p in
Fr a m e id

Figure 1. Simultaneous 3D non-rigid reconstruction, spatial
segmentation and temporal clustering from incomplete 2D
point tracks. Top-left: Example of input 2D point tracks (from
the CMU MoCap dataset). For clarity we show a complete
non-overlapped case, but our approach can handle discontinuous
tracks and high degree of object overlapping. Right: Spatial and
Temporal similarity matrices we retrieve. Each entry expresses
the pairwise affinity between points or frames. Clusters are directly discovered by applying spectral clustering on these matrices. Bottom-left: 3D shape reconstruction together with the temporal and spatial clustering results. Spatial segmentation yields
two objects, represented by red and green points. Temporal clusters clearly identify two motion primitives corresponding to the
‘jump in’ (orange) and ‘jump out’ (magenta) sub-actions.

1. Introduction
The problem of Non-Rigid Structure from Motion
(NRSfM) involves simultaneously recovering deformable
3D shape and camera motion from monocular 2D point
tracks. Since many different shape configurations may yield
similar projections, NRSfM turns to be a highly ambiguous
problem, which requires introducing prior information in
order to be solved. Standard priors include the use of lowrank subspaces constraining the solution space of either the
entire shape [2, 24, 37], the 3D point trajectories [6, 32] or
the force patterns that induce the deformations [3].
All these previous approaches, though, use one single
low-rank modality at a time. This prevents them from being
applicable in situations that require models with high levels of expressiveness, such as for complex point trajectories
or when dealing with multiple objects performing different
types of deformations and motions. In this paper we tackle

both these situations.
There exist previous works partially addressing these
scenarios. For the rigid case, the shape of multiple moving objects can be retrieved by first segmenting the objects
from the input 2D tracks and then applying a rigid SfM algorithm to each of them [30, 33, 39]. However, this strategy
depends on the accuracy of the initial segmentation which,
for the case of non-rigid and overlapping objects is likely to
fail. Regarding the non-rigid case, there has been a recent
attempt at reconstructing complex dynamics by modeling
motion as a union of temporal subspaces [40]. This approach, however, has been applied to one single object, and
relies on continuous and fully observed 2D point tracks.
In order to reconstruct multiple non-rigid objects with
complex motions from partial 2D observations, we introduce a novel optimization framework that combines spatial
16262

