Jointly Learning Energy Expenditures and Activities using
Egocentric Multimodal Signals
Katsuyuki Nakamura2∗ Serena Yeung1
1
Stanford University

Alexandre Alahi1
Hitachi, Ltd.

Li Fei-Fei1

2

katsuyuki.nakamura.xv@hitachi.com, alahi@stanford.edu, {serena,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Physiological signals such as heart rate can provide
valuable information about an individual’s state and activity. However, existing work on computer vision has not
yet explored leveraging these signals to enhance egocentric video understanding. In this work, we propose a model
for reasoning on multimodal data to jointly predict activities and energy expenditures. We use heart rate signals as
privileged self-supervision to derive energy expenditure in
a training stage. A multitask objective is used to jointly optimize the two tasks. Additionally, we introduce a dataset
that contains 31 hours of egocentric video augmented with
heart rate and acceleration signals. This study can lead to
new applications such as a visual calorie counter.

Energy expenditure

Acceleration

Sitting Tasks

Walking

Bicycling

Running

Figure 1. Egocentric videos augmented with heart rate and acceleration signals enable us to further understand activities and energy
expenditures.

1. Introduction
Wearable sensors such as heart rate monitors and accelerometers are widespread as a way to track physical activity and energy expenditure. To detect activities as accurately as possible, these sensors are used in many combinations and configurations, and they are attached to body
parts ranging from the chest to the wrist and foot. More
recently, egocentric first-person cameras have gained popularity as a new modality of wearable sensors. Activity
recognition in visual data is a widely studied problem in
computer vision [22, 63, 35, 2], and a number of works
have investigated this task in the domain of egocentric
video [48, 8, 5, 30] and in combination with other wearable
sensors [59, 44].
However, the degree to which computer vision algorithms alone can be effective for energy expenditure monitoring remains an open question. We would also like to understand how much relevant information still requires other
sensor modalities, and how these other signals should be
best fused with vision. Pioneering works [59, 44] showed
∗ This work was done when Katsuyuki Nakamura was a visiting scholar
at Stanford University.

that systems of inertial measurement units, audio and accelerometer sensors, could improve activity segmentation
and recognition over only egocentric cameras in indoor settings. However, these works were based on relatively simple visual features such as Gist and color histograms. Furthermore, they do not address energy expenditure or reason
on physiological heart rate signals.
In this work, we present a quantitative study of multimodal activity detection and energy expenditure estimation,
using egocentric camera data in conjunction with physiological heart rate data and accelerometer data. Specifically,
we model the real-world use case and interaction of two of
the most commercially popular wearable sensors: egocentric cameras and heart rate monitors (which often additionally contain an accelerometer). Given a video frame and
acceleration signal, we show how to output an activity label
and energy expenditure corresponding to each frame. We
present a recurrent neural network-based model for multimodal activity detection and energy expenditure estimation
and analyze the contributions of the different signals. We
use heart rate signals as privileged self-supervision to de11868

