A Low Power, Fully Event-Based Gesture Recognition System
Arnon Amir, Brian Taba, David Berg, Timothy Melano, Jeffrey McKinstry, Carmelo Di Nolfo,
Tapan Nayak, Alexander Andreopoulos, Guillaume Garreau, Marcela Mendoza† , Jeff Kusnitz,
Michael Debole, Steve Esser, Tobi Delbruck‡ , Myron Flickner, and Dharmendra Modha
IBM Research

†UC San Diego

{arnon, dmodha}@us.ibm.com

‡UZH-ETH Zurich
& iniLabs GmbH
tobi@ini.uzh.ch

Abstract
We present the first gesture recognition system implemented end-to-end on event-based hardware, using a
TrueNorth neurosynaptic processor to recognize hand gestures in real-time at low power from events streamed live by
a Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS). The biologically inspired
DVS transmits data only when a pixel detects a change, unlike traditional frame-based cameras which sample every
pixel at a fixed frame rate. This sparse, asynchronous data
representation lets event-based cameras operate at much
lower power than frame-based cameras. However, much of
the energy efficiency is lost if, as in previous work, the event
stream is interpreted by conventional synchronous processors. Here, for the first time, we process a live DVS event
stream using TrueNorth, a natively event-based processor
with 1 million spiking neurons. Configured here as a convolutional neural network (CNN), the TrueNorth chip identifies the onset of a gesture with a latency of 105 ms while
consuming less than 200mW . The CNN achieves 96.5%
out-of-sample accuracy on a newly collected DVS dataset
(DvsGesture) comprising 11 hand gesture categories from
29 subjects under 3 illumination conditions.

1. Introduction
Event-based computation, used by the eye and the brain,
is a biologically inspired paradigm for using sparse, asynchronous events to represent data more efficiently than the
dense, synchronous frames that are captured and processed
by most modern sensors and computing devices. Remarkably, despite the slower speed of biological neurons and
synapses compared to silicon transistors, biological systems still solve complex vision problems faster and at lower
power than conventional computers, leveraging parallel,
distributed, event-based computation to operate efficiently
in real-time, resource-constrained environments.

The prime example of a frame-based computing device
is a digital camera, which repeatedly scans out its entire array of pixels at a predetermined frame rate, independent of
any activity actually observed in the scene. Frame-based
cameras have two major drawbacks. First, the camera’s reaction speed is limited to its frame rate, typically 30 frames
per second. Second, consecutive video frames are highly
redundant, and acquisition of redundant data wastes considerable resources, both in the camera itself and in any downstream devices, since energy and bandwidth requirements
are driven by the rate of data transfer [36].
Event-based cameras mimic the biological retina by
sending an asynchronous event whenever a pixel detects a
change in brightness, eliminating redundant data transmission [2, 36, 22]. The data transfer rate can vary from very
few events when observing a static scene, to many events
when a large fraction of the scene changes, allowing energy
and bandwidth consumption to scale dynamically with actual demand. The high temporal resolution is an effective
sampling rate that can only be matched by a high-speed
frame-based camera with dramatically higher energy and
bandwidth requirements. Event-based cameras also have
very high dynamic range relative to standard cameras.
The advantages of event-based sensors are diluted if
their event streams must be cast back into synchronous
frames for the benefit of conventional processors downstream. Conventional processors, like CPUs and GPUs,
are efficient in processing dense, synchronously delivered
data structures, not sparse, asynchronous event streams.
Throughput is maintained by keeping the instruction and
data pipelines as full as possible, even at the cost of executing redundant computations on unchanging data [7].
Recently, a new generation of natively event-based neuromorphic processors has appeared that can operate on sensor event streams directly [11]. These many-core systems
instantiate large populations of spiking neurons in massively parallel, low-power hardware, and inherit all of the
advantages of event-based sensors, such as efficient, data17243

