Convex Global 3D Registration with Lagrangian Duality
Jesus Briales
Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez
MAPIR-UMA Group
University of Malaga, Spain
{jesusbriales,javiergonzalez}@uma.es

Abstract
The registration of 3D models by a Euclidean transformation is a fundamental task at the core of many application in computer vision. This problem is non-convex due to
the presence of rotational constraints, making traditional
local optimization methods prone to getting stuck in local minima. This paper addresses finding the globally optimal transformation in various 3D registration problems
by a unified formulation that integrates common geometric
registration modalities (namely point-to-point, point-to-line
and point-to-plane). This formulation renders the optimization problem independent of both the number and nature of
the correspondences.
The main novelty of our proposal is the introduction of a
strengthened Lagrangian dual relaxation for this problem,
which surpasses previous similar approaches [32] in effectiveness. In fact, even though with no theoretical guarantees, exhaustive empirical evaluation in both synthetic and
real experiments always resulted on a tight relaxation that
allowed to recover a guaranteed globally optimal solution
by exploiting duality theory.
Thus, our approach allows for effectively solving the 3D
registration with global optimality guarantees while running at a fraction of the time for the state-of-the-art alternative [34], based on a more computationally intensive
Branch and Bound method.

1. Introduction
The problem of registering 3D geometric data is a classical problem in numerous fields, including computer vision,
robotics, photogrammetry or medical imaging [23, 12, 37].
It seeks the transformation that brings closest together different surfaces according to some meaningful distance function. Consider the ubiquituous scenario in which a system (usually a sensor) returns 3D points {xi }m
i=1 of an
object and a model of the same is available consisting of
3D primitives {Pi } (typically points, lines and/or planes)
[3, 14, 47, 28]. Assuming the correspondences between the

Figure 1. This paper presents a unified formulation for the 3D
registration with point-to-plane, point-to-line and point-to-point
correspondences, and then provides a certifiable globally optimal
solution using Lagrangian duality.

sets are given, xi ↔ Pi , the general problem reduces to
finding the optimal roto-translation T = (R, t) ∈ SE(3) as
T ⋆ = arg min

m
X

dPi (T ⊕ xi )2 .

(1)

T ∈SE(3) i=1

Here SE(3) stands for the usual Special Euclidean group
in 3D, T ⊕ xi denotes the Euclidean transformation of the
point xi and dPi (·) is the distance to the primitive Pi [34].
Even with known correspondences, the registration problem
(1) is tough to solve in a global fashion due to the nonconvexity of the constraints in the rotation R ∈ SO(3). A
closed-form solution exists only if all the correspondences
are point-to-point, as given by Horn et al. [24]. For the other
cases, most pipelines resort to local approximations, with
the inherent risk of getting stuck in local minima [33, 34].
In this paper we address the global optimization of the
general 3D registration problem (1). After providing a thorough overview of potential alternatives for this task in Section 2, we present in Section 3 a unified formulation integrating point-to-point, point-to-line and point-to-plane correspondences into a single quadratic objective that is a function of the rotation R only. Our main contribution is the development of a novel convex relaxation for this formulation
under the usual framework of the Lagrangian dual problem,

4960

