Semantically Coherent Co-segmentation and Reconstruction of Dynamic Scenes
Armin Mustafa
Adrian Hilton
CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
{a.mustafa, a.hilton}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we propose a framework for spatially and
temporally coherent semantic co-segmentation and reconstruction of complex dynamic scenes from multiple static
or moving cameras. Semantic co-segmentation exploits the
coherence in semantic class labels both spatially, between
views at a single time instant, and temporally, between
widely spaced time instants of dynamic objects with similar shape and appearance. We demonstrate that semantic
coherence results in improved segmentation and reconstruction for complex scenes. A joint formulation is proposed for
semantically coherent object-based co-segmentation and
reconstruction of scenes by enforcing consistent semantic
labelling between views and over time. Semantic tracklets are introduced to enforce temporal coherence in semantic labelling and reconstruction between widely spaced instances of dynamic objects. Tracklets of dynamic objects
enable unsupervised learning of appearance and shape priors that are exploited in joint segmentation and reconstruction. Evaluation on challenging indoor and outdoor sequences with hand-held moving cameras shows improved
accuracy in segmentation, temporally coherent semantic labelling and 3D reconstruction of dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Advances in visual scene understanding using deep
learning, with convolutional neural network architectures
and large annotated image collections [56, 10, 40], have
achieved excellent performance in per-pixel labelling of semantic categories in complex real-world scenes from images. Due to the inherent ambiguity in visual segmentation and classification from a single camera view the output
may include errors in pixel labelling and object boundary
segmentation resulting in a lack of temporal coherence in
semantic labelling. Likewise independent classification for
different views of the same scene may result in inconsistent
per-pixel semantic labelling for the same object.
This paper introduces a framework for semantically coherent per-pixel segmentation and reconstruction of dy-

Figure 1. Example of input image from Magician dataset [3]
and standard image classification from fully convolution network
(FCN) [10] on the top. Bottom: Proposed framework resulting in
an accurately labeled segmentation and 3D reconstruction.

namic scenes. The approach enforces semantic coherence
both spatially across different views of the scene and temporally across different observations of the same object. Semantic tracklets are introduced to associate semantic labels between different observations of a dynamic object
with similar shape and appearance over time. This enables improved temporal coherence in semantic labelling
and co-segmentation for monocular video. Joint semantic
co-segmentation and reconstruction across multiple views
of dynamic objects enforces spatial coherence in semantic
labelling resulting in improved performance over previous
approaches which did not exploit semantic information.
Previous research has demonstrated the advantages of
joint segmentation and reconstruction across multiple views
[21, 24, 23, 34, 14, 32], co-segmentation of multiple view
images [11, 31, 13, 12] and temporal coherence in reconstruction [20, 18, 36, 42]. Our contribution is the introduction of a framework for joint semantic co-segmentation
and reconstruction of complex dynamic scenes to obtain semantically coherent per-view 2D object segmentation and
3D scene reconstruction from wide-baseline camera views.
Semantic coherence refers to spatial and temporal coherence of semantic labels across the sequence. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first method addressing the problem of temporally coherent semantic co-segmentation and
reconstruction for dynamic scenes.
4321
422

