Domain Adaptation by Mixture of Alignments of Second- or Higher-Order
Scatter Tensors
Piotr Koniusz∗,1,2
Yusuf Tas∗,1,2
Fatih Porikli2
1
2
Data61/CSIRO, Australian National University
firstname.lastname@{data61.csiro.au, anu.edu.au}

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an approach to the domain
adaptation, dubbed Second- or Higher-order Transfer of
Knowledge (So-HoT), based on the mixture of alignments
of second- or higher-order scatter statistics between the
source and target domains. The human ability to learn
from few labeled samples is a recurring motivation in the
literature for domain adaptation. Towards this end, we investigate the supervised target scenario for which few labeled target training samples per category exist. Specifically, we utilize two CNN streams: the source and target networks fused at the classifier level. Features from
the fully connected layers fc7 of each network are used
to compute second- or even higher-order scatter tensors;
one per network stream per class. As the source and target distributions are somewhat different despite being related, we align the scatters of the two network streams of
the same class (within-class scatters) to a desired degree
with our bespoke loss while maintaining good separation of
the between-class scatters. We train the entire network in
end-to-end fashion. We provide evaluations on the standard
Office benchmark (visual domains) and RGB-D combined
with Caltech256 (depth-to-rgb transfer). We attain state-ofthe-art results.

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation and transfer learning are the problems widely studied in computer vision and machine learning communities [1, 27]. They are directly inspired by
the human cognitive abilities of generalizing to new concepts from very few data samples (cf. training from
scratch on over a million of labeled images of the ImageNet
dataset [31]). From psychological point of view, transfer
of learning is “the dependency of human conduct, learning or performance on prior experience”. This problem
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

was introduced in 1901 under a notion of “transfer of particle” [46]. In machine learning, transfer learning (or inductive learning) concerns “storing knowledge gained while
solving one problem and applying it to a different but related problem” [45]. In practical computer vision and machine learning systems, transfer learning refers to “an ability of a system to recognize and apply knowledge and skills
learned in previous tasks to novel tasks or new domains,
which share some commonality”. In general, given a new
(target) task, the arising question is how to identify the commonality between this task and previous (source) tasks, and
transfer knowledge from the previous tasks to the target one.
Therefore, one has to address three questions: what to transfer, how to transfer, and when to transfer [39].
In what follows, we propose an approach to the domain
adaptation, dubbed Second- or Higher-order Transfer of
Knowledge (So-HoT), based on the mixture of alignments
of second- and/or higher-order scatter statistics between the
source and target domains. Specifically, we utilize secondand/or higher-order scatter tensors, one per each network
stream per class, such that the first stream corresponds to
the source domain while the second to the target. The scatters are built from the feature vectors produced by the fc7
layer of AlexNet [22]. We propose that, as the source and
target distributions are only partially related by their commonality, the scatters of the same class from both streams
(within-class scatters) should be aligned to a desired degree
to capture this commonality as an overlap between parts of
the two distributions. At the same time, to achieve high
classification accuracy, we maintain good separation between the scatters representing different classes (betweenclass scatters). We devise a simple loss that brings each pair
of within-class scatters closer in terms of their covariances
as well as their corresponding means. Therefore, the CNN
parameters stored by convolutional filters and weights of the
target network regularized by the source data in this endto-end fashion must produce statistics consistent with the
source network. We view such a regularization paradigm as
being motivated by the theory of privileged learning [41].
In our case, the statistics of the source network regularize
14478

