Temporal Attention-Gated Model for Robust Sequence Classification
Wenjie Pei1 , Tadas Baltrušaitis2 , David M.J. Tax1 and Louis-Philippe Morency2
1
Pattern Recognition Laboratory, Delft University of Technology
2
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
W.Pei-1@tudelft.nl, tbaltrus@cs.cmu.edu, D.M.J.Tax@tudelft.nl, morency@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Typical techniques for sequence classification are designed for well-segmented sequences which have been
edited to remove noisy or irrelevant parts. Therefore, such
methods cannot be easily applied on noisy sequences expected in real-world applications. In this paper, we present
the Temporal Attention-Gated Model (TAGM) which integrates ideas from attention models and gated recurrent networks to better deal with noisy or unsegmented sequences.
Specifically, we extend the concept of attention model to
measure the relevance of each observation (time step) of
a sequence. We then use a novel gated recurrent network
to learn the hidden representation for the final prediction.
An important advantage of our approach is interpretability
since the temporal attention weights provide a meaningful
value for the salience of each time step in the sequence.
We demonstrate the merits of our TAGM approach, both for
prediction accuracy and interpretability, on three different
tasks: spoken digit recognition, text-based sentiment analysis and visual event recognition.

1. Introduction
Sequence classification is posed as a problem of assigning a label to a sequence of observations. Sequence classification models have extensive applications ranging from
computer vision [17] to natural language processing [1].
Most existing sequence classification models are designed
for well segmented sequences and do not explicitly model
the fact that irrelevant (noisy) parts may be present in
the sequence. To reduce the interference of these irrelevant parts, researchers will often manually pre-process the
dataset to remove irrelevant subsequences. This manual
pre-processing can be very time consuming and reduce applicability in real-world scenarios.
A popular approach for sequence classification is gated
recurrent networks like Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [4]
and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [11]. They employ
gates (e.g., the input gate in the LSTM model) to balance

Temporal
attention

Recurrent
attention-gated
units
Predicted event: Biking

Figure 1. Our proposed model first employs an attention module
to extract the salient frames from the noisy raw input sequences,
and then learns an effective hidden representation for the top classifier. The wider the arrow is, the more the information is incorporated into the hidden representation. The dashed line represents
no transfer of information.

between current and previous time steps when memorizing the temporal information flow. However, these vectorial gates are applied individually to each dimension of the
information flow, thus it is hard to interpret the relative importance of the input time observations (i.e., time steps).
What subset of sequential observations is the most salient
for the classification task? Another way to balance the information flow, as we do in this work, is the adoption of
attention-based mechanism, which applies individual attention scores to each observation (time step), allowing for better interpretability.
In this paper, we introduce the Temporal AttentionGated Model (TAGM) which extends the idea of attentionbased mechanism to sequence classification tasks (see
overview in Figure 1). TAGM’s attention module automatically localizes the salient observations which are relevant
to the final decision and ignore the irrelavant (noisy) parts
of the input sequence. We created a new recurrent neural
unit that can learn a better sequence hidden representation
based on the attention scores. Consequently, TAGM’s classification decision is made based on the selected relevant
segments, improving accuracy over the conventional models that take into account the whole input sequence.

6730

