Knowing When to Look: Adaptive Attention via
A Visual Sentinel for Image Captioning

1

Jiasen Lu2∗†, Caiming Xiong1†, Devi Parikh3 , Richard Socher1
Salesforce Research, 2 Virginia Tech, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology

jiasenlu@vt.edu, parikh@gatech.edu, {cxiong, rsocher}@salesforce.com

…

…

…

0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3

…

…

…

Visual grounding
probability

∗ The major part of this work was done while J. Lu was an intern at
Salesforce Research.
† Equal contribution

…

…

RNN

Automatically generating captions for images has
emerged as a prominent interdisciplinary research problem
in both academia and industry. [8, 11, 18, 23, 27, 30]. It
can aid visually impaired users, and make it easy for users
to organize and navigate through large amounts of typically
unstructured visual data. In order to generate high quality
captions, the model needs to incorporate fine-grained visual
clues from the image. Recently, visual attention-based
neural encoder-decoder models [30, 11, 32] have been explored, where the attention mechanism typically produces
a spatial map highlighting image regions relevant to each
generated word.
Most attention models for image captioning and visual
question answering attend to the image at every time step,
irrespective of which word is going to be emitted next

Adaptive Attention Model

1. Introduction

CNN

Attention-based neural encoder-decoder frameworks
have been widely adopted for image captioning. Most methods force visual attention to be active for every generated
word. However, the decoder likely requires little to no visual
information from the image to predict non-visual words
such as “the” and “of”. Other words that may seem visual
can often be predicted reliably just from the language model
e.g., “sign” after “behind a red stop” or “phone” following
“talking on a cell”. In this paper, we propose a novel adaptive attention model with a visual sentinel. At each time
step, our model decides whether to attend to the image (and
if so, to which regions) or to the visual sentinel. The model
decides whether to attend to the image and where, in order
to extract meaningful information for sequential word generation. We test our method on the COCO image captioning
2015 challenge dataset and Flickr30K. Our approach sets
the new state-of-the-art by a significant margin.

Spatial Attention Sentinel Gate

Abstract

CNN

Figure 1: Our model learns an adaptive attention model
that automatically determines when to look (sentinel gate)
and where to look (spatial attention) for word generation,
which are explained in section 2.2, 2.3 & 5.4.
[31, 29, 17]. However, not all words in the caption have corresponding visual signals. Consider the example in Fig. 1
that shows an image and its generated caption “A white
bird perched on top of a red stop sign”. The words “a”
and “of” do not have corresponding canonical visual signals. Moreover, language correlations make the visual signal unnecessary when generating words like “on” and “top”
following “perched”, and “sign” following “a red stop”. In
fact, gradients from non-visual words could mislead and diminish the overall effectiveness of the visual signal in guiding the caption generation process.
In this paper, we introduce an adaptive attention encoderdecoder framework which can automatically decide when to
rely on visual signals and when to just rely on the language
model. Of course, when relying on visual signals, the model
also decides where – which image region – it should attend
to. We first propose a novel spatial attention model for extracting spatial image features. Then as our proposed adaptive attention mechanism, we introduce a new Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) extension, which produces an additional “visual sentinel” vector instead of a single hidden
state. The “visual sentinel”, an additional latent representation of the decoder’s memory, provides a fallback option to
the decoder. We further design a new sentinel gate, which
1375

