Simultaneous Facial Landmark Detection, Pose and Deformation Estimation
under Facial Occlusion
Yue Wu
ECSE Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Chao Gou
Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences

Qiang Ji
ECSE Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

wuyuesophia@gmail.com

gouchao2012@ic.ac.cn

jiq@rpi.edu

Abstract
Facial landmark detection, head pose estimation, and facial deformation analysis are typical facial behavior analysis tasks in computer vision. The existing methods usually
perform each task independently and sequentially, ignoring their interactions. To tackle this problem, we propose a
unified framework for simultaneous facial landmark detection, head pose estimation, and facial deformation analysis,
and the proposed model is robust to facial occlusion. Following a cascade procedure augmented with model-based
head pose estimation, we iteratively update the facial landmark locations, facial occlusion, head pose and facial deformation until convergence. The experimental results on
benchmark databases demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method for simultaneous facial landmark detection, head pose and facial deformation estimation, even if
the images are under facial occlusion.

1. Introduction
Typical facial behavior analysis tasks include facial landmark detection, head pose estimation, and facial deformation analysis. Facial landmark detection aims to detect the
key points around facial components and facial contour.
The goal of head pose estimation is to predict the orientation and translation of the head with respect to the camera
coordinate frame. Facial deformation refers to the non-rigid
facial motion induced by facial expression change. Current
research usually tackles these tasks independently and sequentially. In reality, rigid head movements and non-rigid
facial expressions often happen together and they both affect the 2D facial landmarks (see Figure 1). Head pose and
non-rigid facial deformation can lead to different 2D facial
shapes, and the 2D facial landmark locations can reflect the
head pose and non-rigid facial deformation. Therefore, due
to the coupled interactions, facial landmark, head pose, and
facial deformation should be estimated jointly utilizing their

Facial
deformation

Head
pose

2d facial
landmark

Figure 1. The coupling of facial landmark locations, head pose and
facial deformation

joint relationships.
Facial occlusion brings significant challenges for facial
behavior analysis. As shown in Figure 2, facial occlusion
can be induced by objects or it may be self-occlusion due to
significant head poses (e.g. > 60 degree). Facial appearance
information is noisy on images with occlusion, and facial
shape on the occluded facial parts is difficult to estimate.
The facial occlusion causes problems for all facial analysis
tasks, including facial landmark detection, head pose estimation, and facial deformation analysis.
Based on the intuitions above, we propose to simultaneously estimate the facial landmark locations, head pose and
facial deformation in a unified framework using a method
that is robust to facial occlusion. There are a few major
contributions of the proposed method:
• We propose an iterative cascade method to simultaneously perform facial landmark detection, pose and
deformation estimation. The unified framework can
leverage the joint relationships among landmarks, pose
and deformation to boost the performances of all the
tasks. This is in contrast to most of the existing works,
which treat them sequentially or independently. It
is also different from some joint methods performing
one-shot estimation [18][2].
• The proposed method allows us to systematically integrate the learning-based facial landmark detection with
model-based head pose and facial deformation estima13471

