Learning Features by Watching Objects Move
Deepak Pathak1,2,* , Ross Girshick1 , Piotr Dollár1 , Trevor Darrell2 , and Bharath Hariharan1
1

2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
This paper presents a novel yet intuitive approach to unsupervised feature learning. Inspired by the human visual
system, we explore whether low-level motion-based grouping cues can be used to learn an effective visual representation. Specifically, we use unsupervised motion-based segmentation on videos to obtain segments, which we use as
‘pseudo ground truth’ to train a convolutional network to
segment objects from a single frame. Given the extensive
evidence that motion plays a key role in the development of
the human visual system, we hope that this straightforward
approach to unsupervised learning will be more effective
than cleverly designed ‘pretext’ tasks studied in the literature. Indeed, our extensive experiments show that this is the
case. When used for transfer learning on object detection,
our representation significantly outperforms previous unsupervised approaches across multiple settings, especially
when training data for the target task is scarce.

1. Introduction
ConvNet-based image representations are extremely versatile, showing good performance in a variety of recognition tasks [9, 15, 19, 50]. Typically these representations
are trained using supervised learning on large-scale image
classification datasets, such as ImageNet [41]. In contrast,
animal visual systems do not require careful manual annotation to learn, and instead take advantage of the nearly infinite amount of unlabeled data in their surrounding environments. Developing models that can learn under these
challenging conditions is a fundamental scientific problem,
which has led to a flurry of recent work proposing methods
that learn visual representations without manual annotation.
A recurring theme in these works is the idea of a ‘pretext task’: a task that is not of direct interest, but can be
used to obtain a good visual representation as a byproduct of training. Example pretext tasks include reconstruct∗ Work done during an internship at FAIR.

Figure 1. Low-level appearance cues lead to incorrect grouping
(top right). Motion helps us to correctly group pixels that move
together (bottom left) and identify this group as a single object
(bottom right). We use unsupervised motion-based grouping to
train a ConvNet to segment objects in static images and show that
the network learns strong features that transfer well to other tasks.

ing the input [4, 20, 44], predicting the pixels of the next
frame in a video stream [17], metric learning on object track
endpoints [46], temporally ordering shuffled frames from a
video [29], and spatially ordering patches from a static image [8, 30]. The challenge in this line of research lies in
cleverly designing a pretext task that causes the ConvNet
(or other representation learner) to learn high-level features.
In this paper, we take a different approach that is motivated by human vision studies. Both infants [42] and newly
sighted congenitally blind people [32] tend to oversegment
static objects, but can group things properly when they move
(Figure 1). To do so, they may rely on the Gestalt principle
of common fate [34, 47]: pixels that move together tend
to belong together. The ability to parse static scenes improves [32] over time, suggesting that while motion-based
grouping appears early, static grouping is acquired later,
possibly bootstrapped by motion cues. Moreover, experiments in [32] show that shortly after gaining sight, human
subjects are better able to name objects that tend to be seen
12701

