Deep Semantic Feature Matching
Nikolai Ufer and Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
nikolai.ufer@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de ommer@uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Estimating dense visual correspondences between objects with intra-class variation, deformations and background clutter remains a challenging problem. Thanks to
the breakthrough of CNNs there are new powerful features
available. Despite their easy accessibility and great success, existing semantic flow methods could not significantly
benefit from these without extensive additional training.
We introduce a novel method for semantic matching with
pre-trained CNN features which is based on convolutional
feature pyramids and activation guided feature selection.
For the final matching we propose a sparse graph matching framework where each salient feature selects among a
small subset of nearest neighbors in the target image. To
improve our method in the unconstrained setting without
bounding box annotations we introduce novel object proposal based matching constraints. Furthermore, we show
that the sparse matching can be transformed into a dense
correspondence field. Extensive experimental evaluations
on benchmark datasets show that our method significantly
outperforms existing semantic matching methods.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences between images is a fundamental problem of computer vision and key to many applications like 3D reconstruction, video analysis, image retrieval and object recognition. Classical correspondence
methods like stereo matching [21] and optical flow [23, 35]
consider input images showing same objects or scenes from
different viewpoints. With the development of better features which are more robust against deformations and appearance changes, researchers started to estimate correspondences across different instances and scenes of the
same semantic category. In the literature this problem is
often denoted as semantic matching or semantic flow in the
case of dense correspondences.
Despite of the success of deep features in many fields
of computer vision, previous work on semantic matching

Figure 1: Overview of our approach for dense semantic
matching. After salient feature extraction we utilize a MRF
for finding sparse correspondences, which are used to estimate a dense flow field using thin plate splines (TPS).

[20, 33] reported that pre-trained CNN features perform
similarly or even worse compared to hand-engineered features such as SIFT [34] or HOG [12, 22]. In this work we
revisit deep semantic feature matching and propose an efficient algorithm specifically designed for this task, which
addresses the following main issues of previous approaches:
(1) Local structures are not robust against intra-class
variation and for finding semantic correspondences more
context is necessary. We extract particular context-sensitive
features by utilizing a deep feature pyramid representation
[19], where we encode image regions by aggregating respective cells of the feature pyramid over two levels. This
provides more discriminative region descriptors compared
to methods where regions are just cropped, rescaled and

6914

