Harvesting Multiple Views for Marker-less 3D Human Pose Annotations
Georgios Pavlakos1 , Xiaowei Zhou1 , Konstantinos G. Derpanis2 , Kostas Daniilidis1
1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Ryerson University

Abstract
Recent advances with Convolutional Networks
(ConvNets) have shifted the bottleneck for many computer vision tasks to annotated data collection. In this
paper, we present a geometry-driven approach to automatically collect annotations for human pose prediction tasks.
Starting from a generic ConvNet for 2D human pose, and
assuming a multi-view setup, we describe an automatic
way to collect accurate 3D human pose annotations. We
capitalize on constraints offered by the 3D geometry of the
camera setup and the 3D structure of the human body to
probabilistically combine per view 2D ConvNet predictions
into a globally optimal 3D pose. This 3D pose is used as
the basis for harvesting annotations. The benefit of the
annotations produced automatically with our approach is
demonstrated in two challenging settings: (i) fine-tuning
a generic ConvNet-based 2D pose predictor to capture
the discriminative aspects of a subject’s appearance
(i.e.,“personalization”), and (ii) training a ConvNet from
scratch for single view 3D human pose prediction without
leveraging 3D pose groundtruth. The proposed multi-view
pose estimator achieves state-of-the-art results on standard
benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method
in exploiting the available multi-view information.

1. Introduction
Key to much of the success with Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) is the availability of abundant labeled
training data. For many tasks though this assumption is
unrealistic. As a result, many recent works have explored
alternative training schemes, such as unsupervised training
[17, 26, 45], auxiliary tasks that improve learning representations [42], and tasks where groundtruth comes for free,
or is very easy to acquire [31]. Inspired by these works,
this paper proposes a geometry-driven approach to automatically gather a high-quality set of annotations for human
pose estimation tasks, both in 2D and 3D.
ConvNets have had a tremendous impact on the task of
2D human pose estimation [40, 41, 27]. A promising research direction to improve performance is to automatically

Multi-view
Setup

Generic 2D pose
ConvNets

Heatmaps

3D Pictorial Structure

3D Annotations

Figure 1: Overview of our approach for harvesting pose
annotations. Given a multi-view camera setup, we use a
generic ConvNet for 2D human pose estimation [27], and
produce single-view pose predictions in the form of 2D
heatmaps for each view. The single-view predictions are
combined optimally using a 3D Pictorial Structures model
to yield 3D pose estimates with associated per joint uncertainties. The pose estimate is further probed to determine
reliable joints to be used as annotations.

adapt (i.e., “personalize”) a pretrained ConvNet-based 2D
pose predictor to the subject under observation [11]. In contrast to its 2D counterpart, 3D human pose estimation suffers from the difficulty of gathering 3D groundtruth. While
gathering large-scale 2D pose annotations from images is
feasible, collecting corresponding 3D groundtruth is not.
Instead, most works have relied on limited 3D annotations
captured with motion capture (MoCap) rigs in very restrictive indoor settings. Ideally, a simple, marker-less, multicamera approach could provide reliable 3D human pose estimates in general settings. Leveraging these estimates as
3D annotations of images would capture the variability in
users, clothing, and settings, which is crucial for ConvNets
to properly generalize.
Towards this goal, this paper proposes a geometry-driven
approach to automatically harvest reliable annotations from
multi-view imagery. Figure 1 provides an overview of our
approach to automatically harvest reliable joint annotations.
Given a set of images captured with a calibrated multi-view
setup, a generic ConvNet for 2D human pose [27] pro16988

