A Reinforcement Learning Approach to the View Planning Problem
Mustafa Devrim Kaba∗
Mustafa Gokhan Uzunbas∗
Ser Nam Lim
General Electric Global Research Center, 1 Research Circle, Niskayuna, NY 12309.
{mustafa.kaba, mustafa.uzunbas, limser}@ge.com

Abstract
We present a Reinforcement Learning (RL) solution to
the view planning problem (VPP), which generates a sequence of view points that are capable of sensing all accessible area of a given object represented as a 3D model. In
doing so, the goal is to minimize the number of view points,
making the VPP a class of set covering optimization problem (SCOP). The SCOP is N P -hard, and the inapproximability results tell us that the greedy algorithm provides the
best approximation that runs in polynomial time. In order
to find a solution that is better than the greedy algorithm, (i)
we introduce a novel score function by exploiting the geometry of the 3D model, (ii) we device an intuitive approach
to VPP using this score function, and (iii) we cast VPP as
a Markovian Decision Process (MDP), and solve the MDP
in RL framework using well-known RL algorithms. In particular, we use SARSA, Watkins-Q and TD with function approximation to solve the MDP. We compare the results of
our method with the baseline greedy algorithm in an extensive set of test objects, and show that we can out-perform
the baseline in almost all cases.

1. Introduction
In this work, we present a solution to the view planning problem (VPP), which aims to automatically determine a minimum number of camera perspectives for viewing a given object in order to achieve a coverage requirement. View planning is becoming increasingly important as
the advent of autonomous platforms is placing demand on
developing algorithms that can provide such a solution, particularly for robots and UAVs mounted with cameras whose
missions are to collect imageries that fully cover the object of interest (See Figure 1). In this paper, we will focus
on model-based view planning where an object’s 3D model
is available. In model-based view planning, one can take
a more global view of the optimization problem involved.
∗ These authors contributed to this paper equally.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) View planning for UAV terrain modeling, (b) Given a
set of initial view points, (c) The goal is to find minimum number
of views that provide sufficient coverage. Here, color code represents correspondence between selected views and the coverage.

This can be seen in Sheinin et al.’s recent work [25] that
tries to take a rough 3D underwater sonar model and exploit an optimization criterion that is based on information
gain, optimizing viewpoints so that the descattered albedo
is least noisy. In contrast, non-model-based view planning
[30, 29] often relies on stochastic state analysis, utilizing
uncertainty estimation to plan the next best view (NBV).
One of the earliest applications of view planning was indoor and outdoor surveillance, which is also known as the
art gallery problem [14]. More recently, there has been an
increased interest in the use of drones in surveillance, inspection and 3D reconstruction, all of which require view
planning [17, 11, 31, 18, 3, 20, 21, 22]. In many of these applications, prior 3D models are available. For example, in
rescue missions, it is critical that survivors be found quickly,
and often such search and rescue missions are conducted
from the air. 3D models of search regions are often readily
available (such as from Google Earth), and can be exploited
in view planning to plan the search paths.
Model based VPP can be regarded as a set covering optimization problem (SCOP) and is constrained by the limitations of SCOP [28]. Under reasonable complexity assumptions, the naı̈ve greedy approach is essentially the best
polynomial time approximation algorithm to the N P -hard
SCOP [7]. Even though one can often find a better solution
specific to the problem in hand, to the best of our knowl16933

