Deep Supervision with Shape Concepts for Occlusion-Aware 3D Object Parsing
Chi Li1 , M. Zeeshan Zia2 , Quoc-Huy Tran2 , Xiang Yu2 , Gregory D. Hager1 and Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

NEC Labs America

3

UC San Diego

Abstract
Monocular 3D object parsing is highly desirable in various scenarios including occlusion reasoning and holistic
scene interpretation. We present a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture to localize semantic parts
in 2D image and 3D space while inferring their visibility
states, given a single RGB image. Our key insight is to exploit domain knowledge to regularize the network by deeply
supervising its hidden layers, in order to sequentially infer
intermediate concepts associated with the final task. To acquire training data in desired quantities with ground truth
3D shape and relevant concepts, we render 3D object CAD
models to generate large-scale synthetic data and simulate
challenging occlusion configurations between objects. We
train the network only on synthetic data and demonstrate
state-of-the-art performances on real image benchmarks
including an extended version of KITTI, PASCAL VOC, PASCAL3D+ and IKEA for 2D and 3D keypoint localization and
instance segmentation. The empirical results substantiate
the utility of our deep supervision scheme by demonstrating
effective transfer of knowledge from synthetic data to real
images, resulting in less overfitting compared to standard
end-to-end training.

1. Introduction
The world around us is rich in structural regularity, particularly when we consider man-made objects such as cars or
furniture. Studies in perception show that the human visual
system imposes structure to reason about stimuli [32]. Consequently, early work in computer vision studied perceptual
organization as a fundamental precept for recognition and
reconstruction [21, 22]. In particular, intermediate concepts
like viewpoint are explored to aid complex perception tasks
such as shape interpretation and mental rotation. However,
algorithms designed on these principles [24, 30] suffered
from limitations in the face of real-world complexities because they relied on hand-crafted features (such as corners
or edges) and hard-coded rules (such as junctions or paral-

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. We use synthetic training
images with intermediate shape concepts to deeply supervise the
hidden layers of a CNN. At test time, given a single real image of
an object, we demonstrate accurate localization of semantic parts in
2D and 3D, while being robust to intra-class appearance variations
as well as occlusions.

lelism). In contrast, with the advent of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in recent years, there has been tremendous
progress in end-to-end trainable feature learning for object
recognition, segmentation and reconstruction.
In this paper, we posit that it is advantageous to consider
a middle ground, where we combine such early intuitions
[22, 21] on shape concepts with the discriminative power
of modern CNNs to parse 2D/3D object geometry across
intra-class appearance variations, including complex phenomena such as occlusions. Specifically, we demonstrate
that intermediate shape concepts pertinent to 2D/3D shape
understanding, such as pose and part visibility, can be applied to supervise intermediate layers of a CNN. This allows
greater accuracy in localizing the semantic elements of an
object observed in a single image.
To illustrate this idea, we use 3D skeleton [35] as the
shape representation, where semantically meaningful object
parts (such as the wheels of a car) are represented by 3D
keypoints and their connections define 3D structure of an
object category. This representation is more efficient than 3D
15465

