Learning Spatial Regularization with Image-level Supervisions
for Multi-label Image Classification
Feng Zhu1,2 , Hongsheng Li2 , Wanli Ouyang2,3 , Nenghai Yu1 , Xiaogang Wang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 3 University of Sydney
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zhufengx@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {hsli,wlouyang,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, ynh@ustc.edu.cn

Spatial Regularization Net

Abstract
Multi-label image classification is a fundamental but
challenging task in computer vision. Great progress has
been achieved by exploiting semantic relations between labels in recent years. However, conventional approaches
are unable to model the underlying spatial relations between labels in multi-label images, because spatial annotations of the labels are generally not provided. In this paper, we propose a unified deep neural network that exploits
both semantic and spatial relations between labels with only
image-level supervisions. Given a multi-label image, our
proposed Spatial Regularization Network (SRN) generates
attention maps for all labels and captures the underlying
relations between them via learnable convolutions. By aggregating the regularized classification results with original
results by a ResNet-101 network, the classification performance can be consistently improved. The whole deep neural
network is trained end-to-end with only image-level annotations, thus requires no additional efforts on image annotations. Extensive evaluations on 3 public datasets with different types of labels show that our approach significantly
outperforms state-of-the-arts and has strong generalization
capability. Analysis of the learned SRN model demonstrates
that it can effectively capture both semantic and spatial relations of labels for improving classification performance.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classification is an important task in
computer vision with various applications, such as scene
recognition [4, 30, 31], multi-object recognition [25, 19,
18], human attribute recognition [24], etc. Compared to
single-label image classification [6, 7, 12], which has been
extensively studied, multi-label problem is more practical
and challenging, as real-world images are usually associated with multiple labels, such as objects or attributes.
Binary relevance method [34] is an easy way to extend
single-label algorithms to solve multi-label classification,
which simply trains one binary classifier for each label.

Input Image

clouds

lake

sky

sun

...
...

ocean

rock

sunset

water

Label Attention Maps
CNN

Learning Spatial Regularization

clouds: 0.803
sky: 0.945
sun: 0.339
lake: 0.685
ocean: 0.974 sunset: 0.908
rocks: 0.405 water: 0.958

sky: 0.973
clouds: 0.880
sun: 0.519
lake: 0.679
ocean: 0.966 sunset: 0.903
rocks: 0.526 water: 0.963

Initial Confidences

Regularized Confidences

Figure 1. Illustration of using our proposed Spatial Regularization
Net (SRN) for improving multi-label image classification. The
SRN learns semantic and spatial label relations from label attention maps with only image-level supervisions.

Various loss functions have been investigated in [11]. To
cope with the problem that labels may relate to different
visual regions over the whole image, proposal-based approaches [38] are proposed to transform multi-label classification problem into multiple single-label classification
tasks. However, these modifications of existing single-label
algorithms ignored semantic relations of labels.
Recent progress on multi-label image classification
mainly focused on capturing semantic relations between
labels. Such relations or dependency can be modeled by
probabilistic graphical models [23, 22], structured inference
neural network [16], or Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
[36]. Despite the great improvements achieved by exploiting semantic relations, existing methods cannot capture spatial relations of labels, because their spatial locations are not
annotated for training. In this paper, we propose to capture
both semantic and spatial relations of labels by a Spatial
Regularization Network in a unified framework (Figure 1),
which can be trained end-to-end with only image-level supervisions, thus requires no additional annotations.
15513

