Modeling Temporal Dynamics and Spatial Configurations of Actions Using
Two-Stream Recurrent Neural Networks
Hongsong Wang1,3
Liang Wang1,2,3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
1

{hongsong.wang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Human action recognition [2] has become an active area
in computer vision and there are many important research
problems, such as event recognition [23], group based activities recognition [27], human object interactions [15] and
activities in egocentric videos [29, 11]. Most approaches
have been proposed to recognize actions in RGB videos

joints

1. Introduction

time

Recently, skeleton based action recognition gains more
popularity due to cost-effective depth sensors coupled with
real-time skeleton estimation algorithms. Traditional approaches based on handcrafted features are limited to represent the complexity of motion patterns. Recent methods
that use Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to handle raw
skeletons only focus on the contextual dependency in the
temporal domain and neglect the spatial configurations of
articulated skeletons. In this paper, we propose a novel
two-stream RNN architecture to model both temporal dynamics and spatial configurations for skeleton based action
recognition. We explore two different structures for the temporal stream: stacked RNN and hierarchical RNN. Hierarchical RNN is designed according to human body kinematics. We also propose two effective methods to model the
spatial structure by converting the spatial graph into a sequence of joints. To improve generalization of our model,
we further exploit 3D transformation based data augmentation techniques including rotation and scaling transformation to transform the 3D coordinates of skeletons during
training. Experiments on 3D action recognition benchmark
datasets show that our method brings a considerable improvement for a variety of actions, i.e., generic actions, interaction activities and gestures.

joints

Temporal RNN

RNN

time

RNN

Softmax
Score

Spatial RNN

RNN

RNN

Softmax

Figure 1. A two-stream RNN architecture for skeleton based action
recognition. Here Softmax denotes a fully connected layer with a
softmax activation function.

recorded by 2D cameras. However, it still remains a challenging problem for three reasons. First, it is hard to well
extract useful information from the high dimensional and
low quality input data. Second, the RGB video is highly sensitive to some factors like illumination changes, occlusion and background clutter. Third, the identification of
actions is related to high-level visual clues such as human
poses and objects, which are very difficult to obtain from
RGB videos directly.
Humans can recognize actions with a few spots describing motions of the main joints of skeletons [24], and experiments show that a large set of actions can be recognized
solely from skeletons [25]. In contrast to RGB based action
recognition, skeleton based action recognition can avoid the
awful task of feature extraction from videos and explicitly
model the dynamics of actions. There are three ways to obtain skeletons: motion capture systems, RGB images and
depth maps. Sophisticated motion capture systems are very
expensive and require the user to wear a motion capture suit
with markers. Extracting reliable skeletons from monocular RGB images or videos, i.e., pose estimation, is still an
unsolved problem. Fortunately, with the recent advent of
affordable depth sensors, it is much easier and cheaper to
obtain 3D skeletons from depth maps. For example, Shot-

499

