Deep Cross-Modal Hashing
Qing-Yuan Jiang and Wu-Jun Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, P. R. China
jiangqy@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to its low storage cost and fast query speed, crossmodal hashing (CMH) has been widely used for similarity
search in multimedia retrieval applications. However, most
existing CMH methods are based on hand-crafted features
which might not be optimally compatible with the hash-code
learning procedure. As a result, existing CMH methods
with hand-crafted features may not achieve satisfactory
performance. In this paper, we propose a novel CMH
method, called deep cross-modal hashing (DCMH), by
integrating feature learning and hash-code learning into
the same framework. DCMH is an end-to-end learning
framework with deep neural networks, one for each modality, to perform feature learning from scratch. Experiments
on three real datasets with image-text modalities show
that DCMH can outperform other baselines to achieve
the state-of-the-art performance in cross-modal retrieval
applications.

1. Introduction
Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search [1] plays a
fundamental role in machine learning and related applications like information retrieval. Due to its low storage cost
and fast retrieval speed, hashing has recently attracted much
attention from the ANN research community [17, 34, 9, 15,
26, 10, 29, 21, 28, 4]. The goal of hashing is to map the
data points from the original space into a Hamming space
of binary codes where the similarity in the original space
is preserved in the Hamming space. By using binary hash
codes to represent the original data, the storage cost can
be dramatically reduced. Furthermore, we can achieve a
constant or sub-linear time complexity for search by using
hash codes to construct an index [15]. Hence, hashing has
become more and more popular for ANN search in largescale datasets.
In many applications, the data can have multi-modalities.
For example, besides the image content, there also exists

text information like tags for the images in Flickr and many
other social websites. This kind of data is always called
multi-modal data. With the rapid growth of multi-modal
data in real applications, especially multimedia applications, multi-modal hashing (MMH) has recently been widely
used for ANN search (retrieval) on multi-modal datasets.
Existing MMH methods can be divided into two main
categories: mutli-source hashing (MSH) [30, 36, 32, 14]
and cross-modal hashing (CMH) [18, 35, 7, 22, 3]. The
goal of MSH is to learn hash codes by utilizing all the information from multiple modalities. Hence, MSH requires
that all the modalities should be observed for all data points
including query points and those in database. In practice,
the application of MSH is limited because in many cases it
is difficult to acquire all modalities of all data points. On
the contrary, the application scenarios of CMH are more
flexible than those of MSH. In CMH, the modality of a
query point is different from the modality of the points in
database. Furthermore, typically the query point has only
one modality and the points in the database can have one or
more modalities. For example, we can use text queries to
retrieve images in the database, and we can also use image
queries to retrieve texts in the database. Due to its wide
application, CMH has gained more attention than MSH.
Many CMH methods have recently been proposed.
Existing
representative
methods
include
cross
modality similarity sensitive hashing (CMSSH) [2],
cross view hashing (CVH) [18],
multi-modal
latent
binary
embedding
(MLBE)
[39],
coregularized hashing (CRH) [38], semantic correlation
maximization (SCM) [35], collective matrix factorization
hashing (CMFH) [7], semantic topic multi-modal
hashing (STMH) [33] and semantics preserving
hashing (SePH) [22]. Almost all these existing CMH
methods are based on hand-crafted features.
One
shortcoming of these hand-crafted feature based methods
is that the feature extraction procedure is independent of
the hash-code learning procedure, which means that the
hand-crafted features might not be optimally compatible

3232

