Diversified Texture Synthesis with Feed-forward Networks
Yijun Li1 , Chen Fang2 , Jimei Yang2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Xin Lu2 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1
2
University of California, Merced
Adobe Research
{yli62,mhyang}@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Recent progresses on deep discriminative and generative
modeling have shown promising results on texture synthesis. However, existing feed-forward based methods trade
off generality for efficiency, which suffer from many issues,
such as shortage of generality (i.e., build one network per
texture), lack of diversity (i.e., always produce visually identical output) and suboptimality (i.e., generate less satisfying
visual effects). In this work, we focus on solving these issues
for improved texture synthesis. We propose a deep generative feed-forward network which enables efficient synthesis
of multiple textures within one single network and meaningful interpolation between them. Meanwhile, a suite of important techniques are introduced to achieve better convergence and diversity. With extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model and techniques for synthesizing a large number of textures and show
its applications with the stylization.

{cfang,jimyang,zhawang,xinl}@adobe.com

tween different types of textures to synthesize. More importantly, such a multi-texture synthesis network facilitates
generating new textures by interpolating with the selection
units. Meanwhile, the noise vector is intended to drive the
network to generate diverse samples even from a single exemplar texture image.

1. Introduction

However, learning such a network is a challenging task.
First, different types of textures have quite different statistical characteristics, which are partially reflected by the
varied magnitudes of texture losses (i.e., the Gram matrixbased losses introduced in [13, 14] to measure style similarity) across different feature layers. Second, the convergence rates for fitting different textures are inherently different due to their drastic visual difference and semantic gaps.
As a result, the overall difficulty of learning such a network
is determined by the variation among the textures and the
complexity of individual textures. Third, the network often
encounters the “explain-away” effect that the noise vector is
marginalized out and thus fails to influence the network output. Specifically, the network is not able to generate diverse
samples of a given texture, and it often means overfitting to
a particular instance.

Impressive neural style transfer results by Gatys et
al. [14] have recently regained great interests from computer
vision, graphics and machine learning communities for the
classic problem of texture synthesis [10, 9, 35]. Considering the expensive optimization process in [14], a few attempts have been made to develop feed-forward networks
to efficiently synthesize a texture image or a stylized image [19, 32]. However, these methods often suffer from
many issues, including shortage of generality (i.e., build one
network per texture), lack of diversity (i.e., always produce
visually identical output) and suboptimality (i.e., generate
less satisfying visual effects).
In this paper, we propose a deep generative network for
synthesizing diverse outputs of multiple textures in a single network. Our network architecture, inspired by [28, 7],
takes a noise vector and a selection unit as input to generate texture images using up-convolutions. The selection
unit is a one-hot vector where each bit represents a texture
type and provides users with a control signal to switch be-

In this work, we propose a suite of effective techniques
to help the network generate diverse outputs of higher quality. We first improve the Gram matrix loss by subtracting
the feature mean, so that the newly designed loss is more
stable in scale and adds stability to the learning. Second,
in order to empower the network with the ability of generating diverse samples and further prevent overfitting, we
aim to correlate the output samples with the input noise vector. Specifically, we introduce a diversity loss that penalizes
the feature similarities of different samples in a mini-batch.
Third, we show that a suitable training strategy is critical for
the network to converge better and faster. Thus we devise
an incremental learning algorithm that expose new training
textures sequentially to the learner network. We start from
learning to synthesize one texture and only incorporate next
new unseen texture into the learning when the previous texture can be well generated. As such, the network gradually
learns to synthesize new textures while retaining the ability
to generate all previously seen textures.
13920

