Weakly Supervised Cascaded Convolutional Networks
Ali Diba1 , Vivek Sharma2,⋆ , Ali Pazandeh3 , Hamed Pirsiavash4 and Luc Van Gool1,5
1

3

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven, 2 CV:HCI, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Sharif University, 4 University of Maryland Baltimore County, 5 CVL, ETH Zürich

ali.diba@kuleuven.be, vivek.sharma@kit.edu, pazandeh@ee.sharif.edu, hpirsiav@umbc.edu

Abstract
Object detection is a challenging task in visual understanding domain, and even more so if the supervision is to
be weak. Recently, few efforts to handle the task without
expensive human annotations is established by promising
deep neural network. A new architecture of cascaded networks is proposed to learn a convolutional neural network
(CNN) under such conditions. We introduce two such architectures, with either two cascade stages or three which
are trained in an end-to-end pipeline. The first stage of both
architectures extracts best candidate of class specific region
proposals by training a fully convolutional network. In the
case of the three stage architecture, the middle stage provides object segmentation, using the output of the activation
maps of first stage. The final stage of both architectures is a
part of a convolutional neural network that performs multiple instance learning on proposals extracted in the previous stage(s). Our experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2007,
2010, 2012 and large scale object datasets, ILSVRC 2013,
2014 datasets show improvements in the areas of weaklysupervised object detection, classification and localization.

1. Introduction
The ability to train a system that detects objects in cluttered scenes by only naming the objects in the training images, without specifying their number or their bounding
boxes, is understood to be of major importance. Then it
becomes possible to annotate very large datasets or to automatically collect them from the web.
Most current methods to train object detection systems
assume strong supervision [12, 26, 19]. Providing both the
bounding boxes and their labels as annotations for each object, still renders such methods more powerful than their
weakly supervised counterparts. Although the availability
of larger sets of training data is advantageous for the training of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), weak super⋆ This work was carried out while he was at ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven.

C Primary
Primary
Stage
O
Stage
N
V

cat

cat

cat

C Secondary
Stage
O Secondary
Stage
N
V

cat

Figure 1. Weakly Supervised Cascaded Deep CNN: Overview
of the proposed cascaded weakly supervised object detection and
classification method. Our cascaded networks take images and existing object labels to find the best location of objects samples in
each of images. Trained networks based on these location is capable of detecting and classifying objects in images, under weakly
supervision circumstances.

vision as a means of producing those has only been embraced to a limited degree.
The proposed weak supervision methods have come in
some different flavors. One of the most common approaches [7] consists of the following steps. The first step
generates object proposals. The last stage extracts features
from the proposals. And the final stage applies multiple
instance learning (MIL) to the features and finds the box labels from the weak bag (image) labels. This approach can
thus be improved by enhancing any of its steps. For instance, it would be advantageous if the first stage were to
produce more reliable - and therefore fewer - object proposals.
It is the aforementioned approach that our weak supervision algorithm also follows. To improve the detection
performance, object proposal generation, feature extraction,
and MIL are trained in a cascaded manner, in an end-to-end
way. We propose two architectures. The first is a two stage
network. The first stage extracts class specific object proposals using a fully convolutional network followed by a
1914

