ViP-CNN: Visual Phrase Guided Convolutional Neural Network
Yikang Li1 , Wanli Ouyang1,2 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Xiao’ou Tang3,1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
University of Sydney, Australia 3 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, China
1

ykli, wlouyang, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
As the intermediate level task connecting image captioning and object detection, visual relationship detection
started to catch researchers’ attention because of its descriptive power and clear structure. It detects the objects
and captures their pair-wise interactions with a subjectpredicate-object triplet, e.g. hperson-ride-horsei. In this
paper, each visual relationship is considered as a phrase
with three components. We formulate the visual relationship
detection as three inter-connected recognition problems and
propose a Visual Phrase guided Convolutional Neural Network (ViP-CNN) to address them simultaneously. In ViPCNN, we present a Phrase-guided Message Passing Structure (PMPS) to establish the connection among relationship
components and help the model consider the three problems
jointly. Corresponding non-maximum suppression method
and model training strategy are also proposed. Experimental results show that our ViP-CNN outperforms the stateof-art method both in speed and accuracy. We further pretrain ViP-CNN on our cleansed Visual Genome Relationship dataset, which is found to perform better than the pretraining on the ImageNet for this task.

1. Introduction
Booted by the development of Deep Learning, letting
the computer understand an image seems to be increasingly
closer. With the research on object detection gradually becoming mature [37, 36, 32, 24, 22, 23], increasingly more
researchers put their attention on higher-level understanding of the scene [21, 51, 2, 48, 49, 46, 9, 6, 7, 47]. As an intermediate level task connecting the image caption and object detection, visual relationship/phrase detection is gaining more attention in scene understanding [33, 41, 3].
Visual phrase detection is the task of localizing a
hsubject-predicate-objecti phrase, where predicate describes the relationship between the subject and object. Visual relationship detection involves detecting and localizing
pairs of interacting objects in an image and also classifying
the predicate or interaction between them. For the example

person–hold–kite

person–hold–kite

Figure 1. Visual phrase (left) and visual relationship (right).

of hperson-hold-kitei in Figure 1, visual relationship detection aims at locating the person, the kite and classifying
the pair-wise relation ‘hold’, while visual phrase concentrates on describing the region as an integrated whole.
Compared with localized objects, visual relationships
have more expressive power. It can help to build up the connection between objects within the image, which opens a
new dimension for image understanding. In addition, unlike
captions, the fixed structure of visual relationships makes it
possible to explicitly design the architecture of the model
for better use of the domain knowledge. Therefore, we can
get a richer semantic understanding of the image through
detecting visual relationships.
For visual relationship detection, there are two commonly used pipelines, the bottom-up and the top-down. The
bottom-up design first detects objects and then recognizes
the possible interactions among them, which is adopted by
the state-of-art method [33]. The top-down design detects
the hsubject-predicate-objecti phrase simultaneously by
regarding the relationship as an integrated whole. In comparison, the sequential order of the bottom-up implementation cuts off the feature-level connection between the two
steps, which is important for correctly recognizing the relationship. Thus, we follow the top-down design by viewing the visual relationship as a phrase and solve it as three
closely-connected recognition problems. Because of the
joint training for the subject, predicate and object, our
model is capable of learning specific visual patterns for the
interaction and taking the visual interdependency into consideration.
Another motivation in our model is that the predictions
of different phrase components are dependent on each other
11347

