On Compressing Deep Models by Low Rank and Sparse Decomposition
Xiyu Yu1
Tongliang Liu1
Xinchao Wang2
Dacheng Tao1
1
UBTech Sydney AI Institute and SIT, FEIT, The University of Sydney
2
IFP, Beckman Institute, The University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)
yuxiyu88@gmail.com tliang.liu@gmail.com xinchao@illinois.edu dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep compression refers to removing the redundancy
of parameters and feature maps for deep learning models.
Low-rank approximation and pruning for sparse structures
play a vital role in many compression works. However,
weight filters tend to be both low-rank and sparse. Neglecting either part of these structure information in previous methods results in iteratively retraining, compromising
accuracy, and low compression rates. Here we propose a
unified framework integrating the low-rank and sparse decomposition of weight matrices with the feature map reconstructions. Our model includes methods like pruning connections as special cases, and is optimized by a fast SVDfree algorithm. It has been theoretically proven that, with a
small sample, due to its generalizability, our model can well
reconstruct the feature maps on both training and test data,
which results in less compromising accuracy prior to the
subsequent retraining. With such a “warm start” to retrain,
the compression method always possesses several merits:
(a) higher compression rates, (b) little loss of accuracy,
and (c) fewer rounds to compress deep models. The experimental results on several popular models such as AlexNet,
VGG-16, and GoogLeNet show that our model can significantly reduce the parameters for both convolutional and
fully-connected layers. As a result, our model reduces the
size of VGG-16 by 15×, better than other recent compression methods that use a single strategy.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has delivered significant improvements in
several fields including image classification [15, 23, 25, 9]
and object detection [21]. However, the intensive computational and memory requirements of most deep models limit
their deployment on daily use devices with low storages
and computing capabilities such as cellphones and embedded devices. This limitation has motivated researchers to
exploit the intrinsic redundancy found in parameters and
feature maps in deep models. Generally, this redundancy

is reflected in the structured nature of the weight matrices
and feature maps [3, 24]. By removing the redundancy,
resources can be saved without affecting the capacity and
generalizability of most deep models.
Sparsity and low-rankness independently acted as vital
structure assumptions in the previous work for redundancy
removal. First, pruning is a straightforward strategy to remove correlated parameters and co-adapted neurons, and to
obtain sparse structures. For example, LeCun et al. [16]
used the second derivative information to guide the removal
of unimportant weights. Han et al. [8] repeatedly retrained
a sparsified model with unimportant weights removed using a hard thresholding method. He et al. [10] used measures like l1 norm of out-linked weights to identify unimportant neurons. Mariet and Sra [19] sampled the most uncorrelated neurons by the determinant point processes, and
removed other highly correlated neurons. Another structure assumption is the low-rankness. Weights in the convolutional and fully connected layers can be reduced by approximating low-rank filters [4, 27, 14]. Zhang et al. [30]
estimated a low-rank subspace for the feature vectors that
resulted in weight matrix decomposition, parameter reduction, and faster testing time.
However, we have observed that independently applying
these assumptions is not sufficient and appropriate. Most
previous work suffers from iteratively retraining, compromising accuracy, and low compression rates. Deep compression should thus process much richer structural information. We note that the weight filters usually share smooth
components in a low-rank subspace, and also remember
some important information represented by weights that are
sparsely scattered outside the low-rank subspace. The resulting feature maps also contain the smooth components
[30] and the spiky changes that represent the uniqueness of
each feature.
Fig.1 well explains our intuition. We show the filters in
the first layer of AlexNet. The 11×11×3×96 filters are represented by 96 3-channel images, rescaling the value range
of the weights to [0,255]. The colors can reflect the patterns
in the filters. As shown in Fig.1(a) and Fig.1(b), using the
17370

