A general framework for curve and surface comparison and registration with
oriented varifolds
Irène Kaltenmark
CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS,
Université Paris-Saclay, 94235, Cachan, France

Benjamin Charlier
IMAG, CNRS,
Université de Montpellier

irene.kaltenmark@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

benjamin.charlier@umontpellier.fr

Nicolas Charon
Center of Imaging Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
charon@cis.jhu.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces a general setting for the construction of data fidelity metrics between oriented or nonoriented geometric shapes like curves, curve sets or surfaces. These metrics are based on the representation of
shapes as distributions of their local tangent or normal
vectors and the definition of reproducing kernels on these
spaces. The construction, that combines in one common
setting and extends the previous frameworks of currents
and varifolds, provides a very large class of kernel metrics
which can be easily computed without requiring any kind
of parametrization of shapes and which are smooth enough
to give robustness to certain imperfections that could result
e.g. from bad segmentation. We then give a sense, with synthetic examples, of the versatility and potentialities of such
metrics when used in various problems like shape comparison, clustering and diffeomorphic registration.

1. Introduction
Context. Shape analysis has become one of the central
problem in many recent applications that ranges from automatic object recognition in computer vision and robotics
to the field of medical imaging where more and more advanced devices and protocols have enabled high resolution
acquisitions of a variety of anatomical structures with varying morphology across individuals or along time in longitudinal studies.
The specific problems that are encountered obviously depend on the nature of the applications and data. Yet, among
the issues that are most often involved in such studies, one
can mention in particular the quantification of shape differences through adequate metrics, registration (i.e. esti-

mation transformations between two given shapes), or the
estimation of shape statistics like means, templates or generative models from an observed population of shapes. Numerous methods have been proposed to address those questions for different shape modalities. Some of these methods,
[24, 7, 22, 21] to mention only a few, rely on the extraction
of a limited number of feature points (or landmarks). Other
methods like [12, 32, 4, 3, 36] instead consider shapes as
entire 2D or 3D images.
In many situations however, the more natural or compact model for shapes is to work with curves or surfaces of
the ambient space which may have been obtained e.g. by
prior segmentation of images. This case involves particular challenges resulting from the complex nature of spaces
of curves and surfaces. The general goal of this paper is
to propose a fairly general construction of similarity metrics between a wide class of those objects that can be easily
used in multiple problems of shape analysis.
Relation to other works. Several frameworks have been
introduced in the past to define similarity metrics or measures between two given curves or surfaces. If metrics like
the Hausdorff or Gromov-Hausdorff distance [27] would
appear natural at first glance, they are however highly sensitive to noise or topological irregularities and not necessarily
fitted for applications to inexact registration.
A class of approaches have attempted to go through
parametrization functions in order to represent and compare
shapes with for example square root velocity functions for
closed curves [35] or q-mappings for closed surfaces [25].
In both cases, enforcing parametrization-invariance is an essential step that involves delicate and possibly costly optimization over discrete reparametrizations.
The focus of this paper is rather on shape distances that
are directly invariant to parametrization. The approach we

3346

