CERN: Confidence-Energy Recurrent Network for Group Activity Recognition
Tianmin Shu1 , Sinisa Todorovic2 and Song-Chun Zhu1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Oregon State University
tianmin.shu@ucla.edu sinisa@onid.orst.edu sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This work is about recognizing human activities occurring in videos at distinct semantic levels, including individual actions, interactions, and group activities. The recognition is realized using a two-level hierarchy of Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) networks, forming a feed-forward
deep architecture, which can be trained end-to-end. In
comparison with existing architectures of LSTMs, we make
two key contributions giving the name to our approach as
Confidence-Energy Recurrent Network – CERN. First, instead of using the common softmax layer for prediction, we
specify a novel energy layer (EL) for estimating the energy
of our predictions. Second, rather than finding the common
minimum-energy class assignment, which may be numerically unstable under uncertainty, we specify that the EL
additionally computes the p-values of the solutions, and in
this way estimates the most confident energy minimum. The
evaluation on the Collective Activity and Volleyball datasets
demonstrates: (i) advantages of our two contributions relative to the common softmax and energy-minimization formulations and (ii) a superior performance relative to the
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses activity recognition in videos, each
showing a group activity or event (e.g., spiking in volleyball) arising as a whole from a number of individual actions (e.g., jumping) and human interactions (e.g., passing
the ball). Our goal is to recognize events, interactions, and
individual actions, for settings where training examples of
all these classes are annotated. When ground truth annotations of interactions are not provided in training data, we
only pursue recognition of events and actions.
Recent deep architectures [14, 22], representing a multilevel cascade of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [13], have shown great promise in recognizing video
events. In these approaches, the LSTMs at the bottom
layer are grounded onto individual human trajectories, initially obtained from tracking. These LSTMs are aimed at

c

{

CERN

Event: c
y12

Actions: {yi }
y1

Interactions: {yij }

y2

y23

y13

y3

Minimize Energy
+

Maximize Confidence

…

…
time !

Figure 1: Our CERN represents a two-level hierarchy of LSTMs
grounded onto human trajectories, where the LSTMs predict individual actions {yi }, human interactions {yij }, or the event class c
in a given video. CERN outputs an optimal configuration of LSTM
predictions which jointly minimizes the energy of the predictions
and maximizes their confidence, for addressing the brittleness of
cascaded predictions under uncertainty. This is realized by extending the two-level hierarchy with an additional energy layer, which
can be trained in an end-to-end fashion.

extracting deep visual representations and predicting individual actions of the respective human trajectories. Outputs of the bottom LSTMs are forwarded to a higher-level
LSTM for predicting events. All predictions are made in a
feed-forward way using the softmax layer at each LSTM.
Such a hierarchy of LSTMs is trained end-to-end using
backpropagation-through-time of the cross-entropy loss.
Motivated by the success of these approaches, we start
off with a similar two-level hierarchy of LSTMs for recognizing individual actions, interactions, and events. We extend this hierarchy for producing more reliable and accurate
predictions in the face of the uncertainty of the visual input.
Ideally, the aforementioned cascade should be learned
to overcome uncertainty in a given domain (e.g., occlusion, dynamic background clutter). However, our empirical evaluation suggests that existing benchmark datasets
(e.g., the Collective Activity dataset [6] and the Volleyball
dataset [14]) are relatively too small for a robust training of
15523

