Efficient optimization for Hierarchically-structured Interacting Segments
(HINTS)
Hossam Isack1

Olga Veksler1

University of Western Ontario1

Ipek Oguz2

Milan Sonka3

University of Pennsylvania2

Abstract
We propose an effective optimization algorithm for a
general hierarchical segmentation model with geometric interactions between segments. Any given tree can specify
a partial order over object labels defining a hierarchy. It
is well-established that segment interactions, such as inclusion/exclusion and margin constraints, make the model
significantly more discriminant. However, existing optimization methods do not allow full use of such models.
Generic a-expansion results in weak local minima, while
common binary multi-layered formulations lead to nonsubmodularity, complex high-order potentials, or polar domain unwrapping and shape biases. In practice, applying
these methods to arbitrary trees does not work except for
simple cases. Our main contribution is an optimization
method for the Hierarchically-structured Interacting Segments (HINTS) model with arbitrary trees. Our Path-Moves
algorithm is based on multi-label MRF formulation and can
be seen as a combination of well-known a-expansion and
Ishikawa techniques. We show state-of-the-art biomedical
segmentation for many diverse examples of complex trees.

1. Introduction
Basic cues like smooth boundaries and appearance models are often insufficient to regularize complex segmentation
problems. This is particularly true in medical applications
where objects have weak contrast boundaries and overlapping appearances. Thus, additional priors are needed,
e.g. shape-priors [29], volumetric constraints [3], or segments interaction [31, 8]. The latter constraint is the essence
of Hierarchically-structured Interacting Segments (HINTS)
model [8, 31], which was successfully applied to many segmentation problems, e.g. cells [23], joint cartilage [31], and
cortical [24] or tubular [21] surfaces.
HINTS model overview: Any hierarchically-structured1
segments could be represented as a label tree T , see Fig. 1.
Tree T defines topological relationship between segments
as follows; (a) child-parent relation means the child seg1 We use hierarchically-structured and partially ordered interchangeably.

Yuri Boykov1

University of Iowa3

ment is inside its parent’s segment, (b) sibling relation
means the corresponding segments exclude each other. For
example, in Fig. 1 A is inside R, E is inside B, while B,
C and D exclude each other in A. Min-margin is one form
of interaction between regions. If region X has δX minmargin then its outside boundary pushes away the outside
boundary of its parent and siblings by at least δX , Fig.1(b).

(a) tree T & margins δ

(b) a feasible segmentation

Figure 1. (a) tree with 6 labels, and δB and δC are min-margins
of labels B and C, respectively. None displayed margins imply zero min-margin. (b) feasible segmentation that satisfies the
hierarchical-structure, i.e. partial ordering, and margins defined by
T and δ. Notice how B’s outside boundary pushes its parent’s and
siblings’ outside boundaries to be at least δB pixels away from it.

ground truth

a-exp[7, 8]

QPBO [26, 8]

ours

Figure 2. HINTS segmentation of brain using different optimization methods where white-matter (yellow), grey-matter (green)
and background are nested regions, and cerebrospinal fluid (red)
and sub-cortical grey-matter (blue) are mutually exclusive regions
inside white-matter. Starting from a trivial solution a-exp converged to a bad local minimum unlike Path-Moves which explores
more solutions. QPBO failed to label some pixels (shown in white)
due to the non-submodular energy and ambiguous color models.

1445

