Depth from Defocus in the Wild
Huixuan Tang1

Scott Cohen2
Brian Price2
1
University
Toronto
University
ofofToronto

Stephen Schiller2
Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1
Adobe
Research
Adobe
Research

2

input1

input2

depth

flow

depth

flow

input1

input2

depth

flow

depth

flow

Figurejust
1: two
From just
twoN5
Nexus N5
cellphone
photos
exhibitingtiny
tinydefocus
defocus blur
significant
inter-frame
motion we
jointly
From
Nexus
cellphone
photos
exhibiting
blurand
and
significant
inter-frame
motion
westimate
jointly
likelihood functions for local depth and 2D flow. These likelihoods are computed independently from very small, 9 × 9-pixel patches (see
inset and zoom far into the electronic copy for actual size). Of these, only a sparse subset is associated with high-confidence depths and
flows (shown color-coded in the middle). We use these very sparse local estimates to infer dense depth and flow in a way that yields sharp
boundaries and respects depth-order relations (rightmost images). Note the sharp boundaries and thin structures preserved in the flower’s
dense depth map; the spatially-varying leaf deformations captured in its flow map; the depth and flow recovered from a pair of selfies with
little texture; and the flow around the subject’s jaw, caused by a slight change in facial expression.

Abstract
We consider the problem of two-frame depth from defocus
in conditions unsuitable for existing methods yet typical of
everyday photography: a non-stationary scene, a handheld
cellphone camera, a small aperture, and sparse scene texture. The key idea of our approach is to combine local
estimation of depth and flow in very small patches with a
global analysis of image content—3D surfaces, deformations, figure-ground relations, textures. To enable local estimation we (1) derive novel defocus-equalization filters that
induce brightness constancy across frames and (2) impose
a tight upper bound on defocus blur—just three pixels in
radius—by appropriately refocusing the camera for the second input frame. For global analysis we use a novel splinebased scene representation that can propagate depth and
flow across large irregularly-shaped regions. Our experiments show that this combination preserves sharp boundaries and yields good depth and flow maps in the face of
significant noise, non-rigidity, and data sparsity.

1. Introduction
The technique of depth from defocus—recovering a depth
map from two differently-focused images of a scene—has
been studied extensively in computer vision for almost three
decades [1, 9, 19, 22, 31, 36]. Although the basic theory behind this technique is well known, depth from defocus (DFD) has found limited use in practice because it is
broadly understood to require static scenes, dense surface
texture, and images with significant defocus blur. These

assumptions rarely hold “in the wild,” where cameras are
handheld and often on a cellphone; lens apertures are small;
surfaces in the scene may move or deform; and scene texture is generally unconstrained.
In this paper we show how to compute DFD under such
challenging conditions from minimal input: two cellphone photos of an unrestricted scene, having visuallyimperceptible defocus blur and captured in rapid succession (Figure 1). This approach stands in sharp contrast to
recent passive depth estimation techniques for mobile cameras (e.g., depth from focal stacks [24, 26] and structure
from motion [8, 35]) which require dozens of photos and
prolonged movement to capture a reliable depth map, and
cannot handle non-rigid scene deformation.
More specifically, we tackle the following challenges:
– tiny blur: cellphone cameras have small apertures that
produce very little defocus blur relative to the image size;
– scene deformation: since motion between a pair of shots
is often unavoidable, 2D flow estimation and DFD are
tightly coupled and cannot be solved independently;
– sparse defocus: defocus blur is only observable in the
neighborhood of strong textures and brightness edges,
both of which may be sparse in a general scene;
– depth discontinuities: thin structures and depth discontinuities occur often and must be handled robustly;
– figure-ground ambiguities: even when defocus can be
measured at an isolated brightness edge, it may not fully
constrain local scene geometry (e.g., surface markings
and depth discontinuities are indistinguishable).
12740

