Semantic Compositional Networks for Visual Captioning
Zhe Gan† , Chuang Gan∗ , Xiaodong He‡ , Yunchen Pu†
Kenneth Tran‡ , Jianfeng Gao‡ , Lawrence Carin† , Li Deng‡
†
Duke University, ∗ Tsinghua University, ‡ Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{zhe.gan, yunchen.pu, lcarin}@duke.edu, ganchuang1990@gmail.com
{xiaohe, ktran, jfgao, deng}@microsoft.com

Abstract
CNN

A Semantic Compositional Network (SCN) is developed
for image captioning, in which semantic concepts (i.e., tags)
are detected from the image, and the probability of each tag
is used to compose the parameters in a long short-term memory (LSTM) network. The SCN extends each weight matrix of
the LSTM to an ensemble of tag-dependent weight matrices.
The degree to which each member of the ensemble is used
to generate an image caption is tied to the image-dependent
probability of the corresponding tag. In addition to captioning images, we also extend the SCN to generate captions for
video clips. We qualitatively analyze semantic composition
in SCNs, and quantitatively evaluate the algorithm on three
benchmark datasets: COCO, Flickr30k, and Youtube2Text.
Experimental results show that the proposed method significantly outperforms prior state-of-the-art approaches, across
multiple evaluation metrics.

snow

1.000

skiing

0.993

man

0.917

slope

0.898

person

0.889

hill

0.808

covered

0.750

riding

0.627

<sos>

a

LSTM

a

man

LSTM

<eos>

slope

Generated caption: a man riding skis down a snow covered slope

LSTM

(a) Overview of the proposed model.
Detected semantic concepts:
person (0.998), baby (0.983), holding (0.952), small
(0.697), sitting (0.638), toothbrush (0.538), child
(0.502), mouth (0.438)
Semantic composition:
1. Only using “baby”: a baby in a
2. Only using “holding”: a person holding a hand
3. Only using “toothbrush”: a pair of toothbrush
4. Only using “mouth”: a man with a toothbrush
5. Using “baby” and “mouth”: a baby brushing its teeth

!

Overall caption generated by the SCN:
a baby holding a toothbrush in its mouth

Influence the caption by changing the tag:
6. Replace “baby” with “girl”: a little girl holding a toothbrush in her mouth
7. Replace “toothbrush” with “baseball”: a baby holding a baseball bat in his hand
8. Replace “toothbrush” with “pizza”: a baby holding a piece of pizza in his mouth

1. Introduction

!

(b) Examples of SCN-based image captioning.

There has been a recent surge of interest in developing
models that can generate captions for images or videos,
termed visual captioning. Most of these approaches learn a
probabilistic model of the caption, conditioned on an image
or a video [29, 47, 13, 20, 48, 52, 10, 46, 32, 56]. Inspired
by the successful use of the encoder-decoder framework employed in machine translation [2, 8, 40], most recent work
on visual captioning employs a convolutional neural network
(CNN) as an encoder, obtaining a fixed-length vector representation of a given image or video. A recurrent neural
network (RNN), typically implemented with long short-term
memory (LSTM) units [17], is then employed as a decoder
to generate a caption.
Recent work shows that adding explicit high-level semantic concepts (i.e., tags) of the input image/video can further
improve visual captioning. As shown in [49, 54], detecting
explicit semantic concepts encoded in an image, and adding

Figure 1: Model architecture and illustration of semantic composition. Each triangle symbol represents an ensemble of tag-dependent
weight matrices. The number next to a semantic concept (i.e., a
tag) is the probability that the corresponding semantic concept is
presented in the input image.

this high-level semantic information into the CNN-LSTM
framework, has improved performance significantly. Specifically, [49] feeds the semantic concepts as an initialization
step into the LSTM decoder. In [54], a model of semantic
attention is proposed which selectively attends to semantic
concepts through a soft attention mechanism [2]. On the
other hand, although significant performance improvements
were achieved, integration of semantic concepts into the
LSTM-based caption generation process is constrained in
these methods; e.g., only through soft attention or initializa15630

