Learning to Extract Semantic Structure from Documents
Using Multimodal Fully Convolutional Neural Networks
Xiao Yang‡ , Ersin Yumer† , Paul Asente† , Mike Kraley† , Daniel Kifer‡ , C. Lee Giles‡
‡
The Pennsylvania State University † Adobe Research
xuy111@psu.edu {yumer, asente, mkraley}@adobe.com dkifer@cse.psu.edu giles@ist.psu.edu

Abstract
We present an end-to-end, multimodal, fully convolutional network for extracting semantic structures from document images. We consider document semantic structure
extraction as a pixel-wise segmentation task, and propose a
unified model that classifies pixels based not only on their
visual appearance, as in the traditional page segmentation
task, but also on the content of underlying text. Moreover,
we propose an efficient synthetic document generation process that we use to generate pretraining data for our network. Once the network is trained on a large set of synthetic
documents, we fine-tune the network on unlabeled real documents using a semi-supervised approach. We systematically study the optimum network architecture and show that
both our multimodal approach and the synthetic data pretraining significantly boost the performance.

1. Introduction
Document semantic structure extraction (DSSE) is an
actively-researched area dedicated to understanding images
of documents. The goal is to split a document image into regions of interest and to recognize the role of each region. It
is usually done in two steps: the first step, often referred to
as page segmentation, is appearance-based and attempts to
distinguish text regions from regions like figures, tables and
line segments. The second step, often referred to as logical
structure analysis, is semantics-based and categorizes each
region into semantically-relevant classes like paragraph and
caption.
In this work, we propose a unified multimodal fully convolutional network (MFCN) that simultaneously identifies
both appearance-based and semantics-based classes. It is a
generalized page segmentation model that additionally performs fine-grained recognition on text regions: text regions
are assigned specific labels based on their semantic functionality in the document. Our approach simplifies DSSE
and better supports document image understanding.
We consider DSSE as a pixel-wise segmentation problem: each pixel is labeled as background, figure, table,

Figure 1: (a) Examples that are difficult to identify if only
based on text. The same name can be a title, an author or
a figure caption. (b) Examples that are difficult to identify
if only based on visual appearance. Text in the large font
might be mislabeled as a section heading. Text with dashes
might be mislabeled as a list.
paragraph, section heading, list, caption, etc. We show
that our MFCN model trained in an end-to-end, pixels-topixels manner on document images exceeds the state-ofthe-art significantly. It eliminates the need to design complex heuristic rules and extract hand-crafted features [30,
22, 21, 46, 4].
In many cases, regions like section headings or captions
can be visually identified. In Fig. 1 (a), one can easily recognize the different roles of the same name. However, a
robust DSSE system needs the semantic information of the
text to disambiguate possible false identifications. For example, in Fig. 1 (b), the text in the large font might look like
section heading, but it does not function that way; the lines
beginning with dashes might be mislabeled as a list.
To this end, our multimodal fully convolutional network
is designed to leverage the textual information in the document as well. To incorporate textual information in a CNNbased architecture, we build a text embedding map and feed
it to our MFCN. More specifically, we embed each sentence
and map the embedding to the corresponding pixels where
the sentence is represented in the document. Fig. 2 summarizes the architecture of the proposed MFCN model. Our
15315

