Learning Motion Patterns in Videos
Pavel Tokmakov

Karteek Alahari

Cordelia Schmid

Inria∗
Abstract
The problem of determining whether an object is in
motion, irrespective of camera motion, is far from being
solved. We address this challenging task by learning motion patterns in videos. The core of our approach is a fully
convolutional network, which is learned entirely from synthetic video sequences, and their ground-truth optical flow
and motion segmentation. This encoder-decoder style architecture first learns a coarse representation of the optical
flow field features, and then refines it iteratively to produce
motion labels at the original high-resolution. We further
improve this labeling with an objectness map and a conditional random field, to account for errors in optical flow,
and also to focus on moving “things” rather than “stuff”.
The output label of each pixel denotes whether it has undergone independent motion, i.e., irrespective of camera motion. We demonstrate the benefits of this learning framework on the moving object segmentation task, where the
goal is to segment all objects in motion. Our approach outperforms the top method on the recently released DAVIS
benchmark dataset, comprising real-world sequences, by
5.6%. We also evaluate on the Berkeley motion segmentation database, achieving state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
The task of analyzing motion patterns has a long history
in computer vision [3, 8, 14, 27, 35, 37, 41]. This includes
methods for motion estimation [3, 35], scene [37] and optical [8, 14] flow computation, video segmentation [27, 41];
all of which aim to estimate or capitalize on motion cues
in scenes. Despite this progress, the fundamental problem
of identifying if an object is indeed moving, irrespective
of camera motion, remains challenging. In this paper, we
make significant advances to address this challenge, with a
novel CNN-based framework to automatically learn motion
patterns in videos, and use it to segment moving objects;
see sample results in Figure 1.
To illustrate the task, consider Figure 2, a sequence from
the FlyingThings3D dataset [23]. It depicts a scene generated synthetically, involving a moving camera (can be easily
observed by comparing the top left corners of the images (a)
∗ Thoth team, Inria, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, Grenoble, France.

Figure 1. Results on the DAVIS dataset. Left: Optical flow field
input to our MP-Net, computed with [6]. Right: Our segmentation
result overlaid on the video frame. Note that our approach accurately segments moving objects, and learns to distinguish between
object and camera motions (seen in the flow fields).

and (b)), with objects in motion, e.g., the three large objects
in the centre of the frame (which are easier to spot in the
ground-truth segmentation (d)). The goal of our work is to
study such motion patterns in video sequences (using optical flow field (c)), and to learn to distinguish real motion of
objects from camera motion. In other words, we target the
moving object segmentation in (d).
The core of our approach is a trainable model, motion
pattern network (MP-Net), for separating independent object and camera motion, which takes optical flow as input and outputs a per-pixel score for moving objects. Inspired by fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [8, 22, 31],
we propose a related encoder-decoder style architecture to
accomplish this two-label classification task. The network
is trained from scratch with synthetic data [23]. Pixel-level
ground-truth labels for training are generated automatically
(see Figure 2(d)), and denote whether each pixel has moved
in the scene. The input to the network is flow fields, such
as the one shown in Figure 2(c). More details of the network, and how it is trained are provided in Section 3. With
this training, our model learns to distinguish motion patterns of objects and background. We then refine these labels with objectness cues [29] and a conditional random
field (CRF) model [19] (see §4), to demonstrate the efficacy of the entire framework on the moving object segmentation task (see §6). These refinement steps are im-

3386

