Spatiotemporal Pyramid Network for Video Action Recognition∗
Yunbo Wang† , Mingsheng Long† , Jianmin Wang† , and Philip S. Yu†‡
†
KLiss, MOE; TNList; NEL-BDSS; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
‡
University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
wangyb15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Two-stream convolutional networks have shown strong
performance in video action recognition tasks. The key idea
is to learn spatiotemporal features by fusing convolutional
networks spatially and temporally. However, it remains unclear how to model the correlations between the spatial and
temporal structures at multiple abstraction levels. First, the
spatial stream tends to fail if two videos share similar backgrounds. Second, the temporal stream may be fooled if two
actions resemble in short snippets, though appear to be distinct in the long term. We propose a novel spatiotemporal
pyramid network to fuse the spatial and temporal features
in a pyramid structure such that they can reinforce each
other. From the architecture perspective, our network constitutes hierarchical fusion strategies which can be trained
as a whole using a unified spatiotemporal loss. A series of
ablation experiments support the importance of each fusion
strategy. From the technical perspective, we introduce the
spatiotemporal compact bilinear operator into video analysis tasks. This operator enables efficient training of bilinear
fusion operations which can capture full interactions between the spatial and temporal features. Our final network
achieves state-of-the-art results on standard video datasets.

1. Introduction
Learning a good video representation is the foundation
of many computer vision tasks, such as action recognition
and video captioning. It goes beyond image analysis and
depends on a joint modeling of both spatial and temporal
cues. Many existing methods [12, 10, 28, 26] are dedicated
to this modeling by taking advantages of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) [16, 13, 23, 27]. However, these
CNN-based methods have not shown an overwhelming performance over other approaches [30, 31] using Fisher Vector [19], HOF [15], and dense trajectories [30]. One reason
is that these CNN frameworks are not specifically designed
for videos and cannot fully exploit spatiotemporal features.
∗ Contact author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn).

Loss

Spatiotemporal
Compact
Bilinear

Attention
Spatiotemporal
Compact
Bilinear

CNN

Temporal
Compact
Bilinear

CNN

CNN

RGB Frame
Spatial Stream

CNN

Optical Flow Frames
Temporal Stream

Figure 1. An overview of our spatiotemporal pyramid network,
which constitutes a multi-level fusion pyramid of spatial features,
long-term temporal features and spatiotemporal attended features.

In addition to capturing the appearance information using standard CNN stream, several recent approaches try out
using optical flow data in a second CNN stream to capture
the motion information [22, 37, 6, 38]. However, when taking a closer look at these models, we observe that for most
misclassification cases, there is usually one stream failing,
while the other remaining correct. Hence, simply averaging
the outputs of the classifier layers is not enough. Instead, we
hope to make the spatial and temporal cues facilitate each
other. This paper presents a novel end-to-end spatiotemporal pyramid architecture, as shown in Figures 1, which can
on one hand boost the accuracy of individual stream and on
the other hand exploits spatiotemporal cues jointly.
From the temporal perspective, since the original optical flow stream only receives 10 consecutive optical flow
frames, it may be fooled if two actions resemble in such a
short snippet, though distinguish in the long term. A typical
example is Pull-ups and RopeClimbing in UCF101: men in
these two categories could be moving in the same single direction in short snippets. But if we enlarge the time range,
we can easily find that the man in Pull-ups is actually moving up and down, while the one in RopeClimbing is mov-

1529

