Discriminative Optimization:
Theory and Applications to Point Cloud Registration
Jayakorn Vongkulbhisal†,‡ , Fernando De la Torre‡ , João P. Costeira†
†
ISR - IST, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
‡
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jvongkul@andrew.cmu.edu, ftorre@cs.cmu.edu, jpc@isr.ist.utl.pt

1. Introduction
Mathematical optimization is fundamental to solving
many problems in computer vision. This fact is apparent
as demonstrated by the plethora of papers that use optimization techniques in any major computer vision conference. For instance, camera calibration, structure from motion, tracking, or registration are traditional computer vision
problems that are posed as optimization problems. Formulating computer vision problems as optimization problems
faces two main challenges: (1) Designing a cost function

(b) ICP

Clean Data
Find θ,t

Corrupted Data

θ

(c) DO

tx

(d) Conv. Regions

Many computer vision problems are formulated as the
optimization of a cost function. This approach faces two
main challenges: (1) designing a cost function with a local optimum at an acceptable solution, and (2) developing
an efficient numerical method to search for one (or multiple) of these local optima. While designing such functions
is feasible in the noiseless case, the stability and location of
local optima are mostly unknown under noise, occlusion, or
missing data. In practice, this can result in undesirable local optima or not having a local optimum in the expected
place. On the other hand, numerical optimization algorithms in high-dimensional spaces are typically local and
often rely on expensive first or second order information to
guide the search. To overcome these limitations, this paper proposes Discriminative Optimization (DO), a method
that learns search directions from data without the need of a
cost function. Specifically, DO explicitly learns a sequence
of updates in the search space that leads to stationary points
that correspond to desired solutions. We provide a formal
analysis of DO and illustrate its benefits in the problem of
2D and 3D point cloud registration both in synthetic and
range-scan data. We show that DO outperforms state-ofthe-art algorithms by a large margin in terms of accuracy,
robustness to perturbations, and computational efficiency.

(a) Data

Abstract

DO

DO

ICP
ICP
Initial Pt.

Local min. / Stationary Pt.

Ground truth Pt.

DO

ICP
Update path

Figure 1. 2D point alignment with ICP and DO. (a) Data. (b) Level
sets of the cost function for ICP. (c) Inferred level sets for the proposed DO. (d) Regions of convergence for ICP and DO. See text
for detailed description (best seen in color).

that has a local optimum that corresponds to a suitable solution. (2) Selecting an efficient and accurate algorithm
for searching the parameter space. Traditionally these two
steps have been treated independently, leading to different
cost functions and search algorithms. However, in the presence of noise, missing data, or inaccuracies of the model,
this traditional approach can lead to having undesirable local optima or even not having an optimum in the expected
solution.
Consider Fig. 1a-left which illustrates a 2D alignment
problem in a case of noiseless data. A good cost function
for this problem should have a global optimum when the

4104

