Agent-Centric Risk Assessment:
Accident Anticipation and Risky Region Localization
Kuo-Hao Zeng∗† Shih-Han Chou∗ Fu-Hsiang Chan∗ Juan Carlos Niebles† Min Sun∗
†
Stanford University ∗ National Tsing Hua University
{khzeng, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu {happy810705, corgi1205}@gmail.com sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

For survival, a living agent (e.g., human in Fig. 1(a))
must have the ability to assess risk (1) by temporally anticipating accidents before they occur (Fig. 1(b)), and (2) by
spatially localizing risky regions (Fig. 1(c)) in the environment to move away from threats. In this paper, we take an
agent-centric approach to study the accident anticipation
and risky region localization tasks. We propose a novel softattention Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) which explicitly
models both spatial and appearance-wise non-linear interaction between the agent triggering the event and another
agent or static-region involved. In order to test our proposed method, we introduce the Epic Fail (EF) dataset consisting of 3000 viral videos capturing various accidents.
In the experiments, we evaluate the risk assessment accuracy both in the temporal domain (accident anticipation)
and spatial domain (risky region localization) on our EF
dataset and the Street Accident (SA) dataset. Our method
consistently outperforms other baselines on both datasets.

1. Introduction
A very important goal for living agents in the world is
survival. In order to survive, they naturally have the ability
to assess risk. For instance, humans exhibit emotional responses while taking or observing risky actions [23], in an
unconscious process that appears to happen without sophisticated reasoning [20]. Furthermore, humans have the ability to turn their attention on the risky areas of the environment more often than others [22], as risk does not distribute
uniformly across the environment. Such risk localization is
very important for the agent to move away to safety. On the
other hand, humans also have the ability to assess longerterm risk by imagining future situations. In this case, highlevel reasoning techniques (imagination, simulation) can be
used to assess risk in a longer term. Such anticipation ability
is also critical for the agent to react before accident occurs.
We are inspired by these key capabilities of human intelligence and perception to study the problem of risk assesment
from a computer vision perspective.

(c)

(a)

(b)

Accident Risk Map
Anticipation
Probability

Abstract

Risky Region

t

Figure 1. Illustration of risk assessment. (a) we show an image
overlaid with a human agent from different frames and label the
risky region before accident occurs in an orange box. (b) risk map
for environment and accident anticipation probability through time
t. (c) risky region (orange box) at the instant when accident occurs.

Towards this goal, we introduce the problem of risk assessment from an agent-centric point of view. That is, given
the observed past and current behavior of each agent in a
video, we tackle the problem by answering two key questions centered around each agent. First, will the agent encounter an accident in the near future? This corresponds
to the task of accident anticipation, where we would like
to predict an accident before it occurs. Second, in which region in the environment might the accident take place? This
corresponds to the task of risky region localization, where
we would like to spatially localize the regions in the scene
that might be involved in a future accident.
We face two key but difficult challenges in this problem.
First, note that similar visual appearances will frequently
correspond to vastly different levels of risk, as risk is dependent on context and interactions between the agent and
the environment. Therefore, we must explicitly consider appearances and spatial relations between agents and regions
in the scene. A second challenge is that of capturing long
term temporal dependencies and causalities that underlie
risk events. This could be tackled by explicitly forecasting
relationships between the agent and the environment.
Some early attempts focus on assessing risk related to the
environment [28] or correlating the statistical occurrance of

2222

