Captioning Images with Diverse Objects
Subhashini Venugopalan†
Raymond Mooney†
†
UT Austin

Lisa Anne Hendricks∗
Trevor Darrell∗
∗
UC Berkeley

{vsub,mooney}@cs.utexas.edu

{lisa anne, rohrbach, trevor}
@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

Marcus Rohrbach∗
Kate Saenko‡
‡
Boston Univ.
saenko@bu.edu

NOC (ours): Jointly train on multiple
sources with auxiliary objectives.
+

Recent captioning models are limited in their ability to
scale and describe concepts unseen in paired image-text
corpora. We propose the Novel Object Captioner (NOC),
a deep visual semantic captioning model that can describe
a large number of object categories not present in existing image-caption datasets. Our model takes advantage of
external sources – labeled images from object recognition
datasets, and semantic knowledge extracted from unannotated text. We propose minimizing a joint objective which
can learn from these diverse data sources and leverage
distributional semantic embeddings, enabling the model to
generalize and describe novel objects outside of imagecaption datasets. We demonstrate that our model exploits
semantic information to generate captions for hundreds of
object categories in the ImageNet object recognition dataset
that are not observed in MSCOCO image-caption training
data, as well as many categories that are observed very
rarely. Both automatic evaluations and human judgements
show that our model considerably outperforms prior work
in being able to describe many more categories of objects.

1. Introduction
Modern visual classifiers [6, 22] can recognize thousands of object categories, some of which are basic or entrylevel (e.g. television), and others that are fine-grained and
task specific (e.g. dial-phone, cell-phone). However, recent
state-of-the-art visual captioning systems [2, 3, 8, 10, 15,
26] that learn directly from images and descriptions, rely
solely on paired image-caption data for supervision and fail
in their ability to generalize and describe this vast set of recognizable objects in context. While such systems could be
scaled by building larger image/video description datasets,
obtaining such captioned data would be expensive and laborious. Furthermore, visual description is challenging because models have to not only correctly identify visual concepts contained in an image, but must also compose these
concepts into a coherent sentence.

MSCOCO +

okapi

Visual Classifiers.
Existing captioners.

A okapi standing in the
middle of a field.

init + train

MSCOCO

A horse standing in the dirt.

Figure 1. We propose
a model that learns simultaneously from
Visual
Classifiers
multiple data sources
with auxiliary objectives to describe a variety of objects unseen in paired image-caption data.

Recent work [7] shows that, to incorporate the vast
knowledge of current visual recognition networks without explicit paired caption training data, caption models
can learn from external sources and learn to compose sentences about visual concepts which are infrequent or nonexistent in image-description corpora. However, the pioneering DCC model from [7] is unwieldy in the sense that
the model requires explicit transfer (“copying”) of learned
parameters from previously seen categories to novel categories. This not only prevents it from describing rare categories and limits the model’s ability to cover a wider variety
of objects but also makes it unable to be trained end-to-end.
We instead propose the Novel Object Captioner (NOC), a
network that can be trained end-to-end using a joint training
strategy to integrate knowledge from external visual recognition datasets as well as semantic information from independent unannotated text corpora to generate captions for a
diverse range of rare and novel objects (as in Fig. 1).
Specifically, we introduce auxiliary objectives which allow our network to learn a captioning model on imagecaption pairs simultaneously with a deep language model
and visual recognition system on unannotated text and labeled images. Unlike previous work, the auxiliary objectives allow the NOC model to learn relevant information
from multiple data sources simultaneously in an end-to-end
fashion. Furthermore, NOC implicitly leverages pre-trained
distributional word embeddings enabling it to describe unseen and rare object categories. The main contributions of
our work are 1) an end-to-end model to describe objects
not present in paired image-caption data, 2) auxiliary/joint
15753

