A Message Passing Algorithm for the Minimum Cost Multicut Problem
Paul Swoboda
IST Austria

Bjoern Andres
MPI for Informatics

pswoboda@ist.ac.at

andres@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
We propose a dual decomposition and linear program
relaxation of the NP-hard minimum cost multicut problem.
Unlike other polyhedral relaxations of the multicut polytope,
it is amenable to efficient optimization by message passing. Like other polyhedral relaxations, it can be tightened
efficiently by cutting planes. We define an algorithm that
alternates between message passing and efficient separation
of cycle- and odd-wheel inequalities. This algorithm is more
efficient than state-of-the-art algorithms based on linear programming, including algorithms written in the framework
of leading commercial software, as we show in experiments
with large instances of the problem from applications in computer vision, biomedical image analysis and data mining.

1. Introduction
Decomposing a graph into meaningful clusters is a fundamental primitive in computer vision, biomedical image
analysis and data mining. In settings where no information is
given about the number or size of clusters, and information
is given only about the pairwise similarity or dissimilarity of
nodes, a canonical mathematical abstraction is the minimum
cost multicut (or correlation clustering) problem [17]. The
feasible solutions of this problem, multicuts, relate one-toone to the decompositions of the graph. A multicut is the set
of edges that straddle distinct clusters. The cost of a multicut
is the sum of costs attributed to its edges.
In the field of computer vision, the minimum cost multicut problem has been applied in [5, 6, 47, 8] to the task of
unsupervised image segmentation defined by the BSDS data
sets and benchmarks [36] . In the field of biomedical image
analysis, the minimum cost multicut problem has been applied to an image segmentation task for connectomics [7]. In
the field of data mining, applications include [9, 40, 15, 16].
Also, recently many computer vision problems that use
the multicut problem as a building block have been proposed:
image and mesh segmentation [31], instance-separating semantic segmentation[33], multiple object tracking [44], cell

tracking[26] and articulated human body pose estimation [3].
Moreover, one of the tightest relaxations for the multi-label
Potts model is based on multicuts [30].
As the minimum cost multicut problem is NP-hard [12,
19], even for planar graphs [10] large and complex instances
with millions of edges, especially those for connectomics,
pose a challenge for existing algorithms.
Related Work. Due to the importance of multicuts for
applications, many algorithms for the minimum cost multicut
problem have been proposed. They are grouped below into
three categories: primal feasible local search algorithms,
linear programming algorithms and fusion algorithms.
Primal feasible local search algorithms [42, 38, 23, 21,
22] attempt to improve an initial feasible solution by means
of local transformations from a set that can be indexed or
searched efficiently. Local search algorithms are practical
for large instances, as the cost of all operations is small
compared to the cost of solving the entire problem at once.
On the downside, the feasible solution that is output typically
depends on the initialization. And even if a solution is found,
optimality is not certified, as no lower bound is computed.
Also, the multicut problem can be transformed into a
Markov random field and solved with primal heuristics there,
as done for the “scribbles” dataset in [37, 11].
Linear programming algorithms [28, 29, 32, 39, 46] operate on an outer polyhedral relaxation of the feasible set.
Their output is independent of their initialization and provides a lower bound. This lower bound can be used directly
inside a branch-and-bound search for certified optimal solutions. Alternatively, the LP relaxation can be tightened
by cutting planes. Several classes of planes are known that
define a facet of the multicut polytope and can be separated
efficiently [17]. On the downside, algorithms for general
LPs that are agnostic to the structure of the multicut problem
scale super-linearly with the size of the instance.
Fusion algorithms attempt to combine feasible solutions
of subproblems obtained by combinatorial or random procedures into successively better multicuts. The fusion process
can either rely on column generation [47], binary quadratic
programming [14] or any algorithm for solving integer
LPs [13]. In particular, [47] provides dual lower bounds
11617

