Efficient Global Point Cloud Alignment using Bayesian Nonparametric Mixtures
Julian Straub∗

Trevor Campbell∗
Jonathan P. How
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

John W. Fisher III

Abstract
Point cloud alignment is a common problem in computer
vision and robotics, with applications ranging from 3D object recognition to reconstruction. We propose a novel approach to the alignment problem that utilizes Bayesian nonparametrics to describe the point cloud and surface normal
densities, and branch and bound (BB) optimization to recover the relative transformation. BB uses a novel, refinable, near-uniform tessellation of rotation space using 4D
tetrahedra, leading to more efficient optimization compared
to the common axis-angle tessellation. We provide objective function bounds for pruning given the proposed tessellation, and prove that BB converges to the optimum of the
cost function along with providing its computational complexity. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the efficiency
of the proposed approach as well as its robustness to realworld conditions such as missing data and partial overlap.

1. Introduction
Point cloud alignment is a fundamental problem for
many applications in robotics [35, 23] and computer vision [45, 40, 54]. Finding the global transformation is
generally hard: point-to-point correspondences typically do
not exist, the point clouds might only have partial overlap,
and the underlying objects themselves are often nonconvex, leading to a potentially large number of alignment local minima. As such, popular local optimization techniques
suffice only in circumstances with small true relative transformations and large overlap, such as in dense 3D incremental mapping [23, 40, 54]. Solving the alignment problem for large unknown relative transformations and small
point cloud overlap calls for a global approach. Example
applications are the loop-closure problem in SLAM [8] and
the model-based detection of objects in 3D scenes [29].
Motivated by the observation that surface normal distributions are translation invariant [25] and straightforward
to compute [39, 46], we develop a two-stage branch and
bound (BB) [31, 32] optimization algorithm for point cloud
alignment. We model the surface normal distribution of
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1: A 3D projection of the 600-cell [57]—a 4D object
tessellating the space of rotations for the proposed branch
and bound approach to point cloud alignment.
each point cloud as a Dirichlet process (DP) [18, 50] vonMises-Fisher (vMF) [20] mixture [47] (DP-vMF-MM). To
find the optimal rotation, we minimize the L2 distance between the distributions over the space of 3D rotations. We
develop a novel refinable tessellation consisting of 4D tetrahedra (see Fig. 1) which more uniformly approximates rotation space and is more efficient than the common axisangle tessellation [33, 22] during BB optimization. Given
the optimal rotation and modeling the two point distributions as DP Gaussian mixtures [3, 11] (DP-GMM), we obtain the optimal translation similarly via BB over the space
of 3D translations. The use of mixture models circumvents
discretization artifacts, while still permitting efficient optimization. In addition to algorithmic developments, we provide corresponding theoretical bounds on the convergence
of both BB stages, linking the quality of the derived rotation and translation estimates to the depth of the search tree
and thus the computation time of the algorithm. Experiments on real data corroborate the theory, and demonstrate
the accuracy and efficiency of BB as well as its robustness
to real-world conditions, such as partial overlap, high noise,
and large relative transformations.

2. Related Work
Local Methods There exists a variety of approaches for
local point cloud alignment [10, 45]. Iterative closest point
(ICP) [6], the most common of these, alternates between as12941

