Making Deep Neural Networks Robust to Label Noise:
a Loss Correction Approach
Giorgio Patrini1,2 , Alessandro Rozza3 , Aditya Krishna Menon2,1 , Richard Nock2,1,4 , Lizhen Qu2,1
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61, 3 Waynaut, 4 University of Sydney
{name.surname}@data61.csiro.au, alessandro.rozza@waynaut.com

Abstract
We present a theoretically grounded approach to train
deep neural networks, including recurrent networks, subject
to class-dependent label noise. We propose two procedures
for loss correction that are agnostic to both application domain and network architecture. They simply amount to at
most a matrix inversion and multiplication, provided that
we know the probability of each class being corrupted into
another. We further show how one can estimate these probabilities, adapting a recent technique for noise estimation
to the multi-class setting, and thus providing an end-to-end
framework. Extensive experiments on MNIST, IMDB, CIFAR10, CIFAR-100 and a large scale dataset of clothing images
employing a diversity of architectures — stacking dense,
convolutional, pooling, dropout, batch normalization, word
embedding, LSTM and residual layers — demonstrate the
noise robustness of our proposals. Incidentally, we also
prove that, when ReLU is the only non-linearity, the loss
curvature is immune to class-dependent label noise.

1. Introduction

primarily developed in Computer Vision [27, 32, 39, 42].
While some such approaches have shown good experimental
performance on specific domains, they lack a solid theoretical framework and often need a large amount of clean labels
to obtain acceptable results — in particular, for pre-training
or validating hyper-parameters [42, 17, 32].
The second strand is recent Machine Learning research
on theoretically grounded means of combating label noise.
In particular, we are interested in the design of corrected
losses that are robust to label noise [38, 28, 30]. Despite
their formal guarantees, these methods have not been fully
appreciated in practice because, crucially, they require noise
rates to be known a priori.
An estimate of the noise is often available to practitioners
by polishing a subset of the training data [42] — which is
useful and often necessary for model selection. Yet, interestingly, recent work has provided practical algorithms for
estimating the noise rates [36, 34, 21, 26, 31]; remarkably,
this is achievable with absolutely no knowledge of ground
truth labels. To our knowledge, no prior work has combined
those estimators with loss correction techniques, nor has
either idea been applied to modern deep architectures. Our
contributions aim to unify these research streams:
• We introduce two alternative procedures for loss correction, provided that we know a stochastic matrix T
summarizing the probability of one class being flipped
into another under noise. The first procedure, a multiclass extension of [28, 30] applied to neural networks,
is called “backward” as it multiplies the loss by T −1 .
The second, inspired by [39], is named “forward” as it
multiplies the network predictions by T .

Large datasets used in training modern machine learning
models, such as deep neural networks, are often affected by
label noise. The problem is pervasive for a simple reason:
manual expert-labelling of each instance at a large scale is
not feasible, and so researchers often resort to cheap but imperfect surrogates. Two such popular surrogates are crowdsourcing using non-expert labellers and — especially for images — the use of search engines to query instances by a keyword, assuming the keyword as a valid label [5, 35, 3, 29, 17]
Both approaches offer the possibility to scale the acquisition
of training labels, but invariably result in the introduction of
label noise, which may adversely affect model training.
Our goal is to effectively train deep neural networks with
modern architectures under label noise. We do so by marrying two different lines of recent research. The first strand is
work on ad-hoc deep architectures tailored to the problem,

• We prove that both procedures enjoy formal robustness
guarantees w.r.t. the clean data distribution. Since we
only operate on the loss function, the approach is both
architecture and application domain independent, as
well as viable for any chosen loss function.
• We take a further step and extend the noise estimator
of [26] to our multi-class setting, thus formulating an
11944

