Context-Aware Correlation Filter Tracking
Matthias Mueller, Neil Smith, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{matthias.mueller.2, neil.smith, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Correlation filter (CF) based trackers have recently
gained a lot of popularity due to their impressive performance on benchmark datasets, while maintaining high
frame rates. A significant amount of recent research focuses
on the incorporation of stronger features for a richer representation of the tracking target. However, this only helps
to discriminate the target from background within a small
neighborhood. In this paper, we present a framework that
allows the explicit incorporation of global context within
CF trackers. We reformulate the original optimization problem and provide a closed form solution for single and multidimensional features in the primal and dual domain. Extensive experiments demonstrate that this framework significantly improves the performance of many CF trackers with
only a modest impact on frame rate.

1. Introduction
Object tracking remains a core problem in computer
vision with numerous applications, such as surveillance,
human-machine interaction, robotics, etc. Large new
datasets and benchmarks such as OTB-50 [26], OTB-100
[27], TC-128 [19], ALOV300++ [24] and UAV123 [23],
as well as, tracking challenges such as the visual object
tracking (VOT) challenge and multi-object tracking (MOT)
challenge have sparked the interest of many researchers and
helped advance the field significantly. Despite substantial
progress in recent years, visual object tracking remains a
challenging problem in computer vision.
In this paper, we address the problem of single-object
tracking, which is commonly approached as a tracking-bydetection problem. Currently, most research focuses on
model-free generic object trackers, where no prior assumptions regarding the object appearance are made. The generic
nature of this problem makes it challenging, since there are
very few constraints on object appearance, and the object
can undergo a variety of unpredictable transformations in
consecutive frames (e.g. aspect ratio change, illumination
variation, in/out-of-plane rotation, occlusion, etc.).
The tracking problem can be divided into two main chal-

Figure 1: Tracking results of our context-aware adaptation
of the baseline SAMF tracker, denoted as SAMFCA , and a
comparison with recent state-of-the-art tracking algorithms
on the Box and Jump sequences from OTB-100.
lenges, object representation and sampling for detection.
Recently, most successful single-object tracking algorithms
use a discriminative object representation with either strong
hand-crafted features, such as HOG and Colornames, or
learned ones. Recent work has integrated deep features [21]
trained on a large dataset, such as ImageNet, to represent the
tracked object. Sampling on the other hand is a trade-off between computation time and precise scanning of the region
of interest for the target.
Lately, CF trackers have sparked a lot of interest, due
to their high accuracy while running at high frame rates.
[4, 6, 10, 11, 14]. In general, CF trackers learn a correlation filter online to localize the object in consecutive frames.
The learned filter is applied to the region of interest in the
next frame and the location of the maximum response corresponds to the object location. The filter is then updated
by using the new object location. The major reasons behind the success of this tracking paradigm is the approximate dense sampling performed by circularly shifting the
training samples and the computational efficiency of learning the correlation filter in the Fourier domain. Provided
that the background is homogeneous and the object does
not move much, these circular shifts are equivalent to actual
translations in the image and this framework works well.
However, since these assumptions are not always valid,
CF trackers have several drawbacks. One major drawback is

1396

