Bayesian Supervised Hashing

Zihao Hu, Junxuan Chen, Hongtao Lu∗, and Tongzhen Zhang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zihaohu, chenjunxuan, htlu}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-tz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Among learning based hashing methods, supervised
hashing seeks compact binary representation of the training
data to preserve semantic similarities. Recent years have
witnessed various problem formulations and optimization
methods for supervised hashing. Most of them optimize a
form of loss function with a regulization term, which can
be viewed as a maximum a posterior (MAP) estimation of
the hashing codes. However, these approaches are prone
to overfitting unless hyperparameters are tuned carefully.
To address this problem, we present a novel fully Bayesian
treatment for supervised hashing problem, named Bayesian
Supervised Hashing (BSH), in which hyperparameters are
automatically tuned during optimization. Additionally, by
utilizing automatic relevance determination (ARD), we can
figure out relative discriminating ability of different hashing bits and select most informative bits among them. Experimental results on three real-world image datasets with
semantic information show that BSH can achieve superior
performance over state-of-the-art methods with comparable
training time.

1. Introduction
Given a dataset, hashing methods map data points from
the original feature space into a binary hashing code space
with pairwise metric distances or semantic similarities preserved. Compact hashing codes can accelerate retrieval
speed on the precondition of the accuracy. Hashing methods can be roughly divided into two main categories: dataindependent methods and data-dependent methods.
The early exploration of hashing focuses on dataindependent methods. The most popular method among
them is Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [4, 17, 1] which
uses random projections to generate hash functions. Theoretically, with the increase of code length, the original
∗ Corresponding author.

distance is asymptotically preserved in Hamming space.
Hence, long codes are usually used to obtain preferable retrieval precision. However, long codes would result in low
recall rate with the usage of the hash lookup table . In practical applications, LSH utilizes multiple tables to ensure a
reasonable recall. Both long codes and multiple tables will
affect the efficiency of retrieval.
Data-dependent methods have been developed to learn
more compact hashing codes by utilizing the training data.
Due to shortcomings of data-independent methods, many
researchers have been putting considerable efforts on designing data-dependent methods. Data-dependent methods
can be further divided into two categories: unsupervised
methods and supervised methods.
Unsupervised methods [19, 5, 10, 7, 20] just use the unlabeled data to generate binary codes, aiming at preserving
the metric structure between data points. Representative
method in this fashion is ITQ [5]. ITQ performs PCA to
reduce the dimension of data points, then seeks an orthogonal matrix to minimize quantization loss between rotated
data points and final binary codes. Compared with dataindependent methods, unsupervised data-dependent methods need fewer bits to achieve comparable performance.
However, a variety of image searching applications prefer semantically similar neighbors. This leads to the formulation of supervised hashing. In contrast to unsupervised
methods in which the training data is unlabeled, supervised
hashing is designed to preserve semantic similarities by utilizing labeled training data. The representatives of supervised hashing methods include [18, 5, 14, 21, 16, 8, 13].
Among these methods, CCA-ITQ [5] and Supervised Discrete Hashing (SDH) [16] only utilize semantic labels of
individual training points. CCA-ITQ first uses CCA to find
projection directions to maximize correlations between feature and label vectors, and then applies standard ITQ to
learn a rotation matrix . The learning objective of SDH is
to generate hashing codes by minimizing linear classification loss function. Different from these two methods, most
approaches are built upon pairwise semantic similarities.
4321
6348

