Zero-Shot Classification with Discriminative Semantic Representation Learning
Meng Ye†
Yuhong Guo
Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University†
School of Computer Science, Carleton University
meng.ye@temple.edu, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Abstract
Zero-shot learning, a special case of unsupervised domain adaptation where the source and target domains have
disjoint label spaces, has become increasingly popular in
the computer vision community. In this paper, we propose
a novel zero-shot learning method based on discriminative
sparse non-negative matrix factorization. The proposed approach aims to identify a set of common high-level semantic components across the two domains via non-negative
sparse matrix factorization, while enforcing the representation vectors of the images in this common component-based
space to be discriminatively aligned with the attributebased label representation vectors. To fully exploit the
aligned semantic information contained in the learned representation vectors of the instances, we develop a label
propagation based testing procedure to classify the unlabeled instances from the unseen classes in the target domain. We conduct experiments on four standard zero-shot
learning image datasets, by comparing the proposed approach to the state-of-the-art zero-shot learning methods.
The empirical results demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
With the rapid increase of image collections, the class
categories involved also expand quickly. The popular standard image classification models such as deep neural networks [15, 28] however require a massive amount of labeled training data from all classes to function properly. To
cope with the expensive and sometimes impractical annotation needs required for building prediction systems over the
newly appeared classes, zero-shot learning (ZSL), which
transfers information from the seen classes with labeled instances to recognize the new classes that have not been seen
in the labeled training data, has recently received increasing attention in the research community. ZSL has already
been investigated on various computer vision tasks, including image categorization [17, 7, 2, 18, 14], event detection

[32] and action recognition [10, 19, 5].
ZSL can be viewed as a special case of unsupervised
domain adaptation, where the source domain (labeled data
from the seen classes) and the target domain (unlabeled
data from the unseen classes) have completely disjoint label spaces. Hence additional side information has typically been required to build inter-class connections to facilitate the information adaptation across class categories.
Attributes, which denote high-level visual entities or visual
characteristics, have been one most common type of side information exploited in zero shot learning. High-level visual
attributes have been exploited in the literature to improve
image classification performance [6, 31, 27]. In ZSL, such
attributes have been primarily used to provide high-level semantic representations for the class labels. For example,
in the Animal with Attributes (AwA) dataset [16], each animal class category has been described as a prototype vector of attributes such as ‘black’, ‘stripes’, ‘four legs’, etc.
By mapping both seen classes and unseen classes into the
semantic space based on the same set of attributes, information adaptation can be achieved for zero-shot categorization [23, 16, 17]. Besides attributes, word embeddings have
also been used to produce semantic label representations,
i.e., prototype label vectors, and build the inter-class connections in some ZSL works [7, 22, 29, 2]. Some other
works have also exploited the class taxonomy structures to
infer label relationships for ZSL [25, 12, 3].
From the methodology perspective, many ZSL methods
have been developed in the literature. They can be roughly
grouped into the following three types: (1) visual feature
projection methods; (2) semantic similarity matching methods; and (3) sparse coding methods. The visual feature projection methods first project an instance (visual feature vector of the image) into the same semantic space as the prototype label vectors, and then assign a prediction label to it by
comparing its similarity with all the prototypes of unseen
classes [17, 1, 2, 7, 26]. The semantic similarity matching
methods work in a different way [17, 22, 34]. Their training part remain the same as conventional image classification problem, i.e., a classifier is trained on the seen classes.
17140

