Viraliency: Pooling Local Virality
1

Xavier Alameda-Pineda1,2 , Andrea Pilzer1 , Dan Xu1 , Nicu Sebe1 , Elisa Ricci3,4
University of Trento, 2 Perception Team, INRIA 3 University of Perugia, 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler

xavier.alameda-pineda@inria.fr, {andrea.pilzer,dan.xu,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, eliricci@fbk.eu

Abstract
In our overly-connected world, the automatic recognition of virality – the quality of an image or video to be
rapidly and widely spread in social networks – is of crucial importance, and has recently awaken the interest of the
computer vision community. Concurrently, recent progress
in deep learning architectures showed that global pooling
strategies allow the extraction of activation maps, which
highlight the parts of the image most likely to contain instances of a certain class. We extend this concept by introducing a pooling layer that learns the size of the support
area to be averaged: the learned top-N average (LENA)
pooling. We hypothesize that the latent concepts (feature
maps) describing virality may require such a rich pooling
strategy. We assess the effectiveness of the LENA layer by
appending it on top of a convolutional siamese architecture
and evaluate its performance on the task of predicting and
localizing virality. We report experiments on two publicly
available datasets annotated for virality and show that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An image related to the U.S. presidential elections that
went viral in different social networks, and its estimated viraliency
map. The proposed pipeline: (i) A convolutional deep architecture is trained to generate virality-sensitive feature maps of the image; (ii) These features are passed through a LENA global pooling
layer; (iii) The global pooling provides activations to estimate the
virality score as well as a rough localization of the virally salient
parts of the image, hence the title viraliency.

Beyond the automatic understanding of objective properties of images, such as the presence of an object and its
position in the scene, the computer vision community also
invested efforts in analyzing subjective attributes of visual
data. Memorability [4, 15], popularity [18], virality [7]
and emotional content [1, 21] are few examples of such
attributes. Further analysis was conducted to understand
which parts of the image were responsible for the recognition of such properties. For instance, Doersch et al. identified specific mid-level visual patterns when recognizing
city-based architectural styles [9]. De Nadai et al. studied
the perception of safety in urban scenes [6], detecting which
areas in an image are responsible for this perception. Naturally, many researchers also wondered how to transform an
image so as to enhance or diminish its subjective properties, or even how to generate images with such properties.
In this regard, Koshla et al. [17] investigated how to transform a face image so as to make it more memorable. Given
a natural image, Gatys et al. [12] showed how to generate a
stylized image from a natural image and an artistic painting

using deep neural architectures.
The particular case of virality – the quality of an image or
video to be rapidly and widely spread on social networks– is
of crucial importance in our overly-connected world, and it
is the focus of this study. We hypothesize that, within an image, there are few different virally salient regions, i.e. areas
responsible for making the image viral. Inspired from previous research studies [27, 22], we introduce a novel global
pooling layer, the learned top-N average (LENA) pooling
layer, specifically designed to automatically detect the visual patterns correlated with virality, i.e. the viraliency map
(Figure 1). We further show that, by embedding our LENA
pooling into a convolutional deep architecture, we can successfully predict the virality score of an image and simultaneously uncover its viraliency map. We test the LENA layer
within different network architectures and perform an extensive experimental evaluation on two recent and publicly
available datasets used for visual virality analysis [14, 7],
demonstrating that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches on virality prediction and localization.
16080

