Deep Self-Taught Learning for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Zequn Jie∗†
∗

Yunchao Wei∗

Xiaojie Jin∗

National University of Singapore

{elejiez, eleweiyv, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

Jiashi Feng∗
†

Wei Liu†

Tencent AI Lab

xiaojie.jin@u.nus.edu

wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Abstract
Most existing weakly supervised localization (WSL) approaches learn detectors by finding positive bounding boxes based on features learned with image-level supervision.
However, those features do not contain spatial location related information and usually provide poor-quality positive
samples for training a detector. To overcome this issue,
we propose a deep self-taught learning approach, which
makes the detector learn the object-level features reliable
for acquiring tight positive samples and afterwards re-train
itself based on them. Consequently, the detector progressively improves its detection ability and localizes more informative positive samples. To implement such self-taught
learning, we propose a seed sample acquisition method via
image-to-object transferring and dense subgraph discovery
to find reliable positive samples for initializing the detector.
An online supportive sample harvesting scheme is further
proposed to dynamically select the most confident tight positive samples and train the detector in a mutual boosting
way. To prevent the detector from being trapped in poor optima due to overfitting, we propose a new relative improvement of predicted CNN scores for guiding the self-taught
learning process. Extensive experiments on PASCAL 2007
and 2012 show that our approach outperforms the state-ofthe-arts, strongly validating its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Weakly Supervised Localization (WSL) refers to learning to localize objects within images with only image-level
annotations that simply indicate the presence of an object
category. WSL is gaining increasing importance in largescale vision applications because it does not require expensive bounding box annotations like its fully-supervised
counterpart [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] in the model training phase.
WSL is a challenging problem due to the insufficiency of
information for learning a good detector. Correctly identifying the reliable positive samples (bounding boxes) from a
collection of candidates is thus of critical importance. Most

Figure 1: An illustration of deep self-taught learning for
weakly supervised object localization. Given image-level
supervision, seed positive proposals are first obtained as initial positive samples for a CNN detector. The CNN detector
is then trained with self-taught learning which alternates between training and online supportive sample harvesting relying on the relative improvement of CNN scores predicted
by the detector.
previous WSL methods [7, 8, 9, 10] discover high-confident
positive samples from the images with positive annotations
by applying multiple instance learning (MIL) or other similar algorithms. Recent WSL methods [11, 12, 13, 14, 9] also
combine deep convolutional neural network (CNN) models
[15, 16, 17] with MIL, considering that CNN architectures
can provide more powerful image representations. However, the representation provided by a CNN tailored to classification does not contain any specific information about object spatial locations and is thus not suitable for object-level
localization tasks, leading to marginal benefits for learning
a high-quality object detector.
Moreover, such methods only perform off-line MIL to
mine confident class-specific object proposals before train-

1377

