Turning an Urban Scene Video into a Cinemagraph
Hang Yan
Washington University
St. Louis, USA

Yebin Liu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Yasutaka Furukawa
Washington University
St. Louis, USA

yanhang@wustl.edu

liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

furukawa@wustl.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes an algorithm that turns a regular
video capturing urban scenes into a high-quality endless
animation, known as a Cinemagraph. The creation of a
Cinemagraph usually requires a static camera in a carefully configured scene. The task becomes challenging for a
regular video with a moving camera and objects. Our approach first warps an input video into the viewpoint of a
reference camera. Based on the warped video, we propose
effective temporal analysis algorithms to detect regions with
static geometry and dynamic appearance, where geometric modeling is reliable and visually attractive animations
can be created. Lastly, the algorithm applies a sequence
of video processing techniques to produce a Cinemagraph
movie. We have tested the proposed approach on numerous challenging real scenes. To our knowledge, this work is
the first to automatically generate Cinemagraph animations
from regular movies in the wild.

1. Introduction
Our world is dynamic. Imagine you are standing in the
middle of Times Square surrounded by constant noise, cars
passing by, or flashy billboards showing advertisements at
every second. A fundamental challenge in Computer Vision is to model and visualize dynamic environments. Cinemagraphs, still photographs containing minor and repeated
animations [1], are one of the most successful examples in
capturing such scene dynamics. Their subtle animations are
effective in capturing the “moment” with striking visual effects.
The generation of high-quality Cinemagraphs have so far
required static cameras with carefully configured scenes [1,
2] or interactive tools [14]. No compelling techniques exist in the automatic conversion of regular videos into Cinemagraphs. Online photo storage services, such as Google
Photos, automatically produce short animations from user
images and movies. However, their animations are either a
simple image slide-show or a trimmed movie segment loop-

ing forward and backward unnaturally.
We seek to make the first step towards automated Cinemagraph generation from regular movies with moving
cameras in the wild. The key insight is that even subtle
animations yield striking visual effects, where our approach
is to selectively and precisely segment regions that lead to
high-quality animations. In particular, we focus on urban
environments or night-time settings, where neon-signs, displays, or flashy billboards decorate a scenery. Such a geometry is static, making the modeling task significantly easier,
while their appearance adds effective dynamics to the scene
visualization.
Formally, this paper turns a regular video capturing urban scenes into a Cinemagraph-style animation in three
steps. First, we utilize existing 3D reconstruction techniques to warp an input video into the viewpoint of a reference frame. Second, novel temporal analysis algorithms are
applied to the warped video to identify regions where highquality animations can be produced. These regions have
static geometry with varying appearance. Third, we perform a sequence of video processing techniques to generate
high-quality animations for the segmented regions, while
fixing the rest of the pixels to the reference frame.
The contributions of this paper are two fold. The technical contribution lies in the effective temporal analysis of
noisy warped videos to enable the segmentation and classification of visually interesting regions. The system contribution is the fact that this is the first effective system automatically generating Cinemagraph animations from regular
movies 1 .

2. Related work
Dynamic scene reconstruction has been a fundamental
problem for Computer Vision. Significant progress has
been made for lab-environments, where multiple calibrated
and synchronized video cameras are the input. A successful
system has been demonstrated for a human body [26], a human face [4], or multiple people with interactions [13, 8].
1 Project page: http://yanhangpublic.github.io/cinemagraph

1394

