Spatial-Semantic Image Search by Visual Feature Synthesis
Long Mai1 , Hailin Jin2 , Zhe Lin2 , Chen Fang2 , Jonathan Brandt2 , and Feng Liu1
1
Portland State University
2
Adobe Research
1
{mtlong,fliu}@cs.pdx.com, 2 {hljin,zlin,cfang,jbrandt}@adobe.com
Person
Surfboard
Water
Text-based query
a) Image search with semantic constraints only
Person
Water
Surfboard

Person

Water

Surfboard

Spatial-semantic query

b) Image search with spatial-semantic constraints

Figure 1: Spatial-semantic image search. (a) Searching with content-only queries such as text keywords, while effective in
retrieving relevant content, is unable to incorporate detailed spatial intents. (b) Spatial-semantic image search allows users to
interact with the 2-D canvas to express their search intent both spatially and semantically.

Abstract
The performance of image retrieval has been improved
tremendously in recent years through the use of deep feature representations. Most existing methods, however, aim
to retrieve images that are visually similar or semantically
relevant to the query, irrespective of spatial configuration.
In this paper, we develop a spatial-semantic image search
technology that enables users to search for images with
both semantic and spatial constraints by manipulating concept text-boxes on a 2D query canvas. We train a convolutional neural network to synthesize appropriate visual features that captures the spatial-semantic constraints from the
user canvas query. We directly optimize the retrieval performance of the visual features when training our deep neural
network. These visual features then are used to retrieve images that are both spatially and semantically relevant to the
user query. The experiments on large-scale datasets such
as MS-COCO and Visual Genome show that our method
outperforms other baseline and state-of-the-art methods in
spatial-semantic image search.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is essential for various applications, such
as browsing photo collections [6, 52], exploring large visual
data archives [15, 16, 38, 43], and online shopping [26, 37].
It has long been an active research topic with a rich literature
in computer vision and multimedia [8, 30, 55, 56, 57]. In
recent years, advances in research on deep feature learning
have led to effective image and query representations that
are shown effective for retrieving images that are visually
similar or semantically relevant to the query [12, 14, 25, 53].
However, in many search scenarios, such as recalling a
specific scene from personal albums or finding appropriate stock photos for design projects, users want to indicate
not only which visual concepts should appear in the image,
but also how these concepts should be spatially arranged
within the scene. This paper presents a spatial-semantic
image search method, which allows users to interact with
a 2D canvas to construct search queries. As shown in Figure 1 (b), by manipulating text boxes representing visual
concepts, users can naturally express their search intent
both spatially and semantically. In contrast, searching with
14718

