Discriminative Correlation Filter with Channel and Spatial Reliability
Alan Lukežič1 , Tomáš Vojı́ř2 , Luka Čehovin Zajc1 , Jiřı́ Matas2 and Matej Kristan1
1
Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
{alan.lukezic, luka.cehovin, matej.kristan}@fri.uni-lj.si
{vojirtom, matas}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
Short-term tracking is an open and challenging problem for which discriminative correlation filters (DCF) have
shown excellent performance.We introduce the channel and
spatial reliability concepts to DCF tracking and provide a
novel learning algorithm for its efficient and seamless integration in the filter update and the tracking process. The
spatial reliability map adjusts the filter support to the part of
the object suitable for tracking. This both allows to enlarge
the search region and improves tracking of non-rectangular
objects. Reliability scores reflect channel-wise quality of
the learned filters and are used as feature weighting coefficients in localization. Experimentally, with only two simple
standard features, HoGs and Colornames, the novel CSRDCF method – DCF with Channel and Spatial Reliability
– achieves state-of-the-art results on VOT 2016, VOT 2015
and OTB100. The CSR-DCF runs in real-time on a CPU.

1. Introduction
Short-term visual object tracking is the problem of continuously localizing a target in a video-sequence given a
single example of its appearance. It has received significant attention of the computer vision community which is
reflected in the number of papers published on the topic and
the existence of multiple performance evaluation benchmarks [42, 28, 29, 26, 27, 32, 37, 35]. Diverse factors –
occlusion, illumination change, fast object or camera motion, appearance changes due to rigid or non-rigid deformations and similarity to the background – make short-term
tracking challenging.
Recent short-term tracking evaluations [42, 28, 29, 26]
consistently confirm the advantages of semi-supervised discriminative tracking approaches [16, 1, 17, 4]. In particular, trackers based on the discriminative correlation filter
method (DCF) [4, 8, 19, 30, 10] have shown state-of-theart performance in all standard benchmarks. Discriminative correlation methods learn a filter with a pre-defined re-

Learning - Update stage:
Spa

tial

Tra
in

ing

Channel
weights

map

Sp

atia

pa

tch

ly c
ﬁlteonstr
rs aine

d

Localization stage:
Channel
weights

Fin

al r

=
Fil

ter

Tes
t

res

po

ns

esp

ons

e

pat

ch

es

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed CSR-DCF approach.
An automatically estimated spatial reliability map restricts
the correlation filter to the parts suitable for tracking (top)
improving the search range and performance for irregularly
shaped objects. Channel reliability weights calculated in
the constrained optimization step of the correlation filter
learning reduce the noise of the weight-averaged filter response (bottom).

sponse on the training image.
The standard formulation of DCF uses circular correlation which allows to implement learning efficiently by Fast
Fourier transform (FFT). However, the FFT requires the filter and the patch size to be equal which limits the detection
range. Due to the circularity, the filter is trained on many examples that contain unrealistic, wrapped-around circularlyshifted versions of the target. These windowing problems
were recently addressed by state-of-the-art approaches of
Galoogahi et al. [23] who propose zero-padding the filter
during learning and by Danneljan et al. [10] who introduce
16309

