Optical Flow in Mostly Rigid Scenes
Jonas Wulff
Laura Sevilla-Lara
Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{jonas.wulff,laura.sevilla,black}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1: Overview. From three frames (a) our method computes a segmentation of the scene into static (red) and moving
(blue) regions (b), the depth structure of the scene (c) , and the optical flow (d). (e) shows ground truth flow.

Abstract
The optical flow of natural scenes is a combination of
the motion of the observer and the independent motion
of objects. Existing algorithms typically focus on either
recovering motion and structure under the assumption of
a purely static world or optical flow for general unconstrained scenes. We combine these approaches in an optical flow algorithm that estimates an explicit segmentation of
moving objects from appearance and physical constraints.
In static regions we take advantage of strong constraints to
jointly estimate the camera motion and the 3D structure of
the scene over multiple frames. This allows us to also regularize the structure instead of the motion. Our formulation
uses a Plane+Parallax framework, which works even under small baselines, and reduces the motion estimation to
a one-dimensional search problem, resulting in more accurate estimation. In moving regions the flow is treated
as unconstrained, and computed with an existing optical
flow method. The resulting Mostly-Rigid Flow (MR-Flow)
method achieves state-of-the-art results on both the MPISintel and KITTI-2015 benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The world is composed of things that move and things that
do not. The 2D motion field, which is the projection of the
3D scene motion onto the image plane, arises from observer
motion relative to the static scene and the independent motion of objects. A large body of work exists on estimating
camera motion and scene structure in purely static scenes,

generally referred to as Structure-from-Motion (SfM). On
the other hand, methods that estimate general 2D image
motion, or optical flow, make much weaker assumptions
about the scene. Neither approach fully exploits the mixed
structure of natural scenes. Most of what we see in such
scenes is static - houses, roads, desks, etc.1 Here, we refer
to these static parts of the scene as the rigid scene, or rigid
regions. At the same time, moving objects like people, cars,
and animals make up a small but often important part of
natural scenes. Despite the long history of both SfM and
optical flow, no state-of-the art optical flow method synthesizes both into an algorithm that works on general scenes
like those in the MPI-Sintel dataset [9] (Fig. 1). In this
work, we propose such a method to estimate optical flow
in video sequences of generic scenes that contain moving
objects within a rigid scene.
For the rigid scene, the camera motion and depth structure fully determine the motion, which forms the basis of
SfM methods. Modern optical flow benchmarks, however,
are full of moving objects such as cars or bicycles in KITTI,
or humans and dragons in Sintel. Assuming a fully static
scene or treating these moving objects as outliers is hence
not viable for optical flow algorithms; we want to reconstruct flow everywhere.
Independent motion in a scene typically arises from well
defined objects with the ability to move. This points to a
possible solution. Recently, convolutional neural networks
(CNN) have achieved good performance on detecting and
segmenting objects in images, and have been successfully
1 In KITTI-2015 and MPI-Sintel, independently moving regions make
up only 15% and 28% of the pixels, respectively.

4671

