Multi-level Attention Networks for Visual Question Answering∗
Dongfei Yu, Jianlong Fu, Tao Mei, Yong Rui
University of Science and Technology of China, Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
ydf2010@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {jianf, tmei}@microsoft.com, yongrui@outlook.com

Abstract
Inspired by the recent success of text-based question answering, visual question answering (VQA) is proposed to
automatically answer natural language questions with the
reference to a given image. Compared with text-based QA,
VQA is more challenging because the reasoning process
on visual domain needs both effective semantic embedding
and fine-grained visual understanding. Existing approaches
predominantly infer answers from the abstract low-level visual features, while neglecting the modeling of high-level
image semantics and the rich spatial context of regions.
To solve the challenges, we propose a multi-level attention network for visual question answering that can simultaneously reduce the semantic gap by semantic attention
and benefit fine-grained spatial inference by visual attention. First, we generate semantic concepts from high-level
semantics in convolutional neural networks (CNN) and select those question-related concepts as semantic attention.
Second, we encode region-based middle-level outputs from
CNN into spatially-embedded representation by a bidirectional recurrent neural network, and further pinpoint the
answer-related regions by multiple layer perceptron as visual attention. Third, we jointly optimize semantic attention, visual attention and question embedding by a softmax
classifier to infer the final answer. Extensive experiments
show the proposed approach outperforms the-state-of-arts
on two challenging VQA datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) has attracted extensive attention recently, since VQA is considered approaching towards the milestone of “AI-complete” that enables a
machine to reason across language and vision as humans
[38]. Compared with text-based QA system in natural language processing (NLP), VQA takes one step further, which
is able to answer a natural language question by considering the correspondence between a question and a reference
∗ This work was performed when Dongfei Yu was visiting Microsoft
Research as a research intern.

Figure 1. Overview of the multi-level attention network (MLAN).
The proposed attention model highlights both question-related semantic concepts (i.e., “baseball,” “game,” “play”) and image regions (i.e., those regions of “bat” and “glove”).

image. The capability of automatic VQA can significantly
promote the mutual understanding between language and
vision, and further benefit a variety of applications, such as
visually-impaired assistant devices, early education, service
robots, and so on.
The challenges of visual question answering are twofold: effective semantic embedding and fine-grained visual
understanding. Most early works transfer image captioning framework [5, 19, 28, 35] to VQA tasks [10, 18, 24] by
the combination of convolutional neural networks (CNN)
[14] and recurrent neural network (RNN) [12]. Specifically, these works extract global image representation from
a pre-trained CNN model and extract question representation from a RNN model. They further feed the joint embedding features across language and vision into either a decoder RNN to generate free-form answers or a softmax classifier to infer the best answer from a predefined answer set
(e.g., 1K answer categories in VQA dataset [2]). Although
promising results have been reported, further improvement
suffers from the following limitations. First, human language question conveys strong high-level semantics with
explicit query intention, while real-world images with tens
of thousands of pixels are relatively low-level and abstract,

4709

