Multi-view Supervision for Single-view Reconstruction
via Differentiable Ray Consistency
Shubham Tulsiani, Tinghui Zhou, Alexei A. Efros, Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{shubhtuls,tinghuiz,efros,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the notion of consistency between a 3D shape
and a 2D observation and propose a differentiable formulation which allows computing gradients of the 3D shape
given an observation from an arbitrary view. We do so by
reformulating view consistency using a differentiable ray
consistency (DRC) term. We show that this formulation
can be incorporated in a learning framework to leverage
different types of multi-view observations e.g. foreground
masks, depth, color images, semantics etc. as supervision
for learning single-view 3D prediction. We present empirical analysis of our technique in a controlled setting. We
also show that this approach allows us to improve over existing techniques for single-view reconstruction of objects
from the PASCAL VOC dataset.

1. Introduction

Luckily, it is also extremely useful as it allows us to connect
the concepts in 3D geometry with the latest developments in
machine learning. While classic 3D reconstruction methods
require large number of 2D views of the same physical 3D
object, learning-based methods are able to take advantage
of their past experience and thus only require a small number of views for each physical object being trained. Finally,
when the system is done learning, it is able to give an estimate of the 3D shape of a novel object from only a single
image, something that classic methods are incapable of doing. The differentiability of our consistency formulation is
what allows its use in a learning framework, such as a neural network. Every new piece of evidence gives gradients
for the predicted shape, which, in turn, yields incremental
updates for the underlying prediction model. Since this prediction model is shared across object instances, it is able to
find and learn from the commonalities across different 3D
shapes, requiring only sparse per-instance supervision.

2. Related Work

When is a solid 3D shape consistent with a 2D image? If
it is not, how do we change it to make it more so? One way
this problem has been traditionally addressed is by space
carving [21]. Rays are projected out from pixels into the
3D space and each ray that is known not to intersect the
object removes the volume in its path, thereby making the
carved-out shape consistent with the observed image.
But what if we want to extend this notion of consistency to the differential setting? That is, instead of deleting chunks of volume all at once, we would like to compute incremental changes to the 3D shape that make it more
consistent with the 2D image. In this paper, we present a
differentiable ray consistency formulation that allows computing the gradient of a predicted 3D shape of an object,
given an observation (depth image, foreground mask, color
image etc.) from an arbitrary view.
The question of finding a differential formulation for ray
consistency is mathematically interesting in and of itself.

Object Reconstruction from Image-based Annotations.
Blanz and Vetter [2] demonstrated the use of a morphable
model to capture 3D shapes. Cashman and Fitzgibbon [4]
learned these models for complex categories like dolphins
using object silhouettes and keypoint annotations for training and inference. Tulsiani et al. [33] extended similar ideas
to more general categories and leveraged recognition systems [15, 18, 34] to automate test-time inference. Wu et
al. [37], using similar annotations, learned a system to predict sparse 3D by inferring parameters of a shape skeleton.
However, since the use of such low-dimensional models
restricts expressivity, Vicente et al. [36] proposed a nonparametric method by leveraging surrogate instances – but
at the cost of requiring annotations at test time. We leverage
similar training data but using a CNN-based voxel prediction framework allows test time inference without manual
annotations and allows handling large shape variations.

Project website with code: https://shubhtuls.github.io/
drc/

Object Reconstruction from 3D Supervision. The advent
of deep learning along with availability of large-scale syn-

2626

