SurfNet: Generating 3D shape surfaces using deep residual networks
Ayan Sinha
MIT

Asim Unmesh
IIT Kanpur

Qixing Huang
UT Austin

Karthik Ramani
Purdue

sinhayan@mit.edu

a.unmesh@gmail.com

huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

ramani@purdue.edu

Abstract
3D shape models are naturally parameterized using vertices and faces, i.e., composed of polygons forming a surface. However, current 3D learning paradigms for predictive and generative tasks using convolutional neural networks focus on a voxelized representation of the object.
Lifting convolution operators from the traditional 2D to
3D results in high computational overhead with little additional benefit as most of the geometry information is contained on the surface boundary. Here we study the problem of directly generating the 3D shape surface of rigid
and non-rigid shapes using deep convolutional neural networks. We develop a procedure to create consistent ‘geometry images’ representing the shape surface of a category
of 3D objects. We then use this consistent representation
for category-specific shape surface generation from a parametric representation or an image by developing novel extensions of deep residual networks for the task of geometry
image generation. Our experiments indicate that our network learns a meaningful representation of shape surfaces
allowing it to interpolate between shape orientations and
poses, invent new shape surfaces and reconstruct 3D shape
surfaces from previously unseen images. Our code is available at https://github.com/sinhayan/surfnet.

1. Introduction
The advent of virtual and augmented reality technologies
along with the democratization of 3D printers has made it
imperative to develop generative techniques for 3D content.
Deep neural networks have shown promise for such generative modeling of 2D images [2, 9, 24]. Using similar techniques for creating high quality 3D content is at its infancy,
especially because of the computational burden introduced
by the 3rd extra dimension [8, 10, 36]. Recent works in
deep learning for 3D have argued for the redundancy of the
3rd extra dimension as almost all of 3D shape information
is contained on the surface. The authors of field probing
neural networks [18] address the sparse occupancy of voxel
representations by developing adaptive 3D filters to reduce

Figure 1. (a) 3D shape surface interpolation between original (left)
and final (right) surface models with realistic intermediate styles
is made possible by our generative deep neural network. (b) 3D
rigid (or man-made) surface reconstruction from a RGB image,
and (c) 3D non-rigid surface reconstruction from a depth image.
The surfaces are constructed with implicit viewpoint estimation.

the cubic learning complexity. Following a similar argument, Sinha et al. propose to learn a 2D geometry image
representation of 3D shape surfaces to mitigate the computational overhead of the 3rd extra dimension [28].
Here, we adopt the geometry image representation for
generative modeling of 3D shape surfaces. Naively creating independent geometry images for a shape category and
feeding them into deep neural networks fails to generate coherent 3D shape surfaces. Our primary contributions are:
(1) A procedure to create consistent and robust geometry
images for genus-0 surfaces across a shape category invariant to cuts and the intermediate spherical parametrization
by solving a large scale correspondence problem, and (2)
extending deep residual networks to automatically generate
geometry images encoding the x, y, z surface coordinates
with implicit pose estimation and preservation of high frequency features for rigid as well as non-rigid shape categories. We demonstrate that neural networks trained using
images or a parametric representation as inputs, and geometry images as outputs possess the ability to generate shape
surfaces for unseen images, intermediate shape poses and
interpolate between shape surfaces as shown in figure 1.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses relevant work. Section 3 discusses the geometry image creation. Section 4 discusses the neural network architecture.
Section 5 shows the result of our method, and section 6 discusses limitations and future work.
16040

