Spatio-Temporal Self-Organizing Map Deep Network for Dynamic Object
Detection from Videos
Yang Du1 , Chunfeng Yuan1∗, Bing Li1 , Weiming Hu1 and Stephen Maybank2
1

CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
duyang2014@ia.ac.cn, cfyuan@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, bli@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wmhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Birkbeck College, London

sjmaybank@dcs.bbk.ac.uk

Abstract
In dynamic object detection, it is challenging to construct an effective model to sufficiently characterize the
spatial-temporal properties of the background. This paper proposes a new Spatio-Temporal Self-Organizing Map
(STSOM) deep network to detect dynamic objects in complex scenarios. The proposed approach has several contributions: First, a novel STSOM shared by all pixels in a
video frame is presented to efficiently model complex background. We exploit the fact that the motions of complex
background have the global variation in the space and the
local variation in the time, to train STSOM using the whole frames and the sequence of a pixel over time to tackle
the variance of complex background. Second, a Bayesian
parameter estimation based method is presented to learn
thresholds automatically for all pixels to filter out the background. Last, in order to model the complex background
more accurately, we extend the single-layer STSOM to the
deep network. Then the background is filtered out layer by
layer. Experimental results on CDnet 2014 dataset demonstrate that the proposed STSOM deep network outperforms
numerous recently proposed methods in the overall performance and in most categories of scenarios.

1. Introduction
Dynamic object detection is a critical task for video
processing in computer vision and it is fundamental for
many applications such as target tracking, recognition and
behavioral analysis [20]. Modern detection algorithms
[9][15][4][21] are generally attained by background mod∗ Corresponding Author

eling. The difficulty of background modeling is to tackle
background motions. We conclude that the motions of complex background mainly have two properties:
• Variation of the global background in the space. It is
mainly caused by the zoom, translation, jitter, etc, of
the camera. We refer to it as the spatial property of
background motion.
• Variation of the local background in the time. It mainly
indicates the dynamic elements in background and at
different frames, such as river, fountain and bad weather. We refer to it as the temporal property of background motion.
In human visual system, visual cortex (V1) simultaneously perceives the stimuli of background and dynamic objects. Input-driven Self-Organizing Map (SOM) [19] is constructed by imitating the structures of superficial areas in
the V1 to restore how the neurons in the essential visual
cortex respond to input stimuli. SOM has been successfully used in dynamic object detection [16]. Generally, SOM
based methods learn the information of background by updating the weights of neural nodes. Subsequently via setting
a threshold for it, each pixel is filtered as the foreground or
background. Weight updating and threshold setting are two
key problems in the SOM based dynamic object detection.
Previous SOM based methods cannot sufficiently characterize the spatial-temporal properties of the background
and are not well suitable for complex scenarios. In terms
of the two properties of background motions, we propose
a new STSOM and train it in two aspects, using the whole
frames from spatial perspective and using the sequence of
a pixel over time from temporal perspective. Then we propose a new method based on Bayesian parameter estimation

5475

