Robust Joint and Individual Variance Explained
Christos Sagonas1,2 , Yannis Panagakis1,3 , Alina Leidinger1 , Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1
Imperial College London, UK
2
Onfido, UK
3
Middlesex University London, UK
christos.sagonas@onfido.com, {i.panagakis, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
Proposed Method

Abstract

Input

Discovering the common (joint) and individual subspaces is crucial for analysis of multiple data sets, including
multi-view and multi-modal data. Several statistical machine learning methods have been developed for discovering the common features across multiple data sets. The most
well studied family of the methods is that of Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) and its variants. Even though the
CCA is a powerful tool, it has several drawbacks that render its application challenging for computer vision applications. That is, it discovers only common features and not
individual ones, and it is sensitive to gross errors present
in visual data. Recently, efforts have been made in order
to develop methods that discover individual and common
components. Nevertheless, these methods are mainly applicable in two sets of data. In this paper, we investigate the
use of a recently proposed statistical method, the so-called
Joint and Individual Variance Explained (JIVE) method, for
the recovery of joint and individual components in an arbitrary number of data sets. Since, the JIVE is not robust to
gross errors, we propose alternatives, which are both robust
to non-Gaussian noise of large magnitude, as well as able
to automatically find the rank of the individual components.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
to two computer vision applications, namely facial expression synthesis and face age progression in-the-wild.

=

Extracting the modes of variation from two or multiple data sets has created a wealth of research in statistics,
signal and image processing, and computer vision. Two
mathematically similar but conceptually different models
underlie the bulk of the methodologies. In particular, the
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [12] and its variants
e.g.,[17, 24] are the methods of choice for extracting linear correlated components among two or more sets of variables. Similarly, inter-battery factor analysis [37] and its

Individual

+
J

X

Error

+
A

E

Applica ons
>Facial Expression Synthesis

>Face age progression
George
Clooney

0-3

36

1. Introduction

Joint

08-15 21-30 41-50 61-70

56

27

51

Figure 1. A visual representation of the RJIVE decomposition and
its applications considered in this paper. Images highlighted in red
boxes are given as input to the RJIVE (best viewed in color).

extensions e.g., [18] determines the common factors among
two sets of variables.
The main limitation of the above mentioned methods
is that they only recover the most correlated (joint) linear
subspace of the data, ignoring the individual components
of the data. This is alleviated by recent methods such as
4321
5267

