BranchOut: Regularization for Online Ensemble Tracking
with Convolutional Neural Networks
Bohyung Han
POSTECH, Korea

Jack Sim
Google Inc.

Hartwig Adam
Google Inc.

bhhan@postech.ac.kr

jacksim@google.com

hadam@google.com

Abstract
We propose an extremely simple but effective regularization technique of convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
referred to as BranchOut, for online ensemble tracking.
Our algorithm employs a CNN for target representation,
which has a common convolutional layers but has multiple branches of fully connected layers. For better regularization, a subset of branches in the CNN are selected
randomly for online learning whenever target appearance
models need to be updated. Each branch may have a different number of layers to maintain variable abstraction levels
of target appearances. BranchOut with multi-level target
representation allows us to learn robust target appearance
models with diversity and handle various challenges in visual tracking problem effectively. The proposed algorithm is
evaluated in standard tracking benchmarks and shows the
state-of-the-art performance even without additional pretraining on external tracking sequences.

In addition, we allow the individual branches to have different numbers of fully connected layers and maintain multilevel target representations.
The main challenge in this ensemble approach is how to
decorrelate multiple branches and diversify learned models
to maximize beneﬁt of ensemble. Note that our problem
is particularly challenging because training should be performed online with only a limited number of training examples in the presence of label noises. To deal with these challenges, we take an extremely simple strategy, BranchOut,
which disregards a subset of the branches in the CNN chosen randomly for model update. This technique is helpful to
maintain diversity of target appearance models and achieve
performance improvement over deterministic methods. The
proposed learning framework shares the motivation with
Dropout [32] and DropConnect [34], where a subset of activations or weights in the fully connected layers are set to
zeros randomly for each mini-batch during training. Our
contribution is summarized as follows:
• We propose a simple but effective regularization technique, BranchOut, which is well-suited for online ensemble tracking. BranchOut alleviates the limitations
of naı̈ve ensemble learning approach—lack of model
diversity and noisy labels of training data.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is valuable source of low-level information for high-level video understanding, so it has been applied to many computer vision tasks such as action recognition [6, 35], event detection [24], object detection from
video [21], and so on. Despite tremendous amount of efforts, visual tracking is still regarded as a challenging problem since there exist a lot of variations imposed on target
and surrounding background, and it is not straightforward to
handle all the variations in a single framework. Most of all,
it is extremely difﬁcult to learn representative but adaptive
features for robust tracking, especially in online scenarios.
We propose a novel visual tracking algorithm focusing
on target appearance modeling, where the appearance is
learned by a convolutional neural network (CNN) with multiple branches as shown in Figure 1. The target state is estimated by an ensemble of all branches while online model
update is performed by the standard error backpropagation.

• Our network has a different number of fully connected
layers in individual branches and maintains multi-level
representations based on a CNN using the branches.
• We explore various options of online ensemble learning for visual tracking and verify the effectiveness of
BranchOut and multi-level representation. Our algorithm illustrates the state-of-the-art performance even
without pretraining with external tracking videos.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
review existing visual tracking algorithms in Section 2. The
proposed online stochastic learning and visual tracking algorithm design are described in Section 3 and 4, respectively. Section 5 presents experimental results with discussion, and Section 6 concludes our paper.

3356

