A Multi-View Stereo Benchmark with
High-Resolution Images and Multi-Camera Videos
Thomas Schöps1
Johannes L. Schönberger1
Silvano Galliani2
1
2
1,4
Torsten Sattler
Konrad Schindler
Marc Pollefeys
Andreas Geiger1,3
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zürich
3
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 4 Microsoft, Redmond

Abstract
Motivated by the limitations of existing multi-view stereo
benchmarks, we present a novel dataset for this task. Towards this goal, we recorded a variety of indoor and outdoor scenes using a high-precision laser scanner and captured both high-resolution DSLR imagery as well as synchronized low-resolution stereo videos with varying fieldsof-view. To align the images with the laser scans, we propose a robust technique which minimizes photometric errors conditioned on the geometry. In contrast to previous
datasets, our benchmark provides novel challenges and covers a diverse set of viewpoints and scene types, ranging
from natural scenes to man-made indoor and outdoor environments. Furthermore, we provide data at significantly
higher temporal and spatial resolution. Our benchmark is
the first to cover the important use case of hand-held mobile
devices while also providing high-resolution DSLR camera
images. We make our datasets and an online evaluation
server available at http:// www.eth3d.net.

1. Introduction
The problem of reconstructing 3D geometry from two
or more views has received tremendous attention in computer vision for several decades. Applications range from
3D reconstruction of objects [4] and larger scenes [3, 5, 35]
over dense sensing for autonomous vehicles [6–8, 11, 30]
or obstacle detection [10] to 3D reconstruction from mobile
devices [14, 20, 28, 36, 41]. Despite its long history, many
problems in 3D reconstruction remain unsolved to date. To
identify these problems and analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the state-of-the-art, access to a large-scale dataset
with 3D ground truth is indispensable.
Indeed, the advent of excellent datasets and benchmarks,
such as [6,12,17,29,32–34,38,40], has greatly advanced the
state of the art of stereo and multi-view stereo (MVS) techniques. However, constructing good benchmark datasets is

a tedious and challenging task. It requires the acquisition
of images and a 3D scene model, e.g., through a laser scanner or structured light sensor, as well as careful registration
between the different modalities. Often, manual work is required [6] to mask occluded regions, sensor inaccuracies or
image areas with invalid depth estimates, e.g., due to moving objects. Therefore, existing benchmarks are limited in
their variability and are often also domain specific.
This paper presents a novel benchmark for two- and
multi-view stereo algorithms designed to complement existing benchmarks across several dimensions (c.f . Fig. 1):
(i) Compared to previous MVS benchmarks, our dataset offers images acquired at a very high resolution. Using a professional DSLR camera, we capture images at 24 Megapixel
resolution compared to 6 Megapixels in Strecha et al. [40],
0.5 Megapixels in KITTI [6], and 0.3 Megapixels in Middlebury [38]. This enables the evaluation of algorithms designed for detailed 3D reconstruction. At the same time, it
encourages the development of memory and computationally efficient methods which can handle very large datasets.
(ii) By now, mobile devices have become powerful enough
for real-time stereo [20, 28, 30, 36, 41], creating the need for
benchmark datasets that model the acquisition process typical for such hand-held devices. In addition to the DSLR
images, we also capture a set of image sequences with four
synchronized cameras forming two stereo pairs that move
freely through the scene. These videos enable algorithms
to exploit the redundancy provided by high frame rates to
improve the reconstruction quality. Again, this scenario rewards efficient algorithms which can handle large amounts
of data. To study the effect of field-of-view (FOV) and distortion, we recorded stereo imagery using different lenses.
(iii) In contrast to the Middlebury benchmarks [33, 38],
our scenes are not carefully staged in a controlled laboratory environment. Instead, they provide the full range
of challenges of real-word photogrammetric measurements.
Rather than moving along a constrained trajectory, e.g., in a

3260

