Personalizing Gesture Recognition Using
Hierarchical Bayesian Neural Networks
Ajjen Joshi1 Soumya Ghosh2 Margrit Betke1 Stan Sclaroff1 Hanspeter Pfister3
1
Boston University 2 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 3 Harvard University
1

{ajjendj, betke, sclaroff}@bu.edu 2 ghoshso@us.ibm.com 3 pfister@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Building robust classifiers trained on data susceptible to
group or subject-specific variations is a challenging pattern
recognition problem. We develop hierarchical Bayesian
neural networks to capture subject-specific variations and
share statistical strength across subjects. Leveraging recent work on learning Bayesian neural networks, we build
fast, scalable algorithms for inferring the posterior distribution over all network weights in the hierarchy. We also
develop methods for adapting our model to new subjects
when a small number of subject-specific personalization
data is available. Finally, we investigate active learning algorithms for interactively labeling personalization data in
resource-constrained scenarios. Focusing on the problem of
gesture recognition where inter-subject variations are commonplace, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
techniques. We test our framework on three widely used gesture recognition datasets, achieving personalization performance competitive with the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1. Graphical model representation of our hierarchical
Bayesian model. Shaded nodes indicate observed random variables. We parameterize group-specific conditional distributions
p(yn | zn = g, f (xn , Wg )), where Wg is the set of group-specific
weights parameterizing a Bayesian neural network f . The class
label, yn , also depends on zn , which indicates the group membership of data instance n. It is shaded blue to indicate that it is
observed during training, but may be unobserved at test time.

1. Introduction

variations in gesture performance. Designing systems robust to such variations is a challenging problem.

The problem of automatically recognizing human gestures has been an active area of computer vision and pattern
recognition research. Gesture recognition enables natural
and intuitive modes of interaction between human and computer, and therefore has numerous applications in a wide
range of fields such as robotics, surveillance, and gaming.
A generic gesture classifier, trained on examples of gestures pooled together from all subjects in the training set,
is expected to be robust to variations with which gestures
are performed by end-users. However, when the signal obtained from gestures performed by different users exhibit
high variance, such systems have difficulty generalizing.
Consider, for example, a vocabulary of gestures used by
members of a household to control a smart-home device.
Although each individual may perform the gestures consistently, it is likely that the gestures are performed with userspecific idiosyncrasies which may lead to large inter-subject

Personalizing gesture recognition systems using subjectspecific training data provides a promising approach to alleviating such difficulties. In this paper, focusing on personalization, we build hierarchical Bayesian classifiers (Figure 1)
that adapt to new subjects using subject-specific conditional
distributions (Figure 2). Different from existing hierarchical
Bayesian models, we parameterize the conditional distributions via multi-layered Bayesian neural networks. They allow us to learn potentially complex functional relationships
between a subject’s gestures and class labels from a modest
number of training examples. Furthermore, by explicitly
modeling uncertainty in weights, Bayesian neural networks
are able to provide well calibrated estimates of posterior uncertainty along with predicted class labels. Leveraging recent progress on scalable stochastic variational inference,
we develop algorithms for learning the posterior distribution over all network weights in the hierarchy. We further

6513

