Deep Joint Rain Detection and Removal from a Single Image
Wenhan Yang1 , Robby T. Tan2,3 , Jiashi Feng2 , Jiaying Liu1 , Zongming Guo1∗, and Shuicheng Yan4,2
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
2

National University of Singapore, 3 Yale-NUS College, 4 360 AI Institute

Abstract
In this paper, we address a rain removal problem from
a single image, even in the presence of heavy rain and rain
streak accumulation. Our core ideas lie in our new rain image model and new deep learning architecture. We add a
binary map that provides rain streak locations to an existing model, which comprises a rain streak layer and a background layer. We create a model consisting of a component representing rain streak accumulation (where individual
streaks cannot be seen, and thus visually similar to mist or
fog), and another component representing various shapes
and directions of overlapping rain streaks, which usually
happen in heavy rain. Based on the model, we develop a
multi-task deep learning architecture that learns the binary rain streak map, the appearance of rain streaks, and the
clean background, which is our ultimate output. The additional binary map is critically beneficial, since its loss
function can provide additional strong information to the
network. To handle rain streak accumulation (again, a phenomenon visually similar to mist or fog) and various shapes
and directions of overlapping rain streaks, we propose a recurrent rain detection and removal network that removes
rain streaks and clears up the rain accumulation iteratively and progressively. In each recurrence of our method, a
new contextualized dilated network is developed to exploit
regional contextual information and to produce better representations for rain detection. The evaluation on real images, particularly on heavy rain, shows the effectiveness of
our models and architecture.

1. Introduction
Restoring rain images is important for many computer
vision applications in outdoor scenes. Rain degrades visibility significantly and causes many computer vision sys-

Figure 1. An example result of our proposed rain removal method
that removes heavy rain streaks and enhances the visibility significantly. Top: The raw image with rain streaks (left) and the output
image of our method (right). Bottom: closer looks at specific regions (blue and red) for more details.

tems to likely fail. Generally, rain introduces a few types
of visibility degradation. Raindrops obstruct, deform and/or
blur the background scenes. Distant rain streaks accumulate
and generate atmospheric veiling effects similar to mist or
fog, which severely reduce the visibility by scattering light
out and into the line of sight. Nearby rain streaks exhibit
strong specular highlights that occlude background scenes.
These rain streaks can have various shapes and directions,
particularly in heavy rain, causing severe visibility degradation.
In the past decades, many researchers have devoted
their attention to solving the problem of restoring rain images. Some focus on rain image recovery from video sequences [3, 4, 5, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 44]. Others focus
on rain removal from the single image, by regarding the
rain streak removal problem as a signal separation problem
[23, 18, 33, 9, 28], or by relying on nonlocal mean smoothing [24]. While there are varying degrees of success, majority of existing methods suffer from several limitations:
• Due to the intrinsic overlapping between rain streaks
and background texture patterns, most methods tend
to remove texture details in non-rain regions, leading
to over-smoothing the regions.

∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61472011 and National Key Technology R&D Program of China under Grant 2015AA011605,
with additional support by the State Scholarship Fund from the China
Scholarship Council.

• The degradation of rain is complex, and the existing
rain model widely used in previous methods [23, 9]
11357

