Learning Object Interactions and Descriptions for Semantic Image Segmentation
Guangrun Wang1,2∗
1

Sun Yat-sen University

4

Ping Luo2,4∗
2

Liang Lin1,3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Xiaogang Wang2,4
3

SenseTime Group (Limited)

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China

wanggrun@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

pluo@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

1. Introduction
Performances of convolutional networks (CNNs) can be
improved by increasing depths, number of parameters, and
number of labeled training data. They achieved state-of-theart results and even surpassed the performances of human
experts in image recognition [6, 7, 30] and object detection
[26, 21]. Nevertheless, since training data with per-pixel
annotations are limited and difficult to obtain in semantic
image segmentation, performance gain of CNNs by merely
increasing its modeling complexity becomes marginal.
To address data limitation in image segmentation, this
work proposes to jointly train CNN from two sources of

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

(a)

Abstract
Recent advanced deep convolutional networks (CNNs)
achieved great successes in many computer vision tasks,
because of their compelling learning complexity and the presences of large-scale labeled data. However, as obtaining
per-pixel annotations is expensive, performances of CNNs
in semantic image segmentation are not fully exploited.
This work significantly increases segmentation accuracy of
CNNs by learning from an Image Descriptions in the Wild
(IDW) dataset. Unlike previous image captioning datasets,
where captions were manually and densely annotated,
images and their descriptions in IDW are automatically
downloaded from Internet without any manual cleaning and
refinement. An IDW-CNN is proposed to jointly train IDW
and existing image segmentation dataset such as Pascal
VOC 2012 (VOC). It has two appealing properties. First,
knowledge from different datasets can be fully explored
and transferred from each other to improve performance.
Second, segmentation accuracy in VOC can be constantly
increased when selecting more data from IDW. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and scalability
of IDW-CNN, which outperforms existing best-performing
system by 12% on VOC12 test set.

linliang@ieee.org

Beautiful girl with long blonde
hair wearing hat happy time
playing with lamb on sheep
farm, holding a small little
lamb in her arms outside in
the morning sunshine.

(b)

person

background

sheep

Figure 1: (a) visualizes an image in IDW and its raw description, searched by using ‘sheep’ and ‘human’ as keywords. We
observe that the description contains unimportant details for object
segmentation (e.g. ‘long blonde hair wearing hat happy time’),
missing important details (e.g. number of people and sheep), and
grammatical errors. As a side-by-side comparison, (b) shows an
image and its per-pixel annotation of VOC12.

data. One is a small set of images with per-pixel annotations, which are difficult to obtain such as VOC12. An image
of ‘human’ and ‘sheep’ in VOC12 and its annotation are
given in Fig.1 (b). The other one is a large set of images
automatically downloaded from the Internet, using the
categories of VOC12 as keywords. Each image is equipped
with an Image Description in the Wild but without per-pixel
annotation. This image set is abbreviated as IDW. Unlike
existing image captioning dataset such as MS COCO [13],
where captions are manually generated by satisfying some
annotation rules, image descriptions in IDW are directly
copied from the web pages, including news, blog, forum,
and photography agency. Fig.1 (a) provides an example
with ‘human’ and ‘sheep’ as keywords, where shows that
raw description of IDW may contain unimportant details,
missing details, and grammatical errors.
With VOC12 and IDW, a novel CNN structure namely

∗ The first two authors share first-authorship.

15859

