Switching Convolutional Neural Network for Crowd Counting
Deepak Babu Sam∗
Shiv Surya∗
R. Venkatesh Babu
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, INDIA 560012
bsdeepak@grads.cds.iisc.ac.in, shiv.surya314@gmail.com, venky@cds.iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We propose a novel crowd counting model that maps a
given crowd scene to its density. Crowd analysis is compounded by myriad of factors like inter-occlusion between
people due to extreme crowding, high similarity of appearance between people and background elements, and large
variability of camera view-points. Current state-of-the art
approaches tackle these factors by using multi-scale CNN
architectures, recurrent networks and late fusion of features
from multi-column CNN with different receptive fields. We
propose switching convolutional neural network that leverages variation of crowd density within an image to improve
the accuracy and localization of the predicted crowd count.
Patches from a grid within a crowd scene are relayed to
independent CNN regressors based on crowd count prediction quality of the CNN established during training. The
independent CNN regressors are designed to have different
receptive fields and a switch classifier is trained to relay the
crowd scene patch to the best CNN regressor. We perform
extensive experiments on all major crowd counting datasets
and evidence better performance compared to current stateof-the-art methods. We provide interpretable representations of the multichotomy of space of crowd scene patches
inferred from the switch. It is observed that the switch relays an image patch to a particular CNN column based on
density of crowd.

1. Introduction
Crowd analysis has important geo-political and civic applications. Massive crowd gatherings are commonplace at
candle-light vigils, democratic protests, religious gatherings
and presidential rallies. Civic agencies and planners rely on
crowd estimates to regulate access points and plan disaster contingency for such events. Critical to such analysis is
crowd count and density.
In principle, the key idea behind crowd counting is self∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1. Sample crowd scenes from the ShanghaiTech
dataset [19] is shown.

evident: density times area. However, crowds are not regular across the scene. They cluster in certain regions and are
spread out in others. Typical static crowd scenes from the
ShanghaiTech Dataset [19] are shown in Figure 1. We see
extreme crowding, high visual resemblance between people and background elements (e.g. Urban facade) in these
crowd scenes that factors in further complexity. Different
camera view-points in various scenes create perspective effects resulting in large variability of scales of people.
Crowd counting as a computer vision problem has seen
drastic changes in the approaches, from early HOG based
head detections [6] to CNN regressors [18, 19, 9] predicting
the crowd density. CNN based regressors have largely outperformed traditional crowd counting approaches based on
weak representations from local features. We build on the
performance of CNN based architectures for crowd counting and propose Switching Convolutional Neural Network
(Switch-CNN) to map a given crowd scene to its density.
Switch-CNN leverages the variation of crowd density
within an image to improve the quality and localization of
the predicted crowd count. Independent CNN crowd density regressors are trained on patches sampled from a grid
in a given crowd scene. The independent CNN regressors
are chosen such that they have different receptive fields and
field of view. This ensures that the features learned by each
CNN regressor are adapted to a particular scale. This ren-

5744

