Deep MANTA: A Coarse-to-fine Many-Task Network for joint 2D and 3D vehicle
analysis from monocular image

1

Florian Chabot1 , Mohamed Chaouch1 , Jaonary Rabarisoa1 , Céline Teulière2 , Thierry Chateau2
CEA-LIST Vision and Content Engineering Laboratory, 2 Pascal Institute, Blaise Pascal University
1

{florian.chabot, mohamed.chaouch, jaonary.rabarisoa}@cea.fr
2

{celine.teuliere, thierry.chateau}@univ-bpclermont.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel approach, called Deep
MANTA (Deep Many-Tasks), for many-task vehicle analysis from a given image. A robust convolutional network is
introduced for simultaneous vehicle detection, part localization, visibility characterization and 3D dimension estimation. Its architecture is based on a new coarse-to-fine
object proposal that boosts the vehicle detection. Moreover,
the Deep MANTA network is able to localize vehicle parts
even if these parts are not visible. In the inference, the network’s outputs are used by a real time robust pose estimation algorithm for fine orientation estimation and 3D vehicle localization. We show in experiments that our method
outperforms monocular state-of-the-art approaches on vehicle detection, orientation and 3D location tasks on the
very challenging KITTI benchmark.

1. Introduction
Over the last years, traffic scene analysis has been improved thanks to deep learning approaches which paves the
way to multiple applications, especially, autonomous driving. Impressive recent work in 2D object detection [33,
15, 14] already provides important information related to
scenes content but does not yet allow to describe objects in
the 3D real world scene. In this paper, we are interested in
both 2D and 3D vehicle analysis from monocular images
in the context of self-driving cars. This is a relevant research field because currently most cars are equipped with
a single camera. For an autonomously driving vehicle, it
is essential to understand the traffic and predict critical situations based on the information extracted from the image
of the scene. For the recovery of speed and direction of
the surrounding cars, 3D vehicle localization and orientation jointly used with temporal description are necessary.
Additionally, for proper traffic understanding it is important
to describe surrounding vehicles in a fine way. For example,

Figure 1. System outputs. Top: 2D vehicle bounding boxes, vehicle part localization and part visibility. In this example, red dots
correspond to visible parts, green dots to occluded parts and blue
dots to self-occluded parts. Bottom: 3D vehicle bounding box localization and 3D vehicle part localization. The camera is represented in blue.

correct localization of high lights is required to interpret vehicle direction indicators, for which knowledge of the exact
location of vehicle parts is needed. Finally, for interpretation of the overall scene the characterization of the visibility
of vehicle parts needs also to be obtained. Thus it will be
known if a vehicle is hidden by other vehicles or environment obstacles. Here we propose an approach that, given
a single image, provides accurate vehicle detections, vehicle part localization, vehicle part visibility, fine orientation,
3D localization and 3D template (3D dimension). Figure 1
illustrates the outputs of our approach.
Our first contribution is to encode 3D vehicle information using characteristic points of vehicles. The underlying idea is that 3D vehicle information can be recovered
using monocular images because vehicles are rigid objects
with well known geometry. Our approach localizes vehicle parts even if these parts are hidden due to occlusion,
truncation or self-occlusion in the image. These parts are

2040

