Efficient Solvers for Minimal Problems by Syzygy-based Reduction
Viktor Larsson Kalle Åström Magnus Oskarsson
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University
{viktorl,kalle,magnuso}@maths.lth.se ∗

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of automatically generating polynomial solvers for minimal problems. The main
contribution is a new method for finding small elimination
templates by making use of the syzygies (i.e. the polynomial
relations) that exist between the original equations. Using these syzygies we can essentially parameterize the set
of possible elimination templates.
We evaluate our method on a wide variety of problems
from geometric computer vision and show improvement
compared to both handcrafted and automatically generated
solvers. Furthermore we apply our method on two previously unsolved relative orientation problems.

1. Introduction
One of the success stories of computer vision is using
robust estimation schemes such as RANSAC [13] in multiple view geometry estimation. With a hypothesis and test
framework, one can efficiently handle large amounts of outliers in the measured data. A key element in such a framework is the ability to model the problem using a small or
minimal subset of data points – a so-called minimal problem. A classic example is the 5-point algorithm for estimating the relative pose between two cameras, given only
image point measurements, [25, 12, 41, 47]. The underlying problems in multiple view geometry naturally lead to
systems of polynomial equations in several variables. In order to devise tractable algorithms, robust and fast solvers of
polynomial equations are needed. The predominant way to
solve minimal problems in computer vision is using methods based on Gröbner bases. The reason is that this often leads to fast and numerically stable algorithms. These
methods were popularized in computer vision by Stewénius
[46]. The earliest examples were methods that were very
much handcrafted [24, 48], but since then much effort has
been put into making the process of constructing the solvers
more automatic. One of the main challenges is ways of au∗ This work has been financed by ELLIIT, MAPCI, eSSENCE and the
Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2012-4213).

tomatically constructing the so-called elimination template,
which is the main focus of this work.
Our contributions in this paper are:
(i) A non-iterative method for automatically finding the
monomial expansion of the initial system of equations.
(ii) A non-iterative reduction step, that often gives a much
more compact representation of the expanding set.
(iii) An efficient implementation of these ideas which produces stand-alone code for solving arbitrary instances of the
problem.
(iv) Solvers for two previously unsolved minimal cases,
based on our developed system.

1.1. Related work
The most closely related work is by Kukelova et al. [33],
where the authors presented an automatic method for generating polynomial solvers. The automatic generator allows
the user to specify a set of polynomial equations and then
automatically generates stand-alone code for solving arbitrary problem instances. This automatic generator has been
widely adopted in the computer vision community and it
has been used to solve several problems in geometric computer vision (see e.g. Table 1 and the references therein.)
The solvers generated using [33] are built on the action matrix method that reduces the polynomial equation system to
an eigenvalue problem. Their automatic generator works
by first computing a Gröbner basis in Macaulay2 [15] for
a random problem instance. The Gröbner basis gives information on the number of solutions and provides a basis
for the quotient space. The elimination template needed for
computing the action matrix is then found by an iterative
search process that alternates between expanding the equation system and performing Gaussian elimination. Once
sufficiently many equations have been generated a pruning step is used to remove any unnecessary equations. The
Gröbner basis computations and the Gaussian eliminations
are performed in some prime field Zp to avoid numerical
problems. The main drawback of the approach in [33] is
that as the number of variables and equations grows the
iterative search and pruning step can quickly become intractable. In this work we propose a new method for finding
the elimination template in place of the iterative search used
1820

