FusionSeg: Learning to combine motion and appearance for fully automatic
segmentation of generic objects in videos
Suyog Dutt Jain∗
Bo Xiong∗
Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin
suyog@cs.utexas.edu, bxiong@cs.utexas.edu, grauman@cs.utexas.edu
http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/fusionseg/

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end learning framework for segmenting generic objects in videos. Our method learns to
combine appearance and motion information to produce
pixel level segmentation masks for all prominent objects.
We formulate the task as a structured prediction problem
and design a two-stream fully convolutional neural network which fuses together motion and appearance in a
unified framework. Since large-scale video datasets with
pixel level segmentations are lacking, we show how to bootstrap weakly annotated videos together with existing image recognition datasets for training. Through experiments
on three challenging video segmentation benchmarks, our
method substantially improves the state-of-the-art results
for segmenting generic (unseen) objects. Code and pretrained models are available on the project website.

1. Introduction
In video object segmentation, the task is to separate out
foreground objects from the background across all frames.
This entails computing dense pixel level masks for foreground objects, regardless of the object’s category—i.e.,
learned object-specific models must not be assumed. A resulting foreground object segment is a spatio-temporal tube
delineating object boundaries in both space and time. This
fundamental problem has a variety of applications, including high level vision tasks such as activity and object recognition, as well as graphics areas such as post production
video editing and rotoscoping.
In recent years, video object segmentation has received
significant attention, with great progress on fully automatic
algorithms [15, 56, 13, 23, 30, 58, 24, 35, 10], propagation methods [40, 47, 11, 50, 19, 53], and interactive methods [51, 26, 2, 42]. We are interested in the fully automated setup, where the system processes the video directly
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1: We show color-coded optical flow images (first row) and video
segmentation results (second row) produced by our joint model. Our proposed end-to-end trainable model simultaneously draws on the respective
strengths of generic object appearance and motion in a unified framework.

without any human involvement. Forgoing manual annotations could scale up the processing of video data, yet it
remains a very challenging problem. Automatic algorithms
not only need to produce accurate space-time boundaries
for any generic object but also need to handle challenges
like occlusions, shape changes, and camera motion.
While appearance alone drives segmentation in images,
videos provide a rich and complementary source of information in form of object motion. It is natural to expect that
both appearance and motion should play a key role in successfully segmenting objects in videos. However, existing
methods fall short of bringing these complementary sources
of information together in a unified manner.
In particular, today motion is employed for video segmentation in two main ways. On the one hand, the propagation or interactive techniques strongly rely on appearance information stemming from human-drawn outlines on
frames in the video. Here motion is primarily used to either propagate information or enforce temporal consistency
in the resulting segmentation [50, 19, 53, 37]. On the other
hand, fully automatic methods strongly rely on motion to
seed the segmentation process by locating possible moving
objects. Once a moving object is detected, appearance is
primarily used to track it across frames [23, 58, 35, 10].
Such methods can fail if the object(s) are static or when
there is significant camera motion. In either paradigm, results suffer because the two essential cues are treated only
13664

