Removing rain from single images via a deep detail network
Xueyang Fu1 Jiabin Huang1 Delu Zeng2 Yue Huang1 Xinghao Ding1∗ John Paisley3
1

Key Laboratory of Underwater Acoustic Communication and Marine Information Technology, Ministry of Education
& School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
3

School of Mathematics, South China University of Technology, China

Department of Electrical Engineering & Data Science Institute, Columbia University, USA

Abstract
We propose a new deep network architecture for removing rain streaks from individual images based on the deep
convolutional neural network (CNN). Inspired by the deep
residual network (ResNet) that simplifies the learning process by changing the mapping form, we propose a deep detail network to directly reduce the mapping range from input
to output, which makes the learning process easier. To further improve the de-rained result, we use a priori image domain knowledge by focusing on high frequency detail during training, which removes background interference and
focuses the model on the structure of rain in images. This
demonstrates that a deep architecture not only has benefits
for high-level vision tasks but also can be used to solve lowlevel imaging problems. Though we train the network on
synthetic data, we find that the learned network generalizes
well to real-world test images. Experiments show that the
proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on both synthetic and real-world images in terms
of both qualitative and quantitative measures. We discuss
applications of this structure to denoising and JPEG artifact reduction at the end of the paper.

Figure 1: An example real-world rainy image and our result.

are needed for a wide range of practical applications. However, when an object’s structure and orientation is similar
with that of rain streaks, it is hard to simultaneously remove rain and preserve structure. To address this difficult
problem, we develop an end-to-end deep network architecture for removing rain from individual images. Figure 1
shows an example of a real-world test image and our result.
To date, many methods have been proposed for removing
rain from images. These methods fall into two categories:
video-based methods and single-image based methods. We
briefly review these approaches and then discuss the contributions of our proposed framework.

1.1. Related work

1. Introduction
Under rainy conditions, the impact of rain streaks on images and video is often undesirable. In addition to a subjective degradation, the effects of rain can also severely affect
the performance of outdoor vision systems, such as surveillance systems. Effective methods for removing rain streaks
∗ Corresponding author: dxh@xmu.edu.cn This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China grants 61571382, 81671766, 61571005, 81671674, U1605252,
61671309 and 81301278, Guangdong Natural Science Foundation grant
2015A030313007, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities grants 20720160075 and 20720150169, and the CCF-Tencent research
fund. X. Fu conducted portions of this work at Columbia University under
China Scholarship Council grant No. [2016]3100.

For video-based methods, rain can be more easily identified and removed using inter-frame information [3,4,10,21,
28, 35]. Many of these methods work well, but are significantly aided by the temporal content of video. In this paper we instead focus on removing rain from a single image.
This task is significantly more challenging since much less
information is available for detecting and removing rain.
Single-image based methods have been proposed to deal
with this challenging problem. For example, in [20] kernel
regression and a non-local mean filtering are used to detect
and remove rain streaks. In [6], the authors propose a generalized model in which additive rain is assumed to be low
rank. In general, however, success has been less noticeable
than in video-based algorithms and there is still much room

3855

