Coarse-to-Fine Segmentation With Shape-Tailored Continuum Scale Spaces
Naeemullah Khan1 , Byung-Woo Hong2 , Anthony Yezzi3 , and Ganesh Sundaramoorthi1
1

KAUST, Saudi Arabia

2

Chung-Ang University, Korea

3

Georgia Tech, USA

{naeemullah.khan,ganesh.sundaramoorthi}@kaust.edu.sa, hong@cau.ac.kr, ayezzi@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
We formulate an energy for segmentation that is designed to have preference for segmenting the coarse over
fine structure of the image, without smoothing across
boundaries of regions. The energy is formulated by integrating a continuum of scales from a scale space computed
from the heat equation within regions. We show that the
energy can be optimized without computing a continuum
of scales, but instead from a single scale. This makes the
method computationally efficient in comparison to energies
using a discrete set of scales. We apply our method to texture and motion segmentation. Experiments on benchmark
datasets show that a continuum of scales leads to better segmentation accuracy over discrete scales and other competing methods.

1. Introduction
Segmentation of images using low-level cues plays a key
role in computer vision. An image consists of many different structures at different scales, and thus the notion of scale
space [24], which consists of blurs of the image at all degrees, has been central to computer vision. The need for incorporating scale space in segmentation is well-recognized
[40]. Further, there is evidence from human visual studies
(e.g., [18, 35]) that the coarse scale, i.e., from high levels of
blurring, is predominantly processed before the fine scale.
This coarse-to-fine principle has led to many efficient algorithms that are able to capture the coarse structure of the
solution, which is often most important in computer vision.
Therefore, it is natural for segmentation algorithms to use
scale space and operate in a coarse-to-fine fashion.
Existing methods for segmentation that incorporate scale
have either one of the following limitations. First, most segmentation methods (e.g., [6, 25, 2]) based on scale spaces
consider global scale spaces that are computed on the whole
image, which does not capture the fact that there exist multiple regions of the segmentation at different scales, and this
could lead to the removal and/or displacement of important structures in the image, for instance, when large struc-

tures are blurred across small ones, leading to an inaccurate
segmentation. Second, algorithms that use a coarse-to-fine
principle (e.g., [5, 33]) do so sequentially (see Figure 1) so
that the algorithm operates at the coarser scale and then uses
the result to initialize computation at a finer scale. While
this warm start may influence the finer scale result, there is
no guarantee that the coarse structure of the segmentation is
preserved in the final solution.
In this paper, we develop an algorithm that simultaneously addresses these two issues. Specifically, we formulate a novel multi-region energy for segmentation, which
integrates a continuum of scales from Shape-Tailored Scale
Spaces. These scale spaces are defined within regions of the
segmentation, and thus they prevent removal or displacement of important structures. By integrating over a continuum of scales of the scale space determined by the heat
equation, we show that this energy has preference to coarse
structure of the data without ignoring the fine structure. We
show that it operates in a parallel coarse-to-fine fashion (see
Figure 1). That is, it is initially dominated by the coarse
structure of the data, then segments finer structure of the
data, while preserving the structure from the coarse-scale
of the data. We provide analytic solutions for the optimization of the energy, which leads to a computationally more
efficient method than similar energies integrating discrete
scales. We apply our algorithm to the problem of texture
segmentation, and show our method outperforms discrete
scale spaces and existing state of the art. We also apply
our method to motion segmentation, show the advantage
of the shape-tailored continuum scale space, and show outperformance against existing state of the art.

1.1. Related Work
Scale space theory [24, 53, 15, 27] has a long and rich
history as a theory for analyzing images, and we only provide brief highlights. The idea is that an image consists of
structures at various different scales (e.g., a leaf of a tree
exists at a different scale than a forest), and thus to analyze an image without a-priori knowledge, it is necessary
to consider the image at all scales. This is accomplished
by blurring the image at a continuum of kernel sizes. The
14240

