Consensus Maximization with Linear Matrix Inequality Constraints
Pablo Speciale1 , Danda P. Paudel2 , Martin R. Oswald1 ,
Till Kroeger2 , Luc V. Gool2,4 , and Marc Pollefeys1,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich.
3
Microsoft, Redmond, USA
{pablo, moswald, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Consensus maximization has proven to be a useful tool
for robust estimation. While randomized methods like
RANSAC are fast, they do not guarantee global optimality
and fail to manage large amounts of outliers. On the other
hand, global methods are commonly slow because they do
not exploit the structure of the problem at hand.
In this paper, we show that the solution space can be reduced by introducing Linear Matrix Inequality (LMI) constraints. This leads to significant speed ups of the optimization time even for large amounts of outliers, while
maintaining global optimality. We study several cases in
which the objective variables have a special structure, such
as rotation, scaled-rotation, and essential matrices, which
are posed as LMI constraints. This is very useful in several standard computer vision problems, such as estimating Similarity Transformations, Absolute Poses, and Relative Poses, for which we obtain compelling results on both
synthetic and real datasets. With up to 90 percent outlier
rate, where RANSAC often fails, our constrained approach
is consistently faster than the non-constrained one - while
finding the same global solution.

1. Introduction
One of the major difficulties of many central computer
vision problems – besides the proper handling of noise and
incomplete data – is the robust detection of outliers. For
many optimization methods, the number of outliers has a
tremendous impact on the runtime or even on the solvability. A common approach for robust estimation is, therefore,
to explicitly maximize the number of inliers for a given
problem – also called Consensus Maximization. A large
number of optimization methods for robust estimation have
been proposed in the literature which can be roughly divided into local and global optimization methods.
Acknowledgements. This project has received funding from the European
Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, and European
Research Council project VarCity, under grant agreements No. 637221
and 273940, respectively.

Computer Vision Laboratory, D-ITET, ETH Zürich
4
VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
{paudel, kroegert, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Local Optimization Methods. With currently more than
15K citations, RANSAC [13], is by far the most popular method. It has been used in numerous applications
and many extensions have been proposed, e.g. [8, 33, 34]
(see [7, 28] for an overview). The great advantage is its
simplicity and effectiveness for various scenarios, but it also
has a number of shortcomings: 1) it does not guarantee optimality and only finds a local optimum, 2) it cannot find the
exact solution if it is not contained in the sampling set, and
3) its expected computation time grows exponentially with
large amounts of outliers.
Global Optimization Methods. Global methods commonly have considerably larger computational costs, as
they are mostly based on exhaustive search within the entire optimization domain. Almost every global method
uses the Branch-and-Bound (BnB) strategy to make the
search tractable, e.g. [1, 2, 16, 22, 38]. Similar to our approach, several methods use Mixed Integer Programming
(MIP) [4, 9, 22, 36] within the BnB optimization in order to
solve the overall problem faster. Recently [5] proposed to
cast the problem of consensus maximization as a tree search
problem which is then traversed with A∗ -search for faster
optimization. This method does not need linearization of
the residual and only traverses a small subset of the tree
compared to exhaustive methods like [10, 26].
Application-wise, many related works are specialized
to a particular problem class, like linear problems [22],
pseudo-convex problems [5, 21], or, they are even more
specialized to a specific type of geometric problem, for instance problems including rotations [2, 16], rotation+focal
length [1], translation [14], rotation+translation+scale [27]
or essential matrices [37]. Most of these methods specialize
on a particular problem and their application to a different
problem class is not necessarily straightforward.
In this paper, we propose a general optimization framework that covers all problems that can be expressed with
LMI constraints and, therefore, tackles the majority of the
aforementioned problem classes.
Contributions. We argue that many computer vision problems have a special structure that can be leveraged in global
robust estimation methods to make them much more com-

4941

