DeepPermNet: Visual Permutation Learning
Rodrigo Santa Cruz Basura Fernando Anoop Cherian Stephen Gould
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Subject: Smiling

We present a principled approach to uncover the structure of visual data by solving a novel deep learning task
coined visual permutation learning. The goal of this task is
to find the permutation that recovers the structure of data
from shuffled versions of it. In the case of natural images,
this task boils down to recovering the original image from
patches shuffled by an unknown permutation matrix. Unfortunately, permutation matrices are discrete, thereby posing difficulties for gradient-based methods. To this end,
we resort to a continuous approximation of these matrices
using doubly-stochastic matrices which we generate from
standard CNN predictions using Sinkhorn iterations. Unrolling these iterations in a Sinkhorn network layer, we propose DeepPermNet, an end-to-end CNN model for this task.
The utility of DeepPermNet is demonstrated on two
challenging computer vision problems, namely, (i) relative
attributes learning and (ii) self-supervised representation
learning. Our results show state-of-the-art performance on
the Public Figures and OSR benchmarks for (i) and on the
classification and segmentation tasks on the PASCAL VOC
dataset for (ii).

1. Introduction
Visual data encompasses rich spatial (and temporal)
structure, which is often useful for solving a variety of
computer vision problems. For instance, surrounding background usually offers strong cues for object recognition,
sky and ground usually appear at predictable locations in
a scene, and objects are made up of known parts at familiar
relative locations. Such structural information within visual
data has been used to improve inference in several problems, such as object detection and semantic segmentation
[31, 35, 29].
In this paper, we present a deep learning framework that
uses the inherent structure in data to solve several visual
tasks. As an example, consider the task of assigning a
meaningful order (with respect to some attribute) to the images shown in the left panel of Figure 1. Indeed, it is diffi-

Permuted Image

Original Image

Subject: Narrow Eyes

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed permutation learning task.
The goal of our method is to jointly learn visual features and the
predictors to solve the visual permutation problem. This can be
applied to ordering image sequences (left) or recovering spatial
layout (right).

cult to solve this task by just processing a single image or
even a pair of images at a time. The task becomes feasible,
however, if one exploits the structure and the broader context by considering the entire set of images jointly. Then,
we start to recognize shared patterns that could guide the
algorithm towards a solution. A similar task involves recovering the spatial structure in images. For example, consider
the task shown in the right panel of Figure 1. Here we ask
the question “given shuffled image patches, can we recover
the original image?”. Although this is a difficult task (even
for a humans), it becomes easy once we identify the object
in the patches (e.g., a cat), and arrange the patches for the
recognized object, thereby recovering the original image.
Such shuffled images can be generated cheaply and in
abundance from natural images. The problem of recovering the original image from shuffled ones can be cast in an
unsupervised learning setting, similar to autoencoder methods [4] popular in the neural networks literature. Here the
recovery task does not require any human annotations (and
is thus unbiased [43]). Instead it uses the spatial structure
as a supervisory signal. Such a learning task is popularly
known as self-supervised learning [10, 16, 30, 32], and is
very useful to learn rich features, especially in the context
of training deep learning models, which often require large
amounts of human annotated datasets.
As is clear, the aforementioned tasks are similar and essentially involve learning a function that can recover the order, i.e., infer the shuffling permutation matrix. Such an in-

3949

