Gated Feedback Refinement Network for Dense Image Labeling
Md Amirul Islam, Mrigank Rochan, Neil D. B. Bruce, and Yang Wang
Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB, Canada
{amirul, mrochan, bruce, ywang}@cs.umanitoba.ca

Abstract
Effective integration of local and global contextual information is crucial for dense labeling problems. Most existing
methods based on an encoder-decoder architecture simply
concatenate features from earlier layers to obtain higherfrequency details in the refinement stages. However, there
are limits to the quality of refinement possible if ambiguous
information is passed forward. In this paper we propose
Gated Feedback Refinement Network (G-FRNet), an end-toend deep learning framework for dense labeling tasks that
addresses this limitation of existing methods. Initially, GFRNet makes a coarse prediction and then it progressively
refines the details by efficiently integrating local and global
contextual information during the refinement stages. We
introduce gate units that control the information passed forward in order to filter out ambiguity. Experiments on three
challenging dense labeling datasets (CamVid, PASCAL VOC
2012, and Horse-Cow Parsing) show the effectiveness of
our method. Our proposed approach achieves state-of-theart results on the CamVid and Horse-Cow Parsing datasets,
and produces competitive results on the PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there have been rapid advances in deep
learning applied to problems in computer vision. This has
been met with a great deal of success, and has given rise to
proliferation of significant variety in the structure of neural
networks. Many current deep learning models apply a cascade comprised of repeated convolutional stages, followed
by spatial pooling. Down-sampling by pooling allows for
a very large pool of distinct and rich features, albeit at the
expense of spatial resolution. For recognition problems, the
loss of spatial precision is not especially problematic. However, dense image labeling problems (e.g. semantic segmentation) require pixel-level precisions. They typically involve
a decoding process that gradually recovers a pixel level specification of categories. In some cases this decoding is done in

Figure 1. An illustration of the relationship between receptive field
size across layers, and ambiguity that may arise. In this case, the
larger (and more discriminative) receptive field (blue) resides at
a deeper layer of the network, and may be of value in refining
the representation carried by an earlier layer (orange) to resolve
ambiguity and improve upon labeling performance.

one step [21]. While in other instances, both the encoding of
patterns, and gradual recovery of spatial resolution are hierarchical. It is interesting to note that this mirrors the observed
computational structure of human vision wherein space is
abstracted away in favour of rich features, and recognition
of patterns precedes their precise localization [10].
Some models that have shown success for segmentation
problems [1, 22] share a common structure involving stagewise encoding of an input image, followed by stage-wise
decoding to recover a per-pixel categorization. At an abstract
level, this is reminiscent of a single network that involves
a feedforward pass, followed by a recurrent pass from the
top layer downward where additional computation and refinement ensues. There are tangible distinctions though, in
that decoding is typically driven only by information flow
that satisfies solving a specific labeling problem, and that
all decoding may be informed only by the representation
carried by the highest encoder layer.
At the deepest stage of encoding, one has the richest
possible feature representation, and relatively poor spatial
resolution from a per-neuron perspective. While spatial
resolution may be poor from a per-neuron perspective, this
13751

