Geodesic Distance Descriptors
Gil Shamai and Ron Kimmel
Technion - Israel Institute of Technologies
sgils@tx.technion.ac.il ron@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
The Gromov-Hausdorff (GH) distance is traditionally
used for measuring distances between metric spaces. It
was adapted for non-rigid shape comparison and matching of isometric surfaces, and is defined as the minimal
distortion of embedding one surface into the other, while
the optimal correspondence can be described as the map
that minimizes this distortion. Solving such a minimization is a hard combinatorial problem that requires precomputation and storing of all pairwise geodesic distances
for the matched surfaces. A popular way for compact representation of functions on surfaces is by projecting them into
the leading eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami Operator (LBO). When truncated, the basis of the LBO is known
to be the optimal for representing functions with bounded
gradient in a min-max sense. Methods such as SpectralGMDS exploit this idea to simplify and efficiently approximate a minimization related to the GH distance by operating in the truncated spectral domain, and obtain state of the
art results for matching of nearly isometric shapes. However, when considering only a specific set of functions on
the surface, such as geodesic distances, an optimized basis
could be considered as an even better alternative. Moreover, current simplifications of approximating the GH distance introduce errors due to low rank approximations and
relaxations of the permutation matrices.
Here, we define the geodesic distance basis, which is optimal for compact approximation of geodesic distances, in
terms of Frobenius norm. We use the suggested basis to extract the Geodesic Distance Descriptor (GDD), which encodes the geodesic distances information as a linear combination of the basis functions. We then show how these
ideas can be used to efficiently and accurately approximate
the metric spaces matching problem with almost no loss of
information. We incorporate recent methods for efficient
approximation of the proposed basis and descriptor without actually computing and storing all geodesic distances.
These observations are used to construct a very simple and
efficient procedure for shape correspondence. Experimental results show that the GDD improves both accuracy and

efficiency of state of the art shape matching procedures.

1. Introduction
One line of thought in shape analysis considers an object as a metric space, and object matching, classification,
and comparison as the operation of measuring the discrepancies and similarities between such metric spaces, see, for
example, [13, 33, 27, 23, 8, 3, 24].
Although theoretically appealing, the computation of
distances between metric spaces poses complexity challenges as far as direct computation and memory requirements are involved. As a remedy, alternative representation spaces were proposed [26, 22, 15, 10, 31, 30, 19, 20].
The question of which representation to use in order to best
represent the metric space that define each form we deal
with, and yet allow for an accurate representation of the
mapping from one metric space to another occupied the
attention of some recent efforts, see for example [2] and
[1]. Indeed, some compact spaces, in the case of matching
metric spaces, allow to reduce the complexity and consequently improve the accuracy of the resulting correspondence maps between surfaces. For example, the Spectral
generalized multidimensional scaling (SGMDS) [3], functional maps (FMaps) [26], and the Iterative Closest Spectral
Kernel Maps (ICSKM) [30] all try to find a linear mapping
in a dual space that encodes the minimal distance distortion mapping between two shapes. ICSKM extends the idea
of FMaps by finding the best alignment between the spectral kernels of the shapes using iterative closest point (ICP).
There, each pair of points produces a constraint, such that
much more information is used in the ICP alignment step.
ICSKM is initialized using Spectral Gradient fields (SGF)
[31], where the normal field of the shape is incorporated,
so that some intrinsic symmetries can be identified and resolved.
By trying to match geodesic distances, the SGMDS efficient procedure provides accurate correspondence maps between nearly isometric shapes. Nevertheless, casting the
Gromov-Hausdorff related minimization as is into the spectral domain forces a low rank representation of a relaxed
16410

