Multi-Task Clustering of Human Actions by Sharing Information
Xiaoqiang Yan, Shizhe Hu, Yangdong Ye*
School of Information Engineering
Zhengzhou University, 450000, Zhengzhou, China

7DVN8&)

iexqyan@gmail.com, ieszhu@gs.zzu.edu.cn, ieydye@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a fundamental research area
in computer vision. Recently, with the continuing rapid development of information technology, massive amounts of
task-speciﬁc human action data are generated everyday. In
realistic videos, recognizing action categories from each data collection can be treated as a learning task. Apparently, different video collections usually have a considerable
amount of similar actions. For instance, both UCF50 [15]
and HMDB [4] contain motion patterns: punching, horse
riding, pushup and fencing. Intuitively, the shared pattern
information can be exploited to enhance the clustering performance of each task. In cross-view videos, the same ac-

HorseRiding

Pushup

Fencing

D 5HDOLVWLFYLGHRV

3LFNXS

7DVN+0'%

Punching

:DYH

Sharing information between multiple tasks can enhance
the accuracy of human action recognition systems. However, using shared information to improve multi-task human
action clustering has never been considered before, and
cannot be achieved using existing clustering methods. In
this work, we present a novel and effective Multi-Task Information Bottleneck (MTIB) clustering method, which is
capable of exploring the shared information between multiple action clustering tasks to improve the performance
of individual task. Our motivation is that, different action collections always share many similar action patterns,
and exploiting the shared information can lead to improved
performance. Specifically, MTIB generally formulates this
problem as an information loss minimization function. In
this function, the shared information can be quantified by
the distributional correlation of clusters in different tasks,
which is based on a high-level common vocabulary constructed through a novel agglomerative information maximization method. Extensive experiments on two kinds of
challenging data sets, including realistic action data sets
(HMDB & UCF50, Olympic & YouTube), and cross-view
data sets (IXMAS, WVU), show that the proposed approach
compares favorably to the state-of-the-art methods.

7DVN&DPHUD 7DVN&DPHUD 7DVN&DPHUD 7DVN&DPHUD
E &URVVYLHZYLGHRV

Figure 1. The shared information between tasks. (a) The similar action patterns in UCF50 and HMDB can be treated as shared
information. (b) In cross-view videos, the same actions from different viewpoints can be adopted as shared information.

tions are captured from different camera viewpoints. We
assume that action pattern discovery in each viewpoint is
treated as a learning task. Due to the problem of selfocclusions, the single view case can not guarantee robust
action recognition. Figure 1 shows the existence of shared
information between tasks. Therefore, jointly learning all
of the tasks together can leverage the shared knowledge among them to improve the generalization ability of model
learning.
Recently, several multi-task learning (MTL) approaches [6, 10, 13, 26, 28, 34, 9] have been proposed for human action recognition, which capitalize on shared information between related tasks to improve the performance
of each task. However, MTL needs to acquire sufﬁcient labeled samples for each task, it is may be impractical
for many complicated applications. Moreover, recognizing
action patterns is usually challenging just with the human
knowledge (label, annotation, etc.), which often invites sub-

6401

