Deep Outdoor Illumination Estimation
Yannick Hold-Geoffroy1* , Kalyan Sunkavalli† , Sunil Hadap† , Emiliano Gambaretto† , Jean-François Lalonde*
Université Laval* , Adobe Research†
yannick.hold-geoffroy.1@ulaval.ca, {sunkaval,hadap,emiliano}@adobe.com, jflalonde@gel.ulaval.ca
http://www.jflalonde.ca/projects/deepOutdoorLight

Abstract
We present a CNN-based technique to estimate highdynamic range outdoor illumination from a single low dynamic range image. To train the CNN, we leverage a large
dataset of outdoor panoramas. We fit a low-dimensional
physically-based outdoor illumination model to the skies in
these panoramas giving us a compact set of parameters (including sun position, atmospheric conditions, and camera
parameters). We extract limited field-of-view images from
the panoramas, and train a CNN with this large set of input image–output lighting parameter pairs. Given a test
image, this network can be used to infer illumination parameters that can, in turn, be used to reconstruct an outdoor illumination environment map. We demonstrate that
our approach allows the recovery of plausible illumination
conditions and enables photorealistic virtual object insertion from a single image. An extensive evaluation on both
the panorama dataset and captured HDR environment maps
shows that our technique significantly outperforms previous
solutions to this problem.

1. Introduction
Illumination plays a critical role in deciding the appearance of a scene, and recovering scene illumination is important for a number of tasks ranging from scene understanding to reconstruction and editing. However, the process of
image formation conflates illumination with scene geometry and material properties in complex ways and inverting
this process is an extremely ill-posed problem. This is especially true in outdoor scenes, where we have little to no
control over the capture process.
Previous approaches to this problem have relied on extracting cues such as shadows and shading [26] and combining them with (reasonably good) estimates of scene geometry to recover illumination. However, both these tasks are
challenging and existing attempts often result in poor per1

Research partly done when Y. Hold-Geoffroy was an intern at Adobe Research.

CNN

Input image (LDR)

Output sky parameters

Outdoor illumination (HDR)

Rendered object

Figure 1. We present an approach for predicting full HDR lighting
conditions from a single LDR outdoor image. Our prediction can
readily be used to insert a virtual object into the image. Our key
idea is to train a CNN using input-output pairs of LDR images
and HDR illumination parameters that are automatically extracted
from a large database of 360◦ panoramas.

formance on real-world images. Alternatively, techniques
for intrinsic images can estimate low-frequency illumination but rely on hand-tuned priors on geometry and material properties [3, 29] that may not generalize to largescale scenes. In this work, we seek a single image outdoor illumination inference technique that generalizes to a
wide range of scenes and does not make strong assumptions
about scene properties.
To this end, our goal is to train a CNN to directly regress
a single input low dynamic range image to its corresponding high dynamic range (HDR) outdoor lighting conditions.
Given the success of deep networks at related tasks like intrinsic images [42] and reflectance map estimation [34], our
hope is that an appropriately designed CNN can learn this
relationship. However, training such a CNN requires a very
large dataset of outdoor images with their corresponding
HDR lighting conditions. Unfortunately, such a dataset currently does not exist, and, because capturing light probes requires significant time and effort, acquiring it is prohibitive.
17312

