Expecting the Unexpected:
Training Detectors for Unusual Pedestrians with Adversarial Imposters
Shiyu Huang
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA

huangsy13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

As autonomous vehicles become an every-day reality,
high-accuracy pedestrian detection is of paramount practical importance. Pedestrian detection is a highly researched
topic with mature methods, but most datasets focus on common scenes of people engaged in typical walking poses on
sidewalks. But performance is most crucial for dangerous
scenarios, such as children playing in the street or people
using bicycles/skateboards in unexpected ways. Such “inthe-tail” data is notoriously hard to observe, making both
training and testing difficult. To analyze this problem, we
have collected a novel annotated dataset of dangerous scenarios called the Precarious Pedestrian dataset.

Even given a dedicated collection effort, it is relatively
small by contemporary standards (≈ 1000 images). To allow for large-scale data-driven learning, we explore the use
of synthetic data generated by a game engine. A significant
challenge is selected the right “priors” or parameters for
synthesis: we would like realistic data with poses and object configurations that mimic true Precarious Pedestrians.
Inspired by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), we
generate a massive amount of synthetic data and train a discriminative classifier to select a realistic subset, which we
deem the Adversarial Imposters. We demonstrate that this
simple pipeline allows one to synthesize realistic training
data by making use of rendering/animation engines within
a GAN framework. Interestingly, we also demonstrate that
such data can be used to rank algorithms, suggesting that
Adversarial Imposters can also be used for “in-the-tail”
validation at test-time, a notoriously difficult challenge for
real-world deployment.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Examples from our novel Precarious Pedestrian Dataset of dangerous, but rare pedestrian scenes. One
important scenario is that of pedestrians on their phone (row
2, col 2), who may not be adequately aware of their surroundings. (b) Examples in Caltech Dataset tend not to
capture such rare scenarios. (c) Examples from a set of
Adveserial Imposters, which are synthetic images that are
adversarially-trained to mimic the set of Precarious Pedstrians. We demonstrate that such images can be used to both
train and evaluate robust pedestrian recognition systems targeting such dangerous scenarios.

1. Introduction
There’s no software designer in the world that’s ever going to be
smart enough to anticipate all the potential circumstances an
autonomous car is going to encounter. The dog that runs out into
the street, the person who runs up the street, the bicyclist, the
policeman or the construction worker.
C. Hart, Chairman of National Transport. Safety Board

As autonomous vehicles become an every-day reality,
high-accuracy pedestrian detection is of paramount practical importance. Pedestrian detection is a highly researched

2243

