Face Normals “in-the-wild” using Fully Convolutional Networks
George Trigeorgis
Imperial College London

Patrick Snape
Imperial College London

Iasonas Kokkinos
University College London

g.trigeorgis@imperial.ac.uk

p.snape@imperial.ac.uk

i.kokkinos@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London
s.zafeiriou@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work we pursue a data-driven approach to the
problem of estimating surface normals from a single intensity image, focusing in particular on human faces. We introduce new methods to exploit the currently available facial databases for dataset construction and tailor a deep
convolutional neural network to the task of estimating facial surface normals ‘in-the-wild’. We train a fully convolutional network that can accurately recover facial normals
from images including a challenging variety of expressions
and facial poses. We compare against state-of-the-art face
Shape-from-Shading and 3D reconstruction techniques and
show that the proposed network can recover substantially
more accurate and realistic normals. Furthermore, in contrast to other existing face-specific surface recovery methods, we do not require the solving of an explicit alignment
step due to the fully convolutional nature of our network.

1. Introduction
Facial surface reconstruction from a single image is a
problem that has attracted considerable attention over the
past 25 years. This is in part due to both the multitude of
applications related to face recognition and facial expression analysis, as well as its tractability due to the desirable properties of the physical structure of the human face.
In contrast to the difficulty of the general case, the recovery of 3D facial shape has been highly successful. Human
faces have a number of qualities that are desirable for shape
recovery: they are extremely homogeneous in configuration (all healthy human faces have two eyes, a nose and
mouth in the same approximate location), convex, exhibit
approximately Lambertian reflectance [54, 17, 61, 43], are
largely captured from a single direction (frontal) and are deformable and mostly not self occluding. Furthermore, there
exists a large amount of publicly available imagery of faces

and human faces are of significant interest to a number of
fields including entertainment, medicine, and psychology.
The two main lines of research consist of (a) Shape from
Shading (SfS) methods, which can also potentially employ
a statistical face prior [71, 3, 65, 12, 55, 59, 56], or (b) building and fitting a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [8, 7, 1]. A

convnet

normals

face shape

Figure 1: Depiction of our pipeline for 3D face shape estimation. Using a number of images of facial normals we
train a fully convolutional network for normal estimation.
Using the estimated normals we can retrieve the 3D face
shape by classical normal integration techniques.
3DMM consists of a linear statistical model of the facial texture and surface which is learnt from a set of captured and
well-aligned 3D facial scans. For many years, the only publicly available 3DMM was the Basel model [40], which was
constructed from 200 Caucasian people displaying a neutral
expression. Now, large-scale 3DMMs of neutral faces are
available in LSFM [8] and expressive 3DMMs can be constructed by combining the statistical model of neutral faces
with blendshapes [26, 9]. Nevertheless, fitting a 3DMM
to single images requires solving a high-dimensional nonlinear optimisation problem which is not only computationally demanding but also requires a near-optimal initialisation. Due to the difficulty of solving the original optimisation problem for 3DMMs, recent methods do not attempt
to optimise the texture consistency term, but instead only
fit the facial surface part of the 3DMM to a set of 2D facial landmarks [1, 26]. SfS [24], is the process of recovering surface by assuming that shading (i.e., the intensity
of a pixel in the image) is generated as a function of the
1 38

