ArtTrack: Articulated Multi-person Tracking in the Wild

Eldar Insafutdinov, Mykhaylo Andriluka, Leonid Pishchulin, Siyu Tang,
Evgeny Levinkov, Bjoern Andres, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saabrücken, Germany

Abstract
In this paper we propose an approach for articulated
tracking of multiple people in unconstrained videos. Our
starting point is a model that resembles existing architectures for single-frame pose estimation but is substantially
faster. We achieve this in two ways: (1) by simplifying and
sparsifying the body-part relationship graph and leveraging
recent methods for faster inference, and (2) by offloading a
substantial share of computation onto a feed-forward convolutional architecture that is able to detect and associate
body joints of the same person even in clutter. We use this
model to generate proposals for body joint locations and
formulate articulated tracking as spatio-temporal grouping
of such proposals. This allows to jointly solve the association problem for all people in the scene by propagating
evidence from strong detections through time and enforcing constraints that each proposal can be assigned to one
person only. We report results on a public “MPII Human
Pose” benchmark and on a new “MPII Video Pose” dataset
of image sequences with multiple people. We demonstrate
that our model achieves state-of-the-art results while using
only a fraction of time and is able to leverage temporal information to improve state-of-the-art for crowded scenes1 .

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the task of articulated human pose
tracking in monocular video. We focus on scenes of realistic
complexity that often include fast motions, large variability in appearance and clothing, and person-person occlusions. A successful approach must thus identify the number
1 The models and the “MPII Video Pose” dataset are available at pose.
mpi-inf.mpg.de/art-track.

Figure 1. Example articulated tracking results of our approach.

of people in each video frame, determine locations of the
joints of each person and associate the joints over time.
One of the key challenges in such scenes is that people might overlap and only a subset of joints of the person
might be visible in each frame either due to person-person
occlusion or truncation by image boundaries (c.f . Fig. 1).
Arguably, resolving such cases correctly requires reasoning
beyond purely geometric information on the arrangement
of body joints in the image, and requires incorporation of a
variety of image cues and joint modeling of several persons.
The design of our model is motivated by two factors.
We would like to leverage bottom-up end-to-end learning
to directly capture image information. At the same time we
aim to address a complex multi-person articulated tracking
problem that does not naturally lend itself to an end-to-end
prediction task and for which training data is not available
in the amounts usually required for end-to-end learning.
To leverage the available image information we learn a
model for associating a body joint to a specific person in an
end-to-end fashion relying on a convolutional network. We
then incorporate these part-to-person association responses
into a framework for jointly reasoning about assignment of
body joints within the image and over time. To that end we
use the graph partitioning formulation that has been used for
people tracking and pose estimation in the past [24, 22], but
has not been shown to enable articulated people tracking.
To facilitate efficient inference in video we resort to fast
16457

