Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks
Xun Huang1

Yixuan Li2
Omid Poursaeed2
John Hopcroft1
Serge Belongie1,3
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University 3 Cornell Tech
{xh258,yl2363,op63,sjb344}@cornell.edu jeh@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel generative model
named Stacked Generative Adversarial Networks (SGAN),
which is trained to invert the hierarchical representations
of a bottom-up discriminative network. Our model consists of a top-down stack of GANs, each learned to generate
lower-level representations conditioned on higher-level representations. A representation discriminator is introduced
at each feature hierarchy to encourage the representation
manifold of the generator to align with that of the bottomup discriminative network, leveraging the powerful discriminative representations to guide the generative model. In
addition, we introduce a conditional loss that encourages
the use of conditional information from the layer above,
and a novel entropy loss that maximizes a variational lower
bound on the conditional entropy of generator outputs. We
first train each stack independently, and then train the whole
model end-to-end. Unlike the original GAN that uses a single noise vector to represent all the variations, our SGAN
decomposes variations into multiple levels and gradually
resolves uncertainties in the top-down generative process.
Based on visual inspection, Inception scores and visual Turing test, we demonstrate that SGAN is able to generate images of much higher quality than GANs without stacking.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous success of deep
neural networks (DNNs), especially the kind of bottom-up
neural networks trained for discriminative tasks. In particular, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
impressive accuracy on the challenging ImageNet classification benchmark [30, 56, 57, 21, 52]. Interestingly, it has
been shown that CNNs trained on ImageNet for classification can learn representations that are transferable to other
tasks [55], and even to other modalities [20]. However,
bottom-up discriminative models are focused on learning
useful representations from data, being incapable of capturing the data distribution.

Learning top-down generative models that can explain
complex data distribution is a long-standing problem in machine learning research. The expressive power of deep neural networks makes them natural candidates for generative
models, and several recent works have shown promising results [28, 17, 44, 36, 68, 38, 9]. While state-of-the-art DNNs
can rival human performance in certain discriminative tasks,
current best deep generative models still fail when there are
large variations in the data distribution.
A natural question therefore arises: can we leverage
the hierarchical representations in a discriminatively trained
model to help the learning of top-down generative models?
In this paper, we propose a generative model named Stacked
Generative Adversarial Networks (SGAN). Our model consists of a top-down stack of GANs, each trained to generate “plausible” lower-level representations conditioned on
higher-level representations. Similar to the image discriminator in the original GAN model which is trained to distinguish “fake” images from “real” ones, we introduce a set of
representation discriminators that are trained to distinguish
“fake” representations from “real” representations. The adversarial loss introduced by the representation discriminator forces the intermediate representations of the SGAN to
lie on the manifold of the bottom-up DNN’s representation space. In addition to the adversarial loss, we also introduce a conditional loss that imposes each generator to
use the higher-level conditional information, and a novel
entropy loss that encourages each generator to generate diverse representations. By stacking several GANs in a topdown way and using the top-most GAN to receive labels and
the bottom-most GAN to generate images, SGAN can be
trained to model the data distribution conditioned on class
labels. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
our SGAN is able to generate images of much higher quality
than a vanilla GAN. In particular, our model obtains stateof-the-art Inception scores on CIFAR-10 dataset.

2. Related Work
Deep Generative Image Models. There has been a large
body of work on generative image modeling with deep
15077

