Spatiotemporal Multiplier Networks for Video Action Recognition
Christoph Feichtenhofer *
Graz University of Technology

Axel Pinz
Graz University of Technology

Richard P. Wildes
York University, Toronto

feichtenhofer@tugraz.at

axel.pinz@tugraz.at

wildes@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract
This paper presents a general ConvNet architecture for
video action recognition based on multiplicative interactions of spacetime features. Our model combines the appearance and motion pathways of a two-stream architecture by motion gating and is trained end-to-end. We theoretically motivate multiplicative gating functions for residual networks and empirically study their effect on classification accuracy. To capture long-term dependencies we
inject identity mapping kernels for learning temporal relationships. Our architecture is fully convolutional in spacetime and able to evaluate a video in a single forward pass.
Empirical investigation reveals that our model produces
state-of-the-art results on two standard action recognition
datasets.

1. Introduction
Extremely deep representations have recently been
highly successful in numerous pattern recognition competitions. Residual Networks (ResNets) [11] provide a structural concept for easing the training of deep architectures
by inserting skip-connections for direct propagation of gradients from the loss layer at the end of the network to
early layers close to the input. Recently, spatiotemporal
ResNets (ST-ResNets) [8] have been presented as a combination of two-stream networks [28] with ResNets. The
resulting architecture nontrivially extended the performance
of the original two-stream approach in application to action
recognition on standard datasets.
While the ST-ResNet [8] yielded state-of-the-art performance in application to action recognition, it did not provide systematic justification for its design choices. Our current work reconsiders the combination of the two-stream
and ResNet approaches in a more thorough fashion to increase the understanding of how these techniques interact,
* Christoph Feichtenhofer is a recipient of a DOC Fellowship of the
Austrian Academy of Sciences at the Institute of Electrical Measurement
and Measurement Signal Processing, Graz University of Technology.

Appearance Stream

∙

Motion Stream

∙

∙

Figure 1. Motion gating at the feature level requires feature correspondence in the forward pass which is enforced through the
gradient update of multiplicative interaction in the backward pass.

with a resulting novel architecture that produces a new stateof-the-art in action recognition.
More specifically, three main contributions are provided
in this work. First, we show that a multiplicative motion
gating of the appearance stream (Fig. 1) provides nontrivial
performance boost over an additive formulation. We discuss
the advantages of multiplicative interactions by the effect
on the gradient in a residual network. We also verify their
effectiveness in a series of ablation experiments where we
systematically explore various alternatives for connecting
the two streams, including bidirectional connections. Second, we discuss several approaches to generalizing the STResNet architecture over long-term input. Here, we propose to inject temporal filters that are initialized as identity mapping kernels at the feature level. These temporal
filters inject new layers in an existing model, while preserving the feature identity property of residual networks.
This approach allows injection of new temporal aggregation filters even into the skip path of the network. We provide ablation studies for where to inject these mappings and
how to initialize the temporal aggregation kernel. Third,
based on what is learned from our investigation of fusing two-streams with residual connections and extending
temporal support, we propose a general ConvNet architecture for action recognition in video. We provide details for how to learn a deep two-stream architecture that
is fully convolutional in spacetime in an end-to-end fashion. We empirically show how multiplicative motion gat14768

