Deep Feature Flow for Video Recognition
Xizhou Zhu1,2∗
1

Yuwen Xiong2∗

Jifeng Dai2

University of Science and Technology of China

ezra0408@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neutral networks have achieved
great success on image recognition tasks. Yet, it is nontrivial to transfer the state-of-the-art image recognition networks to videos as per-frame evaluation is too slow and unaffordable. We present deep feature flow, a fast and accurate framework for video recognition. It runs the expensive
convolutional sub-network only on sparse key frames and
propagates their deep feature maps to other frames via a
flow field. It achieves significant speedup as flow computation is relatively fast. The end-to-end training of the whole
architecture significantly boosts the recognition accuracy.
Deep feature flow is flexible and general. It is validated on
two video datasets on object detection and semantic segmentation. It significantly advances the practice of video
recognition tasks. Code would be released.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant success of deep
convolutional neutral networks (CNNs) for image recognition, e.g., image classification [23, 39, 41, 16], semantic
segmentation [28, 4, 50], and object detection [13, 14, 12,
34, 8, 27]. With their success, the recognition tasks have
been extended from image domain to video domain, such
as semantic segmentation on Cityscapes dataset [6], and object detection on ImageNet VID dataset [36]. Fast and accurate video recognition is crucial for high-value scenarios,
e.g., autonomous driving and video surveillance. Nevertheless, applying existing image recognition networks on individual video frames introduces unaffordable computational
cost for most applications.
It is widely recognized that image content varies slowly
over video frames, especially the high level semantics [45,
51, 21]. This observation has been used as means of regularization in feature learning, considering videos as unsupervised data sources [45, 21]. Yet, such data redundancy
∗ This work is done when Xizhou Zhu and Yuwen Xiong are interns at
Microsoft Research Asia

Lu Yuan2
2

Yichen Wei2

Microsoft Research

{v-yuxio,jifdai,luyuan,yichenw}@microsoft.com

and continuity can also be exploited to reduce the computation cost. This aspect, however, has received little attention
for video recognition using CNNs in the literature.
Modern CNN architectures [39, 41, 16] share a common structure. Most layers are convolutional and account
for the most computation. The intermediate convolutional
feature maps have the same spatial extent of the input image (usually at a smaller resolution, e.g., 16× smaller).
They preserve the spatial correspondences between the low
level image content and middle-to-high level semantic concepts [47]. Such correspondence provides opportunities to
cheaply propagate the features between nearby frames by
spatial warping, similar to optical flow [17].
In this work, we present deep feature flow, a fast and
accurate approach for video recognition. It applies an image
recognition network on sparse key frames. It propagates
the deep feature maps from key frames to other frames via
a flow field. As exemplifed in Figure 1, two intermediate
feature maps are responsive to “car” and “person” concepts.
They are similar on two nearby frames. After propagation,
the propagated features are similar to the original features.
Typically, the flow estimation and feature propagation
are much faster than the computation of convolutional features. Thus, the computational bottleneck is avoided and
significant speedup is achieved. When the flow field is also
estimated by a network, the entire architecture is trained
end-to-end, with both image recognition and flow networks
optimized for the recognition task. The recognition accuracy is significantly boosted.
In sum, deep feature flow is a fast, accurate, general,
and end-to-end framework for video recognition. It can
adopt most state-of-the-art image recognition networks in
the video domain. Up to our knowledge, it is the first work
to jointly train flow and video recognition tasks in a deep
learning framework. Extensive experiments verify its effectiveness on video object detection and semantic segmentation tasks, on recent large-scale video datasets. Compared
to per-frame evaluation, our approach achieves unprecedented speed (up to 10× faster, real time frame rate) with
moderate accuracy loss (a few percent). The high performance facilitates video recognition tasks in practice. Code

2349

