Recurrent 3D Pose Sequence Machines
Mude Lin, Liang Lin∗, Xiaodan Liang, Keze Wang, Hui Cheng
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
linmude@foxmail.com, linliang@ieee.org, xiaodanl@cs.cmu.edu,
wangkeze@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chenghui9@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D human articulated pose recovery from monocular
image sequences is very challenging due to the diverse
appearances, viewpoints, occlusions, and also the human
3D pose is inherently ambiguous from the monocular imagery. It is thus critical to exploit rich spatial and temporal long-range dependencies among body joints for accurate 3D pose sequence prediction. Existing approaches
usually manually design some elaborate prior terms and
human body kinematic constraints for capturing structures,
which are often insufficient to exploit all intrinsic structures
and not scalable for all scenarios. In contrast, this paper
presents a Recurrent 3D Pose Sequence Machine(RPSM)
to automatically learn the image-dependent structural constraint and sequence-dependent temporal context by using a
multi-stage sequential refinement. At each stage, our RPSM
is composed of three modules to predict the 3D pose sequences based on the previously learned 2D pose representations and 3D poses: (i) a 2D pose module extracting the
image-dependent pose representations, (ii) a 3D pose recurrent module regressing 3D poses and (iii) a feature adaption module serving as a bridge between module (i) and
(ii) to enable the representation transformation from 2D to
3D domain. These three modules are then assembled into
a sequential prediction framework to refine the predicted
poses with multiple recurrent stages. Extensive evaluations
on the Human3.6M dataset and HumanEva-I dataset show
that our RPSM outperforms all state-of-the-art approaches
for 3D pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Though quite challenging, recovering the 3D full-body
human pose from a monocular RGB image sequence has re∗ Corresponding author is Liang Lin. This work was supported by
State Key Development Program under Grant 2016YFB1001004, NSFCShenzhen Robotics Projects(U1613211), and the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities, and Guangdong Science and Technology Program under Grant 201510010126.

Figure 1: Some visual results of our approach (RPSM) on
Human3.6M dataset. The estimated 3D skeletons are reprojected into the images and shown by themselves from
the side view (next to the images). The figures from left to
right correspond to the estimated 3D poses generated by the
1st-stage, 2nd-stage and 3rd-stage of RPSM, respectively.
We can observe that the predicted human 3D joints are progressively corrected along with the multi-stage sequential
learning. Best viewed in color.

cently attracted a lot of research interests due to its huge potentials on high-level applications, which includes humancomputer interaction [10], surveillance [14], video browsing/indexing [6] and virtual reality [23].
Besides the challenges shared with 2D image pose estimation (e.g., large variation in human appearance, arbitrary
camera viewpoints and obstructed visibilities due to external entities and self-occlusions), 3D articulated pose recovery from monocular imagery is much more difficult since
3D pose is inherently ambiguous from a geometric perspective [40], as shown in Fig. 1. To resolve all these issues, a
preferable way is to investigate how to simultaneously enforce 2D spatial relationship, 3D geometry constraint and
temporal consistency within one single model.
Recently, notable successes have been achieved for 2D
pose estimation based on 2D part models coupled with 2D
deformation priors, e.g., [35, 37], and the deep learning
techniques, e.g., [32, 29, 34, 36]. However, these meth1810

