Template-based Monocular 3D Recovery of Elastic Shapes using Lagrangian Multipliers
Nazim Haouchine and Stephane Cotin
Inria - Mimesis Group
1, place de l’Hopital, Strasbourg, France
nazim.haouchine@inria.fr | stephane.cotin@inria.fr

Abstract
We present in this paper an efficient template-based
method for 3D recovery of elastic shapes from a fixed
monocular camera. By exploiting the object’s elasticity, in
contrast to isometric methods that use inextensibility constraints, a large range of deformations can be handled. Our
method is expressed as a saddle point problem using Lagrangian multipliers resulting in a linear system which unifies both mechanical and optical constraints and integrates
Dirichlet boundary conditions, whether they are fixed or
free. We experimentally show that no prior knowledge on
material properties is needed, which exhibit the generic
usability of our method with elastic and inelastic objects
with different kinds of materials. Comparisons with existing techniques are conducted on synthetic and real elastic
objects with strains ranging from 25% to 130% resulting to
low errors.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional reconstruction of non-rigid objects
from a monocular camera is a complex problem with many
potential applications in computer graphics, augmented reality and surgical vision. The complexity emanates from its
underconstrained nature since several shape configurations
may produce the same projection which leads to ambiguities [6]. To resolve these ambiguities considering inextensible materials, various approaches have been considered
that, most of the time, rely on additional constraints such
as the preservation of mesh geometrical properties, temporal consistency or shading information. However, the additional constraints that are used are not always suited to the
properties of an elastic object.
Physics-based models have been seldom used in the past
due the complexity which precludes real time algorithms
and due to the necessary assumption on the material stiffness (which is difficult to acquire). Nevertheless, recent
studies [2, 13, 8, 12, 3] have shown that such methods are
appropriate when dealing with elastic objects that can un-

Figure 1: 3D recovery of elastic objects from a fixed
monocular camera. Instead of minimizing the forces that act
on the object, our method solves a constrained optimization
that permits to handle elastic and inelastic materials without
a prior on their properties.

dergo stretching or compression. Thus, we advocate in this
paper the use of elastic models to enable reconstruction of
deformable objects undergoing large deformations (see Figure 1). However, in contrast to related works that express
the problem as force minimization [8] [12] or as non-linear
energy minimization [13], we propose to express the problem as a saddle point problem using Lagrangian multipliers. This formulation permits to build a well-posed linear
system that unifies both optical and mechanical constraints.
Our method is invariant of material properties which makes
it adequate to elastic and inelastic deformations, and behave
well with poorly textured surfaces and presence of occlusions.
We therefore view the contribution of this paper as a
generic method that: (i) truly handles large elastic deformations up to 130 % (more than 2 times the initial shape),
(ii) is invariant to material properties and get rid of mass,
damping coefficients, time-steps and external forces, which
are one of the major concerns in using mechanical models
in computer vision tasks, and (iii) is adapted to both extensible and inextensible materials as well as textured and poorly
textured surfaces and behave well with the presence of occlusions. Furthermore, we experimentally validate it with
various type of materials and data, with tests on synthetic
data and real data with quantitative measures and quantitative assessment and comparison with related works.
14095

