StyleBank: An Explicit Representation for Neural Image Style Transfer
Dongdong Chen1 , Lu Yuan2 , Jing Liao2 , Nenghai Yu1 , Gang Hua2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
cd722522@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{luyuan, jliao, ganghua}@microsoft.com,
ynh@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose StyleBank, which is composed of multiple
convolution filter banks and each filter bank explicitly represents one style, for neural image style transfer. To transfer
an image to a specific style, the corresponding filter bank
is operated on top of the intermediate feature embedding
produced by a single auto-encoder. The StyleBank and the
auto-encoder are jointly learnt, where the learning is conducted in such a way that the auto-encoder does not encode
any style information thanks to the flexibility introduced by
the explicit filter bank representation. It also enables us to
conduct incremental learning to add a new image style by
learning a new filter bank while holding the auto-encoder
fixed. The explicit style representation along with the flexible network design enables us to fuse styles at not only the
image level, but also the region level. Our method is the first
style transfer network that links back to traditional texton
mapping methods, and hence provides new understanding
on neural style transfer. Our method is easy to train, runs
in real-time, and produces results that qualitatively better
or at least comparable to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Style transfer is to migrate a style from an image to another, and is closely related to texture synthesis. The core
problem behind these two tasks is to model the statistics of
a reference image (texture, or style image), which enables
further sampling from it under certain constraints. For texture synthesis, the constraints are that the boundaries between two neighboring samples must have a smooth transition, while for style transfer, the constraints are that the
samples should match the local structure of the content image. So in this sense, style transfer can be regarded as a
generalization of texture synthesis.
Recent work on style transfer adopting Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) ignited a renewed interest in this
problem. On the machine learning side, it has been shown
that a pre-trained image classifier can be used as a feature extractor to drive texture synthesis [11] and style trans-

fer [12]. These CNN algorithms either apply an iterative optimization mechanism [12], or directly learn a feed-forward
generator network [19, 37] to seek an image close to both
the content image and the style image – all measured in the
CNN (i.e., pre-trained VGG-16 [36]) feature domain. These
algorithms often produce more impressive results compared
to the texture-synthesis ones, since the rich feature representation that a deep network can produce from an image
would allow more flexible manipulation of an image.
Notwithstanding their demonstrated success, the principles of CNN style transfer are vaguely understood. After
a careful examination of existing style transfer networks,
we argue that the content and style are still coupled in their
learnt network structures and hyper-parameters. To the best
of our knowledge, an explicit representation for either style
or content has not yet been proposed in these previous neural style transfer methods.
As a result, the network is only able to capture a specific style one at a time. For a new style, the whole network has to be retrained end-to-end. In practice, this makes
these methods unable to scale to large number of styles, especially when the style set needs to be incrementally augmented. In addition, how to further reduce run time, network model size and enable more flexibilities to control
transfer (e.g., region-specific transfer), remains to be challenges yet to be addressed.
To explore an explicit representation for style, we reconsider neural style transfer by linking back to traditional texton (known as the basic element of texture) mapping methods, where mapping a texton to the target location is equivalent to a convolution between a texton and a Delta function
(indicating sampling positions) in the image space.
Inspired by this, we propose StyleBank, which is composed of multiple convolution filter banks and each filter
bank represents one style. To transfer an image to a specific
style, the corresponding filter bank is convolved with the
intermediate feature embedding produced by a single autoencoder, which decomposes the original image into multiple feature response maps. This way, for the first time, we
provide a clear understanding of the mechanism underneath
neural style transfer.

1897

