Specular Highlight Removal in Facial Images
Chen Li1
1

Stephen Lin2

Kun Zhou1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
We present a method for removing specular highlight
reﬂections in facial images that may contain varying illumination colors. This is accurately achieved through the
use of physical and statistical properties of human skin and
faces. We employ a melanin and hemoglobin based model
to represent the diffuse color variations in facial skin, and
utilize this model to constrain the highlight removal solution in a manner that is effective even for partially saturated pixels. The removal of highlights is further facilitated through estimation of directionally variant illumination colors over the face, which is done while taking advantage of a statistically-based approximation of facial geometry. An important practical feature of the proposed
method is that the skin color model is utilized in a way that
does not require color calibration of the camera. Moreover, this approach does not require assumptions commonly
needed in previous highlight removal techniques, such as
uniform illumination color or piecewise-constant surface
colors. We validate this technique through comparisons to
existing methods for removing specular highlights.

1. Introduction
A human face usually exhibits specular highlights
caused by sharp reﬂections of light off its oily skin surface.
Removing or reducing these highlights in photographs is
often desirable for the purpose of aesthetic enhancement or
to facilitate computer vision tasks, such as face recognition
which may be hindered by these illumination-dependent appearance variations. Extraction of a specular highlight layer
can moreover provide useful information for inferring scene
properties such as surface normals and lighting directions.
Specular highlight removal is a challenging task because
for each pixel there are twice as many quantities to be estimated (specular color and diffuse color) as there are to
observe (image color). To manage this problem, previous
methods typically require simplifying assumptions on the
imaging conditions, such as white illumination [33, 34, 41,
40], piecewise-uniform surface colors [13, 1], repeated surface textures [31], or a dark channel prior [11]. These con-

Katsushi Ikeuchi2
2

Microsoft Research

ditions, however, generally do not exist in facial images,
which are normally captured in natural lighting environments and do not exhibit the assumed surface properties.
To address this problem, we present a highlight removal
method that takes advantage of physical and statistical properties of human skin and faces, and also jointly estimates an
approximate model of the lighting environment. Accurate
estimation of illumination and its colors is essential for removing highlights, since highlight reﬂections have the color
of the lighting. Most previous highlight separation techniques simply assume the illumination color to be uniform
and/or known, but this is typically not the case for realworld photographs. We instead solve for it together with
highlight removal while utilizing priors on human faces. In
this way, our method not only is able to account for highlight information and facial priors in estimating the illumination, but it can also estimate an environment map with directionally variant colors often present in everyday scenes,
like an ofﬁce with both ﬂuorescent ceiling lights and sunlight from windows.
Besides the environment map, better prior knowledge
about the diffuse colors of an object is also important for
effectively separating specular highlights. In this work, we
utilize a physically-based model of human skin color to better constrain the highlight removal solution. Human skin is
a turbid medium containing melanin and hemoglobin as its
two dominant pigments. Spatial variations in the amount
of melanin, which is contained in the epidermal layer of
the skin, result in skin features such as freckles or moles.
Hemoglobin, which is a protein in blood, ﬂows within the
dermal layer and forms the appearance of blood circulation.
The variation of skin color is mainly caused by different
densities of these two pigments. Darker skin is a result of
denser concentrations of melanin, while pinkish cheeks indicate a high density of hemoglobin. We use a skin color
model based on these two pigments as a constraint on estimated diffuse colors as well as to effectively deal with highlights that cause partial saturation of measured color values,
a problem neglected in previous techniques.
A well-known ambiguity that exists in separating specular highlights from diffuse reﬂection occurs when the illumination chromaticity is similar to the diffuse chromaticity
4321
3107

