Weakly-supervised Visual Grounding of Phrases with Linguistic Structures
Fanyi Xiao
University of California, Davis

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research

Yong Jae Lee
University of California, Davis

fyxiao@ucdavis.edu

lsigal@disneyresearch.com

yongjaelee@ucdavis.edu

a man that is
cutting sandwich

Abstract
We propose a weakly-supervised approach that takes
image-sentence pairs as input and learns to visually ground
(i.e., localize) arbitrary linguistic phrases, in the form of
spatial attention masks. Specifically, the model is trained
with images and their associated image-level captions,
without any explicit region-to-phrase correspondence annotations. To this end, we introduce an end-to-end model
which learns visual groundings of phrases with two types of
carefully designed loss functions. In addition to the standard discriminative loss, which enforces that attended image regions and phrases are consistently encoded, we propose a novel structural loss which makes use of the parse
tree structures induced by the sentences. In particular,
we ensure complementarity among the attention masks that
correspond to sibling noun phrases, and compositionality
of attention masks among the children and parent phrases,
as defined by the sentence parse tree. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on the Microsoft COCO and Visual
Genome datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition research has made tremendous strides
in recent years, achieving unprecedented performance in
various tasks including image classification [15, 26, 38], object detection [13, 36], semantic segmentation [14, 28], and
image captioning [5, 22, 51]. However, traditional supervised frameworks for these tasks often rely on large datasets
with expensive bounding box or pixel-level segmentation
annotations. As the field pushes toward solving larger-scale
and more complex problems, obtaining massive annotated
datasets is becoming a critical bottleneck.
Weakly-supervised approaches that learn from imagelevel supervision have been proposed to alleviate the need
for expensive and unwieldy annotation. Most previous
work use category tags to train models that can localize
objects without any bounding box or segmentation annotations [6, 12, 21, 22, 31, 33, 40, 41, 43, 48]. While great
progress has been made, learning from a list of category tags
ignores the rich semantics and structure in natural language

a man

sandwich

Figure 1. We propose to localize phrases in images, by exploiting linguistic structure. For example, from the phrase “a man
that is cutting sandwich”, we can infer that “a man” and “sandwich” should be exclusive to each other spatially. At the same
time, they should jointly occupy the spatial extent of “a man that is
cutting sandwich”. We enforce these structural constraints as part
of a novel deep network architecture for weakly-supervised visual
grounding of phrases.

that we humans use to describe visual data. For example,
in Fig. 1, a tag-based description would simply list {man,
sandwich, table} whereas a natural language description
might say “a man that is cutting sandwich on a table”. Importantly, the natural language description provides structure, which can benefit a weakly-supervised learning algorithm. For instance, the description implies that “a man”
and “sandwich” occupy spatially-distinct regions in the image, and that a visual grounding (localization) of the entire
sentence should be the union of the groundings of “a man”
and “sandwich on a table”. By exploiting these constraints
and regularities that are shared between linguistic and visual data, localization in the challenging weakly-supervised
setting can be facilitated.
In this paper, we propose a weakly-supervised visual localization approach that learns from image-level descriptions (i.e., without any region-to-phrase correspondence annotations). In particular, we aim to create spatial attention
masks that produce localizations at the pixel-level. Our key
idea is to utilize the rich structure in a natural language description by transforming it into a hierarchical parse tree
of phrases (see Fig. 2). In this way, we can extract two
types of linguistic structural constraints for visual grounding: (1) compositionality of attention masks among children and their parent phrases (e.g., the mask of “a hand
with a donut” should be the union mask of “a hand” and
“with a donut”), and (2) complementarity among the atten15945

