A Generative Model for Depth-based Robust 3D Facial Pose Tracking

1

Lu Sheng1 Jianfei Cai2 Tat-Jen Cham2 Vladimir Pavlovic3 King Ngi Ngan1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Rutgers University

{lsheng, knngan}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, {asjfcai, astjcham}@ntu.edu.sg, vladimir@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of depth-based robust 3D facial
pose tracking under unconstrained scenarios with heavy occlusions and arbitrary facial expression variations. Unlike the previous depth-based discriminative or data-driven
methods that require sophisticated training or manual intervention, we propose a generative framework that unifies
pose tracking and face model adaptation on-the-fly. Particularly, we propose a statistical 3D face model that owns
the flexibility to generate and predict the distribution and
uncertainty underlying the face model. Moreover, unlike
prior arts employing the ICP-based facial pose estimation,
we propose a ray visibility constraint that regularizes the
pose based on the face model’s visibility against the input
point cloud, which augments the robustness against the occlusions. The experimental results on Biwi and ICT-3DHP
datasets reveal that the proposed framework is effective and
outperforms the state-of-the-art depth-based methods.

1. Introduction
Robust 3D facial pose tracking is an important topic
in the fields of computer vision and computer graphics,
with applications in facial performance capture, humancomputer interaction, immersive 3DTV and free-view TV,
as well as virtual reality and augmented reality. Traditionally, the facial pose tracking has been successfully performed on RGB videos [22, 3, 16, 4, 14, 15, 21, 33, 42]
for well-constrained scenes, challenges posed by illumination variations, shadows, and substantial occlusions hamper
RGB-based facial pose tracking systems from being employed in more typical unconstrained scenarios. The utilization of depth data from commodity real-time range sensors has led to more robust 3D facial pose tracking, not only
by enabling registration along the depth axis, but also by
providing cues for the occlusion reasoning.
Although promising results have been demonstrated by
leveraging both RGB and depth data in unconstrained facial
pose tracking, existing approaches are not yet able to reliably cope when the RGB data is poor due to inconsistent

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Our identity-adaptive facial pose tracking system is robust to occlusions and expression distortions. (a) Poses are estimated with heavy occlusions. The face models are overlaid with
the input point clouds with the visible face points marked by red.
(b) Poses are tracked under varying expressions. The estimated
face identities are not interfered by the expressions.

or poor lighting conditions. Furthermore, RGB data may
not always be available in scenarios when privacy is a major concern. Therefore, it is meaningful to study robust 3D
facial pose tracking using depth data alone, as a complementary alternative to traditional tracking systems.
Some of the new challenges that we want to address
when solely tracking on depth data include: (1) coping
with complex self-occlusions and other occlusions caused
by hair, accessories, hands and etc.; (2) sustaining an
always-on face tracker that can dynamically adapt to any
user without manual calibration; and (3) providing stability over time to variations in user expressions. Unlike
previous depth-based discriminative or data-driven methods [35, 7, 28, 18, 17, 30, 20] that require complex training
or manual calibration, in this paper we propose a framework
that unifies pose tracking and face model adaptation on-thefly, offering highly accurate, occlusion-aware and uninterrupted 3D facial pose tracking, as shown in Fig. 1.
The contributions of this work are threefold. First, we
introduce a novel analytical probabilistic formulation for a
generative 3D face model, advancing the earlier 3D multilinear tensor model [12, 38] and encouraging groupwise
pose estimation and expression-invariant face model updating. Second, we propose an occlusion-aware pose estimation mechanism based on minimizing an information14488

