Synthesizing 3D Shapes via Modeling Multi-View
Depth Maps and Silhouettes with Deep Generative Networks
Amir Arsalan Soltani1 Haibin Huang2 Jiajun Wu1 Tejas D. Kulkarni3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Massachusetts, Amherst 3 Google DeepMind
{arsalans, jiajunwu, jbt}@mit.edu hbhuang@cs.umass.edu tejasdkulkarni@gmail.com

Random Sampling

Silhouettes

Reconstructions

Figure 1: Left: Our method generates multi-view depth maps and silhouettes, and uses a rendering function to obtain the 3D shapes. Right:
We can also extend our framework to reconstruct 3D shapes from single/multi-view depth maps or silhouettes.

Abstract

We study the problem of learning generative models of
3D shapes. Voxels or 3D parts have been widely used as
the underlying representations to build complex 3D shapes;
however, voxel-based representations suffer from high memory requirements, and parts-based models require a large
collection of cached or richly parametrized parts. We take
an alternative approach: learning a generative model over
multi-view depth maps or their corresponding silhouettes,
and using a deterministic rendering function to produce
3D shapes from these images. A multi-view representation
of shapes enables generation of 3D models with fine details, as 2D depth maps and silhouettes can be modeled at a
much higher resolution than 3D voxels. Moreover, our approach naturally brings the ability to recover the underlying
3D representation from depth maps of one or a few viewpoints. Experiments show that our framework can generate
3D shapes with variations and details. We also demonstrate
that our model has out-of-sample generalization power for
real-world tasks with occluded objects.

1. Introduction
What makes a good generative model of 3D shapes? We
argue that the synthesized objects should be both realistic
and novel. The generator should be able to capture the
fine details of objects of different categories. It should also
characterize the possible variations that shapes may have,
generalizing beyond a fixed collection.
Traditional shape synthesis methods typically employ a
template-based model, where objects and parts are from a
large predefined repository. Shape synthesis is then essentially to memorize and recombine these parts [10, 3]. The
template representation enables generating shapes of highfidelity; however, it constrains the possibility of obtaining
novel objects that are never observed before.
Recently, researchers explored sampling novel voxelized
3D shapes by modeling them via volumetric convolutional
networks [28, 27, 6, 18]. Shapes obtained this way are highly
varied; however, the use of voxel representation limits their
resolutions due to the curse of dimensionality.
Here we consider an alternative approach: we first use
deep generative networks to model and sample from the
space of 2D images, specifically multi-view depth maps or
silhouettes; we then employ a rendering function to synthe11511

