A Dataset for Benchmarking Image-based Localization
Xun Sun∗, Yuanfan Xie∗, Pei Luo, Liang Wang
Baidu Autonomous Driving Business Unit†
{sunxun,xieyuanfan,luopei,wangliang18}@baidu.com

Abstract
A novel dataset for benchmarking image-based localization is presented. With increasing research interests in
visual place recognition and localization, several datasets
have been published in the past few years. One of the evident limitations of existing datasets is that precise ground
truth camera poses of query images are not available in a
meaningful 3D metric system. This is in part due to the underlying 3D models of these datasets are reconstructed from
Structure from Motion methods. So far little attention has
been paid to metric evaluations of localization accuracy. In
this paper we address the problem of whether state-of-theart visual localization techniques can be applied to tasks
with demanding accuracy requirements. We acquired training data for a large indoor environment with cameras and a
LiDAR scanner. In addition, we collected over 2000 query
images with cell phone cameras. Using LiDAR point clouds
as a reference, we employed a semi-automatic approach to
estimate the 6 degrees of freedom camera poses precisely
in the world coordinate system. The proposed dataset enables us to quantitatively assess the performance of various
algorithms using a fair and intuitive metric.

(a) Captured point cloud in bird-eye view.

(b) Close-up of the camera poses for database images.

1. Introduction
Image-based Localization (IBL) methods estimate the 6
degrees of freedom (6DOF) pose of a camera with respect to
a 3D representation of the scene. The input of an IBL algorithm is typically one or multiple images and the visual information of which is used to recover the camera pose. This
technique has gained attention recently from both academia
and industry since it can potentially enable many novel
applications, such as location recognition [31, 16], navigation [37], autonomous driving, localization-based augmented reality, and various location-based services [17].
Typical IBL algorithms assume that there is an existing 3D model produced by Structure from Motion (SfM)
∗ Indicates equal contributions and joint first authors.
† This work was done when the authors were with Baidu Research’s
Institute of Deep Learning.

(c) Groundtruth camera poses for the query images.
Figure 1. A glance of the captured point cloud and cameras in our
dataset. This figure is best viewed in color.

or Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [11,
29, 30, 31]. Usually, the 3D model consists of sparse 3D
point clouds as well as their associated 2D feature descriptors. The IBL problem can then be formulated as a 2D3D matching problem, i.e., with image features extracted
17436

