Surface Motion Capture Transfer with Gaussian Process Regression
Adnane Boukhayma, Jean-Sébastien Franco, Edmond Boyer
Inria, LJK, Univ. Grenoble Alpes
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
We address the problem of transferring motion between
captured 4D models. We particularly focus on human subjects for which the ability to automatically augment 4D
datasets, by propagating movements between subjects, is of
interest in a great deal of recent vision applications that
builds on human visual corpus. Given 4D training sets for
two subjects for which a sparse set of corresponding keyposes are known, our method is able to transfer a newly
captured motion from one subject to the other. With the
aim to generalize transfers to input motions possibly very
diverse with respect to the training sets, the method contributes with a new transfer model based on non-linear pose
interpolation. Building on Gaussian process regression,
this model intends to capture and preserve individual motion properties, and thereby realism, by accounting for pose
inter-dependencies during motion transfers. Our experiments show visually qualitative, and quantitative, improvements over existing pose-mapping methods and confirm the
generalization capabilities of our method compared to state
of the art.

1. Introduction
After more than a decade of predominance of standard
motion capture, we have witnessed in the recent years the
emergence of 4D surface capture systems either through
high quality multi-view set-ups [9, 10] or in a more democratized form with low-cost sensors [16, 13, 27]. The
tasks related to the acquisition and exploitation of 4D data,
such as tracking [1, 15, 7], appearance modelling [6, 24]
and animation [17, 8, 5] have received a great deal of interest from the vision and graphics communities recently, and
there are still many problems to be solved in this respect.
Notably, a number of challenges remain open when dealing with corpus of moving subjects. Such datasets can find
many uses for 3D content generation, augmenting machine
learning training sets or statistical modeling, among other
examples.
In this paper, we address the task of transferring cap-

tured motions from one subject to another, to the benefit of
enabling the generation of uncaptured animations, removing the burden of exhaustive motion acquisition for each
subject, and broadening creative possibilities with captured
4D models. Given two training sets of motions for two
subjects and a sparse set of annotated semantic correspondences between the two sets, a regression model can be
built, by which a new captured motion associated to one
of the subjects can be transferred to the other. While the
transfer for sparse surface parameterizations such as motion
capture data have received some attention [19, 23, 29, 11],
only a handful of works exists that deal with the particular
problem of surface to surface transfer relevant to our shape
capture situation [20, 3]. The most successful approach to
date [3] obtains inspiring results with a linear representation
of pose mapping.
We propose a more general model, which significantly
broadens transferring capabilities in a multi-view capture
context, thanks to the following two important contributions. First, we propose a novel motion mapping model,
based on non-linear Gaussian Process regression and on
body part segmentation, which significantly improves the
accuracy and generalization abilities of mappings for a
given training set. Unlike existing works, this regression
model also captures the global rigid component of motion, allowing more realistic transfer of subject displacements. Second, while previous works only use a sparse set
of matching key-frames in the training set, we provide a full
temporal matching densification approach based on probabilistic dynamic time-warping. Starting from the initially
provided matching pairs, or key-frames, between two paired
training sequences, it extrapolates correspondences densely
between the two sequences. This allows the regression to
benefit from an expanded and complete set of frame pairs,
which in turn increases realism by better preserving learned
individual dynamic patterns in new motions.
In order to conduct evaluation, we consider two annotated datasets acquired with different platforms. These
datasets contain motions for two subjects, any subset of
which can be used for training and the other for testing.
Testing data annotations are used as baseline to measure
1184

