Large Kernel Matters ——
Improve Semantic Segmentation by Global Convolutional Network
Chao Peng Xiangyu Zhang Gang Yu Guiming Luo Jian Sun
School of Software, Tsinghua University, {pengc14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gluo@tsinghua.edu.cn}
Megvii Inc. (Face++), {zhangxiangyu, yugang, sunjian}@megvii.com
Abstract
One of recent trends [31, 32, 14] in network architecture design is stacking small filters (e.g., 1x1 or 3x3) in the
entire network because the stacked small filters is more efficient than a large kernel, given the same computational
complexity. However, in the field of semantic segmentation, where we need to perform dense per-pixel prediction,
we find that the large kernel (and effective receptive field)
plays an important role when we have to perform the classification and localization tasks simultaneously. Following
our design principle, we propose a Global Convolutional
Network to address both the classification and localization
issues for the semantic segmentation. We also suggest a
residual-based boundary refinement to further refine the object boundaries. Our approach achieves state-of-art performance on two public benchmarks and significantly outperforms previous results, 82.2% (vs 80.2%) on PASCAL VOC
2012 dataset and 76.9% (vs 71.8%) on Cityscapes dataset.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation can be considered as a per-pixel
classification problem. There are two challenges in this
task: 1) classification: an object associated to a specific semantic concept should be marked correctly; 2) localization:
the classification label for a pixel must be aligned to the appropriate coordinates in output score map. A well-designed
segmentation model should deal with the two issues simultaneously.
However, these two tasks are naturally contradictory. For
the classification task, the models are required to be invariant to various transformations like translation and rotation. But for the localization task, models should be
transformation-sensitive, i.e., precisely locate every pixel
for each semantic category. The conventional semantic segmentation algorithms mainly target for the localization issue, as shown in Figure 1 B. But this might decrease the

Figure 1. A: Classification network; B: Conventional segmentation
network, mainly designed for localization; C: Our Global Convolutional Network.

classification performance.
In this paper, we propose an improved net architecture,
called Global Convolutional Network (GCN), to deal with
the above two challenges simultaneously. We follow two
design principles: 1) from the localization view, the model
structure should be fully convolutional to retain the localization performance and no fully-connected or global pooling
layers should be used as these layers will discard the localization information; 2) from the classification view, large
kernel size should be adopted in the network architecture
to enable densely connections between feature maps and
per-pixel classifiers, which enhances the capability to handle different transformations. These two principles lead to
our GCN, as in Figure 2 A. The FCN [25]-like structure
is employed as our basic framework and our GCN is used
to generate semantic score maps. To make global convolution practical, we adopt symmetric, separable large filters to
reduce the model parameters and computation cost. To further improve the localization ability near the object boundaries, we introduce boundary refinement block to model the
boundary alignment as a residual structure, shown in Figure 2 C. Unlike the CRF-like post-process [6], our boundary
14353

