Hard Mixtures of Experts for Large Scale Weakly Supervised Vision

Sam Gross, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Arthur Szlam
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
Training convolutional networks (CNN’s) that fit on a single
GPU with minibatch stochastic gradient descent has become
effective in practice. However, there is still no effective method
for training large CNN’s that do not fit in the memory of a few
GPU cards, or for parallelizing CNN training. In this work we
show that a simple hard mixture of experts model can be efficiently trained to good effect on large scale hashtag (multilabel)
prediction tasks. Mixture of experts models are not new [7, 3],
but in the past, researchers have had to devise sophisticated
methods to deal with data fragmentation. We show empirically
that modern weakly supervised data sets are large enough to
support naive partitioning schemes where each data point is
assigned to a single expert. Because the experts are independent,
training them in parallel is easy, and evaluation is cheap for
the size of the model. Furthermore, we show that we can use
a single decoding layer for all the experts, allowing a unified
feature embedding space. We demonstrate that it is feasible
(and in fact relatively painless) to train far larger models than
could be practically trained with standard CNN architectures,
and that the extra capacity can be well used on current datasets.

1. Introduction
Large annotated image datasets have revolutionized computer vision. The rise of data hungry machine learning methods
like convolutional neural networks (CNN’s) has been facilitated
by training sets with millions of labeled images, especially Imagenet [13]. These machine learning methods [9, 5] have proven
not only successful at solving the training tasks, but also for finding good features for many image tasks; and to a large extent,
models that perform better on tasks like the Imagenet recognition challenge give features that are better for other tasks [12, 5].
However, hand annotation is laborious. The Imagenet
dataset is small compared to the hundreds of millions of images
posted to the web and social media every day. Recent works
[4, 2, 8] have shown that it is possible to build vision models
with weakly supervised instead of hand-annotated data, and
open the possibility of using truly gigantic datasets.

As the data gets bigger, we can expect to be able to scale
up our models as well, and get better features; more data
means more refined models with less overfitting. However,
even today’s state of the art convolutional models cannot keep
up with the size of today’s weakly supervised data. With our
current optimization technology and hardware, more images are
posted to photo sharing sites in a day than can be passed through
the training pipeline of standard state of the art convolutional
architectures. Furthermore, there is evidence [8, 6] and below
in this work, that these architectures are already underfitting
on datasets at the scale of hundreds of millions of images.
A well established approach for scaling models in a straightforward way is to use “mixture” architectures, where one model
acts as a “gater”, routing data points to “expert” classifiers to
update a final decision, for example as in [7, 3, 6, 19, 16, 1].
In this work, we make two contributions. First, we propose a
particularly simple mixture architecture where each expert is
associated with a cluster in the feature space of a trained CNN,
which acts as the gater. We also describe a variant where all
experts share the same decoder, allowing the feature space of
the experts to be meaningful for transfer tasks. Second, we give
evidence that in the setting of weakly supervised tag prediction
from images, on the large datasets that are available today,
standard CNN models are underfitting. On the other hand, we
show that despite our approach’s simplicity, in this setting, it
can give significant benefits to test accuracy by allowing the
efficient training of much more powerful models.

2. Models
Denote by x1,...,xN a labeled training set of images with
target outputs y1,...,yn. The basic idea of a mixture of experts
[7] model is to have a set of expert classifiers H1,...,HK , and
a gating classifier T . To evaluate the model, an input x is
processed by T , outputting a probability vector T (x) with K
coordinates. The output of the model is then
K
X
T (x)iHi(x)
i=1

16865

(1)

