UntrimmedNets for Weakly Supervised Action Recognition and Detection
Limin Wang1

Yuanjun Xiong2
1

2

Dahua Lin2

Luc Van Gool1

Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Abstract

Training

Testing

Untrimmed videos only with labels

Current action recognition methods heavily rely on
trimmed videos for model training. However, it is expensive and time-consuming to acquire a large-scale trimmed
video dataset. This paper presents a new weakly supervised architecture, called UntrimmedNet, which is able to
directly learn action recognition models from untrimmed
videos without the requirement of temporal annotations of
action instances. Our UntrimmedNet couples two important components, the classification module and the selection
module, to learn the action models and reason about the
temporal duration of action instances, respectively. These
two components are implemented with feed-forward networks, and UntrimmedNet is therefore an end-to-end trainable architecture. We exploit the learned models for action
recognition (WSR) and detection (WSD) on the untrimmed
video datasets of THUMOS14 and ActivityNet. Although
our UntrimmedNet only employs weak supervision, our
method achieves performance superior or comparable to
that of those strongly supervised approaches on these two
datasets. 1

1. Introduction
Action recognition in videos has attracted extensive research attention in the past few years, and much progress
has been made in computer vision community, on both aspects of hand-crafted representations [27, 45, 46, 48] and
deeply-learned representations [23, 40, 42, 50]. In general,
action recognition is usually cast as a classification problem,
where each action instance is manually trimmed from a long
video sequence during the training phase, and the learned
action model is exploited for action recognition in trimmed
clips (e.g., HMDB51 [25] and UCF101 [41]) or untrimmed
videos (e.g., THUMOS14 [22] and ActivityNet [16]). Although these precise temporal annotations could relieve the
difficulty of learning action models, it may be difficult to
adapt to large-scale action recognition in more realistic and
1 The code and models are available at https://github.com/
wanglimin/UntrimmedNet.

Weakly Supervised Action Recognition
Bowling

Input video

Basketball
Recognition result

Baseball

Containing Action of Apply Eye Makeup

Weakly Supervised Action Detection
Input video

UntrimmedNet

Action
Model

Detection result

Finding Action of Apply Eye Makeup here

Figure 1. Weakly supervised action recognition and detection:
during training phase, we simply have untrimmed videos without temporal annotation and we train action models from these
untrimmed videos directly; during test phase, the learned action
models could be applied to action recognition (WSR) and detection (WSD) in untrimmed videos.

challenging scenario due to several reasons. First, annotating temporal duration for each action instance is expensive
and time-consuming. Meanwhile, huge numbers of videos
on Youtube website are temporally untrimmed by nature,
and trimming videos in such scale would be impractical.
More importantly, unlike object boundary, there might even
be no sensible definition about the exact temporal extent of
actions [37, 38]. Thus, these temporal annotations may be
subjective and not consistent across different persons.
To overcome the above limitations of using trimmed
videos for training, we introduce a more efficient setting of
directly learning action recognition models from untrimmed
videos, as shown in Figure 1. In this new setting, only the
video-level action label is available during training, and the
goal is to learn the models from untrimmed videos, which
could be applied to new videos to perform action recognition or detection. As we do not have precise temporal annotations of action instances in training, we call this new problem as weakly supervised action recognition (WSR) and detection (WSD). Without the requirement of exact temporal
14325

