Learning to Rank Retargeted Images
Yang Chen, Yong-Jin Liu∗
Tsinghua University, China

Yu-Kun Lai
Cardiff University, UK

liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Yukun.Lai@cs.cf.ac.uk

Abstract
Image retargeting techniques that adjust images into different sizes have attracted much attention recently. Objective quality assessment (OQA) of image retargeting results
is often desired to automatically select the best results. Existing OQA methods output an absolute score for each retargeted image and use these scores to compare different results. Observing that it is challenging even for human subjects to give consistent scores for retargeting results of different source images, in this paper we propose a learningbased OQA method that predicts the ranking of a set of retargeted images with the same source image. We show that
this more manageable task helps achieve more consistent
prediction to human preference and is sufficient for most
application scenarios. To compute the ranking, we propose
a simple yet efficient machine learning framework that uses
a General Regression Neural Network (GRNN) to model a
combination of seven elaborate OQA metrics. We then propose a simple scheme to transform the relative scores output from GRNN into a global ranking. We train our GRNN
model using human preference data collected in the elaborate RetargetMe benchmark and evaluate our method based
on the subjective study in RetargetMe. Moreover, we introduce a further subjective benchmark to evaluate the generalizability of different OQA methods. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method outperforms eight representative OQA methods in ranking prediction and has better
generalizability to different datasets.

1. Introduction
Image retargeting refers to techniques that adjust a
source image into different sizes, which has become an increasingly demanded tool with the diversification of display
devices. Although a large number of retargeting methods
have been developed, a single method that works well on
any image still does not exist [12, 33]. Subjective quality assessment involving human judgment is usually time∗ Corresponding author

(a) Source image

(b) Result 1 (27) (c) Result 2 (26)

(d) Source image

(e) Result 3 (30) (f) Result 4 (28)

Figure 1. Subjective scores are only comparable for retargeting
results of the same source image. In each row, two retargeting
results are presented and their scores are shown in parentheses.
These scores provided in RetargetMe benchmark [25] are numbers
of votes that people cast when comparing this image against other
images. Higher scores mean better results. Although the scores of
the two retargeting results in (e) and (f) are higher than the scores
in (b) and (c), we cannot conclude that the results in (e) and (f) are
better than the results in (b) and (c); instead, the opposite appears
to be true.

consuming and laborious, and thus unpractical in many situations. As summarized in Section 2, despite recent progress,
existing objective quality assessment (OQA) methods are
still far from ideal in predicting human preference. Therefore, a good OQA method correlating well with human
judgements is essential in automatically selecting the best
retargeting results and helpful for developing new image retargeting methods.
Existing OQA methods compute an absolute score for
every retargeting result and compare the results using these
scores. A key observation that motivates the work presented
in this paper is that in most cases, the scores of retargeted
images are only meaningful with the same source image.
Even for human subjects, it is often difficult to give consistent scores for retargeting results of different sources. An

3994

