Look Closer to See Better: Recurrent Attention Convolutional Neural Network
for Fine-grained Image Recognition
Jianlong Fu1 , Heliang Zheng2 , Tao Mei1
1
2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
1

{jianf, tmei}@microsoft.com, 2 zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recognizing fine-grained categories (e.g., bird species)
is difficult due to the challenges of discriminative region
localization and fine-grained feature learning. Existing
approaches predominantly solve these challenges independently, while neglecting the fact that region detection and
fine-grained feature learning are mutually correlated and
thus can reinforce each other. In this paper, we propose
a novel recurrent attention convolutional neural network
(RA-CNN) which recursively learns discriminative region
attention and region-based feature representation at multiple scales in a mutually reinforced way. The learning at
each scale consists of a classification sub-network and an
attention proposal sub-network (APN). The APN starts from
full images, and iteratively generates region attention from
coarse to fine by taking previous predictions as a reference,
while a finer scale network takes as input an amplified attended region from previous scales in a recurrent way. The
proposed RA-CNN is optimized by an intra-scale classification loss and an inter-scale ranking loss, to mutually learn
accurate region attention and fine-grained representation.
RA-CNN does not need bounding box/part annotations and
can be trained end-to-end. We conduct comprehensive experiments and show that RA-CNN achieves the best performance in three fine-grained tasks, with relative accuracy
gains of 3.3%, 3.7%, 3.8%, on CUB Birds, Stanford Dogs
and Stanford Cars, respectively.

1. Introduction
Recognizing fine-grained categories by computer vision
techniques (e.g., classifying bird species [2, 34], flower
types [21, 24], car models [14, 19], etc.) has attracted
extensive attention. The task is very challenging as some
fine-grained categories (e.g., “eared grebe” and “horned
grebe”) can only be recognized by domain experts. Different from general recognition, the fine-grained image recog-

Figure 1. Two bird species of woodpecker. We can observe the
very subtle visual differences from highly local regions (e.g., heads in yellow boxes), which are difficult to learn from the original
image scale. However, the difference can be more vivid and significant if we can learn to zoom into the attended regions at a finer
scale. [Best viewed in color]

nition should be capable of localizing and representing the
very marginal visual differences within subordinate categories, and thus can benefit a wide variety of applications, e.g., expert-level image recognition [15, 31], rich image
captioning [1, 12], and so on.
The challenges of fine-grained recognition are mainly two-fold: discriminative region localization and finegrained feature learning from those regions. Previous research has made impressive progresses by introducing partbased recognition frameworks, which typically consist of
two steps: 1) identifying possible object regions by analyzing convolutional responses from neural networks in
an unsupervised fashion or by using supervised bounding
box/part annotations, and 2) extracting discriminative features from each region and encoding them into compact
vectors for recognition. Although promising results have
been reported, further improvement suffers from the following limitations. First, human-defined regions or the regions learned by existing unsupervised methods may not
be optimal for machine classification [35]. Second, subtle
visual differences existed in local regions from similar fine14438

