Learning Cross-Modal Deep Representations for Robust Pedestrian Detection
Dan Xu1 , Wanli Ouyang2,3 , Elisa Ricci4,5 , Xiaogang Wang2 , Nicu Sebe1
1
University of Trento, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
The University of Sydney, 4 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 5 University of Perugia
{dan.xu, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it, eliricci@fbk.eu, {wlouyang, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Cross-Modality Transfer
Deep Reconstruction

This paper presents a novel method for detecting pedestrians under adverse illumination conditions. Our approach
relies on a novel cross-modality learning framework and it
is based on two main phases. First, given a multimodal
dataset, a deep convolutional network is employed to learn
a non-linear mapping, modeling the relations between RGB
and thermal data. Then, the learned feature representations
are transferred to a second deep network, which receives as
input an RGB image and outputs the detection results. In
this way, features which are both discriminative and robust
to bad illumination conditions are learned. Importantly, at
test time, only the second pipeline is considered and no thermal data are required. Our extensive evaluation demonstrates that the proposed approach outperforms the state-ofthe-art on the challenging KAIST multispectral pedestrian
dataset and it is competitive with previous methods on the
popular Caltech dataset.

1. Introduction
Great strides in pedestrian detection research [3] have
been made for challenging situations, such as cluttered
background, substantial occlusions and tiny target appearance. As for many other computer vision tasks, in the
last few years significant performance gains have been
achieved thanks to approaches based on deep networks
[21, 1, 17, 32]. Additionally, the adoption of novel sensors, e.g. thermal and depth cameras, has provided new opportunities, advancing the state-of-the-art on pedestrian detection by tackling problems such as adverse illumination
conditions and occlusions [15, 11, 24]. However, the vast
majority of wide camera networks in surveillance systems
still employ traditional RGB sensors and detecting pedestrians in case of illumination variation, shadows, and low
external light is still a challenging open issue.
This paper introduces a novel approach based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to address this problem. Our method is inspired by recent works demonstrat-

Deep Detection

sing ??
Mis data?
l
a
erm

th
RGB Data

Thermal Data

RRN

RGB Data

MSDN

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. Our approach relies on two
networks. The first network, named Region Reconstruction Network (RRN) is used to learn a non-linear feature mapping between
RGB and thermal image pairs. Then, the learned model is transferred to a target domain where thermal inputs are no longer available and a second network, the Multi-Scale Detection Network
(MDN), is used for learning an RGB-based pedestrian detector.

ing that learning deep representations from cross-modal
data is greatly beneficial for detection and recognition tasks
[12, 13]. However, most approaches assume the availability
of large annotated datasets. In the specific case of pedestrian
detection, the community can rely on a great abundance of
visual data gathered with surveillance cameras, cars and
robotic platforms, but there are few labeled multi-modal
datasets. Therefore, motivated by the successes of recent
unsupervised deep learning techniques, we introduce an approach for learning cross-modal representations for pedestrian detection which does not require pedestrian bounding
box annotations. More specifically, we propose leveraging
information from multispectral data and using a deep convolutional network to learn a non-linear mapping from RGB
to thermal images without human supervision. This crossmodal mapping is then exploited by integrating the learned
representations into a second deep architecture, operating
on RGB data and effectively modeling multi-scale information. Importantly, at test time, thermal data are not needed
and pedestrian detection is performed only on color images.
Figure 1 depicts an overview of the proposed approach.
Our intuition, illustrated in Fig.2, is that, by exploiting multispectral data with the proposed method, it is easier to distinguish hard negative samples in color images (e.g., electric
15363

