FastMask: Segment Multi-scale Object Candidates in One Shot
Hexiang Hu∗ †
USC

Shiyi Lan∗ †
Fudan University

Yuning Jiang
Megvii Inc.

Zhimin Cao
Megvii Inc.

Fei Sha
USC

hexiangh@usc.edu

sylan14@fudan.edu.cn

jyn@megvii.com

czm@megvii.com

feisha@usc.edu

Abstract
Objects appear to scale differently in natural images.
This fact requires methods dealing with object-centric tasks
(e.g. object proposal) to have robust performance over variances in object scales. In the paper, we present a novel segment proposal framework, namely FastMask, which takes
advantage of hierarchical features in deep convolutional
neural networks to segment multi-scale objects in one shot.
Innovatively, we adapt segment proposal network into three
different functional components (body, neck and head). We
further propose a weight-shared residual neck module as
well as a scale-tolerant attentional head module for efficient one-shot inference. On MS COCO benchmark, the
proposed FastMask outperforms all state-of-the-art segment proposal methods in average recall being 2∼5 times
faster. Moreover, with a slight trade-off in accuracy, FastMask can segment objects in near real time (∼13 fps) with
800×600 resolution images, demonstrating its potential in
practical applications. Our implementation is available on
https://github.com/voidrank/FastMask.

1. Introduction
Object proposal is considered as the first and fundamental step in object detection task [8, 25, 1, 16, 10, 29]. As the
domain rapidly progressed, a renewed interest in object segment proposal has received intensive attentions [6, 20, 21,
5, 2]. Different from traditional object proposal methods,
segment proposal algorithms are expected to generate a
pixel-wise segment instead of a bounding box for each
object. From this perspective, segment proposal inherits
from both object proposal and image segmentation, and
takes a step further towards simultaneous detection and segmentation [11], which brings more challenges to overcome.
Among all these challenges, how to tackle the scale variances in object appearance remains the most critical one.
Compared to bounding-box-based (bbox-based) object proposal, scale variance becomes a more serious problem for
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work was done during their internships at Megvii Inc.

Receptive field
(too small)

Bbox-based proposal

Segment-based proposal

(a) Problems with small receptive field
Receptive field
(too large)

Ground truth

Segment-based proposal

(b) Problems with large receptive field

Figure 1. How a mismatched receptive field affects the segment
proposal results. Refer to text for detailed explanation.

segment proposal. It is due to that in segment proposal,
a highly matched receptive field is demanded to distinguish the foreground object from background. In Figure 1
two examples are given to explain how a mismatched receptive field affects the segment proposal results: on one
hand (Figure 1 (a)), when the receptive field of object proposer is much smaller than the object itself (e.g. perceiving
only a window of a bus), the bbox-based proposer could
still roughly estimate the bounding box with prior knowledge. However, the mission becomes almost impossible for
a segment-based proposer as they need to imagine the complete contour of the bus; on the other hand (Figure 1 (b)),
too large receptive field may introduce noises from backgrounds and result in the incorrect instance-level segments.
For example, a segment-based proposer could be distracted
by other people standing nearby the target person, leading
to an inaccurate mask covering not only the target person.
As a consequence, once the receptive field of a segmentbased proposer is fixed, object scale variance will badly affect both segmentation fineness and proposal recall.
In general, existing methods [6, 20, 21, 5, 2] could be
divided into two major categories by how they deal with
scale variances. The first category [6, 2] uses extra bboxbased object proposals or object detections as initial inputs.
1991

