Scene Flow to Action Map: A New Representation for RGB-D based
Action Recognition with Convolutional Neural Networks
Pichao Wang1 , Wanqing Li1 , Zhimin Gao1∗, Yuyao Zhang1 , Chang Tang2 and Philip Ogunbona1
1
Advanced Multimedia Research Lab, University of Wollongong, Australia
2
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
pw212@uowmail.edu.au,wanqing@uow.edu.au,{zg126, yz606}@uowmail.edu.au
happytangchang@gmail.com, philipo@uow.edu.au

Abstract
Scene flow describes the motion of 3D objects in real
world and potentially could be the basis of a good feature for 3D action recognition. However, its use for action recognition, especially in the context of convolutional
neural networks (ConvNets), has not been previously studied. In this paper, we propose the extraction and use of
scene flow for action recognition from RGB-D data. Previous works have considered the depth and RGB modalities
as separate channels and extract features for later fusion.
We take a different approach and consider the modalities as
one entity, thus allowing feature extraction for action recognition at the beginning. Two key questions about the use of
scene flow for action recognition are addressed: how to organize the scene flow vectors and how to represent the long
term dynamics of videos based on scene flow. In order to
calculate the scene flow correctly on the available datasets,
we propose an effective self-calibration method to align the
RGB and depth data spatially without knowledge of the
camera parameters. Based on the scene flow vectors, we
propose a new representation, namely, Scene Flow to Action Map (SFAM), that describes several long term spatiotemporal dynamics for action recognition. We adopt a channel transform kernel to transform the scene flow vectors to
an optimal color space analogous to RGB. This transformation takes better advantage of the trained ConvNets models
over ImageNet. Experimental results indicate that this new
representation can surpass the performance of state-of-theart methods on two large public datasets.

1. Introduction
Recognition of human actions from RGB-D data has
generated renewed interest in the computer vision community due to the recent availability of easy-to-use and
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1: Samples of variants of SFAM for action “Bounce
Basketball” from M2 I Dataset [21]. For top-left to bottomright, the images correspond to SFAM-D, SFAM-S, SFAMRPf, SFAM-RPb, SFAM-AMRPf, SFAM-AMRPb, SFAMLABRPf, SFAM-LABRPb.
low-cost depth sensors (e.g. Microsoft Kinect TM sensor).
In addition to tristimulus visual data captured by conventional RGB cameras, depth data are provided in RGB-D
cameras, thus encoding rich 3D structural information of
the entire scene. Previous works [28, 16, 10, 58, 61, 13]
showed the effectiveness of fusing the two modalities for
3D action recognition. However, all the previous methods consider the depth and RGB modalities as separate
channels from which to extract features and fuse them at
a later stage for action recognition. Since the depth and
RGB data are captured simultaneously, it will be interesting to extract features considering them jointly as one entity. Optical flow-based methods for 2D action recognition [48, 18, 31, 30, 50] have provided the state-of-the-art
results for several years. In contrast to optical flow which
provides the projection of the scene motion onto the image plane, scene flow [41, 6, 26, 8, 11, 37, 32] estimates
the actual 3D motion field. Thus, we propose the use of
scene flow for 3D action recognition. Differently from the
optical flow-based late fusion methods on RGB and depth

595

