Multi-Object Tracking with Quadruplet Convolutional Neural Networks
Jeany Son
Mooyeol Baek
Minsu Cho
Bohyung Han
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{jeany, mooyeol, mscho, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose Quadruplet Convolutional Neural Networks
(Quad-CNN) for multi-object tracking, which learn to associate object detections across frames using quadruplet
losses. The proposed networks consider target appearances
together with their temporal adjacencies for data association. Unlike conventional ranking losses, the quadruplet
loss enforces an additional constraint that makes temporally adjacent detections more closely located than the ones
with large temporal gaps. We also employ a multi-task
loss to jointly learn object association and bounding box
regression for better localization. The whole network is
trained end-to-end. For tracking, the target association is
performed by minimax label propagation using the metric learned from the proposed network. We evaluate performance of our multi-object tracking algorithm on public
MOT Challenge datasets, and achieve outstanding results.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking for multiple targets in videos has been
widely studied for various applications, such as human motion analysis, autonomous driving, and video surveillance.
Despite substantial progress in recent years, even the stateof-the-art multi-object tracking algorithms still suffer from
various challenges such as severe occlusions and noisy detections in crowded scenes. Such issues frequently affect
tracking performance in real world scenarios.
Multi-object tracking aims to find an optimal set of trajectories of moving objects within a video. This problem is
typically formulated as a data association task, where an
external detector localizes target bounding boxes in each
frame, and then a tracking algorithm associates corresponding detection boxes across frames. This data association is
a challenging task in the presence of occlusions, missing
objects, and false alarms. Hence, rather than relying on associations over two consecutive frames, existing methods
typically leverage multiple candidate trajectories within a
larger temporal window [56, 3, 1, 6, 50, 8, 22]. In spite of
these efforts, existing multi-object tracking algorithms still

suffer from massive and inaccurate detections.
In recent years, deep learning techniques have achieved
the state-of-the-art performance in a variety of computer vision tasks such as image classification [25, 44, 17], semantic
segmentation [31, 36], and object tracking [35, 16]. However, there are only a few deep learning approaches to multiobject tracking [28, 48, 33], and their performances are not
as competitive as the techniques based on hand-crafted features. There are a couple of reasons that hamper the use
of deep learning techniques for multi-object tracking. First,
training data for multi-object tracking is not yet sufficient
to train deep neural networks with a large number of parameters. Only a limited number of sequences are available due to the cost of annotating ground-truths for video
frames. Second, existing deep neural networks pretrained
on the datasets for image classification have critical limitations in discriminating objects with subtle difference and
capturing motion features in video. While the success of
multi-object tracking relies on the effective use of both target appearance and motion, joint learning of the two factors
in deep neural networks has not been investigated in depth.
Motivated by this fact, we propose a novel multi-object
tracking algorithm using Quadruplet Convolutional Neural
Networks (Quad-CNN), which learns to associate detections across video frames using both appearance and motion
cues. Specifically, unlike conventional ranking losses, the
proposed quadruplet loss introduces an additional constraint
that temporally adjacent detections have smaller distances
than distant ones. This allows us to learn temporally smooth
appearance models of target objects, and is realized by combining appearance embedding with motion-aware position
embedding for metric learning. In addition, we incorporate
bounding-box regression to refine initial detections and improve localizations. We employ a multi-task loss to jointly
learn object association and bounding-box regression, and
the whole network is trained end-to-end. In tracking, we
compute distances between all pairs of detections within a
temporal sliding window using the learned metric, and apply a minimax label propagation to associate detections.
The main contributions of this paper is four-fold:
• We propose a quadruplet architecture of deep neural

5620

