Provable Self-Representation Based Outlier Detection in a Union of Subspaces
Chong You, Daniel P. Robinson, René Vidal
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA

Abstract
Many computer vision tasks involve processing large
amounts of data contaminated by outliers, which need to
be detected and rejected. While outlier detection methods
based on robust statistics have existed for decades, only recently have methods based on sparse and low-rank representation been developed along with guarantees of correct
outlier detection when the inliers lie in one or more lowdimensional subspaces. This paper proposes a new outlier
detection method that combines tools from sparse representation with random walks on a graph. By exploiting the
property that data points can be expressed as sparse linear combinations of each other, we obtain an asymmetric
affinity matrix among data points, which we use to construct a weighted directed graph. By defining a suitable
Markov Chain from this graph, we establish a connection
between inliers/outliers and essential/inessential states of
the Markov chain, which allows us to detect outliers by using random walks. We provide a theoretical analysis that
justifies the correctness of our method under geometric and
connectivity assumptions. Experimental results on image
databases demonstrate its superiority with respect to stateof-the-art sparse and low-rank outlier detection methods.

1. Introduction
In many applications in computer vision, including motion estimation and segmentation [18] and face recognition
[2], high-dimensional datasets can be well approximated by
a union of low-dimensional subspaces. Such applications
have motivated a lot of research on the problems of learning
one or more subspaces from data, a.k.a. subspace learning
and subspace clustering, respectively. In practice, datasets
are often contaminated by points that do not lie in the subspaces, i.e. outliers. In such situations, it is often essential to
detect and reject these outliers before any subsequent processing/analysis is performed.
Prior work. We address the problem of outlier detection in
the setting when the inlier data are assumed to lie close to
a union of unknown low-dimensional subspaces (low relative to the dimension of the ambient space). A traditional
method for solving this problem is RANSAC [12], which is

based on randomly selecting a subset of points, fitting a subspace to them, and counting the number of points that are
well fit by this subspace; this process is repeated for sufficiently many trials and the best fit is chosen. RANSAC is
intrinsically combinatorial and the number of trials needed
to find a good estimate of the subspace grows exponentially
with the subspace dimension. Consequently, the methods of
choice have been to robustly learn the subspaces by penalizing the sum of unsquared distances (in lieu of squared distances used in classical methods such as PCA) of points to
the closest subspace [9, 21, 54, 53]. Such a penalty is robust
to outliers because it reduces the contributions from large
residuals arising from outliers. However, the optimization
problem is usually nonconvex and a good initialization is
extremely important for finding the optimal solution.
The groundbreaking work of Wright et al. [47] and
Candès et al. [4] on using convex optimization techniques to
solve the PCA problem with robustness to corrupted entries
has led to many recent methods for PCA with robustness to
outliers [48, 28, 23, 52, 20]. For example, Outlier Pursuit
[48] uses the nuclear norm k · k∗ to seek low-rank solutions
by solving the problem minL kX −Lk2,1 +λkLk∗ for some
λ > 0. A prominent advantage of convex optimization techniques is that they are guaranteed to correctly identify outliers under certain conditions. Very recently, several nonconvex outlier detection methods have also been developed
with guaranteed correctness [19, 6]. Nonetheless, these
methods typically model a unique inlier subspace, e.g., by
a low rank matrix L in Outlier Pursuit, and therefore cannot deal with multiple inlier subspaces since the union of
multiple subspaces could be high-dimensional.
Another class of methods with theoretical guarantees for
correctness utilizes the fact that outliers are expected to have
low similarities with other data points. In [5, 1], a multiway similarity is introduced that is defined from the polar
curvature, which has the advantage of exploiting the subspace structure. However, the number of combinations in
multi-way similarity can be prohibitively large. Some recent works have explored using inner products between data
points for outlier detection [16, 35]. Although computationally very efficient, these methods require the inliers to be
well distributed and densely sampled within the subspaces.

3395

