Visual-Inertial-Semantic Scene Representation for 3D Object Detection
Jingming Dong∗
Xiaohan Fei∗
Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{dong, feixh, soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We describe a system to detect objects in threedimensional space using video and inertial sensors (accelerometer and gyrometer), ubiquitous in modern mobile
platforms from phones to drones. Inertials afford the ability
to impose class-specific scale priors for objects, and provide a global orientation reference. A minimal sufficient
representation, the posterior of semantic (identity) and syntactic (pose) attributes of objects in space, can be decomposed into a geometric term, which can be maintained by a
localization-and-mapping filter, and a likelihood function,
which can be approximated by a discriminatively-trained
convolutional neural network. The resulting system can
process the video stream causally in real time, and provides
a representation of objects in the scene that is persistent:
Confidence in the presence of objects grows with evidence,
and objects previously seen are kept in memory even when
temporarily occluded, with their return into view automatically predicted to prime re-detection.

1. Introduction
We deem an “object detector” to be a system that takes
as input images and produces as output decisions as to the
presence of objects in the scene. We design one based on
the following premises: (a) Objects exist in the scene, not
in the image; (b) they persist, so confidence on their presence should grow as more evidence is accrued from multiple
(test) images; (c) once seen, the system should be aware of
their presence even when temporarily not visible; (d) such
awareness should allow it to predict when they will return
into view, based on scene geometry and topology; (e) objects have characteristic shape and size in 3D, and vestibular (inertial) sensors provide a global scale and orientation
reference that the system should leverage on.
Detecting objects from images is not the same as detecting images of objects (Fig. 5). Objects do not flicker inand-out of existence, and do not disappear when not seen
∗ Equal contributors.

(Fig. 6). What we call “object detectors” traditionally refers
to algorithms that process a single image and return a decision as to the presence of objects of a certain class in
said image, missing several critical elements (a)-(e) above.
Nevertheless, such algorithms can be modified to produce
not decisions, but evidence (likelihood) for the presence of
objects, which can be processed over time and integrated
against the geometric and topological structure of the scene,
to yield an object detector that has the desired characteristics. The scene context encompasses both the identity and
co-occurrence of objects (semantics) but also their spatial
arrangement in three-dimensional (3D) space (syntax).

1.1. Summary of Contributions and Limitations
To design an object detector based on the premises
above, we (a) formalize an explicit model of the posterior
probability of object attributes, both semantic (identity) and
syntactic (pose), natively in the 3D scene (Sect. 3), which
(b) maintains and updates such a posterior, processing each
image causally over time (Sect. 3.2); (c) the posterior distribution is a form of short-term memory (representation),
which we use to (d) predict visibility and occlusion relations (Sect. 5.3). We exploit the availability of cheap inertial sensors in almost every mobile computing platform to
(e) impose class-specific priors on the size of objects (Sect.
5.2).
The key insight from the formalization (a) above is that
an optimal (minimal sufficient invariant [59]) representation
for objects in the scene (Eq. 1) can be factored into two
components: One geometric – which can be computed recursively by a localization (SLAM) system (Eq. 3) – and
the other a likelihood term, which can be evaluated instantaneously by a discriminatively-trained convolutional neural network (CNN, Eq. 4) operating on a single image.
Some consequences of this insight are discussed in Sect.
6. In practice, this means that we can implement our system using some off-the-shelf components, fine-tuning a pretrained CNN, and at least for some rudimentary modeling
assumptions, our system operates in real-time, generating
object-scene representations at 10-30 frames per second. In
Sect. 5 we report the results of a representative sample of
1960

