An Efficient Background Term for 3D Reconstruction
and Tracking with Smooth Surface Models
Mariano Jaimez1,2∗
Thomas J. Cashman3
Andrew Fitzgibbon3
1
Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez
Daniel Cremers2
1

University of Malaga

2

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
We present a novel strategy to shrink and constrain a 3D
model, represented as a smooth spline-like surface, within
the visual hull of an object observed from one or multiple
views. This new ‘background’ or ‘silhouette’ term combines
the efficiency of previous approaches based on an imageplane distance transform with the accuracy of formulations
based on raycasting or ray potentials. The overall formulation is solved by alternating an inner nonlinear minimization
(raycasting) with a joint optimization of the surface geometry, the camera poses and the data correspondences. Experiments on 3D reconstruction and object tracking show that
the new formulation corrects several deficiencies of existing
approaches, for instance when modelling non-convex shapes.
Moreover, our proposal is more robust against defects in the
object segmentation and inherently handles the presence of
uncertainty in the measurements (e.g. null depth values in
images provided by RGB-D cameras).

1. Introduction
An important problem in computer vision is the recovery
of 3D models from one or more images, whether RGB or
depth. Examples include human body tracking [6], singleview reconstruction [13], or the acquisition of deformable
object class models [3]. A dominant paradigm is to express
the problem as energy minimization: find the 3D model
parameters (including model shape, camera positions, etc.)
which best explain the given data.
Formulations of such problems as energy minimization
typically involve two key data terms: a term encouraging
‘foreground’ measurements within the object to be explained
by the model, and a ‘background’ or ‘empty space’ term,
requiring that the model does not project in front of data
∗ Research funded by the Spanish Government and the European Re-

gional Development Fund (ERDF) under contract DPI2014-55826-R, the
Spanish grant program FPI-MICINN 2012 and the ERC Consolidator Grant
3DReloaded.

3

Microsoft

Data

NB

SK1

DT

SK2

Optimization

Initial control mesh
and limit surface

Figure 1. Modelling an arch from a single depth image and a
challenging initial control mesh topology. Even with depth data,
the model spills over into the background region (NB). We show
how existing background terms based on the distance transform
(DT) fail to capture the concavity, while our new methods based on
shrinking kernels (SK1 and SK2 ) succeed.

samples known to be outside the object. Typically the foreground terms are easily written as variants of a closest-point
or closest-intensity objective, which are readily optimized
using ICP [1] or lifting algorithms [7, 3]. In contrast, the
background terms involve an expensive raycasting or rendering operation, or are approximated by projecting a finite
subset of points on the model surface into a distance transform.
This paper’s contribution is to illustrate the failings of
distance-transform-based background terms, and to introduce a new formulation with the accuracy of raycasting but
which admits efficient optimization using smooth-function
optimizers such as Levenberg-Marquardt. The key innovation is to write raycasting as an optimization problem in its
own right, and to solve the min-of-max optimization that
results from combining raycasting with the foreground term.
We will demonstrate the advantages of such a formulation in two very common scenarios in computer vision: 3D
reconstruction and non-rigid tracking. In both cases the ob-

7177

