Deep Watershed Transform for Instance Segmentation
Min Bai
Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{mbai, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Most contemporary approaches to instance segmentation use complex pipelines involving conditional random
fields, recurrent neural networks, object proposals, or template matching schemes. In this paper, we present a simple yet powerful end-to-end convolutional neural network to
tackle this task. Our approach combines intuitions from the
classical watershed transform and modern deep learning to
produce an energy map of the image where object instances
are unambiguously represented as energy basins. We then
perform a cut at a single energy level to directly yield connected components corresponding to object instances. Our
model achieves more than double the performance over
the state-of-the-art on the challenging Cityscapes Instance
Level Segmentation task.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation seeks to identify the semantic
class of each pixel as well as associate each pixel with a
physical instance of an object. This is in contrast with
semantic segmentation, which is only concerned with the
first task. Instance segmentation is particularly challenging in street scenes, where the scale of the objects can vary
tremendously. Furthermore, the appearance of objects are
affected by partial occlusions, specularities, intensity saturation, and motion blur. Solving this task will, however,
tremendously benefit applications such as object manipulation in robotics, or scene understanding and tracking for
self-driving cars.
Current approaches generally use complex pipelines to
handle instance extraction involving object proposals [20,
22, 7], conditional random fields (CRF) [32, 33], large recurrent neural networks (RNN) [24, 23, 2], or template
matching [28]. In contrast, we present an exceptionally
simple and intuitive method that significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art. In particular, we derive a novel approach which brings together classical grouping techniques
and modern deep neural networks.
The watershed transform is a well studied method in

mathematical morphology. Its application to image segmentation can be traced back to the 70’s [4, 3]. The idea
behind this transform is fairly intuitive. Any greyscale image can be considered as a topographic surface. If we flood
this surface from its minima and prevent the merging of the
waters coming from different sources, we effectively partition the image into different components (i.e., regions).
This transformation is typically applied to the image gradient, thus the basins correspond to homogeneous regions in
the image. A significant limitation of the watershed transform is its propensity to over-segment the image. One of
the possible solutions is to estimate the locations of object
instance markers, which guide the selection of a subset of
these basins [11, 21]. Heuristics on the relative depth of the
basins can be exploited in order to merge basins. However,
extracting appropriate markers and creating good heuristics
is difficult in practice. As a consequence, modern techniques for instance segmentation do not exploit the watershed transform.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach which combines the strengths of modern deep neural networks with the
power of this classical bottom-up grouping technique. We
propose to directly learn the energy of the watershed transform such that each basin corresponds to a single instance,
while all dividing ridges are at the same height in the energy domain. As a consequence, the components can be
extracted by a cut at a single energy level without leading
to over-segmentation. Our approach has several key advantages: it can be easily trained end-to-end, and produces very
fast and accurate estimates. Our method does not rely on iterative strategies such as RNNs, thus has a constant runtime
regardless of the number of object instances.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in the
challenging Cityscapes Instance Segmentation benchmark
[6], and show that we more than double the performance
of the current state-of-the-art. In the following sections, we
first review related work. We then present the details behind
our intuition and model design, followed by an analysis of
our model’s performance. Finally, we explore the impact of
various parts of our model in ablation studies.
15221

