Detect, Replace, Refine: Deep Structured Prediction For Pixel Wise Labeling
Spyros Gidaris
University Paris-Est, LIGM
Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

Nikos Komodakis
University Paris-Est, LIGM
Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

spyros.gidaris@imagine.enpc.fr

nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract
Pixel wise image labeling is an interesting and challenging problem with great significance in the computer vision
community. In order for a dense labeling algorithm to be
able to achieve accurate and precise results, it has to consider the dependencies that exist in the joint space of both
the input and the output variables. An implicit approach
for modeling those dependencies is by training a deep neural network that, given as input an initial estimate of the
output labels and the input image, it will be able to predict a new refined estimate for the labels. In this context,
our work is concerned with what is the optimal architecture for performing the label improvement task. We argue
that the prior approaches of either directly predicting new
label estimates or predicting residual corrections w.r.t. the
initial labels with feed-forward deep network architectures
are sub-optimal. Instead, we propose a generic architecture that decomposes the label improvement task to three
steps: 1) detecting the initial label estimates that are incorrect, 2) replacing the incorrect labels with new ones, and
finally 3) refining the renewed labels by predicting residual corrections w.r.t. them. Furthermore, we explore and
compare various other alternative architectures that consist of the aforementioned Detection, Replace, and Refine
components. We extensively evaluate the examined architectures in the challenging task of dense disparity estimation (stereo matching) and we report both quantitative and
qualitative results on three different datasets. Finally, our
dense disparity estimation network that implements the proposed generic architecture, achieves state-of-the-art results
in the KITTI 2015 test surpassing prior approaches by a
significant margin. We plan to release the Torch [4] code
that implements the paper in: https://github.com/
gidariss/DRR_struct_pred/ .

1. Introduction
Dense image labeling is a problem of paramount importance in the computer vision community as it encompasses

many low or high level vision tasks including stereo matching [37], optical flow [12], surface normals estimation [5],
and semantic segmentation [18], to mention a few characteristic examples. In all these cases the goal is to assign
a discrete or continuous value for each pixel in the image.
Due to its importance, there is a vast amount of work on this
problem. Recent methods can be roughly divided into three
main classes of approaches.
The first class focuses on developing independent patch
classifiers/regressors [31, 29, 30, 18, 7, 20, 23] that would
directly predict the pixel label given as input an image patch
centered on it or, in cases like stereo matching and optical flow, would be used for comparing patches between
different images in order to pick pairs of best matching
pixels [19, 36, 37, 38]. Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) [16] have demonstrated excellent performance in the aforementioned tasks thanks to their ability
to learn complex image representations by harnessing vast
amount of training data [14, 32, 11]. However, despite their
great representational power, just applying DCNNs on image patches, does not capture the structure of output labels,
which is an important aspect of dense image labeling tasks.
For instance, independent feed-forward DCNN patch predictors do not take into consideration the correlations that
exist between nearby pixel labels. In addition, feed-forward
DCNNs have the extra disadvantages that they usually involve multiple consecutive down-sampling operations (i.e.
max-pooling or strided convolutions) and that the top most
convolutional layers do not capture factors such as image
edges or other fine image structures. Both of the above
properties may prevent such methods from achieving precise and accurate results in dense image labeling tasks.
Another class of methods tries to model the joint dependencies of both the input and output variables by use of
probabilistic graphical models such as Conditional Random
Fields (CRFs) [15]. In CRFs, the dense image labeling task
is performed through maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference in a graphical model that incorporates prior knowledge
about the nature of the task in hand with pairwise edge potential between the graph nodes of the label variables. For
15248

