Multiple People Tracking by Lifted Multicut and Person Re-identification
Siyu Tang1,2∗
Mykhaylo Andriluka1
Bjoern Andres1
Bernt Schiele1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Tracking multiple persons in a monocular video of a
crowded scene is a challenging task. Humans can master it
even if they loose track of a person locally by re-identifying
the same person based on their appearance. Care must be
taken across long distances, as similar-looking persons need
not be identical. In this work, we propose a novel graphbased formulation that links and clusters person hypotheses
over time by solving an instance of a minimum cost lifted
multicut problem. Our model generalizes previous works by
introducing a mechanism for adding long-range attractive
connections between nodes in the graph without modifying
the original set of feasible solutions. This allows us to reward tracks that assign detections of similar appearance
to the same person in a way that does not introduce implausible solutions. To effectively match hypotheses over
longer temporal gaps we develop new deep architectures for
re-identification of people. They combine holistic representations extracted with deep networks and body pose layout
obtained with a state-of-the-art pose estimation model. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our formulation by reporting a new state-of-the-art for the MOT16 benchmark. The
code and pre-trained models are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Multiple people tracking has improved considerably in
the last two years, driven also by the MOT challenges
[18, 20]. One trend in this area of research is to develop
CNN-based feature representations for people appearance to
effectively model relations between detections [14, 17]. This
trend has two advantages: Firstly, representations of people
appearance can be learned for varying camera positions and
motion, a goal less easy to achieve with simple motion models, especially for monocular video due to the complexity
of motion under perspective projection. Secondly, appearance facilitates the re-identification of people across long
∗ This work was done while S. Tang was at Max Planck Institute for
Informatics.
1 http://mpi-inf.mpg.de/multicut_tracking

Figure 1. Qualitative results on the MOT16 benchmark. The solid
line under each bounding box indicates the life time of the track.
The lifted multicut tracking model is able to link people through
occlusions and produces persistent long-lived tracks.

distances, unlike motion models that become asymptotically
uncorrelated. Yet, incorporating long-range re-identification
into algorithms for tracking remains challenging. One reason is the simple fact that similar looking people are not
necessarily identical. To address these challenges, in this
paper, we generalize the mathematical model of [28] so as
to express the fact that similar looking people are considered
as the same person only if they are connected by at least one
feasible track (possibly skipping occlusion). More specifically, every detection is represented by a node in a graph;
edges connect detections within and across time frames, and
costs assigned to the edges can be positive, to encourage
the incident nodes to be in the same track, or negative, to
encourage the incident nodes to be in distinct tracks. Such
mathematical abstraction has several advantages. Firstly, the
number of persons is not fixed or biased by the definition of
the problem, but is estimated in an unbiased fashion from
the video sequence and is determined by the solution of the
problem. Secondly, multiple detections of the same person
in the same frame are effectively clustered, which eliminates
the need for heuristic non-maxima suppression. In order to
avoid that distinct but similar looking people are assigned
to the same track, a distinction must be made between the
edges that define possible connections (i.e., a feasible set)
and the edges that define the costs or rewards for assigning
13539

