Unsupervised Video Summarization with Adversarial LSTM Networks
Behrooz Mahasseni, Michael Lam and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR
behrooz.mahasseni@gmail.com

{lamm,sinisa}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of unsupervised video
summarization, formulated as selecting a sparse subset of
video frames that optimally represent the input video. Our
key idea is to learn a deep summarizer network to minimize distance between training videos and a distribution
of their summarizations, in an unsupervised way. Such a
summarizer can then be applied on a new video for estimating its optimal summarization. For learning, we specify a
novel generative adversarial framework, consisting of the
summarizer and discriminator. The summarizer is the autoencoder long short-term memory network (LSTM) aimed
at, first, selecting video frames, and then decoding the obtained summarization for reconstructing the input video.
The discriminator is another LSTM aimed at distinguishing between the original video and its reconstruction from
the summarizer. The summarizer LSTM is cast as an adversary of the discriminator, i.e., trained so as to maximally
confuse the discriminator. This learning is also regularized
for sparsity. Evaluation on four benchmark datasets, consisting of videos showing diverse events in first- and thirdperson views, demonstrates our competitive performance in
comparison to fully supervised state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
A wide range of applications require automated summarization of videos [36, 42], e.g., for saving time of human
inspection, or enabling subsequent video analysis. Depending on the application, there are various distinct definitions
of video summarization [30, 27, 28, 1, 40, 37, 6, 20, 18,
14, 25, 12]. In this paper, we consider unsupervised video
summarization, and cast it as a key frame selection problem. Given a sequence of video frames, our goal is to select
a sparse subset of frames such that a representation error
between the video and its summary is minimal.
Our problem statement differs from other formulations
considered in the literature, for example, when a particular

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Overview: Our goal is to select key frames
such that a distance between feature representations of the
selected key frames and the video is minimized. (b) As
specifying a suitable distance between deep features is difficult, we use a generative adversarial framework for optimizing the frame selector. Our approach consists of a variational auto-encoder and a generative adversarial network.

domain of videos to be summarized is a priori known (e.g.,
first-person videos) [18], or when ground-truth annotations
of key frames are provided in training data based on attention, aesthetics, quality, landmark presence, and certain object occurrences and motions [9].
Fig. 1a shows an overview of our approach to selecting
key frames from a given video. The key frame selector is
learned so as to minimize a distance between features extracted from the video and the selected key frames. Following recent advances in deep learning [35, 41, 43], we extract
deep features from both the video and selected sequence
of key frames using a cascade of a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) – specifically GoogleNet [38] – and Long
Short-Term Memory Network (LSTM) [13, 35]. The CNN
is grounded onto pixels and extracts deep features from a
given frame. The LSTM then fuses a sequence of the CNN’s

202

