Noise-Blind Image Deblurring
Meiguang Jin
University of Bern
Switzerland

Stefan Roth
TU Darmstadt
Germany

Abstract
We present a novel approach to noise-blind deblurring,
the problem of deblurring an image with known blur, but
unknown noise level. We introduce an efficient and robust
solution based on a Bayesian framework using a smooth
generalization of the 0-1 loss. A novel bound allows the calculation of very high-dimensional integrals in closed form.
It avoids the degeneracy of Maximum a-Posteriori (MAP)
estimates and leads to an effective noise-adaptive scheme.
Moreover, we drastically accelerate our algorithm by using
Majorization Minimization (MM) without introducing any
approximation or boundary artifacts. We further speed up
convergence by turning our algorithm into a neural network
termed GradNet, which is highly parallelizable and can be
efficiently trained. We demonstrate that our noise-blind formulation can be integrated with different priors and significantly improves existing deblurring algorithms in the noiseblind and in the known-noise case. Furthermore, GradNet
leads to state-of-the-art performance across different noise
levels, while retaining high computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Non-blind image deblurring has been studied extensively
in the literature. Its principal assumption is that the blur
kernel affecting the image is known ahead of time. While
this may seem limiting, the blur may be known from the design of the imaging system [14] or can be estimated through
other modalities, e.g., inertial sensors [12]. Moreover, the
vast majority of blind deblurring algorithms have a nonblind subcomponent [15], alternating between kernel estimation and non-blind deblurring.
Even if the blur kernel is known, image deblurring is still
difficult due to the loss of high-frequency information and
the sensor noise. Moreover, noise cannot be avoided even
with the best image sensors. Although we might theoretically calibrate the noise level for each camera and each ISO
level, this quickly becomes infeasible in practice.
One approach to address this issue is to use a separate
noise estimator to tune a deblurring algorithm that assumes

Paolo Favaro
University of Bern
Switzerland

known noise. For example [13, 24, 25, 37] focus on the
scenario where the noise level is known or user specified.
Discriminative approaches [24, 25] are even custom-trained
for specific noise levels; we would need to train and store a
deblurring method for each noise level, which is not practical. A key challenge of a separate noise estimation step is
that most noise estimation algorithms [6, 8, 17, 19, 35] are
designed for non-blurry input. An exception is [36], which
is able to estimate noise levels from blurry images. As we
show in the experiments, the combination of noise estimation with subsequent deblurring can be suboptimal both in
accuracy and in execution time.
Therefore, we aim at estimating both the noise level and
a sharp image from a single noisy and blurred image, a
problem that we call noise-blind image deblurring. There
has been very little work on noise-blind deblurring so far.
Schmidt et al. [26] propose a Bayesian framework to deal
with the noise-blind case. Nevertheless, their samplingbased technique is computationally very intensive, thus impractical for high-resolution images. In fact, computational
efficiency is a challenge even in the known noise case; only
very few fast and effective approaches exist [13, 25, 30].
In this paper, we propose an approach to noise-blind deblurring based on a noise-adaptive formulation derived from
Bayesian principles. More specifically, instead of using the
common 0-1 loss, which yields the well-known Maximum
a-Posteriori (MAP) estimation, we use a smooth Gaussian
utility function. We treat noise as a parameter that can be
integrated into the data term of the energy function. As a
consequence our formulation is noise-adaptive, and tuning
for different noise levels is no longer needed. Moreover,
we majorize the energy function, such that FFT-based preconditioning can be applied, which speeds up the execution
process significantly, but also avoids artifacts from circular
boundary assumptions [25, 30]. We combine the above formulations and derive a convolutional neural network, which
we call GradNet, that can solve the noise-blind image deblurring problem with very high computational efficiency.
Each block of layers in GradNet implements a gradient descent step. Thus, the training of such network is the optimization of a gradient descent algorithm [2, 7]. We can also

3510

