STD2P: RGBD Semantic Segmentation using
Spatio-Temporal Data-Driven Pooling
Yang He1 , Wei-Chen Chiu1 , Margret Keuper2 and Mario Fritz1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics,
Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany

Image Sequence

We propose a novel superpixel-based multi-view convolutional neural network for semantic image segmentation.
The proposed network produces a high quality segmentation
of a single image by leveraging information from additional
views of the same scene. Particularly in indoor videos such
as captured by robotic platforms or handheld and bodyworn RGBD cameras, nearby video frames provide diverse
viewpoints and additional context of objects and scenes. To
leverage such information, we first compute region correspondences by optical flow and image boundary-based superpixels. Given these region correspondences, we propose
a novel spatio-temporal pooling layer to aggregate information over space and time. We evaluate our approach on
the NYU–Depth–V2 and the SUN3D datasets and compare
it to various state-of-the-art single-view and multi-view approaches. Besides a general improvement over the stateof- the-art, we also show the benefits of making use of unlabeled frames during training for multi-view as well as
single-view prediction.

...

...

Single-View
Predictions

Abstract

...

...

STD2P

Key frame

Final result

Ground truth

1. Introduction

Figure 1: An image sequence can provide rich context and
appearance, as well as unoccluded objects for visual recognition systems. Our Spatio-Temopral Data-Driven Pooling
(STD2P) approach integrates the multi-view information to
improve semantic image segmentation in challenging scenarios.

Consumer friendly and affordable combined image and
depth-sensors such as Kinect are nowadays commercially
deployed in scenarios such as gaming, personal 3D capture
and robotic platforms. Interpreting this raw data in terms
of a semantic segmentation is an important processing step
and hence has received significant attention. The goal is
typically formalized as predicting for each pixel in the image plane the corresponding semantic class.
For many of the aforementioned scenarios, an image sequence is naturally collected and provides a substantially
richer source of information than a single image. Multiple
images of the same scene can provide different views that
change the observed context, appearance, scale and occlusion patterns. The full sequence provides a richer observa-

tion of the scene and propagating information across views
has the potential to significantly improve the accuracy of semantic segmentations in more challenging views as shown
in Figure 1.
Hence, we propose a multi-view aggregation method by
a spatio-temporal data-driven pooling (STD2P) layer which
is a principled approach to incorporate multiple frames
into any convolutional network architecture. In contrast to
previous work on superpixel-based approaches [12, 4, 2],
we compute correspondences over time which allows for
knowledgeable and consistent prediction over space and
time.
As dense annotation of full training sequences is time
14837

