Unsupervised Vanishing Point Detection and Camera Calibration
from a Single Manhattan Image with Radial Distortion
Michel Antunes1 , João P. Barreto2 , Djamila Aouada1 , and Björn Ottersten1
1

Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg,
{michel.antunes,djamila.aouada,bjorn.ottersten}@uni.lu
2
Institute of Systems and Robotics (ISR), University of Coimbra,
jpbar@deec.uc.pt

Abstract
The article concerns the automatic calibration of a camera with radial distortion from a single image. It is known
that, under the mild assumption of square pixels and zero
skew, lines in the scene project into circles in the image,
and three lines suffice to calibrate the camera up to an ambiguity between focal length and radial distortion. The calibration results highly depend on accurate circle estimation,
which is hard to accomplish, because lines tend to project
into short circular arcs. To overcome this problem, we show
that, given a short circular arc edge, it is possible to robustly determine a line that goes through the center of the
corresponding circle. These lines, henceforth called Lines
of Circle Centres (LCCs), are used in a new method that detects sets of parallel lines and estimates the calibration parameters, including the center and amount of distortion, focal length, and camera orientation with respect to the Manhattan frame. Extensive experiments in both semi-synthetic
and real images show that our algorithm outperforms stateof-the-art approaches in unsupervised calibration from a
single image, while providing more information.

1. Introduction
The 3D reconstruction of a scene from multiple images is
a widely investigated topic in computer vision [1, 16]. The
abundance of imagery in the internet has motivated recent
efforts toward single view reconstruction. The works in single view reconstruction can be broadly divided into learning, e.g. [10], or geometrical based, e.g. [14]. The first category usually requires 2D or 3D data for the learning task,
while the second uses assumptions about the layout of the
scene for restricting the reconstruction process. Learning
based approaches are nowadays showing very promising re-

Figure 1. Unsupervised calibration from a single image with radial distortion. Traditional approaches (top) start by estimating
circles from edges, and use these circles for performing the calibration. The quality of the estimated circles is usually low, and
this has significant impact in the calibration accuracy. We propose
a new framework (bottom) that simultaneously performs circle fitting and VP estimation for accurate calibration.

sults. However, they usually only provide an approximation
of the scene being perceived [15, 10, 22]. The actual 3D
scene can only be recovered using geometric approaches.
Many geometric based approaches use the assumption of
orthogonality in man-made environments for computing a
3D model of the scene [6, 11, 14, 23]. They usually require
that the intrinsic camera calibration information is available
[14, 23], or the images do not exhibit significant radial distortion (RD) [11]. Nowadays, wide-angle-lenses incorporated into small cameras, e.g. GoPro, are ubiquitous, and
single image reconstruction techniques handling also this
type of imagery would be desirable. There are several methods and approaches for the calibration of cameras with RD
[25, 18]. However, they require multiple images and/or the
acquisition of a known object (e.g. checkerboard), which is,

4288

