Scalable Person Re-identification on Supervised Smoothed Manifold
Song Bai1 , Xiang Bai1∗, Qi Tian2
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 University of Texas at San Antonio
{songbai,xbai}@hust.edu.cn, qi.tian@utsa.edu

Abstract
Most existing person re-identification algorithms either
extract robust visual features or learn discriminative metrics for person images. However, the underlying manifold
which those images reside on is rarely investigated. That
raises a problem that the learned metric is not smooth with
respect to the local geometry structure of the data manifold.
In this paper, we study person re-identification with
manifold-based affinity learning, which did not receive
enough attention from this area. An unconventional
manifold-preserving algorithm is proposed, which can 1)
make the best use of supervision from training data, whose
label information is given as pairwise constraints; 2) scale
up to large repositories with low on-line time complexity;
and 3) be plunged into most existing algorithms, serving
as a generic postprocessing procedure to further boost the
identification accuracies. Extensive experimental results
on five popular person re-identification benchmarks consistently demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Especially, on the largest CUHK03 and Market-1501, our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art alternatives by a
large margin with high efficiency, which is more appropriate for practical applications.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is an active task driven by the applications of visual surveillance, which aims
to identify person images from the gallery that share the
same identity as the given probe. Due to the large intraclass variations in viewpoint, pose, illumination, blur and
occlusion, person re-identification is still a rather challenging task, though extensively studied in recent years.
Current research interests can be coarsely divided into two mainstreams: 1) those focus on designing robust visual
descriptors [55, 13, 37, 26, 64] to accurately model the appearance of person; 2) those seek for a discriminative metric [65, 25, 54, 28, 18], under which instances of the same
identity should be closer while instances of different identities are far away.
∗ Corresponding author.

Unlike those methods performed in the metric space,
we investigate person re-identification task from another
perspective, i.e., taking into account the manifold structure [42]. Since existing methods only analyze the pairwise
distances between instances, the underlying data manifold,
which those images reside on, is more or less neglected. It
results in that the learned relationships (similarities or dissimilarities) between instances are not smooth with respect
to the local geometry of the manifold.
To overcome this issue, potential solutions can be semisupervised [68, 66] or unsupervised [67, 5, 58, 12, 6] algorithms about manifold learning. However, directly applying
such algorithms to person re-identification might be problematic for two reasons. First, semi-supervised algorithms
(e.g., label propagation [68]) can only predict the labels of
unlabeled data, but fail to depict the relationship between
the probe and gallery instances. Moreover, they require category labels, while supervision in ReID is given as pairwise (equivalence) constraints [22]. Meanwhile, unsupervised algorithms (e.g., manifold ranking [67], graph transduction [7]) totally ignore the beneficial influence from the
labeled training data. Second, since most manifold learning algorithms operate on graph models, their algorithmic
complexity is usually high. Therefore, the heavy computational cost hinders their promotions in this field, especially
in recent years researchers begin to attach more importance
to the scalability issue [24, 63]. In summary, due to the
above factors, those conventional manifold learning algorithms are inadequate to derive a more faithful similarity
for person re-identification.
In this paper, we tackle person re-identification task on
the data manifold by proposing a novel affinity learning
algorithm called Supervised Smoothed Manifold (SSM).
Compared with existing algorithms, the primary contribution of SSM is that the similarity value between two instances is estimated in the context of other pairs of instances, thus the learned similarity well reflects the geometry structure of the underlying manifold.
Moreover, SSM is customized specifically for person reidentification, which further possesses three merits (as illustrated in Fig. 1) as follows: i) supervision: instead of

2530

