S3Pool: Pooling with Stochastic Spatial Sampling
Shuangfei Zhai: Hui Wu; Abhishek Kumar; Yu Cheng; Yongxi Lu§ Zhongfei Zhang: Rogerio Feris;
Binghamton Univeristy: IBM Research; UC San Diego§
{szhai2, zhongfei}@binghamton.edu {wuhu, abhishk, chengyu, rsferis}@us.ibm.com yol070@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Feature pooling layers (e.g., max pooling) in convolutional neural networks (CNNs) serve the dual purpose of
providing increasingly abstract representations as well as
yielding computational savings in subsequent convolutional
layers. We view the pooling operation in CNNs as a twostep procedure: first, a pooling window (e.g., 2 ˆ 2) slides
over the feature map with stride one which leaves the spatial
resolution intact, and second, downsampling is performed
by selecting one pixel from each non-overlapping pooling
window in an often uniform and deterministic (e.g., topleft) manner. Our starting point in this work is the observation that this regularly spaced downsampling arising from
non-overlapping windows, although intuitive from a signal
processing perspective (which has the goal of signal reconstruction), is not necessarily optimal for learning (where the
goal is to generalize). We study this aspect and propose
a novel pooling strategy with stochastic spatial sampling
(S3Pool), where the regular downsampling is replaced by a
more general stochastic version. We observe that this general stochasticity acts as a strong regularizer, and can also
be seen as doing implicit data augmentation by introducing distortions in the feature maps. We further introduce a
mechanism to control the amount of distortion to suit different datasets and architectures. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we perform extensive experiments on several popular image classification benchmarks,
observing excellent improvements over baseline models.

1. Introduction
The use of pooling layers (max pooling, in particular) in
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is critical for
their success in modern object recognition systems. In most
of the common implementations, each pooling layer downsamples the spatial dimensions of feature maps by a factor
of s (e.g., 2). This not only reduces the amount of computation required by the time consuming convolution operation in subsequent layers of the network, it also facilitates
the higher layers to learn more abstract representations by

looking at larger receptive fields.
In this paper, we provide new insights into the design of
the pooling operation by viewing it as a two-step procedure.
In the first step, a pooling window slides over the feature
map with stride size 1 producing the pooled output; in the
second step, spatial downsampling is performed by extracting the top-left corner element of each disjoint sˆs window,
resulting in a feature map with s times smaller spatial dimensions. Our starting point in this work is the observation
that although this uniformly spaced spatial downsampling
is reasonable from a signal processing perspective which
aims for signal reconstruction [19] and is also computationally friendly, it is not necessarily the optimal design for the
purpose of learning which aims for generalization to unseen
examples1 .
Motivated by this observation, we introduce and study
a novel pooling scheme, named S3Pool, where the second
step (downsampling) is modified to a stochastic version. For
a feature map with spatial dimensions h ˆ w, S3Pool begins
with partitioning it into p vertical and q horizontal strips,
with p “ hg , q “ wg and g being a hyperparameter named
grid size. It then randomly selects gs rows and gs columns
for each horizontal and vertical strip, respectively, with s
being the stride, to obtain the final downsampled feature
map of size hs ˆ ws . Compared to the downsampling used
in standard pooling layers, S3Pool performs a spatial downsampling that is stochastic and hence is highly likely to be
non-uniform. The stochastic nature of S3Pool enables it
to produce different feature maps at each pass for the same
training examples, which amounts to implicitly performing
a sort of data augmentation [20], but at intermediate layers. Moreover, the non-uniform characteristics of S3Pool
further extends the space of possible downsampled feature
maps, which produces spatially distorted downsampled versions at each pass. The grid size g provides a handle for
controlling the amount of distortion that S3Pool introduces,
which can be used to adapt to CNNs with different designs,
1 Uniform sampling has also been examined in the Signal Processing

literature, e.g., J. R. Higgins writes [10]: “What is special about equidistantly spaced sample points?”; and then finding that the answer is “Within
certain limitations, nothing at all.”

14970

