Fast Haze Removal for Nighttime Image Using Maximum Reﬂectance Prior
Jing Zhang∗ , Yang Cao∗
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, China

Shuai Fang
Hefei University of Technology
Hefei, China

zjwinner@mail.ustc.eud.cn, forrest@ustc.edu.cn

fangshuai@hfut.edu.cn

Yu Kang
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, China

Chang Wen Chen
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, U.S.A.

kangduyu@ustc.edu.cn

chencw@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address a haze removal problem from a
single nighttime image, even in the presence of varicolored
and non-uniform illumination. The core idea lies in a novel
maximum reflectance prior. We first introduce the nighttime
hazy imaging model, which includes a local ambient illumination item in both direct attenuation term and scattering
term. Then, we propose a simple but effective image prior,
maximum reflectance prior, to estimate the varying ambient
illumination. The maximum reflectance prior is based on a
key observation: for most daytime haze-free image patches,
each color channel has very high intensity at some pixels.
For the nighttime haze image, the local maximum intensities
at each color channel are mainly contributed by the ambient
illumination. Therefore, we can directly estimate the ambient illumination and transmission map, and consequently
restore a high quality haze-free image. Experimental results
on various nighttime hazy images demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. In particular, our approach
has the advantage of computational efficiency, which is 10100 times faster than state-of-the-art methods.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Input nighttime hazy image. (b)-(d) Dehazing results
of [10], [4] and our proposed method, respectively. Daytime dehazing method [10] and [4] fail to handle nighttime hazy scene due
to the varicolored illumination.

camera, in which the magnitude of reflection light decreases and the magnitude of ambient light increases. Middleton’s model [21] describes the hazy imaging process as a
linear combination of the direct attenuation term and scattering term. Based on this model, a number of methods
have been proposed to remove haze from a single image
[7, 6, 10, 12, 20, 26, 27, 18, 3, 2, 24, 8, 14, 25]. The key
idea of these methods relies on various image priors, e.g.,
color attenuation [30], dark channel [10], and haze line [3].
Although the effectiveness of these methods has been
demonstrated when dealing with daytime haze, there are
great limitations when applying these methods to night-time
hazy images. The main reason is that the daytime hazy
imaging model and priors do not hold for most nighttime
hazy scenes. The daytime hazy imaging model assumes the
ambient illumination is globally consistent. Therefore, most
dehazing methods estimate a white ambient light from the
brightest region in the image. However, nighttime scenes
usually have multiple colored artificial light sources, e.g.
road lamp, neon light and automobile lamp, which result in
strongly non-uniform and varicolored ambient illumination.
This not only makes the estimation of ambient light inaccu-

1. Introduction
Restoring hazy images is important for many computer vision applications for outdoor scenes. Since tiny particles floating in the air absorb and scatter light in the atmosphere, the hazy images suffer from significant visibility
degradation manifested in two aspects: the attenuation of
the direct reflection light and the accumulation of the scattering ambient light. The degradation of hazy image increases with the distance between the scene points and the
∗ co-first author

7418

