Semantic Scene Completion from a Single Depth Image
Shuran Song

Fisher Yu

Andy Zeng

Angel X. Chang Manolis Savva
Princeton University
http://sscnet.cs.princeton.edu

Thomas Funkhouser

Abstract
This paper focuses on semantic scene completion, a task
for producing a complete 3D voxel representation of volumetric occupancy and semantic labels for a scene from
a single-view depth map observation. Previous work has
considered scene completion and semantic labeling of depth
maps separately. However, we observe that these two problems are tightly intertwined. To leverage the coupled nature of these two tasks, we introduce the semantic scene
completion network (SSCNet), an end-to-end 3D convolutional network that takes a single depth image as input and
simultaneously outputs occupancy and semantic labels for
all voxels in the camera view frustum. Our network uses a
dilation-based 3D context module to efficiently expand the
receptive field and enable 3D context learning. To train our
network, we construct SUNCG - a manually created largescale dataset of synthetic 3D scenes with dense volumetric annotations. Our experiments demonstrate that the joint
model outperforms methods addressing each task in isolation and outperforms alternative approaches on the semantic scene completion task. The dataset and code is available
at http://sscnet.cs.princeton.edu.

1. Introduction
We live in a 3D world where empty and occupied space
is determined by the physical presence of objects. To successfully navigate within and interact with the world, we
rely on an understanding of both the 3D geometry and the
semantics of the environment. Similarly, for a robot, the
ability to infer complete 3D shape from partial observations
is necessary for low-level tasks such as grasping and obstacle avoidance [33], while the ability to infer the semantic meaning of objects in the scene enables high-level tasks
such as retrieval of objects.
With this motivation, our goal is to have a model that
predicts both volumetric occupancy (i.e., scene completion)
and object category (i.e., scene labeling) from a single depth
image of a 3D scene — in this paper we refer to this task as
semantic scene completion (Figure 1). Prior work is lim-

Figure 1. Semantic scene completion. (a) Input single-view depth
map (b) Visible surface from the depth map; color is for visualization only. (c) Semantic scene completion result: our model jointly
predicts volumetric occupancy and object categories for each of
the 3D voxels in the view frustum. Note that the entire volume
occupied by the bed is predicted to have the bed category.

ited to address only part of this problem as shown in Figure 2: RGB-D segmentation approaches consider only visible surfaces without the full 3D shape [6, 26], while shape
completion approaches consider only geometry without semantics [3] or a single object out of context [32, 34].
Our key observation is that the occupancy patterns of
the environment and the semantic labels of the objects are
tightly intertwined. Therefore, the two problems of predicting voxel occupancy and identifying object semantics are
strongly coupled. In other words, knowing the identity of
an object helps us predict what areas of the scene it is likely
to occupy without direct observation (e.g., seeing the top of
a chair behind a table and inferring the presence of a seat
and legs). Likewise, having an accurate occupancy pattern
for an object helps us recognize its semantic class.

1746

