Matting and Depth Recovery of Thin Structures using a Focal Stack
Chao Liu

Srinivasa G. Narasimhan

Artur W. Dubrawski

chaoliu1@cs.cmu.edu

srinivas@cs.cmu.edu

awd@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Thin structures such as fences, grass and vessels are
common in photography and scientific imaging. They contribute complexity to 3D scenes with sharp depth variations/discontinuities and mutual occlusions. In this paper,
we develop a method to estimate the occlusion matte and
depths of thin structures from a focal image stack, which
is obtained either by varying the focus/aperture of the lens
or computed from a one-shot light field image. We propose
an image formation model that explicitly describes the spatially varying optical blur and mutual occlusions for structures located at different depths. Based on the model, we
derive an efficient MCMC inference algorithm that enables
direct and analytical computations of the iterative update
for the model/images without re-rendering images in the
sampling process. Then, the depths of the thin structures
are recovered using gradient descent with the differential
terms computed using the image formation model. We apply the proposed method to scenes at both macro and micro
scales. For macro-scale, we evaluate our method on scenes
with complex 3D thin structures such as tree branches and
grass. For micro-scale, we apply our method to in-vivo microscopic images of micro-vessels with diameters less than
50 µm. To our knowledge, the proposed method is the first
approach to reconstruct the 3D structures of micro-vessels
from non-invasive in-vivo image measurements.

1. Introduction
Thin structures such as meshes, grass or tree branches
are common in photography. Similarly, in medical and microscopic imaging, thin curvilinear structures such as vessels and neurons appear very often. Recovering the 3D
information for such structures with non-invasive imaging
modalities is useful for study of plants [5, 25], blood vessels [20, 21], and neurons [2, 12].
Segmenting thin structures from the background and recovering their depths is a challenging task for multiple reasons. First, thin structures located in close range might occlude more distant objects. So the ray corresponding to a
pixel may encounter multiple occluders at different depths
due to the partial occlusion. Second, the 3D structures of
curvilinear objects in nature such as vessels and grass are
often complex and non-planar, thus the methods based on

Figure 1: Example scenes with thin structures: mesh, grass,
tree branches, and micro-vessels. Such structures are often non-planar, located at multiple depths, and occluding
one another. The goal of this paper is to matte and recover
depths of these thin structures from a single-view focal image stack.
planarity assumption [9, 7, 29] fail in those cases. Third, because of the small widths of the thin structures, the high spatial frequency depth discontinuities are likely to be recovered coarsely using patch-based depth-from-focus/defocus
methods [22, 11, 10, 3].
In this work, we present a method for matting and depth
recovery of 3D thin structures with self-occlusions using
single-view focal stack images. To this end, we first propose a general image formation model that explicitly describes the spatially varying blur and multiple partial occlusions along a line of sight. Jointly optimizing the occlusion mattes and depths in the model is computationally intractable. We derive a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
inference algorithm for the thin structure matting where the
image/model update is directly and analytically computed.
The analytic computation enables efficient updates of the
model without re-rendering new images during the MCMC
process, which makes the algorithm practical. The depths
of thin structures are then recovered using gradient descent
with the differential terms calculated from the model.
We evaluate the performance of the proposed method using images of scenes at both macro and micro scales. For
macro-scale, we evaluate our method on scenes with complex 3D thin structures such as meshes, tree branches and

6970

