What Can Help Pedestrian Detection?
Jiayuan Mao∗†

Tete Xiao∗†

The Institute for Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS)
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science
Peking University, Beijing, China
jasonhsiao97@pku.edu.cn

mjy14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yuning Jiang

Zhimin Cao

Megvii Inc.
Beijing, China

Megvii Inc.
Beijing, China

jyn@megvii.com

czm@megvii.com

Abstract
Aggregating extra features has been considered as an effective approach to boost traditional pedestrian detection
methods. However, there is still a lack of studies on whether
and how CNN-based pedestrian detectors can benefit from
these extra features. The first contribution of this paper is
exploring this issue by aggregating extra features into CNNbased pedestrian detection framework. Through extensive
experiments, we evaluate the effects of different kinds of extra features quantitatively. Moreover, we propose a novel
network architecture, namely HyperLearner, to jointly learn
pedestrian detection as well as the given extra feature. By
multi-task training, HyperLearner is able to utilize the information of given features and improve detection performance without extra inputs in inference. The experimental
results on multiple pedestrian benchmarks validate the effectiveness of the proposed HyperLearner.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection, as the first and most fundamental
step in many real-world tasks, e.g., human behavior analysis, gait recognition, intelligent video surveillance and automatic driving, has attracted massive attention in the last
decade [11, 26, 10, 35, 33, 30]. However, while great
progress has been made by deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on general object detection [24, 19, 7, 14],
research in the realm of pedestrian detection remains not as
cumulative considering two major challenges.
Firstly, compared to general objects, pedestrians are less
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work was done during their internships at Megvii Inc.

positive samples

negative samples

(a)

accurate localization

inaccurate localization

groundtruth annotation

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Examples of true pedestrians and hard negative samples of low resolution. Without extra semantic contexts, it is difficult to discriminate between them, even for human eyes. (b) Example of pedestrians in crowded scenes, where CNN-based detectors fail to locate each individual without low-level apparent
features.

discriminable from backgrounds. In other words, the discrimination relies more on the semantic contexts. As shown
in Figure 1(a), usually appearing in low resolution (less than
20×40 pixels), pedestrians together with the cluttered background bring about hard negative samples, such as traffic
signs, pillar boxes, and models in shopping windows, which
have very similar apparent features with pedestrians. Without extra semantic contexts, detectors working with such
low-resolution inputs are unable to discriminate between
them, resulting in the decrease in recall and increase in false
alarms.
How to accurately locate each pedestrian is the second
13127

