Instance-Level Salient Object Segmentation
Guanbin Li1,2
1

Yuan Xie1

Sun Yat-sen University

Liang Lin1
2

Yizhou Yu2∗

The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Image saliency detection has recently witnessed rapid
progress due to deep convolutional neural networks. However, none of the existing methods is able to identify object
instances in the detected salient regions. In this paper, we
present a salient instance segmentation method that produces a saliency mask with distinct object instance labels
for an input image. Our method consists of three steps, estimating saliency map, detecting salient object contours and
identifying salient object instances. For the first two steps,
we propose a multiscale saliency refinement network, which
generates high-quality salient region masks and salient object contours. Once integrated with multiscale combinatorial grouping and a MAP-based subset optimization framework, our method can generate very promising salient object instance segmentation results. To promote further research and evaluation of salient instance segmentation, we
also construct a new database of 1000 images and their pixelwise salient instance annotations. Experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed method is capable of achieving state-of-the-art performance on all public benchmarks
for salient region detection as well as on our new dataset
for salient instance segmentation.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection attempts to locate the most noticeable and eye-attracting object regions in images. It is a
fundamental problem in computer vision and has served as
a pre-processing step to facilitate a wide range of vision applications including content-aware image editing [4], object
detection [38], and video summarization [36].
Recently the accuracy of salient object detection has
been improved rapidly [29, 30, 33, 45] due to the deployment of deep convolutional neural networks. Nevertheless,
most of previous methods are only designed to detect pixels
that belong to any salient object, i.e. a dense saliency map,
but are unaware of individual instances of salient objects.
We refer to the task performed by these methods “salient
∗ Corresponding author (email: yizhouy@acm.org).

Input

Salient region

Filtered salient
object proposals

Salient instance
segmentation

Figure 1. An example of instance-level salient object segmentation. Left: input image. Middle left: detected salient region. Middle right: filtered salient object proposals. Right: result of salient
instance segmentation. Different colors indicate different object
instances in the detected salient region.

region detection”, as in [51]. In this paper, we tackle a more
challenging task, instance-level salient object segmentation
(or salient instance segmentation for short), which aims to
identify individual object instances in the detected salient
regions (Fig. 1). The next generation of salient object detection methods need to perform more detailed parsing within
detected salient regions to achieve this goal, which is crucial
for practical applications, including image captioning [25],
multilabel image recognition [46] as well as various weakly
supervised or unsupervised learning scenarios [28, 9].
We suggest to decompose the salient instance segmentation task into the following three sub-tasks. 1) Estimating
binary saliency map. In this sub-task, a pixel-level saliency
mask is predicted, indicating salient regions in the input image. 2) Detecting salient object contours. In this sub-task,
we perform contour detection for individual salient object
instances. Such contour detection is expected to suppress
spurious boundaries other than object contours and guide
the generation of salient object proposals. 3) Identifying
salient object instances. In this sub-task, salient object proposals are generated, and a small subset of salient object
proposals are selected to best cover the salient regions. Finally, a CRF based refinement method is applied to improve
the spatial coherence of salient object instances.
A number of recent papers have explored the use of fully
convolutional neural networks for saliency mask generation [30, 33, 45]. Though these methods are efficient and
can produce favorable results, they have their own limitations. Most of these methods infer saliency by learning contrast from the internal multi-layer structure of a single VGG
network [45, 33]. As their output is derived from receptive fields with a uniform size, they may not perform well
12386

