Realtime Multi-Person 2D Pose Estimation using Part Affinity Fields ∗
Zhe Cao
Tomas Simon
Shih-En Wei
Yaser Sheikh
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{zhecao,shihenw}@cmu.edu

{tsimon,yaser}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present an approach to efficiently detect the 2D pose
of multiple people in an image. The approach uses a nonparametric representation, which we refer to as Part Affinity
Fields (PAFs), to learn to associate body parts with individuals in the image. The architecture encodes global context, allowing a greedy bottom-up parsing step that maintains high accuracy while achieving realtime performance,
irrespective of the number of people in the image. The architecture is designed to jointly learn part locations and
their association via two branches of the same sequential
prediction process. Our method placed first in the inaugural COCO 2016 keypoints challenge, and significantly exceeds the previous state-of-the-art result on the MPII MultiPerson benchmark, both in performance and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Human 2D pose estimation—the problem of localizing
anatomical keypoints or “parts”—has largely focused on
finding body parts of individuals [8, 4, 3, 21, 33, 13, 25, 31,
6, 24]. Inferring the pose of multiple people in images, especially socially engaged individuals, presents a unique set
of challenges. First, each image may contain an unknown
number of people that can occur at any position or scale.
Second, interactions between people induce complex spatial interference, due to contact, occlusion, and limb articulations, making association of parts difficult. Third, runtime
complexity tends to grow with the number of people in the
image, making realtime performance a challenge.
A common approach [23, 9, 27, 12, 19] is to employ
a person detector and perform single-person pose estimation for each detection. These top-down approaches directly leverage existing techniques for single-person pose
estimation [17, 31, 18, 28, 29, 7, 30, 5, 6, 20], but suffer
from early commitment: if the person detector fails–as it
is prone to do when people are in close proximity–there is
no recourse to recovery. Furthermore, the runtime of these
∗ Video result: https://youtu.be/pW6nZXeWlGM

Figure 1. Top: Multi-person pose estimation. Body parts belonging to the same person are linked. Bottom left: Part Affinity Fields
(PAFs) corresponding to the limb connecting right elbow and right
wrist. The color encodes orientation. Bottom right: A zoomed in
view of the predicted PAFs. At each pixel in the field, a 2D vector
encodes the position and orientation of the limbs.

top-down approaches is proportional to the number of people: for each detection, a single-person pose estimator is
run, and the more people there are, the greater the computational cost. In contrast, bottom-up approaches are attractive
as they offer robustness to early commitment and have the
potential to decouple runtime complexity from the number
of people in the image. Yet, bottom-up approaches do not
directly use global contextual cues from other body parts
and other people. In practice, previous bottom-up methods [22, 11] do not retain the gains in efficiency as the final parse requires costly global inference. For example, the
seminal work of Pishchulin et al. [22] proposed a bottom-up
approach that jointly labeled part detection candidates and
associated them to individual people. However, solving the
integer linear programming problem over a fully connected
graph is an NP-hard problem and the average processing
time is on the order of hours. Insafutdinov et al. [11] built
on [22] with stronger part detectors based on ResNet [10]
and image-dependent pairwise scores, and vastly improved
the runtime, but the method still takes several minutes per
image, with a limit on the number of part proposals. The
pairwise representations used in [11], are difficult to regress
precisely and thus a separate logistic regression is required.
17291

