MIML-FCN+: Multi-instance Multi-label Learning via Fully Convolutional
Networks with Privileged Information
Hao Yang1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 , Jianfei Cai1 , and Yew Soon Ong1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU, Singapore. Lancelot365@gmail.com
2
IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-instance multi-label (MIML) learning has many
interesting applications in computer visions, including
multi-object recognition and automatic image tagging.
In these applications, additional information such as
bounding-boxes, image captions and descriptions is often available during training phrase, which is referred as
privileged information (PI). However, as existing works on
learning using PI only consider instance-level PI (privileged instances), they fail to make use of bag-level PI (privileged bags) available in MIML learning. Therefore, in this
paper, we propose a two-stream fully convolutional network, named MIML-FCN+, unified by a novel PI loss
to solve the problem of MIML learning with privileged
bags. Compared to the previous works on PI, the proposed MIML-FCN+ utilizes the readily available privileged bags, instead of hard-to-obtain privileged instances,
making the system more general and practical in real world
applications. As the proposed PI loss is convex and SGDcompatible and the framework itself is a fully convolutional
network, MIML-FCN+ can be easily integrated with stateof-the-art deep learning networks. Moreover, the flexibility of convolutional layers allows us to exploit structured
correlations among instances to facilitate more effective
training and testing. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
MIML-FCN+, outperforming state-of-the-art methods in
the application of multi-object recognition.

1. Introduction
In the traditional supervised learning, each training instance is typically associated with one label. With the rapid
development of deep learning [12], such single-instance
single-label classification problem is nearly solved, given
abundant well-labelled training data. For example, for

single object recognition tasks, such as ILSVRC, several methods have already achieved super-human performance [7, 8, 10]. However, in many real-world applications,
instead of training instances, we often encounter the problem of training bags, each of which usually contains many
instances, e.g., frames in a video clip, object proposals of an
image, which is referred as multi-instance setting. In addition, to accurately describe a bag, we often need to associate
multiple labels or tags to it, which is referred as multi-label
setting. Such multi-instance multi-label (MIML) learning
setting [37] is more general, but more challenging.
MIML learning has many applications in computer vision. For example, in multi-object recognition and automatic image tagging problems, an image can be decomposed into many object proposals, where we can treat each
image as a bag and each of its proposals as an instance in
the bag, as illustrated in Fig.1. The MIML learning problem essentially is, given training bags with only bag-level
labels, how to learn an effective model that can accurately
assign multiple labels to new bags. MIML learning problems have attracted significant attentions in the past few
years [25, 32, 21, 2]. With the release of large scale multilabel datasets such as YFCC100M [26] and Google Open
Images [11], it will stimulate more large-scale MIML learning studies.
On the other hand, in many applications, additional information is often available in the training phrase. Vapnik and Vashist [28] referred such additional information
as privileged information (PI) and showed that PI can be
utilized as a teacher to train more effective models in traditional supervised learning problems. This motivates us
to incorporate PI into MIML learning problem. However,
there are two main obstacles hinging us from applying
learning using privileged information (LUPI) paradigm to
MIML problems.
First of all, existing works on privileged information
only consider instance-level PI [28, 27, 17, 14]. This might
11577

