Deep Matching Prior Network: Toward Tighter Multi-oriented Text Detection
Yuliang Liu, Lianwen Jin∗
College of Electronic Information Engineering
South China University of Technology
∗

lianwen.jin@gmail.com

Abstract
Detecting incidental scene text is a challenging task because of multi-orientation, perspective distortion, and variation of text size, color and scale. Retrospective research
has only focused on using rectangular bounding box or horizontal sliding window to localize text, which may result in
redundant background noise, unnecessary overlap or even
information loss. To address these issues, we propose a
new Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based method,
named Deep Matching Prior Network (DMPNet), to detect
text with tighter quadrangle. First, we use quadrilateral
sliding windows in several specific intermediate convolutional layers to roughly recall the text with higher overlapping area and then a shared Monte-Carlo method is proposed for fast and accurate computing of the polygonal areas. After that, we designed a sequential protocol for relative regression which can exactly predict text with compact
quadrangle. Moreover, a auxiliary smooth Ln loss is also
proposed for further regressing the position of text, which
has better overall performance than L2 loss and smooth L1
loss in terms of robustness and stability. The effectiveness
of our approach is evaluated on a public word-level, multioriented scene text database, ICDAR 2015 Robust Reading
Competition Challenge 4 “Incidental scene text localization”. The performance of our method is evaluated by using
F-measure and found to be 70.64%, outperforming the existing state-of-the-art method with F-measure 63.76%.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection is an important prerequisite [32, 31,
37, 1, 34] for many content-based applications, e.g., multilingual translation, blind navigation and automotive assistance. Especially, the recognition stage always stands in
need of localizing scene text in advance, thus it is a significant requirement for detecting methods that can tightly and
robustly localize scene text.
Camera captured scene text are often found with lowquality; these texts may have multiple orientations, per-

(a) Rectangular bounding box cause unnecessary overlap.

(c) Marginal text can not be exactly localized with rectangle.

(d) Rectangular bounding box brings redundant noise.
Figure 1. Comparison of quadrilateral bounding box and rectangular bounding box for localizing texts.

spective distortions, and variation of text size, color or
scale [40], which makes it a very challenging task [39]. In
the past few years, various existing methods have successfully been used for detecting horizontal or near-horizontal
texts [2, 4, 23, 11, 10]. However, due to the horizontal rectangular constraints, multi-oriented text are restrictive to be
recalled in practice, e.g. low accuracies reported in ICDAR
2015 Competition Challenge 4 “Incidental scene text localization” [14].
Recently, numerous techniques [35, 36, 13, 39] have
been devised for multi-oriented text detection; these methods used rotated rectangle to localize oriented text. However, Ye and Doermann [34] indicated that because of characters distortion, the boundary of text may lose rectangular
shape, and the rectangular constraints may result in redun11962

