Improved Stereo Matching with Constant Highway Networks
and Reflective Confidence Learning
Amit Shaked1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Israel
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present an improved three-step pipeline for the stereo
matching problem and introduce multiple novelties at each
stage. We propose a new highway network architecture
for computing the matching cost at each possible disparity, based on multilevel weighted residual shortcuts, trained
with a hybrid loss that supports multilevel comparison of
image patches. A novel post-processing step is then introduced, which employs a second deep convolutional neural
network for pooling global information from multiple disparities. This network outputs both the image disparity
map, which replaces the conventional “winner takes all”
strategy, and a confidence in the prediction. The confidence
score is achieved by training the network with a new technique that we call the reflective loss. Lastly, the learned
confidence is employed in order to better detect outliers in
the refinement step. The proposed pipeline achieves state of
the art accuracy on the largest and most competitive stereo
benchmarks, and the learned confidence is shown to outperform all existing alternatives.

1. Introduction
The modern pipeline for stereo matching, which
achieves state of the art results on the most challenging
benchmarks, contains a deep neural network for computing the matching score, and a few heuristic post-processing
steps. The main goal of these processing steps is to incorporate spatial information in order to verify the plausibility of
the proposed matching and to selectively smooth and refine
the obtained results.
We present methods that improve the deep matching
network by incorporating, among other improvements, a
variant of highway networks [32] with a multilevel skipconnection structure and a gating signal that is fixed at a
constant. Analysis of this architecture is provided, and ex-

perimental results are shown to support its advantages over
many existing Residual Network alternatives [16, 6, 18, 32].
To compute the disparity image, a second network is introduced to replace the “winner takes all” (WTA) rule, and
is currently applied to obtain both the predicted disparity at
each position and the confidence in this result as a separate
output.
A confidence measure for the disparity prediction has
been the subject of considerable study. More generally, assessing the correctness of a CNN output is also a subject
that is under magnifying glass. We propose a new training
signal, which we call the reflective loss. The labels used
for this loss are changing dynamically, based on the current
success of the CNN on each training sample. In our case,
when the disparity predicted by the network for a given example during training is correct, the target confidence label
of the sample is 1, otherwise 0.
The obtained confidence is a crucial part of the subsequent refinement step of the pipeline, in which we detect
incorrect disparity predictions and replace them by interpolating neighboring pixels.
The contributions of this paper are: (i) In Sec. 3 we
present a new highway network architecture for patch
matching including multilevel constant highway gating and
scaling layers that control the receptive field of the network.
(ii) This network is trained with a new hybrid loss (Sec. 3.3)
for better use of the description-decision network architecture. (iii) Computing the disparity image by using a CNN
instead of the previously suggested WTA strategy, as depicted in Sec. 4. (iv) In Sec. 4.2 we introduce a novel way
to measure the correctness of the output of a CNN via reflective learning that outperforms other techniques in the literature for assessing confidence in stereo matching. (v) In
Sec. 5 we show how to use this confidence score for better outlier detection and correction in the refinement process. (vi) Achieving the best results on the KITTI 2012 and
KITTI 2015 stereo data sets with an error rates of 2.27 and
3.42, respectively, improving the 2.43 and 3.89 of the MC-

4641

