Deep Level Sets for Salient Object Detection
Ping Hu†

Bing Shuai†

Jun Liu†

Gang Wang‡

phu005@ntu.edu.sg

bshuai001@ntu.edu.sg

jliu029@ntu.edu.sg

wanggang@ntu.edu.sg

†

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Deep learning has been applied to saliency detection in
recent years. The superior performance has proved that
deep networks can model the semantic properties of salient
objects. Yet it is difficult for a deep network to discriminate
pixels belonging to similar receptive fields around the object boundaries, thus deep networks may output maps with
blurred saliency and inaccurate boundaries. To tackle such
an issue, in this work, we propose a deep Level Set network to produce compact and uniform saliency maps. Our
method drives the network to learn a Level Set function for
salient objects so it can output more accurate boundaries
and compact saliency. Besides, to propagate saliency information among pixels and recover full resolution saliency map, we extend a superpixel-based guided filter to be
a layer in the network. The proposed network has a simple structure and is trained end-to-end. During testing, the
network can produce saliency maps by efficiently feedforwarding testing images at a speed over 12FPS on GPUs.
Evaluations on benchmark datasets show that the proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With limited computational resource, the human vision
system can effectively select important information from
complex visual inputs for further processing. Inspired by
this biological capability, visual saliency computation is introduced into the field of computer vision for its potential to enhance tasks like image processing [4, 12], image understanding [58, 63], video analysis and compression [13, 45]. Over the past years, many saliency detecting methods have been proposed. Early works focused on
fixation-level saliency detection [19, 14, 17] that aims to
predict human’s attentional priority when viewing an image. Later, it was extended to object-level saliency detection [54, 55, 12, 64, 10, 34, 60] which targets at computing
saliency maps to highlight the regions of salient objects ac-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Examples of pixel-wise saliency prediction. (a) Input.
(b) Groundtruth. (c) Saliency maps by deep network trained with
Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) loss. (d) Saliency maps by deep network trained with Level Set method. (e) Final results by deep level
set network inserted with a guided superpixel filtering layer.

curately.
Based on different mechanisms, these methods can be
roughly divided into two classes: bottom-up methods which
are stimulus-driven and top-down approaches that are task
driven. Bottom-up methods use low-level features and cues,
like contrast [10, 40], spatial property [12, 54], spectral information [17, 42], objectness [59, 22] etc. Because of the
unawareness of image content, purely low-level cues are difficult to detect salient objects in complex scenes. Different
from bottom-up methods, top-down approaches [12, 34, 20]
incorporate high-level visual knowledge into detection. For
this kind of models, it is critical to effectively learn the semantic relationship between salient objects and background
from data. Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN)
have shown superior performance in many vision tasks due
to its superior ability to extract high-level and multi-scale
features. In saliency detection, several recent works using
CNNs [62, 29, 24, 33, 26, 39, 30, 51, 46] have significantly
outperformed previous methods which only use low-level
cues and hand-crafted features.
However, when applying CNNs to pixel-wise saliency
12300

