Annotating Object Instances with a Polygon-RNN
Lluı́s Castrejón

Kaustav Kundu
Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

Sanja Fidler

{castrejon, kkundu, urtasun, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We propose an approach for semi-automatic annotation
of object instances. While most current methods treat object segmentation as a pixel-labeling problem, we here cast
it as a polygon prediction task, mimicking how most current
datasets have been annotated. In particular, our approach
takes as input an image crop and sequentially produces vertices of the polygon outlining the object. This allows a human annotator to interfere at any time and correct a vertex
if needed, producing as accurate segmentation as desired
by the annotator. We show that our approach speeds up the
annotation process by a factor of 4.7 across all classes in
Cityscapes, while achieving 78.4% agreement in IoU with
original ground-truth, matching the typical agreement between human annotators. For cars, our speed-up factor is
7.3 for an agreement of 82.2%. We further show generalization capabilities of our approach to unseen datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation has been receiving significant attention in the community [5, 17]. With new benchmarks such as Cityscapes [6], object instance segmentation
is also gaining steam [14, 24, 34, 21, 29]. Most of the recent approaches are based on neural networks, achieving
impressive performance for these tasks [5, 17, 10, 21]. Deep
learning approaches are, however, data hungry and their
performance is strongly correlated with the amount of available training data. This requires the community to annotate
large-scale datasets which is both time consuming and expensive. Our goal in this paper is to make this process faster,
while yielding ground-truth as precise as the one available
in the current datasets.
There have been several attempts at reducing the dependency on very detailed annotation such as object segmentation masks. In the weakly-supervised setting, approaches
aim at learning segmentation models from weak annotation
such as image tags or bounding boxes [13, 31, 11]. In [15],
the authors rely on scribbles, one on each object, while [1]
requires only a single point on the object. While these ap-

Figure 1. Given a bounding box, we automatically predict the
polygon outlining the object instance inside the box, using our
Polygon-RNN. Our method is designed to facilitation annotation,
and easily incorporates user corrections of points to improve the
overall object’s polygon. Our method cuts down the number of
required annotation clicks by a factor of 4.74.

proaches hold promise, their performance is not yet competitive with fully supervised approaches. Other work exploits
easier-to-obtain ground-truth such as bounding boxes, and
produces (noisy) labeling inside each box with a GrabCut
type of approach [25, 4]. It has been shown that such annotation can serve as useful auxilary data to train neural
segmentation networks [36, 29]. Yet, these segmentations
cannot be used as official ground-truth for a benchmark due
to its inherent imprecisions.
Most of the large-scale segmentation datasets have been
collected by having annotators outline the objects with a
polygon [8, 18, 16, 6, 37]. Since typically objects are connected and without holes, polygons provide a way of annotating an object with a relatively small number of clicks,
typically around 30 to 40 per object. In this paper, we
propose an interactive segmentation method that produces
highly accurate and structurally coherent object annotations, and reduces annotation time by a factor of 4.7.
Given a ground-truth bounding box, our method generates a polygon outlining the object instance using a Recurrent Neural Network, which we call Polygon-RNN. Our approach takes as input an image crop and sequentially pro15230

