Procedural Generation of Videos to Train Deep Action Recognition Networks
César Roberto de Souza1,3 , Adrien Gaidon2 , Yohann Cabon1 , Antonio Manuel López3
1
Computer Vision Group, Xerox Research Center Europe, Meylan, France
2
Toyota Research Institute, Los Altos, CA, USA
3
Centre de Visió per Computador, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain
{cesar.desouza, yohann.cabon}@xrce.xerox.com, adrien.gaidon@tri.global, antonio@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
Deep learning for human action recognition in videos is
making significant progress, but is slowed down by its dependency on expensive manual labeling of large video collections. In this work, we investigate the generation of synthetic training data for action recognition, as it has recently
shown promising results for a variety of other computer vision tasks. We propose an interpretable parametric generative model of human action videos that relies on procedural generation and other computer graphics techniques of
modern game engines. We generate a diverse, realistic, and
physically plausible dataset of human action videos, called
PHAV for ”Procedural Human Action Videos”. It contains
a total of 39, 982 videos, with more than 1, 000 examples for
each action of 35 categories. Our approach is not limited
to existing motion capture sequences, and we procedurally
define 14 synthetic actions. We introduce a deep multi-task
representation learning architecture to mix synthetic and
real videos, even if the action categories differ. Our experiments on the UCF101 and HMDB51 benchmarks suggest
that combining our large set of synthetic videos with small
real-world datasets can boost recognition performance, significantly outperforming fine-tuning state-of-the-art unsupervised generative models of videos.

1. Introduction
Understanding human behavior in videos is a key problem in computer vision. Accurate representations of both
appearance and motion require either carefully handcrafting
features with prior knowledge (e.g., the dense trajectories
of [71]) or end-to-end deep learning of high capacity models with a large amount of labeled data (e.g., the two-stream
network of [53]). These two families of methods have complementary strengths and weaknesses, and they often need
Work done while A. Gaidon was at Xerox Research Centre Europe.

Figure 1: Procedurally generated human action videos
(clockwise): push, kick ball, walking hug, car hit.
to be combined to achieve state-of-the-art action recognition performance [74, 9]. Nevertheless, deep networks have
the potential to significantly improve their accuracy based
on training data. Hence, they are becoming the de-facto
standard for recognition problems where it is possible to
collect large labeled training sets, often by crowd-sourcing
manual annotations (e.g., ImageNet [10], MS-COCO [32]).
However, manual labeling is costly, time-consuming, errorprone, raises privacy concerns, and requires massive human
intervention for every new task. This is often impractical,
especially for videos, or even unfeasible for ground truth
modalities like optical flow or depth.
Using realistic synthetic data generated from virtual
worlds alleviates these issues. Thanks to modern modeling,
rendering, and simulation software, virtual worlds allow for
the efficient generation of vast amounts of controlled and
algorithmically labeled data, including for modalities that
cannot be labeled by a human. This approach has recently
shown great promise for deep learning across a breadth
of computer vision problems, including optical flow [37],
depth estimation [32], object detection [34, 65, 78, 59, 42],
pose and viewpoint estimation [52, 41, 57], tracking [15],
and semantic segmentation [23, 49, 48].
14757

