Adaptive and Move Making Auxiliary Cuts
for Binary Pairwise Energies
Lena Gorelick Yuri Boykov Olga Veksler
Computer Science Department
University of Western Ontario

Abstract
Many computer vision problems require optimization of
binary non-submodular energies. In this context, local iterative submodularization techniques based on trust region
(LSA-TR) and auxiliary functions (LSA-AUX) have been recently proposed [9]. They achieve state-of-the-art-results
on a number of computer vision applications.
In this paper we extend the LSA-AUX framework in two
directions. First, unlike LSA-AUX, which selects auxiliary functions based solely on the current solution, we propose to incorporate several additional criteria. This results in tighter bounds for configurations that are more
likely or closer to the current solution. Second, we propose
move-making extensions of LSA-AUX which achieve tighter
bounds by restricting the search space.
Finally, we evaluate our methods on several applications. We show that for each application at least one of our
extensions significantly outperforms the original LSA-AUX.
Moreover, the best extension of LSA-AUX is comparable to
or better than LSA-TR on four out of six applications.

1. Introduction
Minimization of binary pairwise non-submodular energies is a classical problem in combinatorial optimization, e.g. see [15, 8, 2]. In the last decade optimization
methods based on LP relaxations, e.g. QPBO [21] and
TRWS [13], became popular in vision and are thoroughly
evaluated [12].
Another group of methods is based on local linearization, e.g. parallel ICM, IPFP [16], and similar methods [4].
These methods iteratively linearize the energy around the
current solution and globally optimize the approximation
within the integer domain. Such approach often gets stuck
in poor local minimum by making large steps regardless of
the quality of approximation. IPFP tries to control the step
size by exploring relaxed solutions on a certain continuous
line in the vicinity of the new minimum. Unfortunately, as

with global LP relaxations, such relaxed solutions have no
guarantees with respect to the original integer problem.
Recently, two local submodularization methods, LSATR and LSA-AUX have been proposed [9]. Instead of linear
approximation, they use a more general class of submodular functions, which gives better approximation, yet allows
efficient optimization.
LSA-TR is based on the trust region framework [23]. In
each iteration, it approximates the original energy around
current solution using a submodular function. The approximation is only trusted within a small region around current
solution, called the trust region. The next candidate solution is obtained by globally optimizing the approximation
within this trust region. The trust region size is then either
increased or decreased based on the quality of the approximation, providing a better control of the step-size problem.
LSA-AUX is based on the auxiliary function framework
[14, 18, 1], also known as bound optimization. In each iteration, it finds a submodular upper bound for the original
energy around the current solution and minimizes it globally. There is no need to control the step size as the global
minimizer is guaranteed to decrease the original energy.
Local submodularization methods were reported to obtain state-of-the-art results on several applications, involving quadratic [9, 11] and high-order [22] energies, with
LSA-TR being the more accurate and LSA-AUX the faster.
In this paper we extend the LSA-AUX framework in two
directions. First, we introduce a new way to select upper
bounds for each supermodular potential. LSA-AUX uses
a predetermined bound based solely on its configuration in
the current solution. In contrast, we propose using an adaptive upper bound that is selected based on several additional
criteria such as unary term preference, energetic preference,
proximity to the current solution and combinations of the
above. Intuitively, this gives tighter bounds for configurations that are more likely or closer to the current solution.
Second, inspired by move-making algorithms in the context of multilabel energies [3, 17] and binary energies [10],
we propose two types of binary move-making extensions of
LSA-AUX. They achieve more accurate bounds by restrict14922

