Person Re-identification in the Wild
Liang Zheng1 , Hengheng Zhang2 , Shaoyan Sun3 , Manmohan Chandraker4 , Yi Yang1 , Qi Tian2
1
2
3
4
University of Technology Sydney
UTSA
USTC
UCSD & NEC Labs
{liangzheng06,manu.chandraker,yee.i.yang,wywqtian}@gmail.com

Gallery

Abstract
Raw video frames

Detection result

1

This paper presents a novel large-scale dataset and comprehensive baselines for end-to-end pedestrian detection and
person recognition in raw video frames. Our baselines address three issues: the performance of various combinations
of detectors and recognizers, mechanisms for pedestrian
detection to help improve overall re-identification (re-ID)
accuracy and assessing the effectiveness of different detectors for re-ID. We make three distinct contributions. First,
a new dataset, PRW, is introduced to evaluate Person Reidentification in the Wild, using videos acquired through
six near-synchronized cameras. It contains 932 identities
and 11,816 frames in which pedestrians are annotated with
their bounding box positions and identities. Extensive benchmarking results are presented on this dataset. Second, we
show that pedestrian detection aids re-ID through two simple
yet effective improvements: a cascaded fine-tuning strategy
that trains a detection model first and then the classification model, and a Confidence Weighted Similarity (CWS)
metric that incorporates detection scores into similarity measurement. Third, we derive insights in evaluating detector
performance for the particular scenario of accurate person
re-ID.

1. Introduction
Automated entry and retail systems at theme parks, passenger flow monitoring at airports, behavior analysis for
automated driving and surveillance are a few applications
where detection and recognition of persons across a camera network can provide critical insights. Yet, these two
problems have generally been studied in isolation within
computer vision. Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to
find occurrences of a query person ID in a video sequence,
1 L. Zheng, H. Zhang and S. Sun contribute equally. This work was partially supported by the Google Faculty Award and the Data to Decisions Cooperative Research
Centre. This work was supported in part to Dr. Qi Tian by ARO grant W911NF15-1-0290 and Faculty Research Gift Awards by NEC Laboratories of America and
Blippar. This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) 61429201. Project page: http://www.liangzheng.com.cn

Cam 1

Cam 2, 3,…

…
(a) Pedestrian Detection

(b) Person Re-identification

Figure 1: Pipeline of an end-to-end person re-ID system. It
consists of two modules: pedestrian detection and person
recognition (to differentiate from the overall re-ID). This paper not only benchmarks both components, but also provides
novel insights in their interactions.

where state-of-the-art datasets and methods start from predefined bounding boxes, either hand-drawn [22, 25, 37] or
automatically detected [21, 45]. On the other hand, several pedestrian detectors achieve remarkable performance on
benchmark datasets [12, 30], but little analysis is available
on how they can be used for person re-ID.
In this paper, we propose a dataset and baselines for practical person re-ID in the wild, which moves beyond sequential
application of detection and recognition. In particular, we
study three aspects of the problem that have not been considered in prior works. First, we analyze the effect of the
combination of various detection and recognition methods
on person re-ID accuracy. Second, we study whether detection can help improve re-ID accuracy and outline methods
to do so. Third, we study choices for detectors that allow for
maximal gains in re-ID accuracy.
Current datasets lack annotations for such combined evaluation of person detection and re-ID. Pedestrian detection
datasets, such as Caltech [10] or Inria [6], typically do not
have ID annotations, especially from multiple cameras. On
the other hand, person re-ID datasets, such as VIPeR [16]
or CUHK03 [21], usually provide just cropped bounding
boxes without the complete video frames, especially at a
large scale. As a consequence, a large-scale dataset that evaluates both detection and overall re-ID is needed. To address
this, Section 3 presents a novel large-scale dataset called

1367

