Hand Keypoint Detection in Single Images using Multiview Bootstrapping
Tomas Simon

Hanbyul Joo
Iain Matthews
Carnegie Mellon University

Yaser Sheikh

{tsimon,hanbyulj,iainm,yaser}@cs.cmu.edu
Ri
Right

Left

L

Right

Ri
Left

L

(b) 3D Hand Motion Capture by Triangulating Multiple 2D Detections

(a) Realtime 2D Hand Detection on YouTube and Webcam Videos

Figure 1: Multiview bootstrapping enables us to produce a method to detect hand keypoints in (a) realtime on RGB images,
and (b) can be triangulated to produce 3D markerless motion capture of hands.

Abstract
We present an approach that uses a multi-camera system
to train fine-grained detectors for keypoints that are prone
to occlusion, such as the joints of a hand. We call this procedure multiview bootstrapping: first, an initial keypoint detector is used to produce noisy labels in multiple views of
the hand. The noisy detections are then triangulated in 3D
using multiview geometry or marked as outliers. Finally, the
reprojected triangulations are used as new labeled training
data to improve the detector. We repeat this process, generating more labeled data in each iteration. We derive a
result analytically relating the minimum number of views
to achieve target true and false positive rates for a given
detector. The method is used to train a hand keypoint detector for single images. The resulting keypoint detector runs
in realtime on RGB images and has accuracy comparable
to methods that use depth sensors. The single view detector, triangulated over multiple views, enables 3D markerless hand motion capture with complex object interactions.

1. Introduction
While many approaches to image-based face and body
keypoint localization exist, there are no markerless hand
keypoint detectors that work on RGB images in the wild.
This is surprising given the important role that hands play
in our daily activities—they are the way we interact with

the world: we use tools, we play instruments, we touch,
and we gesture. A method that can localize hand joints in
RGB images (without requiring depth) would enable new
analyses of human motion on the largest existing sources
of visual data (e.g., YouTube and Netflix), as well as new
applications in HCI and robotics. We present a method that
enables realtime 2D hand tracking in single view video and
3D hand motion capture, as shown in Fig. 1.
Unlike the face and body, large datasets of annotated
keypoints do not exists for hands. Generating such datasets
presents a major challenge compared to the face or body.
Due to heavy occlusions, even manual keypoint annotations
are difficult to get right: for the keypoints that are occluded,
the annotated locations are at best an educated guess. Fig. 2
shows examples of manually annotated images that contain self-occlusion due to articulation, self-occlusion due to
viewpoint, and occlusion by a grasped object. In each case,
several keypoints had to be estimated by the annotator, increasing annotation time and cost while reducing accuracy.
In this paper, we present an approach to boost the performance of a given keypoint detector using a multi-camera
setup. This approach, which we refer to as multiview bootstrapping is based on the following observation: even if
a particular image of the hand has significant occlusion,
there often exists an unoccluded view. Multiview bootstrapping systematizes this insight to produce a far more powerful hand detector, that we demonstrate generalizes beyond
the capture setup. In particular, it allows a weak detector,

1145

