MuCaLe-Net: Multi Categorical-Level Networks
to Generate More Discriminating Features
Youssef Tamaazousti1,2
Hervé Le Borgne1
Céline Hudelot2
1
CEA, LIST, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
2
CentraleSupélec (University of Paris-Saclay), MICS, 92295 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Abstract
In a transfer-learning scheme, the intermediate layers of
a pre-trained CNN are employed as universal image representation to tackle many visual classification problems. The
current trend to generate such representation is to learn
a CNN on a large set of images labeled among the most
specific categories. Such processes ignore potential relations between categories, as well as the categorical-levels
used by humans to classify. In this paper, we propose
Multi Categorical-Level Networks (MuCaLe-Net) that include human-categorization knowledge into the CNN learning process. A MuCaLe-Net separates generic categories
from each other while it independently distinguishes specific ones. It thereby generates different features in the intermediate layers that are complementary when combined
together. Advantageously, our method does not require additive data nor annotation to train the network. The extensive experiments over four publicly available benchmarks of
image classification exhibit state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) established the
state-of-the-art for several visual recognition problems.
One of the most important reasons behind their success is
their ability to generate rich discriminating features (convolutional and unit-filters). The common scenario to obtain such performing features is to solve a discriminative
problem, that consists to separate categories from one another. By solving this discriminative problem, features are
generated at the intermediate layers of the network. In a
transfer-learning scenario [2, 23, 38], these latter can then
serve as image representation for a new target problem with
few training-data. Since these CNN-based descriptors have
obtained good performance on many target-problems, they
were assigned the property of universality. An important
question, that the current article investigates, is thus to determine how to obtain more universal image representations
resulting from the generative aspect of a CNN.
The problem of increasing the universality of a CNN-

Figure 1. A standard CNN (Net-S) solves a discriminative problem (D1) that consists to separate specific categories ((1) and
(2)) from each other. This last, automatically generates powerful specific features in the intermediate layers (G1), from which
the fully-connected activations (a) are generally used as imagerepresentation in a transfer-learning scheme. Here, we advocate
that varying the discriminative problem aims to vary the generated
features, even through the same training-images. More precisely,
our method re-labels the training-images at a generic categoricallevel (simply by re-labeling the categories), then use these generic
categories (3) as the discriminative problem (D2) to be solved by
another CNN (Net-G) for generating different features (G2). After
normalization, we combine the specific (a) and generic (b) fullyconnected activations, to get the final MuCaLe representation (c).
In contrast to standard CNN-descriptors, MuCaLe is more diversified in terms of relevant features (convolutional and unit-filters)
leading to better performances. Best view in color.

descriptor can be handled by increasing the quantity of relevant filters generated by a CNN. However, it is unclear how
to directly supervise their complex generative aspect. Consequently, many works indirectly tackle the issue by focusing on the discriminative problem. In particular, two approaches emerge when reviewing the literature. The first
one is known as the “ensemble-model” [14, 15, 31, 36, 40],
and the second as the “data-enlargement” [2, 17, 21, 41].
The former consists to train many different networks and
merge their internal features as image representation to
solve the target-problem. The difference between each
network can be the random initialization [40], the image16711

