Simultaneous Feature Aggregating and Hashing for Large-scale Image Search
Thanh-Toan Do†⋆

Trung T. Pham†

Dang-Khoa Le Tan⋆

Ngai-Man Cheung⋆

†

The University of Adelaide, ⋆ Singapore University of Technology and Design
{thanh-toan.do, trung.pham}@adelaide.edu.au, {letandang khoa, ngaiman cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
In most state-of-the-art hashing-based visual search systems, local image descriptors of an image are first aggregated as a single feature vector. This feature vector is
then subjected to a hashing function that produces a binary hash code. In previous work, the aggregating and the
hashing processes are designed independently. In this paper, we propose a novel framework where feature aggregating and hashing are designed simultaneously and optimized
jointly. Specifically, our joint optimization produces aggregated representations that can be better reconstructed by
some binary codes. This leads to more discriminative binary hash codes and improved retrieval accuracy. In addition, we also propose a fast version of the recently-proposed
Binary Autoencoder to be used in our proposed framework. We perform extensive retrieval experiments on several benchmark datasets with both SIFT and convolutional
features. Our results suggest that the proposed framework
achieves significant improvements over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
We are interested in the problem of large-scale image
search in which finding a compact image representation is
one of the crucial problems. State-of-the-art image search
systems [22, 2, 20, 1, 9] include three main steps in computing the image representation: local feature extraction, embedding, and aggregating. The local feature extraction step
extracts a set of local features, e.g. SIFT [31], representing the image. The embedding step improves the discriminativeness of the local features by mapping these features
into a high-dimensional space [20, 22, 9]. The aggregating
(pooling) step converts the set of mapped high dimensional
vectors into a single vector representation which usually has
the dimensionality of several thousands [20, 22, 9]. In particular, the aggregating step is very important. First, the aggregating step reduces the storage requirement which is one
of main concerns in large-scale image search. Second, the

aggregated representation vectors can be directly compared
using standard metrics such as Euclidean distance.
Although the aggregated representation reduces the storage and allows simple distance-based comparison, it is not
efficient enough for large-scale database which requires
very compact representation and fast searching. An attractive approach for achieving these requirements is binary hashing. Specifically, binary hashing encodes the
image representation into a compact binary hash code.
Existing binary hashing methods can be categorized as
data-independent and data-dependent schemes [43, 44, 13].
Data-dependent hashing methods use available training data
for learning hash functions and they achieve better retrieval results than data-independent methods. The training can be unsupervised [45, 12, 14, 15, 7, 8] or supervised
[34, 25, 30, 28]. In particular, unsupervised hashing does
not require any label information. Hence, it is suitable for
large-scale image search in which the label information is
usually unavailable. Therefore, our work focuses on the unsupervised hashing for large-scale image search.
In this work, we propose a novel framework where
feature aggregating and hashing are designed simultaneously and optimized jointly. Traditionally, the aggregating/hashing processes are designed independently and separately [11, 23, 16]: First, some aggregation is applied on the
local (embedded) features, resulting in a single aggregated
representation for each image. Then, the set of aggregated
representations is used for learning a hash function which
encodes the aggregated representations into compact binary
codes. For example, the recent Generalized Max Pooling
[33] seeks a representation that can achieve some desirable
aggregation property, i.e., equalizing the similarity between
the representation and individual local features. This aggregation process does not take into account any aspect of the
subsequent hashing, and the resulted representations may
not be suitable for hashing: in the context of unsupervised
hashing, the aggregated representation may be difficult to
be reconstructed by binary codes. On the contrary, in our
proposed simultaneous aggregating/hashing framework, we
aim to compute aggregated representations that not only can
achieve some desired aggregation property (equalized sim-

6618

