Large Margin Object Tracking with Circulant Feature Maps
Mengmeng Wang1 , Yong Liu1 ∗, Zeyi Huang2
1
Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University, 2 Exacloud Limited, Zhejiang, China
mengmengwang@zju.edu.cn; yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn; haoran@qunhemail.com

Abstract
Structured output support vector machine (SVM) based
tracking algorithms have shown favorable performance recently. Nonetheless, the time-consuming candidate sampling and complex optimization limit their real-time applications. In this paper, we propose a novel large margin object tracking method which absorbs the strong discriminative ability from structured output SVM and speeds up by the
correlation filter algorithm significantly. Secondly, a multimodal target detection technique is proposed to improve the
target localization precision and prevent model drift introduced by similar objects or background noise. Thirdly, we
exploit the feedback from high-confidence tracking results to avoid the model corruption problem. We implement
two versions of the proposed tracker with the representations from both conventional hand-crafted and deep convolution neural networks (CNNs) based features to validate
the strong compatibility of the algorithm. The experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed tracker performs superiorly against several state-of-the-art algorithms on the
challenging benchmark sequences while runs at speed in
excess of 80 frames per second.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking enjoys a wide popularity recently and has
been applied in many applications such as robotic services,
surveillance, human motion analyses, human-computer interactions and so on. In this paper, we consider the most
general scenario of visual tracking, i.e., short-term, singleobject tracking with the target given in the first frame. The
most difficult point of this problem is to track the target at a
high speed for real-time applications while handle all challenging factors simultaneously both from background or the
target itself such as occlusions, deformations, fast motions,
illumination variations and so on.
Due to the lack of training samples, most existing trackers handle this problem from two aspects. The first one is
∗ Corresponding author

to explore an effective tracking algorithm which can be designed to be either discriminative [17, 9, 13, 15, 22, 1, 31]
or generative [24, 18, 16, 33] models. It seeks to design a
robust classifier or filter to detect the target, and establish
an optimal mechanism to update the model at each frame.
The other one is to exploit the power of the target representation which may come from conventional handcraft
features [16, 18, 17, 9, 24] or high-level convolutional features [15, 28, 23, 27, 21] from deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs). These methods improve performance
significantly from different aspects. However, to further
improve the performance by more complex tracking algorithms or features, it would undoubtedly increase the computational complexity, which would limit the real-time performance of visual tracking.
The most popular and successful framework for visual
tracking is tracking-by-detection [14, 17, 34, 13, 22, 13]
which treats the tracking problem as a detection task and
learns information about the target from each detection online. There are many classification algorithms used in this
framework, such as multiple instance learning [1], P-N
learning [17], online boosting [11, 12], support vector machines (SVM) [13, 15, 22, 31] and so on. Among them,
structured output SVM is demonstrated with an excellent
potential in this field [13, 22]. Structured output SVM is a
kind of classification algorithm which can deal with complex outputs like trees, sequences, or sets rather than class
labels [26]. Hare et al. [13] employ this algorithm in the
visual tracking for the first time and improve tracking accuracy considerably in several benchmarks [29, 30]. They
propose a tracking algorithm named Struck based on kernelized structured output SVM where the output space is
defined as the translations of the target relative to the previous frame. However, Struck suffers from a high computational complexity by its complex optimization while its
training samples are still not dense enough. Therefore it operates slowly and limits to extend to higher dimensional features. Ning et al. [22] propose a dual linear structured SVM
(DLSSVM) algorithm which approximates nonlinear kernels with explicit feature maps. DLSSVM improves tracking performance significantly, while its tracking speed is not
14021

