Noisy Softmax: Improving the Generalization Ability of DCNN via Postponing
the Early Softmax Saturation

1

Binghui Chen1 , Weihong Deng1 , Junping Du2
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing China.
chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, whdeng@bupt.edu.cn, junpingd@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Over the past few years, softmax and SGD have become
a commonly used component and the default training strategy in CNN frameworks, respectively. However, when optimizing CNNs with SGD, the saturation behavior behind
softmax always gives us an illusion of training well and
then is omitted. In this paper, we first emphasize that the
early saturation behavior of softmax will impede the exploration of SGD, which sometimes is a reason for model converging at a bad local-minima, then propose Noisy Softmax to mitigating this early saturation issue by injecting
annealed noise in softmax during each iteration. This operation based on noise injection aims at postponing the early
saturation and further bringing continuous gradients propagation so as to significantly encourage SGD solver to be
more exploratory and help to find a better local-minima.
This paper empirically verifies the superiority of the early
softmax desaturation, and our method indeed improves the
generalization ability of CNN model by regularization. We
experimentally find that this early desaturation helps optimization in many tasks, yielding state-of-the-art or competitive results on several popular benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs)
have taken the computer vision field by storm, significantly
improving the state-of-the-art performances in many visual
tasks, such as face recognition [43, 44, 33, 36], large-scale
image classification [23, 39, 46, 11, 13], and fine-grained
object classification [31, 18, 21, 48]. Meanwhile, softmax
layer and the training strategy of SGD together with backpropagation (BP) become the default components, and are
generally applied in most of the aforementioned works.
It is widely observed that when optimizing with SGD
and BP, the smooth and free gradients propagation is crucial
to improve the training of DCNNs. For example, replacing

Figure 1. Decomposition of typical softmax layer in DCNN. It can
be rewritten into three parts: fully connection component, softmax
activation and cross-entropy loss.

sigmoid activation function with the piecewise-linear activation functions such as ReLU and PReLU [12] handles
the problem of gradients vanishing caused by sigmoid saturation and, allows the training of much deeper networks.
While, it is interesting that softmax activation function (illustrated in Figure 1) is implicitly like sigmoid function due
to their similar formulation (shown in Sec. 3), and has the
saturation behavior as well when its input is large. However, many take the softmax activation for granted and the
problem behind its saturation behavior is omitted as a result
of illusion of performance improvements based on DCNNs.
In standard SGD, the saturation behavior of softmax
turns up when its output is very close to the ground truth,
certainly it is our goal of model training. However, in some
ways, it is a barrier to improve the generalization ability
of CNNs especially when it shows up early (inopportune).
Concretely, for one instance input, it will early stop contributing gradients to BP when its softmax output is prematurely saturated, yielding short-lived gradients propagation
in history which is not enough for robust learning. And
in this case, the learning process with SGD and BP hardly
explore more due to poor gradients propagation and parameters update. We define this saturation behavior as individual saturation and the corresponding individual as saturated
one. As the training going, the number of non-saturated
contributing training samples gradually decreases and the
robust learning of network will be impeded. It sometimes
is a reason for algorithm going to bad local-minima1 and
being difficult to escape. Furthermore, the problem of over1 For simplicity, we use local or ’global’ minima to represent a neighbouring region not a single point.

15372

