Asynchronous Temporal Fields for Action Recognition
Gunnar A. Sigurdsson1∗ Santosh Divvala2,3 Ali Farhadi2,3 Abhinav Gupta1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Washington 3 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
github.com/gsig/temporal-fields/
Abstract
Actions are more than just movements and trajectories:
we cook to eat and we hold a cup to drink from it. A thorough understanding of videos requires going beyond appearance modeling and necessitates reasoning about the
sequence of activities, as well as the higher-level constructs
such as intentions. But how do we model and reason about
these? We propose a fully-connected temporal CRF model
for reasoning over various aspects of activities that includes
objects, actions, and intentions, where the potentials are
predicted by a deep network. End-to-end training of such
structured models is a challenging endeavor: For inference and learning we need to construct mini-batches consisting of whole videos, leading to mini-batches with only
a few videos. This causes high-correlation between data
points leading to breakdown of the backprop algorithm. To
address this challenge, we present an asynchronous variational inference method that allows efficient end-to-end
training. Our method achieves a classification mAP of
22.4% on the Charades [42] benchmark, outperforming the
state-of-the-art (17.2% mAP), and offers equal gains on the
task of temporal localization.

1. Introduction
Consider the video shown in Figure 1: A man walks
through a doorway, stands at a table, holds a cup, pours
something into it, drinks it, puts the cup on the table, and
finally walks away. Despite depicting a simple activity,
the video involves a rich interplay of a sequence of actions
with underlying goals and intentions. For example, the man
stands at the table ‘to take a cup’, he holds the cup ‘to drink
from it’, etc. Thorough understanding of videos requires
us to model such interplay between activities as well as to
reason over extensive time scales and multiple aspects of
actions (objects, scenes, etc).
Most contemporary deep learning based methods have
treated the problem of video understanding as that of only
appearance and motion (trajectory) modeling [43, 53, 7,
∗ Work was done while Gunnar was an intern at AI2.

Time
Holding a cup
Pouring into a cup
Drinking from a cup
Intent: Getting something to drink

Figure 1. Understanding human activities in videos requires jointly
reasoning about multiple aspects of activities, such as ‘what is happening’, ‘how’, and ‘why’. In this paper, we present an end-toend deep structured model over time trained in a stochastic fashion. The model captures rich semantic aspects of activities, including Intent (why), Category (what), Object (how). The figure
shows video frames and annotations used in training from the Charades [42] dataset.

27]. While this has fostered interesting progress in this
domain, these methods still struggle to outperform models based on hand-crafted features, such as Dense Trajectories [56]. Why such a disconnect? We argue that video
understanding requires going beyond appearance modeling,
and necessitates reasoning about the activity sequence as
well as higher-level constructs such as intentions. The recent emergence of large-scale datasets containing rich sequences of realistic activities [42, 63, 60] comes at a perfect
time facilitating us to explore such complex reasoning.
But what is the right way to model and reason about temporal relations and goal-driven behaviour? Over the last
couple of decades, graphical models such as Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs) have been the prime vehicles for
structured reasoning. Therefore, one possible alternative
is to use ConvNet-based approaches [19] to provide features for a CRF training algorithm. Alternatively, it has
been shown that integrating CRFs with ConvNet architectures and training them in an end-to-end manner provides
substantial improvements in tasks such as segmentation and
situation recognition [66, 1, 62].
Inspired by these advances, we present a deep-structured
model that can reason temporally about multiple aspects of
activities. For each frame, our model infers the activity cate-

585

