Multi-attention Network for One Shot Learning
Peng Wang1∗, Lingqiao Liu1∗, Chunhua Shen1 ,Zi Huang2 , Anton van den Hengel1 , Heng Tao Shen3
1
The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia 2 The University of Queensland, QLD, Australia
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China

Abstract
One-shot learning is a challenging problem where the
aim is to recognize a class identified by a single training
image. Given the practical importance of one-shot learning, it seems surprising that the rich information present in
the class tag itself has largely been ignored. Most existing
approaches restrict the use of the class tag to finding similar classes and transferring classifiers or metrics learned
thereon. We demonstrate here, in contrast, that the class tag
can inform one-shot learning as a guide to visual attention
on the training image for creating the image representation.
This is motivated by the fact that human beings can better
interpret a training image if the class tag of the image is
understood. Specifically, we design a neural network architecture which takes the semantic embedding of the class tag
to generate attention maps and uses those attention maps to
create the image features for one-shot learning. Note that
unlike other applications, our task requires that the learned
attention generator can be generalized to novel classes. We
show that this can be realized by representing class tags
with distributed word embeddings and learning the attention map generator from an auxiliary training set. Also, we
design a multiple-attention scheme to extract richer information from the exemplar image and this leads to substantial performance improvement. Through comprehensive experiments, we show that the proposed approach leads to
superior performance over the baseline methods.

1. Introduction
The volume of data required to train current machine
learning technologies is one of the major limitations on the
range of problems they can usefully be applied to. Human
beings, in contrast, are often able to learn to identify a class
from a single training instance. One-shot learning is the
machine learning problem which aims to mimic this human
ability. One of the primary difficulties in one-shot learn∗ The first two authors contributed to this work equally.
L.
Liu’s participation was in part supported by ARC DECRA Fellowship
(DE170101259).

Database

Tutu
(clothing)

Figure 1. Given an exemplar image of a novel class, the objective of one-shot learning is to identify the images belonging to the
same class from a database. The left image is an exemplar image
of class tutu. Using the image solely can result in ambiguity in
recognition. If the class tag is understood that tutu is a kind of
clothing, it can help to focus the attention on the tutu parts and
consequently make more accurate decision.

ing is to generalize beyond the specific, single, training instance, which inevitably requires identifying which parts of
the training image are important. The class tag is a useful
source of information which can help to identify the essential features of the class. However, most, if not all, existing
approaches use the class tag in a very restricted way, that is,
they turn to the class tag only when seeking other classes
from which to source exploitable classifiers [7, 19].
The approach we propose here uses the class tag to guide
an attention mechanism able to identify which parts of the
training image are most relevant. Our method is motivated
by the observation that human beings can better interpret an
exemplar image if its class tag is well understood. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1, from a single exemplar it is
difficult to understand which part of the image is relevant to
the class, which leads to ambiguity in recognition. But if we
understand that the class tag “tutu” implies a kind of clothing, we can infer that the region around the human body
is most relevant. Mimicking this process, in this paper we

2721

