Learning to Learn from Noisy Web Videos
Serena Yeung
Stanford University

Vignesh Ramanathan
Stanford University

Olga Russakovsky
Carnegie Mellon University

serena@cs.stanford.edu

vigneshr@stanford.edu

olgarus@cmu.edu

Liyue Shen
Stanford University

Greg Mori
Simon Fraser University

Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University

liyues@stanford.edu

mori@cs.sfu.ca

feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Understanding the simultaneously very diverse and intricately fine-grained set of possible human actions is a
critical open problem in computer vision. Manually labeling training videos is feasible for some action classes but
doesn’t scale to the full long-tailed distribution of actions. A
promising way to address this is to leverage noisy data from
web queries to learn new actions, using semi-supervised or
“webly-supervised” approaches. However, these methods
typically do not learn domain-specific knowledge, or rely on
iterative hand-tuned data labeling policies. In this work, we
instead propose a reinforcement learning-based formulation for selecting the right examples for training a classifier
from noisy web search results. Our method uses Q-learning
to learn a data labeling policy on a small labeled training
dataset, and then uses this to automatically label noisy web
data for new visual concepts. Experiments on the challenging Sports-1M action recognition benchmark as well as on
additional fine-grained and newly emerging action classes
demonstrate that our method is able to learn good labeling
policies for noisy data and use this to learn accurate visual
concept classifiers.

TRAINING: Learn to select queries from “YouTube”

Riding animals

Riding a camel

Running horse

Riding a bull

TESTING: Select right queries from “YouTube”

Feeding animals

Feeding camels

Feeding cattle

Grazing animals

Our model
Semi-supervised

?

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Our model uses a set of annotated data to learn a
policy for how to label data for new, unseen classes. This
enables learning domain-specific knowledge and how to select diverse exemplars while avoiding semantic drift. For
example, it can learn from training data that human motion
cues are important for actions involving animals (e.g. “riding animals”) while animal appearance is not. This knowledge can be applied at test time to label noisy data for new
classes such as “feeding animals”, while traditional semisupervised methods would label based on visual similarity.

Humans are a central part of many visual scenes, and understanding human actions in videos is an important problem in computer vision. However, a key challenge in action
recognition is scaling to the long tail of actions. In many
practical applications, we would like to quickly and cheaply
learn classifiers for new target actions where annotations are
scarce, e.g. fine-grained, rare or niche classes. Manually
annotating data for every new action becomes impossible,
so there is a need for methods that can automatically learn
from readily available albeit noisy data sources.
A promising approach is to leverage noisy data from web

queries. Training models for new classes using the data returned by web queries has been proposed as an alternative
to expensive manual annotation [7, 8, 19, 28]. Methods
for automated labeling of new classes include traditional
semi-supervised learning approaches [14, 33, 34] as well
as webly-supervised approaches [7, 8, 19]. However, these
methods typically rely on iterative hand-tuned data labeling policies. This makes it difficult to dynamically manage
the risk trade-off between exemplar diversity and semantic
drift. Going further, as a result these methods typically can15154

