Supervising Neural Attention Models for Video Captioning by Human Gaze Data
Youngjae Yu† Jongwook Choi† Yeonhwa Kim‡ Kyung Yoo‡ Sang-Hun Lee‡ Gunhee Kim†
†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering ‡ Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
yj.yu@vision.snu.ac.kr

{wookayin, billygma, yookyung20484, visionsl, gunhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
The attention mechanisms in deep neural networks are
inspired by human’s attention that sequentially focuses on
the most relevant parts of the information over time to generate prediction output. The attention parameters in those
models are implicitly trained in an end-to-end manner, yet
there have been few trials to explicitly incorporate human
gaze tracking to supervise the attention models. In this paper, we investigate whether attention models can benefit
from explicit human gaze labels, especially for the task of
video captioning. We collect a new dataset called VAS, consisting of movie clips, and corresponding multiple descriptive sentences along with human gaze tracking data. We
propose a video captioning model named Gaze Encoding
Attention Network (GEAN) that can leverage gaze tracking information to provide the spatial and temporal attention for sentence generation. Through evaluation of language similarity metrics and human assessment via Amazon mechanical Turk, we demonstrate that spatial attentions guided by human gaze data indeed improve the performance of multiple captioning methods. Moreover, we show
that the proposed approach achieves the state-of-the-art
performance for both gaze prediction and video captioning
not only in our VAS dataset but also in standard datasets
(e.g. LSMDC [24] and Hollywood2 [18]).

1. Introduction
Attention-based models have recently gained much interest as a powerful deep neural network architecture in
a variety of applications, including image captioning [35],
video captioning [15], action recognition [27], object recognition [1], and machine translation [2] to name a few. The
attention models are loosely inspired by visual attention
mechanism of humans, who do not focus their attention on
the entire scene at once, but instead sequentially adjust the
focal points on different parts of the scene over time.
Although the attention models simulate human’s attention, surprisingly there have been few trials to explicitly in-

corporate human gaze tracking labels to supervise the attention mechanism. Usually attention models are trained in an
end-to-end manner, and thus attention weights are implicitly
learned. In this paper, we aim at investigating whether the
explicit human gaze labels can better guide attention models
and eventually enhance their prediction performance. We
focus on the task of video captioning, whose objective is to
generate a descriptive sentence for a given video clip. We
choose the video captioning because the attention mechanism may have more room to play a role in summarizing a
sequence of frames that may contain too much information
for a short output sentence. It is worth noting that our objective is not to replace existing video captioning methods for
every use case, given that acquisition of human gaze data
is expensive. Instead, we study the effect of supervision by
human gaze for attention mechanism, which has not been
discussed in previous literature.
We collect a new dataset named VAS (Visual Attentive
Script), consisting of movie videos of 15 seconds long,
with multiple descriptive sentences and gaze tracking data.
For pretraining and evaluation of models, we also leverage large-scale caption-only LSMDC dataset [24] and gazeonly Hollywood2 eye movement dataset [17, 18].
To explicitly model the gaze prediction for sentence generation, we propose a novel video captioning model named
Gaze Encoding Attention Network (GEAN). The encoder
generates pools of visual features depending on not only
content and motion in videos, but also gaze maps predicted
by the recurrent gaze prediction (RGP) model. The decoder
generates word sequences by dynamically focusing on the
most relevant subsets of the feature pools.
Through quantitative evaluation using language metrics and human assessment via Amazon Mechanical Turk
(AMT), we show that human gaze indeed helps enhance the
video captioning accuracy of attention models. One promising result is that our model learns from a relatively small
amount of gaze data of VAS and Hollywood2 datasets, and
improves the captioning quality on LSMDC dataset with no
gaze annotation. It hints that potentially we could leverage
gaze information in a semi-supervised manner, and apply

490

