Object Co-skeletonization with Co-segmentation
Koteswar Rao Jerripothula1,2 , Jianfei Cai2 , Jiangbo Lu3,4 and Junsong Yuan2
1
2
Graphic Era University, India
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
4
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
Shenzhen Cloudream Technology, China
krjimp@geu.ac.in, {asjfcai,jsyuan}@ntu.edu.sg, jiangbo.lu@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent advances in the joint processing of images have
certainly shown its advantages over the individual processing. Different from the existing works geared towards cosegmentation or co-localization, in this paper, we explore
a new joint processing topic: co-skeletonization, which is
defined as joint skeleton extraction of common objects in
a set of semantically similar images. Object skeletonization in real world images is a challenging problem, because
there is no prior knowledge of the object’s shape if we consider only a single image. This motivates us to resort to the
idea of object co-skeletonization hoping that the commonness prior existing across the similar images may help, just
as it does for other joint processing problems such as cosegmentation. Noting that skeleton can provide good scribbles for segmentation, and skeletonization, in turn, needs
good segmentation, we propose a coupled framework for
co-skeletonization and co-segmentation tasks so that they
are well informed by each other, and benefit each other
synergistically. Since it is a new problem, we also construct a benchmark dataset for the co-skeletonization task.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that proposed method
achieves very competitive results.

1. Introduction
Our main objective in this paper is to exploit joint processing [30, 13, 6] to extract objects’ skeletons in images
of the same category. We call it object co-skeletonization.
By objects, we mean something which interests the image viewer more compared to the stuff like sky, roads,
mountains, sea, etc, in its presence. Automatic skeletonization of such objects has many applications such as
image search, image synthesis, generating training data
for object detectors, etc. However, it is difficult to solve
this problem as a standalone task, because it requires objects shape information as well. Existing methods either
need pre-segmentation [3, 21] of the object in the image or groundtruth skeletons for the training images to

Source images

Co-skeletonization

Co-segmentation

Joint Optimization

Skeletons

Segmentations

Figure 1. Object co-skeletonization with co-segmentation. Skeletons are in yellow.

learn [25, 20] to perform skeletonization on test images.
The recent deep learning based method [22] requires not
only the skeleton location information but also the skeleton
scale information that accounts for shape information. The
skeleton scale is basically the distance between a skeleton
point and the nearest boundary point of the object.
In contrast, in this paper we consider the skeletonization problem with weak supervision, i.e. co-skeletonization,
which does not need pre-segmentation or groundtruth
skeletons of training images. Particularly, we leverage
the existing idea of object co-segmentation to help coskeletonization. It turns out that co-skeletonization can also
help co-segmentation in return by providing good scribbles.
In this way, both co-skeletonization and co-segmentation
benefit each other synergistically. We couple these two
tasks to achieve what we call “Object Co-skeletonization
with Co-segmentation” as shown in Fig. 1.
There are several challenges involved in performing
co-skeletonization and the coupling with co-segmentation.
First, existing skeletonization algorithms [21, 17, 3, 19]
can yield a good skeleton if a good and smooth shape is
provided, but they are quite sensitive to the given shape,

6205

