Making the V in VQA Matter:
Elevating the Role of Image Understanding in Visual Question Answering
Yash Goyal∗† Tejas Khot∗† Douglas Summers-Stay‡ Dhruv Batra§ Devi Parikh§
†
Virginia Tech ‡ Army Research Laboratory § Georgia Institute of Technology
†

{ygoyal, tjskhot}@vt.edu

‡

douglas.a.summers-stay.civ@mail.mil

Abstract
Problems at the intersection of vision and language
are of significant importance both as challenging research
questions and for the rich set of applications they enable.
However, inherent structure in our world and bias in our
language tend to be a simpler signal for learning than visual modalities, resulting in models that ignore visual information, leading to an inflated sense of their capability.
We propose to counter these language priors for the task
of Visual Question Answering (VQA) and make vision (the V
in VQA) matter! Specifically, we balance the popular VQA
dataset [3] by collecting complementary images such that
every question in our balanced dataset is associated with
not just a single image, but rather a pair of similar images
that result in two different answers to the question. Our
dataset is by construction more balanced than the original VQA dataset and has approximately twice the number
of image-question pairs. Our complete balanced dataset
is publicly available at http://visualqa.org/ as
part of the 2nd iteration of the Visual Question Answering
Dataset and Challenge (VQA v2.0).
We further benchmark a number of state-of-art VQA
models on our balanced dataset. All models perform significantly worse on our balanced dataset, suggesting that
these models have indeed learned to exploit language priors. This finding provides the first concrete empirical evidence for what seems to be a qualitative sense among practitioners.
Finally, our data collection protocol for identifying complementary images enables us to develop a novel interpretable model, which in addition to providing an answer
to the given (image, question) pair, also provides a counterexample based explanation. Specifically, it identifies an image that is similar to the original image, but it believes has
a different answer to the same question. This can help in
building trust for machines among their users.

∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

§

Who is wearing glasses?
man

woman

Is the umbrella upside down?
yes

no

{dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

Where is the child sitting?
fridge

arms

How many children are in the bed?
2

1

Figure 1: Examples from our balanced VQA dataset.

1. Introduction
Language and vision problems such as image captioning [8, 4, 7, 19, 40, 21, 28] and visual question answering
(VQA) [3, 26, 27, 10, 31] have gained popularity in recent
years as the computer vision research community is progressing beyond “bucketed” recognition and towards solving multi-modal problems.
The complex compositional structure of language makes
problems at the intersection of vision and language challenging. But recent works [6, 47, 49, 16, 18, 1] have pointed
out that language also provides a strong prior that can result in good superficial performance, without the underlying
models truly understanding the visual content.
This phenomenon has been observed in image captioning [6] as well as visual question answering [47, 49, 16, 18,
1]. For instance, in the VQA [3] dataset, the most common sport answer “tennis” is the correct answer for 41%
of the questions starting with “What sport is”, and “2” is
the correct answer for 39% of the questions starting with
“How many”. Moreover, Zhang et al. [47] points out a particular ‘visual priming bias’ in the VQA dataset – specifically, subjects saw an image while asking questions about it.
Thus, people only ask the question “Is there a clock tower
in the picture?” on images actually containing clock towers. As one particularly perverse example – for questions
16904

