Feature Pyramid Networks for Object Detection
Tsung-Yi Lin1,2 , Piotr Dollár1 , Ross Girshick1 ,
Kaiming He1 , Bharath Hariharan1 , and Serge Belongie2
1

2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Cornell University and Cornell Tech

Abstract

predict

predict
predict

Feature pyramids are a basic component in recognition
systems for detecting objects at different scales. But recent
deep learning object detectors have avoided pyramid representations, in part because they are compute and memory
intensive. In this paper, we exploit the inherent multi-scale,
pyramidal hierarchy of deep convolutional networks to construct feature pyramids with marginal extra cost. A topdown architecture with lateral connections is developed for
building high-level semantic feature maps at all scales. This
architecture, called a Feature Pyramid Network (FPN),
shows significant improvement as a generic feature extractor in several applications. Using FPN in a basic Faster
R-CNN system, our method achieves state-of-the-art singlemodel results on the COCO detection benchmark without
bells and whistles, surpassing all existing single-model entries including those from the COCO 2016 challenge winners. In addition, our method can run at 5 FPS on a GPU
and thus is a practical and accurate solution to multi-scale
object detection. Code will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Recognizing objects at vastly different scales is a fundamental challenge in computer vision. Feature pyramids
built upon image pyramids (for short we call these featurized image pyramids) form the basis of a standard solution
[1] (Fig. 1(a)). These pyramids are scale-invariant in the
sense that an object’s scale change is offset by shifting its
level in the pyramid. Intuitively, this property enables a
model to detect objects across a large range of scales by
scanning the model over both positions and pyramid levels.
Featurized image pyramids were heavily used in the
era of hand-engineered features [5, 25]. They were so
critical that object detectors like DPM [7] required dense
scale sampling to achieve good results (e.g., 10 scales per
octave). For recognition tasks, engineered features have

predict
predict

(a) Featurized image pyramid

(b) Single feature map

predict
predict
predict
predict
predict
predict

(c) Pyramidal feature hierarchy

(d) Feature Pyramid Network

Figure 1. (a) Using an image pyramid to build a feature pyramid.
Features are computed on each of the image scales independently,
which is slow. (b) Recent detection systems have opted to use
only single scale features for faster detection. (c) An alternative is
to reuse the pyramidal feature hierarchy computed by a ConvNet
as if it were a featurized image pyramid. (d) Our proposed Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN) is fast like (b) and (c), but more accurate.
In this figure, feature maps are indicate by blue outlines and thicker
outlines denote semantically stronger features.

largely been replaced with features computed by deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) [19, 20]. Aside from being
capable of representing higher-level semantics, ConvNets
are also more robust to variance in scale and thus facilitate
recognition from features computed on a single input scale
[15, 11, 29] (Fig. 1(b)). But even with this robustness, pyramids are still needed to get the most accurate results. All recent top entries in the ImageNet [33] and COCO [21] detection challenges use multi-scale testing on featurized image
pyramids (e.g., [16, 35]). The principle advantage of featurizing each level of an image pyramid is that it produces
a multi-scale feature representation in which all levels are
semantically strong, including the high-resolution levels.
Nevertheless, featurizing each level of an image pyramid has obvious limitations. Inference time increases considerably (e.g., by four times [11]), making this approach
impractical for real applications. Moreover, training deep
12117

