Detecting Visual Relationships with Deep Relational Networks
Bo Dai
Yuqi Zhang
Dahua Lin
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
db014@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

zy016@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

sit (on)

Abstract
Relationships among objects play a crucial role in image
understanding. Despite the great success of deep learning techniques in recognizing individual objects, reasoning about the relationships among objects remains a challenging task. Previous methods often treat this as a classification problem, considering each type of relationship
(e.g. “ride”) or each distinct visual phrase (e.g. “personride-horse”) as a category. Such approaches are faced with
significant difficulties caused by the high diversity of visual
appearance for each kind of relationships or the large number of distinct visual phrases. We propose an integrated
framework to tackle this problem. At the heart of this framework is the Deep Relational Network, a novel formulation
designed specifically for exploiting the statistical dependencies between objects and their relationships. On two
large data sets, the proposed method achieves substantial
improvement over state-of-the-art.

(man, sit, chair) (man, sit, chair) (man, sit, street)

carry

(man, sit, bike)

(man, carry, board) (man, carry, bag) (man, carry, bag) (man, carry, bag)

Visual Relationship Detector

(tree, under, sky)

under

above

(tree, on, grass)
tree

(giraffe, on, grass)
(giraffe, behind, tree)
(giraffe, eat, tree)

1. Introduction
Images in the real world often involve multiple objects
that interact with each other. To understand such images,
being able to recognize individual objects is generally not
sufficient. The relationships among them also contain crucial messages. For example, image captioning, a popular
application in computer vision, can generate richer captions
based on relationships in addition to objects in the images.
Thanks to the advances in deep learning, the past several
years witness remarkable progress in several key tasks in
computer vision, such as object recognition [2], scene classification [3], and attribute detection [4]. However, visual
relationship detection remains a very difficult task. On Visual Genome [5], a large dataset designed for structural
image understanding, the state-of-the-art can only obtain
11.79% of Recall@50 [1]. This performance is clearly far
from being satisfactory.
A natural approach to this problem is to treat it as a classification task. Early attempts [6] used to consider different
combinations of objects and relationship predicates (known

sky

(sky, above, tree)

Image

Triplets

on

giraffe behind

on

tree

eat

grass

Graph

Figure 1: Visual relationships widely exist in real-world images.
Here are some examples from the VRD [1] dataset, with relationship predicates “sit” and “carry”. We develop a method that can
effectively detect such relationships from a given image. On top
of that, a scene graph can be constructed.

as visual phrases) as different classes. While it may work in
a restricted context where the number of possible combinations is moderate, such strategy would be met with a fundamental difficulty in general – an extremely large number of
imbalanced classes. As a case in point, Visual Genome [5]
contains over 75K distinct visual phrases, and the number
of samples for each phrase ranges from just a handful to
over 10K. Even the most sophisticated classifier would suffer facing such a large and highly imbalanced class space.
An alternative strategy is to consider each type of re13076

