Weighted-Entropy-based Quantization for Deep Neural Networks
Eunhyeok Park, Junwhan Ahn§ , and Sungjoo Yoo
canusglow@gmail.com, junwhan@snu.ac.kr, sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com

Seoul National University
Computing and Memory Architecture Laboratory § Design Automation Laboratory

Abstract
Quantization is considered as one of the most effective
methods to optimize the inference cost of neural network
models for their deployment to mobile and embedded systems, which have tight resource constraints. In such approaches, it is critical to provide low-cost quantization under a tight accuracy loss constraint (e.g., 1%). In this paper, we propose a novel method for quantizing weights and
activations based on the concept of weighted entropy. Unlike recent work on binary-weight neural networks, our approach is multi-bit quantization, in which weights and activations can be quantized by any number of bits depending on the target accuracy. This facilitates much more
flexible exploitation of accuracy-performance trade-off provided by different levels of quantization. Moreover, our
scheme provides an automated quantization flow based on
conventional training algorithms, which greatly reduces the
design-time effort to quantize the network. According to
our extensive evaluations based on practical neural network
models for image classification (AlexNet, GoogLeNet and
ResNet-50/101), object detection (R-FCN with ResNet-50),
and language modeling (an LSTM network), our method
achieves significant reductions in both the model size and
the amount of computation with minimal accuracy loss.
Also, compared to existing quantization schemes, ours provides higher accuracy with a similar resource constraint
and requires much lower design effort.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming more and
more popular in mobile and embedded systems [1, 7, 23].
Those systems are characterized by tight resource constraints in terms of performance, energy consumption, and
memory capacity. Due to this, today’s typical scenario for
deploying DNNs to mobile systems is to train such DNNs
in servers and perform only the inference in such systems.
Therefore, it is imperative to reduce the inference cost of
neural networks for widespread application of DNNs to mo-

bile and embedded systems.
One of the most effective methods for reducing the inference cost of neural networks is to reduce the precision
of computation. Recent research has demonstrated that inference of DNNs can be accurately done by using 8-bit or
even narrower bitwidth representations for weights and activations, rather than conventional 32-/64-bit floating-point
numbers [22]. In addition, there have been active studies
that aim at further reducing the precision of both computation and values by aggressively quantizing the weights
and/or activations for inference [4, 12, 17, 19, 25]. Such aggressive quantization methods are promising in that they
can achieve significant reductions in the execution time,
energy consumption, and memory capacity requirements
of neural networks during the inference by exploiting the
benefits of dedicated hardware accelerators, e.g. NVIDIA
P40 and P4 [2] which support 8-bit integer arithmetic or
Stripes [14] which provides execution time and energy consumption proportional to the bitwidth.
However, existing quantization techniques have two limitations that can hinder practical application of such techniques into mobile and embedded systems. First, existing methods lack in supporting flexible trade-off between
output quality and inference performance. Mobile and embedded systems often have stringent constraints in both resource and inference accuracy, which requires design space
exploration for trade-off between output quality and inference performance. However, some of the existing approaches are not flexible enough to exploit such tradeoff relationship. For example, techniques that binarize
weights [4, 19, 25] suffer from a significant loss of output
quality for deep networks, which cannot be applied if the
target system allows a very small accuracy loss, e.g. 1%.
Second, even if existing quantization techniques support such trade-off, they require modifications to the target network to achieve good quantization quality and/or
apply quantization to only part of the network. Due to
this, such techniques may require significant effort at design time, which may eventually prevent widespread adoption of them. In addition, existing methods such as XNOR-

5456

