DESIRE: Distant Future Prediction in Dynamic Scenes with Interacting Agents
Namhoon Lee1 , Wongun Choi2 , Paul Vernaza2 , Christopher B. Choy3 ,
Philip H. S. Torr1 , Manmohan Chandraker2,4
1

University of Oxford, 2 NEC Labs America, 3 Stanford University, 4 University of California, San Diego

Abstract
We introduce a Deep Stochastic IOC1 RNN Encoderdecoder framework, DESIRE, for the task of future predictions of multiple interacting agents in dynamic scenes.
DESIRE effectively predicts future locations of objects in
multiple scenes by 1) accounting for the multi-modal nature
of the future prediction (i.e., given the same context, future
may vary), 2) foreseeing the potential future outcomes and
make a strategic prediction based on that, and 3) reasoning not only from the past motion history, but also from the
scene context as well as the interactions among the agents.
DESIRE achieves these in a single end-to-end trainable neural network model, while being computationally efficient.
The model first obtains a diverse set of hypothetical future
prediction samples employing a conditional variational autoencoder, which are ranked and refined by the following RNN
scoring-regression module. Samples are scored by accounting for accumulated future rewards, which enables better
long-term strategic decisions similar to IOC frameworks.
An RNN scene context fusion module jointly captures past
motion histories, the semantic scene context and interactions
among multiple agents. A feedback mechanism iterates over
the ranking and refinement to further boost the prediction
accuracy. We evaluate our model on two publicly available
datasets: KITTI and Stanford Drone Dataset. Our experiments show that the proposed model significantly improves
the prediction accuracy compared to other baseline methods.

1. Introduction
It is far better to foresee even without certainty than not
to foresee at all.
Henri Poincaré (Foundations of Science)

Considering the future as a consequence of a series of
past events, a prediction entails reasoning about probable
1 IOC: Abbreviation for inverse optimal control, which will be more
explained throughout the paper.

(a) Future prediction example
Pedestrian
Car

Observations

Sample
Generation

Future
Trajectory
Past
Trajectory
Scene
Elements

Ranking
Reﬁnement
1
2
3
4

(b) Workflow of DESIRE
Figure 1. (a) A driving scenario: The white van may steer into left
or right while trying to avoid a collision to other dynamic agents.
DESIRE produces accurate future predictions (shown as blue paths)
by tackling multi-modaility of future prediction while accounting
for a rich set of both static and dynamic scene contexts. (b) DESIRE
generates a diverse set of hypothetical prediction samples, and then
ranks and refines them through a deep IOC network.

outcomes based on past observations. But predicting the future in many computer vision tasks is inherently riddled with
uncertainty (see Fig. 1). Imagine a busy traffic intersection,
where such ambiguity is exacerbated by diverse interactions
of automobiles, pedestrians and cyclists with each other, as
well as with semantic elements such as lanes, crosswalks and
traffic lights. Despite tremendous recent interest in future
prediction [3, 5, 17, 23, 26, 45, 46], existing state-of-the-art
produces outcomes that are either deterministic, or do not
fully account for interactions, semantic context or long-term
future rewards.
In contrast, we present DESIRE, a Deep Stochastic IOC
RNN Encoder-decoder framework, to overcome those limitations. The key traits of DESIRE are its ability to simultaneously: (a) generate diverse hypotheses to reflect a distribution
over plausible futures, (b) reason about interactions between
multiple dynamic objects and the scene context, (c) rank
and refine hypotheses with consideration of long-term future
rewards (see Fig. 1). These objectives are cast within a deep
learning framework.

336

