A Domain Based Approach to Social Relation Recognition
Qianru Sun
Bernt Schiele
Mario Fritz
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
{qsun, schiele, mfritz}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Attachment (d0)

father – child
(r0)

mother – child
(r1)

grandpa - grandchild grandma - grandchild
(r3)
(r2)

friends
(r4)

siblings
(r5)

Hierarchical power (d3)

presenter – audience
(r8)

teacher – student
(r9)

trainer – trainee
(r10)

Mating (d2)

Reciprocity (d1)

classmates
(r6)

lovers / spouses
(r7)

Coalitional groups (d4)

leader – subordinate
(r11)

band members
(r12)

dance team members
(r13)

sport team members
(r14)

colleagues
(r15)

Figure 1: We investigate the recognition of social relations in a domain-based approach. Our study is based on Burgental’s
social psychology theory [1] that partitions social life into 5 domains from which we derive 16 social relations.

Abstract
Social relations are the foundation of human daily life.
Developing techniques to analyze such relations from visual data bears great potential to build machines that better understand us and are capable of interacting with us at
a social level. Previous investigations have remained partial due to the overwhelming diversity and complexity of the
topic and consequently have only focused on a handful of
social relations. In this paper, we argue that the domainbased theory from social psychology is a great starting
point to systematically approach this problem. The theory provides coverage of all aspects of social relations and
equally is concrete and predictive about the visual attributes
and behaviors defining the relations included in each domain. We provide the first dataset built on this holistic conceptualization of social life that is composed of a hierarchical label space of social domains and social relations. We
also contribute the first models to recognize such domains
and relations and find superior performance for attribute
based features. Beyond the encouraging performance of
the attribute based approach, we also find interpretable features that are in accordance with the predictions from social
psychology literature. Beyond our findings, we believe that
our contributions more tightly interleave visual recognition

and social psychology theory that has the potential to complement the theoretical work in the area with empirical and
data-driven models of social life.

1. Introduction
Today, major part of our social life is captured via social
media. As we communicate through multi-modal channels
such as Facebook or Twitter, we leave traces that explicitly
and implicitly capture social relations in texts, blogs, images and video [4]. As we are approaching a future, where
intelligent and potential autonomous systems become our
assistants and coworkers, we not only want them to be proficient at their task, but also enable them to blend in and
act appropriately in different situations of our – human –
life. Additionally, through better understanding about such
hidden information we would like to inform users about potential privacy risks.
Both tasks require conceptualizations and models of social life that provide coverage of all aspects of social life
and lend themselves to computational models from sensory
input. While initial efforts have been undertaken to address
this challenging problem, progress is hampered by the overwhelming diversity and complexity of social life. Most of13481

