Quo Vadis, Action Recognition? A New Model and the Kinetics Dataset

†

João Carreira†

Andrew Zisserman†,∗

joaoluis@google.com

zisserman@google.com

DeepMind

∗

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
The paucity of videos in current action classification
datasets (UCF-101 and HMDB-51) has made it difficult
to identify good video architectures, as most methods obtain similar performance on existing small-scale benchmarks. This paper re-evaluates state-of-the-art architectures in light of the new Kinetics Human Action Video
dataset. Kinetics has two orders of magnitude more data,
with 400 human action classes and over 400 clips per
class, and is collected from realistic, challenging YouTube
videos. We provide an analysis on how current architectures
fare on the task of action classification on this dataset and
how much performance improves on the smaller benchmark
datasets after pre-training on Kinetics.
We also introduce a new Two-Stream Inflated 3D ConvNet (I3D) that is based on 2D ConvNet inflation: filters and pooling kernels of very deep image classification ConvNets are expanded into 3D, making it possible
to learn seamless spatio-temporal feature extractors from
video while leveraging successful ImageNet architecture
designs and even their parameters. We show that, after
pre-training on Kinetics, I3D models considerably improve
upon the state-of-the-art in action classification, reaching
80.2% on HMDB-51 and 97.9% on UCF-101.

1. Introduction
One of the unexpected benefits of the ImageNet challenge has been the discovery that deep architectures trained
on the 1000 images of 1000 categories, can be used for other
tasks and in other domains. One of the early examples of
this was using the fc7 features from a network trained on
ImageNet for the PASCAL VOC classification and detection challenge [10]. Furthermore, improvements in the deep
architecture, changing from AlexNet to VGG-16, immediately fed through to commensurate improvements in the
PASCAL VOC performance [23]. Since then, there have
been numerous examples of ImageNet trained architectures
warm starting or sufficing entirely for other tasks, e.g. seg-

Figure 1. A still from ‘Quo Vadis’ (1951). Where is this going?
Are these actors about to kiss each other, or have they just done
so? More importantly, where is action recognition going? Actions
can be ambiguous in individual frames, but the limitations of existing action recognition datasets has meant that the best-performing
video architectures do not depart significantly from single-image
analysis, where they rely on powerful image classifiers trained on
ImageNet. In this paper we demonstrate that video models are
best pre-trained on videos and report significant improvements by
using spatio-temporal classifiers pre-trained on Kinetics, a freshly
collected, large, challenging human action video dataset.

mentation, depth prediction, pose estimation, action classification.
In the video domain, it is an open question whether training an action classification network on a sufficiently large
dataset, will give a similar boost in performance when applied to a different temporal task or dataset. The challenges of building video datasets has meant that most popular benchmarks for action recognition are small, having on
the order of 10k videos.
In this paper we aim to provide an answer to this question
using the new Kinetics Human Action Video Dataset [16],
which is two orders of magnitude larger than previous
datasets, HMDB-51 [18] and UCF-101 [27]. Kinetics has
16299

