Improving RANSAC-Based Segmentation Through CNN Encapsulation
Dustin Morley and Hassan Foroosh
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816
dustinrmorley@knights.ucf.edu, foroosh@cs.ucf.edu

Abstract
In this work, we present a method for improving a random sample consensus (RANSAC) based image segmentation algorithm by encapsulating it within a convolutional
neural network (CNN). The improvements are gained by
gradient descent training on the set of pre-RANSAC filtering and thresholding operations using a novel RANSACbased loss function, which is geared toward optimizing the
strength of the correct model relative to the most convincing false model. Thus, it can be said that our loss function
trains the network on metrics that directly dictate the success or failure of the final segmentation rather than metrics that are merely correlated to the success or failure.
We demonstrate successful application of this method to a
RANSAC method for identifying the pupil boundary in images from the CASIA-IrisV3 iris recognition data set, and
we expect that this method could be successfully applied to
any RANSAC-based segmentation algorithm.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have revolutionized the field of computer vision over the course of the past
few years. This recent revolution had its ultimate origins in
the specific area of object recognition in two-dimensional
images, and then quickly spread to other areas such as semantic segmentation. As part of the natural evolution of the
methodology, early work on utilizing CNNs for segmentation maintained as much similarity as possible to the successful object recognition approaches. Among other things,
this led to the still commonly used approach of training a
CNN to classify individual patches from images rather than
operating on the entire image at once. Recent works on segmentation [15] have begun to move away from this for a variety of reasons, including efficiency. Indeed, the approach
of operating on the entire image at once in CNN-based segmentation bears much clearer resemblance to segmentation
pipelines which do not involve deep learning.
Model-specific segmentation problems, defined as a seg-

Figure 1. Our method for improving RANSAC segmentation performance by CNN encapsulation, shown with idealized intermediate outputs for an example problem of pupil segmentation. Following encapsulation of the algorithm into a CNN, the network is
finetuned with a RANSAC based loss function.

mentation problem in which some straightforward mathematical form for the boundary of the desired object(s) is
known beforehand, have yet to be explored with CNNs to
the extent that other segmentation problems have. One popular approach to model-specific segmentation problems is

6338

