Few-Shot Object Recognition from Machine-Labeled Web Images
Zhongwen Xu∗
Linchao Zhu∗
Yi Yang
CAI, University of Technology Sydney
{zhongwen.s.xu, zhulinchao7, yee.i.yang}@gmail.com

Abstract

tiger shark
blacktip shark

With the tremendous advances made by Convolutional
Neural Networks (ConvNets) on object recognition, we can
now easily obtain adequately reliable machine-labeled annotations easily from predictions by off-the-shelf ConvNets.
In this work, we present an “abstraction memory” based
framework for few-shot learning, building upon machinelabeled image annotations. Our method takes large-scale
machine-annotated dataset (e.g., OpenImages) as an external memory bank. In the external memory bank, the information is stored in the memory slots in the form of keyvalue, in which image feature is regarded as the key and the
label embedding serves as the value. When queried by the
few-shot examples, our model selects visually similar data
from the external memory bank and writes the useful information obtained from related external data into another
memory bank, i.e. abstraction memory. Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) controllers and attention mechanisms are
utilized to guarantee the data written to the abstraction
memory correlates with the query example. The abstraction
memory concentrates information from the external memory bank to make the few-shot recognition effective. In
the experiments, we first confirm that our model can learn
to conduct few-shot object recognition on clean humanlabeled data from the ImageNet dataset. Then, we demonstrate that with our model, machine-labeled image annotations are very effective and abundant resources for performing object recognition on novel categories. Experimental
results show that our proposed model with machine-labeled
annotations achieves great results, with only a 1% difference in accuracy between the machine-labeled annotations
and the human-labeled annotations.

1. Introduction
Innovations in the architecture of Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) [21, 30, 27, 12] have resulted
in tremendous improvements in image classification in the
∗ Indicates equal contribution.

requiem shark
return

Large vocabulary

bull shark

1-shot query

Figure 1. Given a large vocabulary of labels and their corresponding images, we conduct few-shot learning on a novel category
which is not in the vocabulary and only has a handful of positive
examples. The image examples in the vocabulary are stored in the
external memory of our model, and the image example from the
novel category queries the external memory. Our model returns
helpful information according to visual similarity and LSTM controllers. The retrieved information, i.e., visual features and their
corresponding labels, are combined to classify this query image
example.

past few years. With the increase in the capacity of neural networks, the demand for more labeled data in richer
categories is rising. However, it is impractical and very expensive to manually label a dataset 10 times larger than ImageNet. This prompts us to design a new paradigm that
can utilize the machine-labeled image annotations to enable
rapid learning from novel object categories. Figure 1 illustrates the proposed task. Our major question in this work is
as follows: Can we use machine-labeled web image annotations to rapidly conduct object recognition for novel categories with only a handful of examples?
We propose a new memory component in neural net11164

