3DMatch: Learning Local Geometric Descriptors from RGB-D Reconstructions
Andy Zeng1 Shuran Song1 Matthias Nießner2 Matthew Fisher2,4 Jianxiong Xiao3 Thomas Funkhouser1
1
2
3
4
Princeton University
Stanford University
AutoX
Adobe Systems
http://3dmatch.cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Matching local geometric features on real-world depth
images is a challenging task due to the noisy, lowresolution, and incomplete nature of 3D scan data. These
difficulties limit the performance of current state-of-art
methods, which are typically based on histograms over geometric properties. In this paper, we present 3DMatch, a
data-driven model that learns a local volumetric patch descriptor for establishing correspondences between partial
3D data. To amass training data for our model, we propose
a self-supervised feature learning method that leverages the
millions of correspondence labels found in existing RGB-D
reconstructions. Experiments show that our descriptor is
not only able to match local geometry in new scenes for reconstruction, but also generalize to different tasks and spatial scales (e.g. instance-level object model alignment for
the Amazon Picking Challenge, and mesh surface correspondence). Results show that 3DMatch consistently outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches by a significant
margin. Code, data, benchmarks, and pre-trained models
are available online at http://3dmatch.cs.princeton.edu.

1. Introduction
Matching 3D geometry has a long history starting in
the early days of computer graphics and vision. With the
rise of commodity range sensing technologies, this research
has become paramount to many applications including object pose estimation, object retrieval, 3D reconstruction, and
camera localization.
However, matching local geometric features in lowresolution, noisy, and partial 3D data is still a challenging task as shown in Fig. 1. While there is a wide range
of low-level hand-crafted geometric feature descriptors that
can be used for this task, they are mostly based on signatures derived from histograms over static geometric properties [18, 21, 27]. They work well for 3D models with
complete surfaces, but are often unstable or inconsistent in
real-world partial surfaces from 3D scanning data and difficult to adapt to new datasets. As a result, state-of-the-

Figure 1. In this work, we present a data-driven local descriptor
3DMatch that establishes correspondences (green) to match geometric features in noisy and partial 3D scanning data. This figure
illustrates an example of bringing two RGB-D scans into alignment using 3DMatch on depth information only. Color images are
for visualization only.

art 3D reconstruction methods using these descriptors for
matching geometry require significant algorithmic effort to
handle outliers and establish global correspondences [5].
In response to these difficulties, and inspired by the recent success of neural networks, we formulate a data-driven
method to learn a local geometric descriptor for establishing correspondences between partial 3D data. The idea is
that by learning from example, data-driven models can sufficiently address the difficulties of establishing correspondences between partial surfaces in 3D scanning data. To this
end, we present a 3D convolutional neural network (ConvNet), called 3DMatch, that takes in the local volumetric
region (or 3D patch) around an arbitrary interest point on a
3D surface and computes a feature descriptor for that point,
where a smaller distance between two descriptors indicates
a higher likelihood of correspondence.
However, optimizing a 3D ConvNet-based descriptor for
this task requires massive amounts of training data (i.e.,
ground truth matches between local 3D patches). Obtaining

1802

