Query-Focused Video Summarization:
Dataset, Evaluation, and A Memory Network Based Approach

†

Aidean Sharghi† , Jacob S. Laurel‡∗, and Boqing Gong†
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL 35294
aidean.sharghi@knights.ucf.edu, jslaurel@uab.edu, bgong@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a resurgence of interest in
video summarization. However, one of the main obstacles to
the research on video summarization is the user subjectivity
— users have various preferences over the summaries. The
subjectiveness causes at least two problems. First, no single
video summarizer fits all users unless it interacts with and
adapts to the individual users. Second, it is very challenging
to evaluate the performance of a video summarizer.
To tackle the first problem, we explore the recently proposed query-focused video summarization which introduces
user preferences in the form of text queries about the video
into the summarization process. We propose a memory network parameterized sequential determinantal point process
in order to attend the user query onto different video frames
and shots. To address the second challenge, we contend that
a good evaluation metric for video summarization should
focus on the semantic information that humans can perceive
rather than the visual features or temporal overlaps. To
this end, we collect dense per-video-shot concept annotations, compile a new dataset, and suggest an efficient evaluation method defined upon the concept annotations. We
conduct extensive experiments contrasting our video summarizer to existing ones and present detailed analyses about
the dataset and the new evaluation method.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a resurgence of interest in
video summarization, probably due to the overwhelming
video volumes showing up in our daily life. Indeed, both
consumers and professionals have the access to ubiquitous
video acquisition devices nowadays. While the video data
is a great asset for information extraction and knowledge
discovery, due to its size and variability, it is extremely hard
for users to monitor or find the occurrences in it.
∗ Jacob S. Laurel contributed to this work while he was an NSF REU
student at UCF thanks to the support of NSF CNS #1461121.

Intelligent video summarization algorithms allow us to
quickly browse a lengthy video by capturing the essence
and removing redundant information. Early video summarization methods were built mainly upon basic visual qualities (e.g., low-level appearance and motion features) [13,
16, 24, 28, 36, 43, 52], while recently more abstract and
higher-level cues are leveraged in the summarization frameworks [14, 17, 18, 23, 37, 44, 47, 50].
However, one of the main obstacles to the research on
video summarization is the user subjectivity — users have
various preferences over the summaries they would like to
watch. The subjectiveness causes at least two problems.
First, no single video summarizer fits all users unless it interacts with and adapts to the users. Second, it is very challenging to evaluate the performance of a video summarizer.
In an attempt to solve the first problem, we have studied a new video summarization mechanism, query-focused
video summarization [37], that introduces user preferences
in the form of text queries about the video into the summarization process. While this may be a promising direction to
personalize video summarizers, the experimental study in
[37] was conducted on the datasets originally collected for
the conventional generic video summarization [25, 48]. It
remains unclear whether the real users would generate distinct summaries for different queries, and if yes, how much
the query-focused summaries differ from each other.
In this paper, we explore more thoroughly the queryfocused video summarization and build a new dataset particularly designed for it. While we collect the user annotations, we meet the challenge how to define a good evaluation metric to contrast system generated summaries to user
labeled ones — the second problem above-mentioned due
to the user subjectivity about the video summaries.
We contend that the pursuit of new algorithms for video
summarization has actually left one of the basic problems
underexplored, i.e., how to benchmark different video summarizers. User study [26, 29] is too time-consuming to
compare different approaches and their variations at large
scale. In the prior arts of automating the evaluation pro14788

