Deep Unsupervised Similarity Learning using Partially Ordered Sets
Miguel A. Bautista∗ , Artsiom Sanakoyeu∗ , Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of visual similarities is of
paramount importance to computer vision, particularly due
to lacking training data for fine-grained similarities. Deep
learning of similarities is often based on relationships between pairs or triplets of samples. Many of these relations are unreliable and mutually contradicting, implying
inconsistencies when trained without supervision information that relates different tuples or triplets to each other. To
overcome this problem, we use local estimates of reliable
(dis-)similarities to initially group samples into compact
surrogate classes and use local partial orders of samples
to classes to link classes to each other. Similarity learning
is then formulated as a partial ordering task with soft correspondences of all samples to classes. Adopting a strategy
of self-supervision, a CNN is trained to optimally represent
samples in a mutually consistent manner while updating the
classes. The similarity learning and grouping procedure
are integrated in a single model and optimized jointly. The
proposed unsupervised approach shows competitive performance on detailed pose estimation and object classification.

1. Introduction
Visual similarities lie at the heart of a large number of
computer vision tasks ranging from low-level image processing to high-level understanding of human poses or object classification. Of the numerous techniques for similarity learning, supervised methods have been a popular technique, leading to formulations in which similarity learning
was casted as a ranking [36], regression [8], and classification [23] task. In recent years, with the advent of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), formulations based on a
ranking (i.e. ordering) of pairs or triplets of samples according to their similarity have shown impressive results [33].
However, to achieve this performance boost, these CNN architectures require millions of samples of supervised train∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Visualization of the interaction between surrogate classes
and partially ordered sets (posets). Our approach starts with a set
of unlabeled samples, building small surrogate classes and generating posets to unlabeled samples to learn fine-grained similarities.

ing data or at least the fine-tuning [5] on large datasets such
as PASCAL VOC.
Although the amount of accessible image data is growing
at an ever increasing rate, supervised labeling of similarities
is very costly. In addition, not only similarities between
images are important, but especially between objects and
their parts. Annotating the fine-grained similarities between
all these entities is a futile undertaking, in particular for the
large-scale datasets typically used for training CNNs. Deep
unsupervised learning of similarities is, therefore, of great
interest to the vision community, since it does not require
any labels for pre-training or fine-tuning. In this way we
can utilize large image datasets without being limited by
the need for costly manual annotations.
To utilize the vast amounts of available unlabeled training data, there is a quest to leverage context information intrinsic to images/video for self-supervision. However, this
context is typically highly local (i.e position of patches in
the same image [5], object tracks through short number of
frames [33] or image impainting [22]), establishing relations between tuples [5] or triplets [20, 38, 33] of images.
Hence, these approaches utilize loss functions that order a
positive Ip and a negative In image with respect to an anchor image Ia so that, d(Ia , Ip ) < d(Ia , In ). During train17130

