Deep Network Flow for Multi-Object Tracking
Samuel Schulter Paul Vernaza Wongun Choi Manmohan Chandraker
NEC Laboratories America, Media Analytics Department
Cupertino, CA, USA
{samuel,pvernaza,wongun,manu}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Data association problems are an important component
of many computer vision applications, with multi-object
tracking being one of the most prominent examples. A typical approach to data association involves finding a graph
matching or network flow that minimizes a sum of pairwise association costs, which are often either hand-crafted
or learned as linear functions of fixed features. In this
work, we demonstrate that it is possible to learn features
for network-flow-based data association via backpropagation, by expressing the optimum of a smoothed network flow
problem as a differentiable function of the pairwise association costs. We apply this approach to multi-object tracking
with a network flow formulation. Our experiments demonstrate that we are able to successfully learn all cost functions for the association problem in an end-to-end fashion,
which outperform hand-crafted costs in all settings. The integration and combination of various sources of inputs becomes easy and the cost functions can be learned entirely
from data, alleviating tedious hand-designing of costs.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is the task of predicting
the trajectories of all object instances in a video sequence.
MOT is challenging due to occlusions, fast moving objects
or moving camera platforms, but it is an essential module in
many applications like action recognition, surveillance or
autonomous driving. The currently predominant approach
to MOT is tracking-by-detection [3, 7, 10, 15, 26, 33, 41],
where, in a first step, object detectors like [16, 43, 51] provide potential locations of the objects of interest in the form
of bounding boxes. Then, the task of multi-object tracking
translates into a data association problem where the bounding boxes are assigned to trajectories that describe the path
of individual object instances over time.
Bipartite graph matching [25, 35] is often employed in
on-line approaches to assign bounding boxes in the current
frame to existing trajectories [22, 37, 38, 52]. Off-line meth-

ods can be elegantly formulated in a network flow framework to solve the association problem including birth and
death of trajectories [27, 29, 54]. Section 2 gives more examples. All these association problems can be solved in a
linear programming (LP) framework, where the constraints
are given by the problem. The interplay of all variables in
the LP, and consequently their costs, determines the success
of the tracking approach. Hence, designing good cost functions is crucial. Although cost functions are hand-crafted in
most prior work, there exist approaches for learning costs
from data. However, they either do not treat the problem as
a whole and only optimize parts of the costs [27, 31, 52, 54]
or are limited to linear cost functions [49, 50].
We propose a novel formulation that allows for learning
arbitrary parameterized cost functions for all variables of
the association problem in an end-to-end fashion, i.e., from
input data to the solution of the LP. By smoothing the LP,
bi-level optimization [6, 13] enables learning of all the parameters of the cost functions such as to minimize a loss
that is defined on the solution of the association problem,
see Section 3.2. The main benefit of this formulation is its
flexibility, general applicability to many problems and the
avoidance of tedious hand-crafting of cost functions. Our
approach is not limited to log-linear models (c.f ., [49]) but
can take full advantage of any differentiable parameterized
function, e.g., neural networks, to predict costs. Indeed, our
formulation can be integrated into any deep learning framework as one particular layer that solves a linear program
in the forward pass and back-propagates gradients w.r.t. the
costs through its solution (see Figure 2).
While our approach is general and can be used for
many association problems, we explore its use for multiobject tracking with a network flow formulation (see Sections 3.1 and 3.4). We empirically demonstrate on public
data sets [17, 28, 32] that: (i) Our approach enables end-toend learning of cost functions for the network flow problem.
(ii) Integrating different types of input sources like bounding box information, temporal differences, appearance and
motion features becomes easy and all model parameters can
be learned jointly. (iii) The end-to-end learned cost func-

6951

