Learning random-walk label propagation
for weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
Paul Vernaza
Manmohan Chandraker
NEC Laboratories America, Media Analytics Department
10080 N Wolfe Road, Cupertino, CA 95014
{pvernaza,manu}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
input
image

Large-scale training for semantic segmentation is challenging due to the expense of obtaining training data for
this task relative to other vision tasks. We propose a novel
training approach to address this difficulty. Given cheaplyobtained sparse image labelings, we propagate the sparse
labels to produce guessed dense labelings. A standard
CNN-based segmentation network is trained to mimic these
labelings. The label-propagation process is defined via
random-walk hitting probabilities, which leads to a differentiable parameterization with uncertainty estimates that
are incorporated into our loss. We show that by learning
the label-propagator jointly with the segmentation predictor, we are able to effectively learn semantic edges given
no direct edge supervision. Experiments also show that
training a segmentation network in this way outperforms
the naive approach.

sparse
training
labels

Arbitrary
segmentation
net

Random-walk label propagator

propagated
labels
Consistency
loss
training time only

1. Introduction
We consider the task of semantic segmentation, which
is to learn a predictor capable of accurately assigning a semantic label to each pixel in an image. As with many other
popular vision problems, convolutional neural nets (CNNs)
have emerged as the leading tool to solve semantic segmentation problems, in part due to their ability to leverage large
datasets effectively. However, datasets for semantic segmentation remain orders of magnitude smaller than for tasks
such as classification and detection, due chiefly to the much
higher annotation expense of this task.
To ease the annotation burden, and in line with previous
work [1, 11], we propose a method for training CNN-based
semantic segmentation networks given sparse annotations,
such as the scribbles depicted in Fig. 1, which also depicts
our proposed training strategy. The idea of our method
is to learn mutually-consistent networks for propagating
the sparse labels to unlabeled points, and predicting the

Semantic edge
predictor

predicted
segmentation

Figure 1: Overview of proposed training method.

true labeling given the image alone. Optimizing a mutualconsistency objective obviates the need for dense (or, fullylabeled) supervision. A key innovation of our approach is
proposing to use a specific, probabilistic model of sparse
label propagation that is a differentiable function of semantic boundary predictions. As it is differentiable, minimizing our loss via gradient-based methods results in simultaneous learning of an image-to-semantic-boundary predictor
and an image-to-semantic-segmentation predictor, despite
having no direct observations of semantic edges.
Our method is comparable to recent work by Lin et
al. [11], which proposes alternating between propagating
sparse labels using a CRF defined over superpixels, and
17158

