POSEidon: Face-from-Depth for Driver Pose Estimation
Guido Borghi

Marco Venturelli Roberto Vezzani Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
Fast and accurate upper-body and head pose estimation is a key task for automatic monitoring of driver attention, a challenging context characterized by severe illumination changes, occlusions and extreme poses. In this
work, we present a new deep learning framework for head
localization and pose estimation on depth images. The core
of the proposal is a regressive neural network, called POSEidon, which is composed of three independent convolutional nets followed by a fusion layer, specially conceived
for understanding the pose by depth. In addition, to recover the intrinsic value of face appearance for understanding head position and orientation, we propose a new Facefrom-Depth model for learning image faces from depth. Results in face reconstruction are qualitatively impressive. We
test the proposed framework on two public datasets, namely
Biwi Kinect Head Pose and ICT-3DHP, and on Pandora,
a new challenging dataset mainly inspired by the automotive setup. Results show that our method overcomes all recent state-of-art works, running in real time at more than
30 frames per second.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, we are witnessing a revolution in the automotive field, where ICT technologies are becoming sometimes
more important than the engine itself.
New solutions are required to solve many human-centered
problems: semi-autonomous driving, driver behavior understanding, human-machine-interaction for entertainment,
driver attention analysis for safe driving are just some examples. All of them, lay on the basic task of estimating
driver pose, and in particular of the face and upper body
parts, which are the mainly visible items of a driver. Computer vision research [37, 50, 5, 16, 13] achieved encouraging results, even if they are still not completely satisfactory due to some strong constraints of the context: reliability with strong pose changes, robustness to large occlusions
(e.g. glasses), in conjunction with non-intrusive capabilities, real time and low cost requirements (Fig. 1). In addi-

Figure 1. Some real situations in which head and upper-body pose
estimation are useful to monitor driver’s attention level: from the
top-left, driver is talking with passengers, is playing with smartphone, is falling sleep and is looking at the rear-view mirror.

tion, standard techniques based on intensity images are not
always applicable, due to the poor illumination conditions
during the night and the continuous illumination changes
during the day. For this reasons, computer vision solutions
based on illumination-insensitive data sources such as thermal [51] or depth [35] cameras are emerging.
Therefore, we propose a complete framework for driver
monitoring based on depth images only, that can be easily
acquired by commercial low-cost sensors placed inside the
vehicles. Starting from head localization, the ultimate goal
of the framework is the estimation of the head and shoulder pose, measured as pitch, roll and yaw rotation angles.
To this aim, a new triple regressive Convolutional Neural
Network architecture, called POSEidon, is proposed, that
combines depth, motion images and appearance.
One of the most innovative contribution is a Face-fromDepth network, that is able to reconstruct gray-level faces
directly from head depth images. This solution derives from
the awareness that intensity face images are very useful to
detect head pose [1, 17]: without having intensity data we
would like to have similar benefits. Gray-level faces extracted by depth images have a qualitatively impressive sim-

4661

