Thin-Slicing Network: A Deep Structured Model for Pose Estimation in Videos
Jie Song1

Limin Wang2
1

AIT Lab, ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool2
2

Otmar Hilliges1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

Abstract
Deep ConvNets have been shown to be effective for the
task of human pose estimation from single images. However, several challenging issues arise in the video-based
case such as self-occlusion, motion blur, and uncommon
poses with few or no examples in the training data. Temporal information can provide additional cues about the
location of body joints and help to alleviate these issues.
In this paper, we propose a deep structured model to estimate a sequence of human poses in unconstrained videos.
This model can be efficiently trained in an end-to-end manner and is capable of representing the appearance of body
joints and their spatio-temporal relationships simultaneously. Domain knowledge about the human body is explicitly incorporated into the network providing effective priors
to regularize the skeletal structure and to enforce temporal
consistency. The proposed end-to-end architecture is evaluated on two widely used benchmarks for video-based pose
estimation (Penn Action and JHMDB datasets). Our approach outperforms several state-of-the-art methods. 1

1. Introduction
Estimating human poses is one of the core problems
in computer vision and has many applications in the lifesciences, computer animation and the growing fields of
robotics, augmented and virtual reality. Accurate pose estimates can also drastically improve the performance of
activity recognition and high-level analysis of videos (cf.
[14, 34, 36]). Recent pose estimation methods have exploited deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) for bodypart detection in single, fully unconstrained images [2, 17,
18, 22, 31, 32, 35]. While demonstrating the feasibility of
detection-based pose estimation from images taken under
general conditions, such methods still struggle with several challenging aspects including the diversity of human
appearance and self-symmetries. Several methods [2, 37]
have explicitly incorporated geometric constraints among
body parts into such frameworks, ensuring spatial consis1 Code and models are available at https://github.com/
JieSong89/thin-slicing-network.

Figure 1. Our method incorporates spatio-temporal information
into a single end-to-end trainable network architecture, aiming to
deal with challenging problems such as (self-)occlusions, motion
blur, and uncommon poses. Taking fully unconstraind images as
input (a), we regress body-part locations with standard ConvNet
layers (b). Spatial inference helps in overcoming confusion due to
symmetric body parts (c). Our spatio-temporal inference layer (d)
can deal with extreme cases where spatial information only fails
(cf. 11 vs 12, 15 vs 16) and improves prediction accuracies for
unary terms due to repeating measurements by temporal propagation of joint position estimates (3 vs 4).

tency and penalizing physically impossible solutions (cf.
Figure 1, (c)).
In this paper we consider the comparatively less studied problem of human pose estimation from unconstrained
videos [11, 20, 39, 42]. While inheriting many properties
from image-based pose estimation, it also brings new challenges. In particular, unconstrained videos such as those
found in online portals, contain many frames with occlusions, unusual poses, and motion blur (see Figure 1). These
issues continue to limit the accuracy of joint detection even
if taking priors about the spatial configuration of the human
skeleton into consideration, and often result in visible jitter
if such models are applied directly to video sequences.
To tackle these problems, we propose to incorporate spa14220

