Deep Sequential Context Networks for Action Prediction
Yu Kong1
Zhiqiang Tao1
Yun Fu1,2
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
2
College of Computer and Information Science.
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
{yukong,zqtao,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human action recognition has gained significant interests due to its broad applications, such as visual surveillance and video retrieval. This task is to infer the action
label after the entire action execution has been observed.
However, in some scenarios, predicting the action label before the action execution ends is extremely important. For
example, it would be very helpful if an intelligent system
on a vehicle can predict a traffic accident before it happens;
opposed to recognizing the dangerous accident event thereafter. More importantly, it is essential that the intelligent
system can make accurate predictions at the very beginning
stage of a video, for instance, when only the beginning 10%

Full observations

Stacked layers
of features

t
…

This paper proposes efficient and powerful deep networks for action prediction from partially observed videos
containing temporally incomplete action executions. Different from after-the-fact action recognition, action prediction
task requires action labels to be predicted from these partially observed videos. Our approach exploits abundant sequential context information to enrich the feature representations of partial videos. We reconstruct missing information in the features extracted from partial videos by learning
from fully observed action videos. The amount of the information is temporally ordered for the purpose of modeling
temporal orderings of action segments. Label information
is also used to better separate the learned features of different categories. We develop a new learning formulation that
enables efficient model training. Extensive experimental results on UCF101, Sports-1M and BIT datasets demonstrate
that our approach remarkably outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, and is up to 300× faster than these methods. Results also show that actions differ in their prediction characteristics; some actions can be correctly predicted even
though only the beginning 10% portion of videos is observed.

0

Raw features

…
Information transfer

Learned
features
Raw
features

Figure 1. Our DeepSCN predicts the action label given an unfinished action video. Given features extracted from a partially
observed video, DeepSCN gains extra discriminative information
from fully observed video. Multiple layers of learned features
(purple nodes) are stacked to better abstract raw features.

frames of a full video is observed.
Action prediction is challenging because decisions must
be made based on temporally incomplete action executions.
However, certain actions are predictable at their early stage
if particular temporal patterns are observed and temporal
context is available. Consider, for example, a video of a
triple jump. We could imagine that a player is very likely
to jump after running since we have seen this type of sport
elsewhere1 . The sequential context of the full video observation provides us with the knowledge that the triple jump
action consists of running and jumping, and how the action
appearance evolves in the temporal domain. This crucial
information transferred along temporal axis is the key to
action prediction as it helps us to understand the action evolution in the full action observation.
In this paper, we propose novel deep sequential context
networks (DeepSCN) for action prediction. DeepSCN is
based on marginalized stacked autoencoder (MSDA) [4],
but extends it to accommodate sequential data. Our deep
networks utilize rich sequential context information to better capture the appearance evolution and temporal structure
of the full video observations. We learn such information
from full videos (see Figure 1), and transfer it to the features extracted from partial videos containing temporally
incomplete action executions. This enriches the feature representations, and improves their discriminative power even
1 We acknowledge that the scene gist also plays an important role here.

11473

