Parsing Images of Overlapping Organisms with
Deep Singling-Out Networks
Victor Yurchenko∗
Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Skolkovo, Moscow, Russia
{victor.yurchenko,lempitsky}@skoltech.ru

Abstract
This work is motivated by the mostly unsolved task of
parsing biological images with multiple overlapping articulated model organisms (such as worms or larvae). We
present a general approach that separates the two main
challenges associated with such data, individual object
shape estimation and object groups disentangling. At the
core of the approach is a deep feed-forward singling-out
network (SON) that is trained to map each local patch to
a vectorial descriptor that is sensitive to the characteristics (e.g. shape) of a central object, while being invariant
to the variability of all other surrounding elements. Given
a SON, a local image patch can be matched to a gallery of
isolated elements using their SON-descriptors, thus producing a hypothesis about the shape of the central element in
that patch. The image-level optimization based on integer
programming can then pick a subset of the hypotheses to
explain (parse) the whole image and disentangle groups of
organisms.
While sharing many similarities with existing “analysisby-synthesis” approaches, our method avoids the need
for stochastic search in the high-dimensional configuration space and numerous rendering operations at test-time.
We show that our approach can parse microscopy images
of three popular model organisms (the C.Elegans roundworms, the Drosophila larvae, and the E. Coli bacteria)
even under significant crowding and overlaps between organisms. We speculate that the overall approach is applicable to a wider class of image parsing problems concerned
with crowded articulated objects, for which rendering training images is possible.

1. Introduction
Parsing images of biological substances has become one
of the important applications of computer vision [8]. In
∗ Currently with Yandex, Moscow.

C Elegans
(roundworms)

Drosophila
(larvae)

E.Coli
(bacteria)

Figure 1. We consider the image parsing tasks for three different organisms that are popular in biomedical research. In each
case, parsing is hard because of a certain shape variability of individual organisms as well as organism overlap and crowding. Although the three organisms are very different biologically, we approach the corresponding parsing tasks with a unified framework
that first uses a specially-designed deep network to propose hypotheses about the shapes of individual organisms and then use
integer programming to pick a viable hypotheses set.

many biologically-important scenarios it is necessary to
deal with images of overlapping objects or organisms. In recent years, several approaches have been proposed that can
parse images when objects have simple blob-type shapes
(e.g. cell cultures) [1, 2, 4, 7, 23]. Less attention, however,
has been paid to images containing more complex organisms exhibiting significant shape and pose variations, such
as worms, larvae, and bacilli. The sheer importance of such
model organisms for biomedical studies calls for further improvement of parsing approaches for this class of images.
Two factors make parsing of such images a complicated
task. First, organisms can exhibit significant rigid and nonrigid pose variations. Secondly, these organisms often form
clusters that cannot be segmented into individual organisms
using simple image processing methods. The two factors
complicate each other, as the variation of the appearance
of clusters can be combinatorially larger than the variation
of the appearance of a single organism, thus defying bruteforce parsing approaches.
Our approach uses a combination of deep learning and
generative modeling to tackle the challenge of organism

6280

