Robust Visual Tracking Using Oblique Random Forests
Le Zhang1 , Jagannadan Varadarajan1 , Ponnuthurai Nagaratnam Suganthan2 ,
Narendra Ahuja1,3 and Pierre Moulin1,3
1
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore, 2 Nanyang Technology University, Singapore
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL USA,
{zhang.le,vjagan}@adsc.com.sg, epnsugan@ntu.edu.sg, {moulin.ifp, n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Random forest has emerged as a powerful classification
technique with promising results in various vision tasks
including image classification, pose estimation and object
detection. However, current techniques have shown little
improvements in visual tracking as they mostly rely on
piece wise orthogonal hyperplanes to create decision
nodes and lack a robust incremental learning mechanism
that is much needed for online tracking. In this paper,
we propose a discriminative tracker based on a novel
incremental oblique random forest. Unlike conventional
orthogonal decision trees that use a single feature and
heuristic measures to obtain a split at each node, we
propose to use a more powerful proximal SVM to obtain
oblique hyperplanes to capture the geometric structure
of the data better. The resulting decision surface is not
restricted to be axis aligned, and hence has the ability to
represent and classify the input data better. Furthermore, in
order to generalize to online tracking scenarios, we derive
incremental update steps that enable the hyperplanes in
each node to be updated recursively, efficiently and in a
closed-form fashion. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method using two large scale benchmark datasets
(OTB-51 and OTB-100) and show that our method gives
competitive results on several challenging cases by relying
on simple HOG features as well as in combination with
more sophisticated deep neural network based models. The
implementations of the proposed random forest are available at https://github.com/ZhangLeUestc/
Incremental-Oblique-Random-Forest.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking can be viewed as a method to estimate
the coordinates of an object (e.g., object bounding box in
the image plane) consistently through a sequence of frames.
Due to its far-reaching applications in domains including surveillance, human computer interaction, autonomous

Figure 1. Results obtained from the proposed Obli-RaF on challenging scenarios from OTB-100 dataset. First – second row: the
target undergoes severe motion problems, third – fourth row: Occlusion, fifth – sixth row: illumination variations. Our method (indicated by red bounding box) achieves more precise results when
compared to HCF [32] (in green) and FCNT [47] (in blue). Best
viewed in color and when zoomed.

driving, and health care, tracking is a core problem in computer vision.
In this paper, we study the problem of ‘single-object
model-free tracking’ which is widely addressed in the tracking literature. Here, the tracker is initialized with a bounding box of an arbitrary object of interest in the first frame.
Given this single (labeled) instance, the goal is to predict the
location of the object in an online manner in a model-free
setting, i.e., without using any explicit appearance or shape

5589

