Quality Aware Network for Set to Set Recognition
Yu Liu
SenseTime Group Limited

Junjie Yan
SenseTime Group Limited

Wanli Ouyang
University of Sydney

liuyuisanai@gmail.com

yanjunjie@sensetime.com

wanli.ouyang@gmail.com

Abstract

Shake Blur

AvePool

MaxPool

AvePool

Legible samples

Shake

Blur

Good Quality

This paper targets on the problem of set to set recognition, which learns the metric between two image sets. Images in each set belong to the same identity. Since images
in a set can be complementary, they hopefully lead to higher accuracy in practical applications. However, the quality of each sample cannot be guaranteed, and samples with
poor quality will hurt the metric. In this paper, the quality aware network (QAN) is proposed to confront this problem, where the quality of each sample can be automatically
learned although such information is not explicitly provided
in the training stage. The network has two branches, where
the first branch extracts appearance feature embedding for
each sample and the other branch predicts quality score for
each sample. Features and quality scores of all samples in
a set are then aggregated to generate the final feature embedding. We show that the two branches can be trained in
an end-to-end manner given only the set-level identity annotation. Analysis on gradient spread of this mechanism
indicates that the quality learned by the network is beneficial to set-to-set recognition and simplifies the distribution
that the network needs to fit. Experiments on both face verification and person re-identification show advantages of the
proposed QAN. The source code and network structure can
be downloaded at GitHub1

Legible samples

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation, best viewed in color.
Left column: A classical puzzle in set-to-set recognition. Both
set A (upper) and B (lower) contain noisy image samples caused
by shake and blur. Their features (shown by histograms in middle
row) are more similar to samples in other class than the inner class.
Right column: Distributions and samples of two identities in hyperspace. Top: Due to the noisy, variances of two identities are
large and they both have hard negative samples. Bottom: Quality
aware network (QAN) weaken the noisy samples and narrow down
identities’ variances, which makes them more discriminative.

1. Introduction
Face verification [12, 26, 27, 28, 30] and person reidentification [5, 6, 20, 42] have been well studied and widely used in computer vision applications such as financial
identity authentication and video surveillance. Both the two tasks need to measure the distance between two face or
person images. Such tasks can be naturally formalized as a
metric learning problem, where the distance of images from
the same identity should be smaller than that from different
1 github.com/sciencefans/Quality-Aware-Network

Note that we are developing P-QAN (a fine-grained version of QAN, see
Sec.5) in this repository so the performance of the code may be higher
than that we report in this paper.

identities. Built on large scale training data, convolutional
neural networks and carefully designed optimization criterion, current methods can achieve promising performance on
standard benchmarks, but may still fail due to appearance
variations caused by large pose or illumination.
In practical applications, instead of one single image, a
set of images for each identity can always be collected. For
example, the image set of one identity can be sampled from
the trajectory of the face or person in videos. Images in a
set can be complementary to each other, so that they provide
more information than a single image, such as images from
different poses. The direct way to aggregate identity infor15790

