Generalized Rank Pooling for Activity Recognition
Anoop Cherian1,3

Basura Fernando1,3
Mehrtash Harandi2,3
Stephen Gould1,3
1
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, 2 Data61/CSIRO
3
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
firstname.lastname@{anu.edu.au, data61.csiro.au}

Abstract
Most popular deep models for action recognition split
video sequences into short sub-sequences consisting of a
few frames; frame-based features are then pooled for recognizing the activity. Usually, this pooling step discards
the temporal order of the frames, which could otherwise be
used for better recognition. Towards this end, we propose
a novel pooling method, generalized rank pooling (GRP),
that takes as input, features from the intermediate layers of
a CNN that is trained on tiny sub-sequences, and produces
as output the parameters of a subspace which (i) provides
a low-rank approximation to the features and (ii) preserves
their temporal order. We propose to use these parameters as
a compact representation for the video sequence, which is
then used in a classification setup. We formulate an objective for computing this subspace as a Riemannian optimization problem on the Grassmann manifold, and propose an
efficient conjugate gradient scheme for solving it. Experiments on several activity recognition datasets show that our
scheme leads to state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Activity recognition from videos is challenging as realworld actions are often complex, confounded with background activities and vary significantly from one actor to
another. Efficient solutions to this difficult problem can facilitate several useful applications such as human-robot cooperation, visual surveillance, augmented reality, and medical monitoring systems. The recent resurgence of deep
learning algorithms has demonstrated significant advancements in several fundamental problems in computer vision, including activity recognition. However, such solutions are still far from being practically useful and thus
activity recognition continues to be a challenging research
topic [2, 12, 34, 38, 45, 47].
Deep learning algorithms on long video sequences demand huge computational resources, such as GPU, memory,
etc. One popular approach to circumvent this practical chal-

Figure 1. An illustration of our pooling scheme. For every video,
our formulation learns the parameters of a low-dimensional subspace in which the projected video frames conform to their temporal order. We use the subspaces as respective representations of the
sequences. Such subspaces belong to the Grassmann manifold, on
which we learn non-linear action classifiers.

lenge is to train networks on sub-sequences consisting of
one to a few tens of video frames. The activity predictions
from such short temporal receptive fields are then aggregated via a pooling step [25, 7, 38], such as computing the
average or maximum of the generated CNN features. Given
that the features are from temporally-ordered input data, it
is likely that they capture the temporal evolution of the actions in the sequence. Thus, a pooling scheme that can use
this temporal structure is preferred for activity recognition.
In Fernando et al. [15, 13], the problem of pooling using
the temporal structure is cast in a learning-to-rank setup,
termed Rank Pooling, that computes a line in input space;
the projection of input data onto this line preserving the
temporal order. The parameters of this line are then used
as a summarization of the video sequence. However, several issues remain unanswered, namely (i) while the line is
assumed to belong to the input space, there is no guarantee
that it captures other properties of the data (other than order), such as background, context, etc. which may be useful
for recognition, (ii) the ranking constraints are linear, (iii)
13222

