Detangling People: Individuating Multiple Close People
and Their Body Parts via Region Assembly
Hao Jiang
Boston College, USA

Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin, USA

hjiang@cs.bc.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Today’s person detection methods work best when people are in common upright poses and appear reasonably
well spaced out in the image. However, in many real images,
that’s not what people do. People often appear quite close
to each other, e.g., with limbs linked or heads touching, and
their poses are often not pedestrian-like. We propose an
approach to detangle people in multi-person images. We
formulate the task as a region assembly problem. Starting
from a large set of overlapping regions from body part semantic segmentation and generic object proposals, our optimization approach reassembles those pieces together into
multiple person instances. Since optimal region assembly
is a challenging combinatorial problem, we present a Lagrangian relaxation method to accelerate the lower bound
estimation, thereby enabling a fast branch and bound solution for the global optimum. As output, our method produces a pixel-level map indicating both 1) the body part
labels (arm, leg, torso, and head), and 2) which parts belong to which individual person. Our results on challenging
datasets show our method is robust to clutter, occlusion, and
complex poses. It outperforms a variety of competing methods, including existing detector CRF methods and region
CNN approaches. In addition, we demonstrate its impact
on a proxemics recognition task, which demands a precise
representation of “whose body part is where” in crowded
images.

1. Introduction
Person detection has made tremendous progress over the
last decade [1]. Standard methods work best on pedestrians: upright people in fairly simple, predictable poses, and
with minimal interaction and occlusion between the person
instances. Unfortunately, people in real images are not always so well-behaved! Plenty of in-the-wild images contain
multiple people close together, perhaps with their limbs intertwined, faces close, bodies partially occluded, and in a
variety of poses. A number of computer vision applications
demand the ability to parse such natural images into indi-

Figure 1. Our method ﬁnds human instances and the body part regions
(arms, legs, torso, and head). From left to right: input image, semantic
body part segmentation, person instance segmentation, ﬁnal person individuation and part labeling.

vidual people and their respective body parts—for example, fashion [2], consumer photo analysis, predicting interperson interactions [31], or as a stepping stone towards activity recognition, gesture, and pose analysis.
Current methods for segmenting person instances [9, 10,
4, 26, 27, 23, 24] take a top-down approach. First they use
a holistic person detector to localize each person, and then
they perform pixel level segmentation. Limited by the efﬁciency and performance of person detectors, such methods are slow when dealing with people at unknown scales
and orientations. Furthermore, they suffer when presented
with close or overlapping people, or people in unusual nonpedestrian-like body poses [31].
We propose a new approach to detangle people and their
body parts in multi-person images. Reversing the traditional
top-down pipeline, we pose the task as a region assembly problem and develop a bottom-up, purely region-based
approach. Given an input image containing an unknown
number of people, we ﬁrst compute a pool of regions using
both body-part semantic segmentations and object proposals. Regions in this pool are often fragmented body parts
and often overlap. Despite their imperfections, our method
automatically selects the best subset and groups them into
human instances. To solve this difﬁcult jigsaw puzzle, we
formulate an optimization problem in which parts are assigned to people, with constraints preferring small overlap,
correct sizes and spatial relationships between body parts,
and a low-energy association of body part regions to their
person instance. We show that this problem can be solved
efﬁciently using decomposition and a branch and bound

6021

