Learning and Refining of Privileged Information-based RNNs for Action
Recognition from Depth Sequences
Zhiyuan Shi, Tae-Kyun Kim
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London
{z.shi,tk.kim}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Existing RNN-based approaches for action recognition
from depth sequences require either skeleton joints or handcrafted depth features as inputs. An end-to-end manner,
mapping from raw depth maps to action classes, is nontrivial to design due to the fact that: 1) single channel map
lacks texture thus weakens the discriminative power; 2) relatively small set of depth training data. To address these
challenges, we propose to learn an RNN driven by privileged information (PI) in three-steps: An encoder is pretrained to learn a joint embedding of depth appearance and
PI (i.e. skeleton joints). The learned embedding layers are
then tuned in the learning step, aiming to optimize the network by exploiting PI in a form of multi-task loss. However, exploiting PI as a secondary task provides little help
to improve the performance of a primary task (i.e. classification) due to the gap between them. Finally, a bridging
matrix is defined to connect two tasks by discovering latent PI in the refining step. Our PI-based classification loss
maintains a consistency between latent PI and predicted
distribution. The latent PI and network are iteratively estimated and updated in an expectation-maximization procedure. The proposed learning process provides greater discriminative power to model subtle depth difference, while
helping avoid overfitting the scarcer training data. Our experiments show significant performance gains over stateof-the-art methods on three public benchmark datasets and
our newly collected Blanket dataset.

1. Introduction
Action recognition from depth sequences [57, 34, 29,
44, 49] has attracted significant interest recently due to the
emergence of low-cost depth sensors. Human action refers
to a temporal sequence of primitive movements carried out
by a person [55]. Recurrent neural network (RNN) [17]
is naturally suited for modeling temporal dynamics of human actions as it can be used to model joint probability

distribution over sequences, especially in the case of long
short-term memory (LSTM) [18] which is capable of modeling long-term contextual information of complex sequential data.
RNN-based approaches become the dominant solution
[61, 42, 9, 27] for action recognition from depth sequence
recently. However, these approaches require either skeleton joints [61, 9, 22] or hand-crafted depth features [42] as
inputs in both training and testing. Skeleton-based action
recognition assumes that a robust tracker can estimate body
joints accurately in the testing stage. This often does not
hold in practice, especially when a human body is partly
in view or the person is not in an upright position. Handcrafted features with heuristic parameters are designed for
task-specific data. This often requires multi-stage processing phases, each of which needs to be carefully designed
and tuned.
An end-to-end trainable model from raw video frames
[8] is desired to extract spatio-temporal features and model
complex sequences in a unified framework. This learning pipeline typically combines a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) [25] as visual feature extractor and an
RNN [17] to model and recognize temporal dynamics of
sequential data. Unfortunately, these conventional end-toend manners (CNN+RNN) are difficult to be applied to action recognition from depth sequences due to the fact that:
1) Color and texture are precluded in depth maps, which
weaken the discriminative power of the representation captured by the CNN model. 2) Existing depth data of human
actions are considered as a small-scale dataset compared to
publicly available RGB image dataset. These conventional
pipelines are purely data-driven that learn its representation
directly from the pixels. Such model is likely at the risk of
overfitting when the network is optimized on limited training data.
To address the above-mentioned issues, we propose
a privileged information-based recurrent neural network
(PRNN) that exploits additional knowledge to obtain a better estimate of network parameters. This additional knowl13461

