Context-aware Captions from Context-agnostic Supervision
Ramakrishna Vedantam1 Samy Bengio2 Kevin Murphy2 Devi Parikh3 Gal Chechik2
1
Virginia Tech 3 Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Google
1

vrama91@vt.edu

3

parikh@gatech.edu

2

{bengio,kpmurphy,gal}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce an inference technique to produce discriminative context-aware image captions (captions that describe differences between images or visual concepts) using
only generic context-agnostic training data (captions that
describe a concept or an image in isolation). For example, given images and captions of “siamese cat” and “tiger
cat”, we generate language that describes the “siamese
cat” in a way that distinguishes it from “tiger cat”. Our
key novelty is that we show how to do joint inference over
a language model that is context-agnostic and a listener
which distinguishes closely-related concepts. We first apply our technique to a justification task, namely to describe
why an image contains a particular fine-grained category
as opposed to another closely-related category of the CUB200-2011 dataset. We then study discriminative image captioning to generate language that uniquely refers to one
of two semantically-similar images in the COCO dataset.
Evaluations with discriminative ground truth for justification and human studies for discriminative image captioning
reveal that our approach outperforms baseline generative
and speaker-listener approaches for discrimination.

Figure 1: An illustration of two tasks requiring pragmatic reasoning explored in this paper. 1) justification: Given an image of a bird, a target
(ground-truth) class (green), and a distractor class (red), describe the target
image to explain why it belongs to the target class, and not the distractor
class. The distractor class images are only shown for illustration, and are
not provided to the algorithm. 2) discriminative image captioning: Given
two similar images, produce a sentence to identify a target image (green)
from the distractor image (red). Our introspective speaker model improves
over a context-free speaker.

teaching, conversation and discussions.

1. Introduction
Language is the primary modality for communicating,
and representing knowledge. To convey relevant information, we often use language in a way that takes into account
context. For example, instead of describing a situation in a
“literal” way, one might pragmatically emphasize selected
aspects in order to be persuasive, impactful or effective.
Consider the target image at the bottom left in Fig. 1. A
literal description “An airplane is flying in the sky” conveys
the semantics of the image, but would be inadequate if the
goal was to disambiguate this image from the distractor image (bottom right). For this purpose, a more pragmatic description would be, “A large passenger jet flying through a
blue sky”. This description is aware of context, namely, that
the distractor image also has an airplane. People use such
pragmatic considerations continuously, and effortlessly in

In this vein, it is desirable to endow machines with pragmatic reasoning. One approach would be to collect training
data of language used in context, for example, discriminative ground truth utterances from people describing images
in context of other images, or justifications explaining why
an image contains a target class as opposed to a distractor
class (Fig. 1). Unfortunately, collecting such data has a prohibitive cost, since the space of objects in possible contexts
is often too large. Furthermore, in some cases the context
in which we wish to be pragmatic may be unknown apriori. For example, a free-form conversation agent may have
to respond in a context-aware or discriminative fashion depending upon the history of a conversation. Such scenarios
also arise in human-robot interaction, as in the case where,
a robot may need to reason about which spoon a person is
asking for. Thus, in this paper, we focus on deriving pragmatic (context-aware) behavior given access only to generic
(context-agnostic) ground truth.
1251

