Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SReN: Shape Regression Network for Comic Storyboard Extraction
Zheqi He, Yafeng Zhou, Yongtao Wang, and Zhi Tang
Institute of Computer Science & Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{hezheqi, zhouyafeng, wangyongtao, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The goal of storyboard extraction is to decompose the comic
image into storyboards, which is the fundamental step of
comic image understanding and producing digital comic documents suitable for mobile reading. Most of existing approaches are based on hand crafted low-level visual patters
like edge segments and line segments, which do not capture
high-level vision information. To overcome this drawback
of the existing approaches, we propose a novel architecture
based on deep convolutional neural network, named Shape
Regression Network (SReN), to detect storyboards within
comic images. Firstly, we use Fast R-CNN to generate rectangle bounding boxes as storyboard proposals. Then we train
a deep neural network to predict quadrangles for these proposals. Unlike existing object detection methods which only
output rectangle bounding boxes, SReN can produce more
precise quadrangle bounding boxes. Experimental results on
7382 comic pages, demonstrate that SReN outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods by more than 10% in terms of F1score and page correction rate.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Original comic page; (b) Comic storyboards
(Source:Mitsuru Adachi, Rough,vol.1, p.52).
Recently, deep learning methods (Girshick 2015; Liu et
al. 2015) have been applied to object detection and gain the
state-of-the-art performances in many challenges. The effective feature learning capability of deep neural network make
great contribution to high-level vision tasks. However, these
methods can only obtain rectangle bounding box of objects,
which are not precise enough for many application tasks. For
example, the tasks of comic storyboard detection or trafﬁc
sign detection. It is better to use parameterized shape like
triangle, quadrangle or ellipse to represent the detected results.
In this paper, we propose a novel architecture based on
deep convolutional neural network named SReN 1 to detect
storyboards within comic images. SReN can regress parameters of quadrangles, which improve localization accuracy
for object detection. Experiments conducted on a dataset
of 7382 comic pages, and the results demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Comic is a kind of entertainment publication popular among
people of different ages around the world. As shown in Fig.
1, the storyboard is the basic semantic unit of a comic.
Hence, decomposing the comic image into storyboards is
the fundamental step to understand content of comic. In addition, decomposing the comic image into storyboards is the
key technique to produce digital comic documents suitable
for reading on mobile devices with small screen.
Most of previous storyboard extraction methods (Wang,
Zhou, and Tang 2015; Li et al. 2015) use only hand crafted
low-level visual patterns, such as edge segments, line segments or connected component. These methods can work effectively under certain assumptions. However, they may fail
to handle the comic image with complex layout. For example, when the storyboards with missing borderlines or when
more than two storyboards are overlapped with each other,
these methods are tend to fail. The most important reason is
that low-level visual patterns can not represent image content well.

SReN: A Storyboard Extraction Architecture
In this section, we introduce our new storyboard extraction
architecture SReN, which consists of two main steps: generate storyboard proposals and train shape regression network.
The architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2.

Generating storyboard proposals
We use comic images to train a Fast R-CNN model which
detect rectangle bounding boxes r for storyboards. Since

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Supplemental materials of this research are available in
http://philokey.github.io/sren.html

4937

