Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Artiﬁcial Agent for Robust Image Registration
Rui Liao, Shun Miao, Pierre de Tournemire, Sasa Grbic,
Ali Kamen, Tommaso Mansi, Dorin Comaniciu
Technology Center, Medical Imaging Technologies
Siemens Medical Solutions USA
Princeton, NJ 08540

While medical image registration has been an active research area for more than two decades (Markelj et al. 2012;
Murphy et al. 2011), fully automatic and robust 3-D registration remains a challenging task that requires manual intervention for possible corrections. Up-to-date image registration has been largely formulated as an optimization problem, where a generic matching metric is deﬁned to measure
the similarity of the image pairs to be registered (Razlighi,
Kehtarnavaz, and Youseﬁ 2013). The transformation parameters between the image pairs are then estimated via maximization of the deﬁned matching metric using an optimizer
(Rios and Sahinidis 2013). This formulation faces two challenges. First, a generic matching metric is often non-convex
over the plausible registration parameter space and generic
optimizers perform poorly on non-convex problems. For example, the CT and cone-beam CT (CBCT) spine images in
Figure 1.a have very different ﬁeld of views (FOVs), resulting in local maxima due to the repetitive nature of vertebra
(Figure 1.b). Second, a generic matching metric does not
guarantee a good alignment, e.g, when the data is noisy or
with drastically different appearance due to different imaging physics. The cardiac case in Figure 1.c shows contrast
enhanced vessels in CT and severe streaking artifacts and
weak soft tissue contrast in CBCT.
In this paper, we reformulate the registration problem by
mimicking more closely how an expert performs image registration as a process of sequential actions of object recognition and manipulation. Motivated by recent advances in
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016;
Caicedo and Lazebnik 2015; Hausknecht and Stone 2015;
Neumann et al. 2016), during training the agent learns a registration strategy (policy) via a DNN that maps the current
state to the optimal next action that best improves the alignment. During testing, the agent applies the learned policy
sequentially to align the images. As a result, the artiﬁcial
agent inherently learns both a data-driven matching metric
and a registration task-driven policy.
Our main technical contributions are: 1) Instead of oneshot regression mapping the raw image data to the registration parameters, which is often a very hard problem
to learn, we decompose the registration task into a sequence of (often easier) classiﬁcation problems, i.e. ﬁnding the best action among a limited set of possible solu-

Abstract
3-D image registration, which involves aligning two or more
images, is a critical step in a variety of medical applications
from diagnosis to therapy. Image registration is commonly
performed by optimizing an image matching metric as a cost
function. However, this task is challenging due to the nonconvex nature of the matching metric over the plausible registration parameter space and insufﬁcient approaches for a robust optimization. As a result, current approaches are often
customized to a speciﬁc problem and sensitive to image quality and artifacts. In this paper, we propose a completely different approach to image registration, inspired by how experts
perform the task. We ﬁrst cast the image registration problem as a ”strategy learning” process, where the goal is to ﬁnd
the best sequence of motion actions (e.g. up, down, etc.) that
yields image alignment. Within this approach, an artiﬁcial
agent is learned, modeled using deep convolutional neural
networks, with 3D raw image data as the input, and the next
optimal action as the output. To cope with the dimensionality of the problem, we propose a greedy supervised approach
for an end-to-end training, coupled with attention-driven hierarchical strategy. The resulting registration approach inherently encodes both a data-driven matching metric and an optimal registration strategy (policy). We demonstrate, on two 3D/3-D medical image registration examples with drastically
different nature of challenges, that the artiﬁcial agent outperforms several state-of-art registration methods by a large margin in terms of both accuracy and robustness.

Introduction
The goal of 3-D medical image registration is to recover correspondences between two 3-D images acquired from 1) different patients, 2) the same patient at different time, and 3)
different modalities e.g. Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Positron Emission Tomography (PET) etc. The images are brought into the same coordinate system via various transformation models, e.g. rigid,
afﬁne, parametric splines, and dense motion ﬁelds (Oliveira
and Tavares 2014). The aligned images could then provide complimentary information for decision-making, enable longitudinal change analysis, or guide minimally invasive therapy (James and Dasarathy 2014; Liao et al. 2013).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4168

