Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Wikitop: Using Wikipedia Category Network to Generate Topic Trees
Saravana Kumar, Prasath Rengarajan, and Arockia Xavier Annie
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Guindy
Anna University, Sardar Patel Road, Guindy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 600025
{savkumar90,prasathindiarajan,aucs.annie}@gmail.com

hierarchy. We formally deﬁne topic trees and topic hierarchies in section .
We present a supervised classiﬁcation approach using
Support Vector Machines that exploits the category structure
of Wikipedia and uses it as an initial topic hierarchy to perform hierarchical classiﬁcation and subsequently build topic
trees. Moreover, since Wikipedia is the largest curated online encyclopaedia, there are an enormous number of articles
labelled with their categories. Therefore, there is a massive
amount of training data. We evaluate an initial prototype of
the Wikitop system by passing a collection of 125 articles to
prove its feasibility.

Abstract
Automated topic identiﬁcation is an essential component in
various information retrieval and knowledge representation
tasks such as automated summary generation, categorization
search and document indexing. In this paper, we present the
Wikitop system to automatically generate topic trees from the
input text by performing hierarchical classiﬁcation using the
Wikipedia Category Network (WCN). Our preliminary results over a collection of 125 articles are encouraging and
show potential of a robust methodology for automated topic
tree generation.

Introduction

Automated Topic Tree Generation

Automated topic identiﬁcation (ATI) of textual data is the
process of assigning a collection of tags that best represent
the input text. ATI can also be seen as a text categorization or classiﬁcation task. Currently prevalent research in
ATI is focused on generating a ﬂat structure of tags by semantic analysis methods such as word frequency counting
and title-keyword techniques. However, a ﬂat structure may
not be a sufﬁcient representation of the input text as it omits
conceptual generalisations. Moreover, as shown in (Coursey
and Mihalcea 2009), the topic of a text may not always be
apparent in the input text and may need an external knowledge source to help predict the topic. Topic trees or category
trees are a collection of tags in tree form with the tags organised in descending order of generality. The tag representing
the most general concept occupies the root of the tree and
the tags representing the least general concepts occupy the
leaves of the trees.
The Wikipedia Category Network (WCN) is the logical
organisation of all Wikipedia categories, subcategories and
pages in the form of a tree. Although the category structure of Wikipedia is a directed cyclic graph, we develop the
WCN as a tree by ignoring cycle causing edges and develop
a topic hierarchy.
We build upon prior research in topic tree generation
(Sun and Lim 2001; Lin 1995) and hierarchical classiﬁcation (Koller and Sahami 1997) to develop the Wikitop system for automated topic tree generation by hierarchical classiﬁcation using the Wikipedia Category Network as a topic

A topic hierarchy can be deﬁned as topic tags organised in
tree structure, where every parent node is a conceptual generalisation of its children.
For a given input text document, the problem of automatic topic recognition involves assigning topic tags from
the topic hierarchy to an output topic tree such that, the tags
are the best description of the topic of the text and are organised in the same way as they are in the topic hierarchy where
each parent is a conceptual generalisation of it’s children

Methodology
We adapt the concept of hierarchical classiﬁcation from
(Koller and Sahami 1997) and use the Wikipedia Category
Network (WCN) as a topic hierarchy. A multi-class multilabel classiﬁer is trained at every node of the WCN. The
classiﬁer at each node uses the names of the categories directly connected and one level below it as classes for training. We use multi-class multi-label classiﬁers because at
each level, there maybe more than two categories directly
connected to it and a given text can belong to more than
one of those categories. For training samples each class is
assigned the pages that are directly connected to both itself
and to categories that come under it up to a depth of δ. The
δ values are an indication of the number of training example. If δ = 0 only pages that are directly connected to the
class node are considered as training example for that class.
If δ = 1 the pages that are directly connected to the class
node and pages that belong to the category immediately connected to the class node are considered for training and so

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4951

