Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Condensed Memory Networks for Clinical Diagnostic Inferencing
Aaditya Prakash∗

Siyuan Zhao

Brandeis University, MA
aprakash@brandeis.edu

Worcester Polytechnic Institute, MA
szhao@wpi.edu

Sadid A. Hasan, Vivek Datla, Kathy Lee, Ashequl Qadir, Joey Liu, Oladimeji Farri
∗

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Philips Research North America, Cambridge, MA
{ﬁrstname.lastname,kathy.lee 1,dimeji.farri}@philips.com
In this paper, we explore the discriminatory capability of
the unstructured free-text clinical notes to correctly infer
the most probable diagnoses from a complex clinical scenario. In the Clinical Decision Support track1 of the recent
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) series, clinical diagnostic inferencing from unstructured free texts has been shown
to play a signiﬁcant role in improving the accuracy of relevant biomedical article retrieval (Hasan et al. 2014; 2015;
2016). We also explore the use of an external knowledge
source like Wikipedia from which the model can extract relevant information, such as signs and symptoms for various
diseases. Our goal is to combine such an external clinical
knowledge source with the free-text clinical notes and use
the learning capability of memory networks to correctly infer the most probable diagnosis.
Memory Networks (MemNNs) (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015;
Weston, Chopra, and Bordes 2014) are a class of models
which contain an external memory and a controller to read
from and write to the memory. Memory Networks read a
given input source and a knowledge source several times
(hops) while updating an internal memory state. The memory state is the representation of relevant information from
the knowledge base optimized to solve the given task. This
allows the network to remember useful features. The notion of neural networks with memory was introduced to
solve AI tasks that require complex reasoning and inferencing. These models have been successfully applied in
the Question Answering domain on datasets like bAbi (Weston et al. 2015), MovieQA (Tapaswi et al. 2015), and WikiQA (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015; Miller et al. 2016). Memory
networks are harder to train than traditional networks and
they do not scale easily to a large memory. End-to-End
Memory Networks (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015) and Key-Value
Memory Networks (KV-MemNNs) (Miller et al. 2016) try to
solve these problems by training multiple hops over memory
and compartmentalizing memory slots into hashes, respectively.
When the memory is large, hashing can be used to selectively retrieve only relevant information from the knowledge
base, however not much work has been done to improve
the information content of the memory state. If the network
were trained for factoid question answering, the memory

Abstract
Diagnosis of a clinical condition is a challenging task, which
often requires signiﬁcant medical investigation. Previous
work related to diagnostic inferencing problems mostly consider multivariate observational data (e.g. physiological signals, lab tests etc.). In contrast, we explore the problem using
free-text medical notes recorded in an electronic health record
(EHR). Complex tasks like these can beneﬁt from structured
knowledge bases, but those are not scalable. We instead exploit raw text from Wikipedia as a knowledge source. Memory networks have been demonstrated to be effective in tasks
which require comprehension of free-form text. They use the
ﬁnal iteration of the learned representation to predict probable classes. We introduce condensed memory neural networks (C-MemNNs), a novel model with iterative condensation of memory representations that preserves the hierarchy
of features in the memory. Experiments on the MIMIC-III
dataset show that the proposed model outperforms other variants of memory networks to predict the most probable diagnoses given a complex clinical scenario.

Introduction
Clinicians perform complex cognitive processes to infer the
probable diagnosis after observing several variables such as
the patient’s past medical history, current condition, and various clinical measurements. The cognitive burden of dealing
with complex patient situations could be reduced by having an automated assistant provide suggestions to physicians
of the most probable diagnostic options for optimal clinical
decision-making.
Some work has been done in building Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) systems that can support clinical decision making (Lipton et al. 2015; Choi, Bahadori, and Sun 2015;
Choi et al. 2016). These works have primarily focused on the
use of various biosignals as features. EHRs typically store
such structured clinical data (e.g. physiological signals, vital signs, lab tests etc.) about the patients’ clinical encounters in addition to unstructured textual notes that contain a
complete picture of the associated clinical events. Structured
clinical data generally contain raw signals without much
interpretation, whereas unstructured free-text clinical notes
contain detailed description of the overall clinical scenario.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3274

http://www.trec-cds.org/

