Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

ATSUM: Extracting Attractive Summaries
for News Propagation on Microblogs
Fang Liu, Xiaojun Wan
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{fangliu, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

that the incorporation of the text attractiveness factor is
very helpful for extracting attractive summaries.

In this paper, we investigate how to automatically extract attractive summaries for news propagation on microblogs and
propose a novel system called ATSUM to achieve this goal
via text attractiveness analysis. It first analyzes the sentences in a news article and automatically predict the attractiveness score of each sentence by using the support vector regression method. The predicted attractiveness scores are
then incorporated into a summarization system. Experimental results on a manually labeled dataset verify the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Sentence-Level Text Attractiveness Analysis
In this study, the attractiveness of a sentence is reflecting
how likely the normal people will have interest in the sentence and want to gain an insight into the whole story after
the people read it in a very short time. In other words, if a
sentence can attract most people’s attention, the sentence is
attractive. In a news document, different sentences describing different aspects of an event may have different attractiveness levels, and some sentences may be more attractive
than other sentences if they contain some attentiongrabbing words (e.g. “䍯䍲 /bribery”, “↫ӑ /death”), hot
themes and expressions. The attractiveness of a sentence
can be considered a prior score for the sentence.
The sentence-level attractiveness estimation task is considered a regression problem and in this study, we adopt
the ε-SVR method for addressing this problem. More specifically, we use the LIBSVM toolkit (Chang and Lin 2001)
with the RBF kernel for this regression task. We extract a
few features for each sentence, including special words
(including degree, vitality, secret words), figures, punctuations, and PMI values with several seed words (e.g. ↫ӑ
GHDWKᵰӪPXUGHU䍚⊑HPEH]]OHPHQW 䍯䍲 EULEHU\
ᕪྨUDSH).
We collected 1,000 sentences from a set of Chinese
news articles. Two Chinese human judges were asked to
mark the attractiveness between 1 (“unattractive”) and 4
(“very attractive”) of every sentence according to a short
guideline. The Correlation Coefficient (ρ) of two judges’
annotations is 0.6603. Finally, the overall attractiveness
score of each sentence is the average of the scores provided
by the two annotators. Based on this dataset, the evaluation
performance (MSE) via 5-fold cross-validation is 0.26.
Finally, we apply the SVR method to predict the attractiveness score of each sentence in a new document to be

Introduction
With the rapid growth and popular use of microblogs (e.g.
Twitter and Sina Weibo), news events can be promptly
concerned by a large number of people. The common way
of releasing news on microblogs is to post human-edited
short summaries on microblog sites, and the corresponding
full news articles can be found via a URL link to external
news portals. Usually, an attractive news summary will
often bring more people to read and discuss the news, and
attractiveness is a very important property of news summaries on microblog sites.
The problem investigated in this study is how to automatically produce a microblog-oriented attractive summary
for online news, and thus alleviate human editors’ burden.
Disappointingly, existing summarization systems do not
consider the property of summary attractiveness. In order
to address the problem, we propose a novel system called
ATSUM (ATtractive Summarization) which explicitly
consider the attractiveness factor during the summarization
process. The attractiveness scores of sentences are automatically estimated and then incorporated into two summarization methods. Evaluation results on a real dataset prove

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4957

