Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Visual Object Tracking for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles:
A Benchmark and New Motion Models
Siyi Li, Dit-Yan Yeung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
sliay@cse.ust.hk, dyyeung@cse.ust.hk

useful for tracking animals, ﬁnding people, monitoring realtime trafﬁc situations, and so on.
In this paper, we study visual tracking on the drone platform. Besides the research issues common to visual tracking in general, a major new challenge that we have to face
is the abrupt camera motion frequently encountered when
using drones to capture video. Speciﬁcally, a small perturbation such as a slight rotation of the camera often leads to
large displacement of the target position in the image scene.
Also, since a drone ﬂies, its motion typically has a higher
degree of freedom than that of many conventional tracking
applications. Therefore a more sophisticated motion model
is needed. As a result, conventional motion models used for
tracking applications with stationary or slow-moving cameras are no longer applicable. One focus of this paper is in
conducting a benchmark evaluation and proposing baseline
algorithms to explicitly estimate the ego-motion.
The goals of this paper are three-fold: 1. Construct a uniﬁed drone tracking benchmark dataset with detailed analysis
of statistics; 2. Design general baseline algorithms for camera motion estimation and integrate them into various tracking systems; 3. Conduct an extensive experimental comparison and provide basic insights into the motion model in
tracking, with the aim of opening up a new research direction for the visual tracking community.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in the visual tracking community,
most studies so far have focused on the observation model. As
another important component in the tracking system, the motion model is much less well-explored especially for some extreme scenarios. In this paper, we consider one such scenario
in which the camera is mounted on an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) or drone. We build a benchmark dataset of high
diversity, consisting of 70 videos captured by drone cameras.
To address the challenging issue of severe camera motion, we
devise simple baselines to model the camera motion by geometric transformation based on background feature points.
An extensive comparison of recent state-of-the-art trackers
and their motion model variants on our drone tracking dataset
validates both the necessity of the dataset and the effectiveness of the proposed methods. Our aim for this work is to lay
the foundation for further research in the UAV tracking area.

Introduction
Visual tracking is a fundamental problem pertinent to many
real-world applications including video surveillance, autonomous vehicle navigation, human-computer interaction,
and many more. Given the initial state (e.g., position and
size) of the target object in a video frame, the goal of tracking is to automatically estimate the states of the moving object in subsequent frames. Although visual tracking has been
studied for decades, it remains a challenging problem due
to various factors such as partial occlusion, fast and abrupt
object motion, illumination changes, and large variations in
viewpoint and pose.
In recent years, we have witnessed the advent of a
new type of robot, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or
drones (Floreano and Wood 2015). Although drones were
mostly used for military applications in the past, the recent
commercial drone revolution has seen an increasing number of research laboratories working on small, affordable,
human-friendly drones. The rapid development of commercial drones could have a major impact on many civilian
applications, including transportation and communication.
Meanwhile, a number of foreseeable applications on this
new platform will need visual tracking as a core enabling
technology. To name a few, visual tracking can make drones

Related Work
Many methods have been proposed for single object tracking
in the last decade. For a comprehensive review and comparison of the trackers proposed, readers are referred to (Wu,
Lim, and Yang 2013; Smeulders et al. 2014). In this section, we review some recent algorithms for object tracking
in terms of the target representation scheme and the motion
model. We also review the existing tracking benchmarks.
The target representation scheme determines how the appearance of the target is represented. Most trackers can
be categorized into the generative or discriminative approaches. Generative approaches typically assume a generative process of the appearance model and locate an object by searching for the region most similar to the reference model. Such methods are typically based on templates (Alt, Hinterstoisser, and Navab 2010; Matthews,
Ishikawa, and Baker 2004; Arandjelović 2015), principal
component analysis (Ross et al. 2008), sparse coding (Mei

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4140

