Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Regularization for Unsupervised Deep Neural Nets
Baiyang Wang, Diego Klabjan
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences,
Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, C210
Evanston, Illinois 60208

decay method, or Ls regularization, is also commonly used
(Witten, Frank, and Hall 2011). Recently Dropout is proposed, which optimizes the parameters over an average of
exponentially many models with a subset of all nodes (Srivastava et al. 2014). It has been shown to outperform weight
decay regularization in many situations.
For regularizing unsupervised neural networks, sparseRBM-type models encourage a smaller proportion of 1valued hidden nodes (Cho, Ilin, and Taiko 2012; Lee,
Ekanadham, and Ng 2007). DBNs are regularized in Goh et
al. (2013) with outcome labels. While these works tend to be
goal-speciﬁc, we consider regularization for unsupervised
neural networks in a more general setting. Our work and
contributions are as follows: (1) we extend common regularization methods to unsupervised deep neural networks, and
explain their underlying mechanisms; (2) we propose partial
Dropout/DropConnect which can improve the performance
of Dropout/DropConnect; (3) we compare the performance
of different regularization methods on real data sets, thus
providing suggestions on regularizing unsupervised neural
networks. We note that this is the very ﬁrst study illustrating
the mechanisms of various regularization methods for unsupervised neural nets with model convergence and likelihood bounds, including the effective newly proposed partial
Dropout/DropConnect.
Section 2 reviews recent works for regularizing neural
networks, and Section 3 exhibits RBM regularization as a
basis for regularizing deeper networks. Section 4 discusses
the model convergence of each regularization method. Section 5 extends regularization to unsupervised deep neural
nets. Section 6 presents a numerical comparison of different regularization methods on RBM, DBN, DBM, RSM
(Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009b) and Gaussian RBM
(Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and Hinton 2007). Section 7 discusses potential future research and concludes the paper.

Abstract
Unsupervised neural networks, such as restricted Boltzmann
machines (RBMs) and deep belief networks (DBNs), are
powerful tools for feature selection and pattern recognition
tasks. We demonstrate that overﬁtting occurs in such models just as in deep feedforward neural networks, and discuss
possible regularization methods to reduce overﬁtting. We also
propose a “partial” approach to improve the efﬁciency of
Dropout/DropConnect in this scenario, and discuss the theoretical justiﬁcation of these methods from model convergence
and likelihood bounds. Finally, we compare the performance
of these methods based on their likelihood and classiﬁcation
error rates for various pattern recognition data sets.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised neural networks assume unlabeled data to be
generated from a neural network structure, and have been
applied extensively to pattern analysis and recognition. The
most basic one is the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM)
(Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and Hinton 2007), an energy-based
model with a layer of hidden nodes and a layer of visible
nodes. With such a basic structure, we can stack multiple
layers of RBMs to create an unsupervised deep neural network structure, such as the deep belief network (DBN) and
the deep Boltzmann machine (DBM) (Hinton, Osindero, and
Teh 2006; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009a). These models
can be calibrated with a combination of the stochastic gradient descent and the contrastive divergence (CD) algorithm or
the PCD algorithm (Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and Hinton 2007;
Tieleman 2008). Once we learn the parameters of a model,
we can retrieve the values of the hidden nodes from the visible nodes, thus applying unsupervised neural networks for
feature selection. Alternatively, we may consider applying
the parameters obtained from an unsupervised deep neural network to initialize a deep feedforward neural network
(FFNN), thus improving supervised learning.
One essential question for such models is to adjust for the
high-dimensionality of their parameters and avoid overﬁtting. In FFNNs, the simplest regularization is arguably the
early stopping method, which stops the gradient descent algorithm before the validation error rate goes up. The weight

2

Related Works

To begin with, we consider a simple FFNN with a single
layer of input ı = (ı1 , . . . , ıI )T and a single layer of output
o = (o1 , . . . , oJ )T ∈ {0, 1}J . The weight matrix W is of
size J × I. We assume the relation

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

E(o) = a(W · ı),

2681

(1)

