Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Unitary Operators with Help From u(n)
Stephanie L. Hyland,1, 2 Gunnar Rätsch1
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Tri-Institutional Training Program in
Computational Biology and Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical, New York
{hyland, raetsch}@inf.ethz.ch

Imposing unitarity (or orthogonality) on this transition
matrix is however challenging for gradient-based optimization methods, as additive updates typically do not preserve
unitarity. Solutions include re-unitarizing after each batch,
or using a parametrization of unitary matrices closed under
addition. In this work we propose a solution in the second
category, using results from the theory of Lie algebras and
Lie groups to deﬁne a general parametrization of unitary matrices in terms of skew-Hermitian matrices (elements of the
Lie algebra associated to the Lie group of unitary matrices).
As explained in more detail below, elements of this Lie algebra can be identiﬁed with unitary matrices, while the algebra is closed under addition, forming a vector space over
real numbers.
While we are motivated by the issues of RNNs, and we
consider an application in RNNs, our primary focus here is
on a core question: how can unitary matrices be learned?
Assuming the choice of a unitary transition matrix is an appropriate modelling choice, the gradients on this operator
should ultimately guide it towards unitarity, if it is possible under the parametrization or learning scheme used. It is
therefore useful to know which approach is best. We distil
the problem into its simplest form (a learning task described
in detail later), so that our ﬁndings cannot be confounded by
other factors speciﬁc to the RNN long-term memory task,
before demonstrating our parametrization in that setting.

Abstract
A major challenge in the training of recurrent neural networks
is the so-called vanishing or exploding gradient problem. The
use of a norm-preserving transition operator can address this
issue, but parametrization is challenging. In this work we
focus on unitary operators and describe a parametrization
using the Lie algebra u(n) associated with the Lie group
U (n) of n × n unitary matrices. The exponential map provides a correspondence between these spaces, and allows us
to deﬁne a unitary matrix using n2 real coefﬁcients relative
to a basis of the Lie algebra. The parametrization is closed
under additive updates of these coefﬁcients, and thus provides a simple space in which to do gradient descent. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of this parametrization on the
problem of learning arbitrary unitary operators, comparing
to several baselines and outperforming a recently-proposed
lower-dimensional parametrization. We additionally use our
parametrization to generalize a recently-proposed unitary recurrent neural network to arbitrary unitary matrices, using it
to solve standard long-memory tasks.

Introduction
While recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are seeing
widespread success across many tasks, the fundamental architecture presents challenges to typical training algorithms.
In particular, the problem of ‘vanishing/exploding gradients’ (Hochreiter 1991) in gradient-based optimization persists, where gradients either vanish or diverge as one goes
deeper into the network, resulting in slow training or numerical instability. The long short-term memory (LSTM) network (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) was designed to
overcome this issue. Recently, the use of norm-preserving
operators in the transition matrix - the matrix of weights
connecting subsequent internal states - of the RNN have
been explored (Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016; Mikolov
et al. 2015; Le, Jaitly, and Hinton 2015). Using operators
with bounded eigenvalue spectrum should, as demonstrated
by Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio (2016), bound the norms of
the gradients in the network, assuming an appropriate nonlinearity is applied. Unitary matrices satisfy this requirement
and are the focus of this work.

Related work
We draw most inspiration from the recent work of Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio (2016), who proposed a speciﬁc parametrization of unitary matrices and demonstrated
its utility in standard long-term memory tasks for RNNs.
We describe their parametrization here, as we use it later.
Citing the difﬁculty of obtaining a general and efﬁcient
parametrization of unitary matrices, they use the fact that the
unitary group is closed under matrix multiplication to form
a composite operator:
U = D3 R2 F −1 D2 ΠR1 FD1

(1)

where each component is unitary and easily parametrized:
• D is a diagonal matrix with entries of the form eiα , α ∈ R
†

vv
• R is a complex reﬂection operator; R = I − 2 v
2 (†
denotes Hermitian conjugate)

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2050

