Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

DeepFix: Fixing Common C Language Errors by Deep Learning
Rahul Gupta, Soham Pal, Aditya Kanade, Shirish Shevade
Department of Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
{rahul.gupta, soham.pal, kanade, shirish}@csa.iisc.ernet.in

the programming task at hand, but relate to the overall syntax and structure of the programming language. These are
analogous to grammatical errors in natural languages.
We propose to ﬁx common programming errors by deep
learning. Because of the inter-dependencies among different
parts of a program, ﬁxing even a single error may require
analysis of the entire program. This makes it challenging to
ﬁx them automatically. The accuracy bar is also quite high
for program repair. The usual notion of token-level accuracy
is much too relaxed for this setting. For a ﬁx to be correct,
the repair tool must produce the entire sequence pertaining
to the ﬁx precisely.
We present an end-to-end solution, called DeepFix, that
does not use any external tool to localize or ﬁx errors. We
use a compiler only to validate the ﬁxes suggested by DeepFix. At the heart of DeepFix is a multi-layered sequenceto-sequence neural network with attention (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014), comprising of an encoder recurrent neural network (RNN) to process the input and a decoder RNN
with attention that generates the output. The network is
trained to predict an erroneous program location along with
the correct statement. DeepFix invokes it iteratively to ﬁx
multiple errors in the program one-by-one.
Figure 1(a) shows an input C program p.c with a missing closing brace at line 13. Figure 1(c) shows the program
after the ﬁx suggested by DeepFix is applied. DeepFix correctly predicts that line 13 has an error and generates a sequence with a closing brace inserted after “return 0;”.
To gain an insight into how our network predicts the ﬁx correctly, we visualize the attention weights assigned by DeepFix to each token in the input program in Figure 1(b). The
background color of a token is proportional to the average
attention weight assigned to it by the network while predicting the sequence of tokens in the ﬁx. We observe that the
network captures a local context closer to the faulty line (enclosed by a box) and a global context (enclosed by a shadowbox) which also contains the declaration of main at line 4
with the unmatched opening brace. It is also interesting to
note that attention is comparatively less for lines 6–10 and
also for lines 14–18. Lines 14–18 deﬁne another function
pow that does not have a bearing on the error being ﬁxed.
Compilers can detect common programming errors, but
they usually do not pinpoint error locations accurately
(Traver 2010). For example, if we compile the program in

Abstract
The problem of automatically ﬁxing programming errors is a
very active research topic in software engineering. This is a
challenging problem as ﬁxing even a single error may require
analysis of the entire program. In practice, a number of errors
arise due to programmer’s inexperience with the programming language or lack of attention to detail. We call these
common programming errors. These are analogous to grammatical errors in natural languages. Compilers detect such errors, but their error messages are usually inaccurate. In this
work, we present an end-to-end solution, called DeepFix, that
can ﬁx multiple such errors in a program without relying on
any external tool to locate or ﬁx them. At the heart of DeepFix
is a multi-layered sequence-to-sequence neural network with
attention which is trained to predict erroneous program locations along with the required correct statements. On a set of
6971 erroneous C programs written by students for 93 programming tasks, DeepFix could ﬁx 1881 (27%) programs
completely and 1338 (19%) programs partially.

Introduction
Debugging programming errors is one of the most timeconsuming activities for programmers. Therefore, the problem of automatically ﬁxing programming errors, also called
program repair, is a very active research topic in software
engineering (Monperrus 2015). Most of the program repair techniques focus on logical errors in programs. Using
a speciﬁcation of the program (such as a test suite or an assertion), they attempt to ﬁx the program. Since their focus is
on ﬁxing logical errors in individual programs, they assume
that the program compiles successfully.
This leaves a large and frequent class of errors out of the
purview of the existing techniques. These include errors due
to missing scope delimiters (such as a closing brace), adding
extraneous symbols, using incompatible operators or missing variable declarations. Such mistakes arise due to programmer’s inexperience or lack of attention to detail, and
cause compilation or build errors. Not only novice students
but experienced developers also make such errors as found
in a study of build errors at Google (Seo et al. 2014). We
call them common programming errors. These are common
in the sense that, unlike logical errors, they are not speciﬁc to
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1345

