Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Online SPARC for Drawing and Animation
Elias Marcopoulos,1 Maede Rayatidamavandi,2 Crisel Suarez,3 Yuanlin Zhang4
1

Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, USA
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, USA
3
Department of Mathematics, St. Edward’s University, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, Texas Tech University, USA
1
emarcopoulos@gmail.com, 2 maede.rayati@gmail.com,
3
csuarez@stedwards.edu, 4 y.zhang@ttu.edu
2

SPARC programs into the SPARC online development environment (Reotutar et al. 2016). The use of an online system
is much easier than a standalone software, which is necessary for teaching K-12 or general undergraduate students.

Abstract
We developed a method to draw and animate using
SPARC, a logic programming system, and an online environment to support this method. Particularly, we introduce two predicates: one for drawing and one for animation. By our method, programmers will write a SPARC
program, using our introduced predicates, to specify
their drawing or animation. The drawing or animation
will then be rendered upon executing the program with
our system. In fact, our online system provides an environment where the programmers can easily edit and
execute their programs.

Drawing and Animation Design
To allow programmers to create drawings and animations,
we simply design two predicates, called display predicates:
one for drawing and one for animation. The atoms using
these predicates are called display atoms.
Drawing. A drawing predicate is of the form: draw(c)
where c is called a drawing command. Intuitively the atom
containing this predicate draws texts and graphics as instructed by the command c. By drawing a picture, we mean
a shape is drawn with a style. A shape is a geometric line
or curve. A style speciﬁes the physical visual properties of
the shape it is applied to. For example, one visual property is color. Note the origin of the coordinate system is
at the top left corner of the canvas. Here is a an example
of drawing a red line from point (0, 0) to (2, 2). First, we
introduce a style name redline and associate it to the
red color by the style command line color(redline,
red). With this deﬁned style we then draw the red line
by the shape command draw line(redline, 0, 0,
2, 2). Style commands and shape commands form all
drawing commands. The SPARC program rules to draw the
given line are
draw(line color(redline, red)).
draw(draw line(redline, 0, 0, 2, 2)).

Introduction
We have developed an online environment to produce drawings and animations using a logical programming language called SPARC. The online environment is available
at http://goo.gl/ukSZET.
SPARC is a special instance of Answer Set Programming
(ASP) (Gelfond and Kahl 2014). ASP is a recent successful development in Logic Programming (Kowalski 2014).
It is now fully declarative and gets rid of procedural features of classical Logic Programming systems such as PROLOG. The procedural features are taken as the source of
misconceptions in students’ learning of Logic Programming
(Mendelsohn, Green, and Brna 1990). SPARC is designed to
further facilitate the teaching of logic programming by introducing sorts (or types) which simplify the difﬁcult programming concept of domain variables in classical ASP systems
such as Clingo (Gebser et al. 2011) and help programmers to
identify errors early thanks to sort information. Initial experiment of teaching SPARC to high school students is promising (Reyes et al. 2016).
It is observed that multimedia and visualization play a
positive role in promoting students’ learning (Guzdial 2001;
Clark et al. 2009). By introducing drawing and animation
to SPARC, we expect to provide new opportunities for students to present their solutions to problems in a more visually straightforward and exciting manner (instead of the
answer sets which are simply a set of literals). We integrate
our program for rendering the drawing and animation for

Animation. A frame, or drawing/picture, is a critical concept for animation. When a sequence of frames (whose content is normally relevant) is shown on the screen in rapid succession (usually 24, 25, 30, or 60 frames per second), a ﬂuid
animation is seemingly created. To design an animation, a
designer will specify the drawing for each frame. Given that
the order of frames matters, we give a frame a value equal
to its index in the given sequence. We introduce the animate
predicate animate(c, i) which indicates a desire to draw
a picture at the ith frame using drawing command c and i
starts from 0. The frames will be shown on the screen at
a rate of 60 frames per second, and the ith frame will be
showed at (i ∗ 1/60) second from the start of the animation
for a duration of 1/60 second.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4817

