Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Non-Additive Security Games
Sinong Wang, Fang Liu

Ness Shroff

Department of ECE,
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
{wang.7691, liu.3977}@osu.edu

Departments of ECE and CSE,
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
shroff.11@osu.edu

However, these works are limited to speciﬁc dependencies and provide neither a systematic understanding of complexity properties, nor an efﬁcient algorithm. For example,
Shakarian et al. (2014) assumes that the attacker and defender can choose a subset of nodes in a power grid and their
utilities are dependent on the set of disconnected loads. They
show that the defender best response problem (DBR) can be
solved in polynomial time if the attacker attacks at most one
target, while NP-hard in other cases. However, their complexity results cannot be easily reduced to the complexity of
determining the defender’s mixed strategies.
In this paper, we introduce a new security game, which we
call the Non-additivity Security Game (NASG). It is a nonzero-sum game including two players - the defender and attacker, and n targets, denoted by [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}. We
model various dependencies among the targets by deﬁning
the strategy of each player as a subset of [n] and adopt a
general set function as the utilities. Speciﬁcally, the attacker
obtains beneﬁts for successfully attacked targets and pays a
cost for its strategy. Also, the defender will lose beneﬁts for
those targets and also pays a cost. A critical feature of the
NASG is that the beneﬁt and cost for several targets is not
the summation of each target’s utility, instead, it is dependent on the speciﬁc combination of targets..
At a high level, the main challenge of NASG is that both
the size of the strategy space and the number of utility functions are Θ(2n ). We are interested whether the following
well understood questions in the case of additive utility functions can be addressed under the non-additivity assumption.

Abstract
Security agencies have found security games to be useful
models to understand how to better protect their assets. The
key practical elements in this work are: (i) the attacker can
simultaneously attack multiple targets, and (ii) different targets exhibit different types of dependencies based on the assets being protected (e.g., protection of critical infrastructure,
network security, etc.). However, little is known about the
computational complexity of these problems, especially when
there exist dependencies among the targets. Moreover, previous security game models do not in general scale well. In this
paper, we investigate a general security game where the utility function is deﬁned on a collection of subsets of all targets,
and provide a novel theoretical framework to show how to
compactly represent such a game, efﬁciently compute the optimal (minimax) strategies, and characterize the complexity
of this problem. We apply our theoretical framework to the
network security game. We characterize settings under which
we ﬁnd a polynomial time algorithm for computing optimal
strategies. In other settings we prove the problem is NP-hard
and provide an approximation algorithm.

Introduction
The nature of resource allocation in practical security games
often results in exponentially many pure strategies for the
defender, such that the defender’s optimal mixed strategy is
hard to solve. In the past few years, several works have tried
to resolve this issue from both theoretical and practical perspectives (Kiekintveld et al. 2009; Korzhyk, Conitzer, and
Parr 2010; Jain et al. 2011; Letchford and Conitzer 2013;
Xu et al. 2014; Xu 2016). A common restriction in these
works is to either assume that the attacker only attacks one
target, or that different targets are independent. The latter
implies that the payoff of a group of targets is the sum of
the payoffs of each one (Korzhyk, Conitzer, and Parr 2011).
In practice, there exists various dependencies among the targets such that attacking one target will inﬂuence the others. Traditional models that ignore the inherent synergistic
effects among the targets could lead to catastrophic consequences (Buldyrev et al. 2010). Motivated by this phenomenon, some recent works have investigated the security
game with dependent targets (Shakarian, Lei, and Lindelauf
2014; Vorobeychik and Letchford 2015).

• How to compactly represent the NASG and how to efﬁciently compute the mixed strategies of NASG?
• What is the complexity of computing the mixed strategies
of NASG?
To answer these questions, we make the following contributions: (1) We provide the conditions for compactly representing the NASG and prove that there exists poly(n)
number of variables in the compact model if the number
of non-additive utility functions is poly(n). The main technique is isomorphism and projection of a polytope. (2) We
design an algorithmic framework to efﬁciently compute the
mixed strategies for NASGs by reducing the original problem to an oracle problem. The main technique is to design
a polynomial-time vertex mapping algorithm from the low-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

728

