Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Sparse Low-Rank Tensor Completion
Using the Frank-Wolfe Algorithm
Xiawei Guo, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
{xguoae, qyaoaa, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk
for tensors. Indeed, most tensor problems, even computing
the tensor rank, is NP-hard (Hillar and Lim 2013).
To impose a low-rank structure on tensors, CP and Tucker
decompositions assume that the tensor can be decomposed
into low-rank factor matrices (Kolda and Bader 2009).
This can then be learned by alternating least squares or
coordinate descent (Acar et al. 2010). Recently, Kressner,
Steinlechner, and Vandereycken (2014) proposed to utilize
the Riemannian structure on the manifold of tensors with
ﬁxed multilinear rank, and then perform nonlinear conjugate
gradient descent. It can be speeded up by preconditioning
(Kasai and Mishra 2016). However, these models are nonconvex, can suffer from the problem of local minimum,
and has no theoretical guarantee on the convergence rate.
Moreover, its per-iteration cost depends on the product of
all the mode ranks, and so can be expensive.
Another popular approach is to unfold the tensor and
apply low-rank matrix factorization techniques on all the
resultant matricizations (Tomioka, Hayashi, and Kashima
2010; Xu et al. 2013). However, the low-rank constraint
is not directly enforced on the tensor and can be misleading (Cheng et al. 2016). To alleviate this problem, one
can use instead convex low-rank regularizers as in matrix
completion. While the matrix nuclear norm is the tightest
convex envelope of the matrix rank (Candès and Recht
2009), there are a number of norms that induce low-rank
tensors. Common examples include the tensor trace norm
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2012), overlapped nuclear norm (Liu
et al. 2013; Tomioka, Hayashi, and Kashima 2010), latent
nuclear norm (Tomioka, Hayashi, and Kashima 2010) and
scaled latent nuclear norm (Wimalawarne, Sugiyama, and
Tomioka 2014). By using these convex low-rank tensor regularizers, the resulting optimization problem can be solved
by standard convex optimizers. For example, the FaLRTC
algorithm (Liu et al. 2013) considers the overlapped nuclear
norm regularizer, and uses Nesterov’s smoothing (Nesterov 2005) and accelerated proximal algorithm (Beck and
Teboulle 2009) for optimization. Though convergence can
be guaranteed, these algorithms do not utilize sparsity of the
observed tensor. In each iteration, they have to operate on the
full-sized tensor. When the tensor is large, it may not even
be able to ﬁt into memory. Moreover, low-rank tensor regularization are more complicated and difﬁcult to optimize.
Typically, expensive multiple partial SVD operations on a

Abstract
Most tensor problems are NP-hard, and low-rank tensor
completion is much more difﬁcult than low-rank matrix
completion. In this paper, we propose a time and spaceefﬁcient low-rank tensor completion algorithm by using the
scaled latent nuclear norm for regularization and the FrankWolfe (FW) algorithm for optimization. We show that all the
steps can be performed efﬁciently. In particular, FW’s linear
subproblem has a closed-form solution which can be obtained
from rank-one SVD. By utilizing sparsity of the observed
tensor, we only need to maintain sparse tensors and a set
of small basis matrices. Experimental results show that the
proposed algorithm is more accurate, much faster and more
scalable than the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Tensors have been commonly used to describe the linear and
multilinear relationships in the data. For example, in remote
sensing applications, a hyperspectral image with multiple
bands can be naturally represented as a 3-dimensional tensor. A multidimensional social network can also be modeled
as a 3-dimensional tensor, where the third mode may represent different type of relations. Higher-dimensional tensors
are also useful. For example, a multi-mode social network
(such as the DBLP network) with heterogeneous actors
(papers, authors, terms and venues) can be represented by
a 4-order tensor, and a relation can connect these four kinds
of entities (Tang, Wang, and Liu 2009).
Analogous to matrix completion (Candès and Recht
2009), tensor completion attempts to recover a lowrank tensor that best approximates a partially observed data
tensor. For example, in recommender systems, users can rate
an item based on different criteria (e.g., story, visual effects,
actors). By treating these attributes as another dimension,
rating prediction becomes a tensor completion problem on a
3-dimensional tensor (Adomavicius, Manouselis, and Kwon
2011). Similarly, in hyperspectral imaging, as some bands
may be partially missing due to sensor problems, tensor
completion can be used to inpaint the incomplete image.
However, while matrix completion has attracted a lot of
interest, these matrix techniques cannot be readily adopted
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1948

