Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

MPGL: An Efﬁcient Matching
Pursuit Method for Generalized LASSO
Dong Gong,†‡ Mingkui Tan,∗ Yanning Zhang,† Anton van den Hengel,‡§ Qinfeng Shi‡
†

‡

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia, § The Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
∗
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
edgong01@gmail.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn, ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn,
{anton.vandenhengel,javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au
way to seek x with sparsity on Dx is as follows (Liu, Yuan,
and Ye 2013),

Abstract
Unlike traditional LASSO enforcing sparsity on the variables,
Generalized LASSO (GL) enforces sparsity on a linear transformation of the variables, gaining ﬂexibility and success in
many applications. However, many existing GL algorithms
do not scale up to high-dimensional problems, and/or only
work well for a speciﬁc choice of the transformation. We
propose an efﬁcient Matching Pursuit Generalized LASSO
(MPGL) method, which overcomes these issues, and is guaranteed to converge to a global optimum. We formulate the
GL problem as a convex quadratic constrained linear programming (QCLP) problem and tailor-make a cutting plane
method. More speciﬁcally, our MPGL iteratively activates a
subset of nonzero elements of the transformed variables, and
solves a subproblem involving only the activated elements
thus gaining signiﬁcant speed-up. Moreover, MPGL is less
sensitive to the choice of the trade-off hyper-parameter between data ﬁtting and regularization, and mitigates the longstanding hyper-parameter tuning issue in many existing methods. Experiments demonstrate the superior efﬁciency and accuracy of the proposed method over the state-of-the-arts in
both classiﬁcation and image processing tasks.

min f (x) + λDx0 ,
x

(1)

where f : Rn → R is a loss function (sometimes known as
data ﬁtting term) depending on the application, ·0 denotes
the 0 -norm regularizer, and λ ≥ 0 is known as the trade-off
hyper-parameter between the data ﬁtting and the regularization. By letting A ∈ Rm×n be a designing matrix, y ∈ Rm
be a response vector, n ∈ Rm be a vector of Gaussian noise,
and assuming a linear regression model y = Ax + n, a
typical choice of f is f (x) = 12 y − Ax22 , which will be
used throughout the rest of the paper. Since problem (1) is
NP-hard, a convex relaxation is widely used:
1
(2)
min y − Ax22 + λDx1 ,
x 2
which is referred to as Generalized LASSO (Tibshirani et al.
2011). D depends on the application, and reﬂects the desirable behaviors of the variables. Some well-known applications and choices of D are:
• 1-dimensional total variation (TV) model (Rudin, Osher,
and Fatemi 1992) where D ∈ R(n−1)×n and
⎡
⎤
−1 1
0 ... 0
⎢ 0 −1 1 . . . 0 ⎥
D = Q(TV) = ⎣
. (3)
... ... ... ... ... ⎦
0
0 . . . −1 1

Introduction
Learning with sparsity-inducing norms has gained much
success in many applications including medical data analysis (Tibshirani and Wang 2008), image processing (Rudin,
Osher, and Fatemi 1992), feature selection (Tan, Tsang, and
Wang 2014) and so on. One efﬁcient way to enforce sparsity on the variables is to use the 1 -norm as LASSO (Tibshirani 1996) instead of the 0 -norm. Since then, many methods
have been proposed to enforce some additional constraints
(Huang, Zhang, and Metaxas 2011; Kim and Xing 2010;
Tibshirani et al. 2011) to improve the results. A group of
methods among them is called generalized LASSO (Tibshirani et al. 2011), which promotes the sparsity of the variables after a linear transformation (Liu, Yuan, and Ye 2013)
instead of the variables themselves. The choice of such a
transformation represents the property of the variables to be
desired, and often depends on the application.
Generalized LASSO. Let x ∈ Rn denote the target variable
and D ∈ Rl×n be a linear transformation operator. A natural

Such a D penalizes the absolute differences in adjacent
coordinates of x.
• Fused LASSO (FL) (Tibshirani et al. 2005), which solves
minx 21 y − Ax22 + λ1 x1 + λ2 Qx1 , and can be rewritten as problem (2) with D = [ λλ1 IT , λλ2 Q(TV)T ]T ,
a concatenation of an identity matrix and the TV matrix
Q(TV). Note that if letting D = I, the problem reduces
to the classical LASSO problem.
• Generalized fused LASSO (GFL) (Xin et al. 2014), which
extends the TV model using a graph. Let G = (V, E)
be a graph with vertices V and edges E, where each
vertex corresponds to an element of 
the variable x. The
graph-guided TV-norm is deﬁned as (i,j)∈E |xi − xj |.
In the matrix form like (3), the k-th edge (i, j) corresponds to the k-th row of the matrix Q(G) ∈ R|E|×n

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1934

