Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Performance of Analogue Readout Layers for
Photonic Reservoir Computers with Online Learning
Laboratoire d’Information Quantique, Université libre de Bruxelles,
Avenue F. D. Roosevelt 50, CP 224, Brussels, Belgium
2
Service OPERA-Photonique, Université libre de Bruxelles,
Avenue F. D. Roosevelt 50, CP 194/5, Brussels, Belgium
†
Email: pantonik@ulb.ac.be, Phone: +32 (0)2 650 4486
Analogue readout

Reservoir Computing is a bio-inspired computing
paradigm for processing time-dependent signals (Jaeger and
Haas 2004; Maass, Natschläger, and Markram 2002). The
performance of its hardware implementation (see e.g. (Soriano et al. 2015) for a review) is comparable to state-ofthe-art digital algorithms on a series of benchmark tasks.
The major bottleneck of these implementation is the readout
layer, based on slow ofﬂine post-processing. Several analogue solutions have been proposed (Smerieri et al. 2012;
Duport et al. 2016; Vinckier et al. 2016), but all suffered
from noticeable decrease in performance due to added complexity of the setup. Here we propose the online learning
approach to solve these issues. We present an experimental reservoir computer with a simple analogue readout layer,
based on previous works, and show numerically that online
learning allows to disregard the added complexity of an analogue layer and obtain the same level of performance as with
a digital layer. This work thus demonstrates that online training allows building high-performance fully-analogue reservoir computers, and represents an important step towards experimental validation of the proposed solution.

xi (n)

Pr
50/50

SLD

Pb

-

MZ
wi (n)

y(n)

C

Att
MZ
50/50

Comb

DAC

Amp

ADC
1.6 km

1

Piotr Antonik,1† Marc Haelterman,2 Serge Massar1

FPGA

Pf
Mi × u(n)
Opto-electronic reservoir

Figure 1: Scheme of the proposed experimental setup. The
optical and electronic components are shown in black and
grey, respectively. The reservoir layer consists of an incoherent light source (SLD), a Mach-Zehnder intensity modulator
(MZ), a 50/50 beam splitter, an optical attenuator (Att), an
approximately 1.6 km ﬁbre spool, a feedback photodiode
(Pf ), a resistive combiner (Comb) and an ampliﬁer (Amp).
The analogue readout layer contains another 50/50 beam
splitter, a readout photodiode (Pr ), a dual-output intensity
modulator (MZ), a balanced photodiode (Pb ) and a capacitor
(C). The FPGA board generates the inputs and the readout
weights, samples the reservoir states and the output signal,
and trains the system.

Theory and methods
Reservoir computing. A general reservoir computer is
described in (Lukoševičius and Jaeger 2009). In our implementation we use a sine transfer function and a ring topology to simplify the interconnection matrix, so that only the
ﬁrst neighbour nodes are connected (Paquot et al. 2012). The
system is trained online, using the simple gradient descent
algorithm, as in (Antonik et al. 2016a).

Error (NMSE).

Benchmark tasks. We tested the performance of our system on two benchmark tasks, commonly used by the RC
community: wireless channel equalisation and NARMA10.
The ﬁrst, introduced in (Jaeger and Haas 2004) aims at
recovering the transmitted message from the output of a
noisy nonlinear wireless communication channel. The performance of the equaliser is measured in terms of Symbol
Error Rate (SER), that is, the number of misclassiﬁed symbols. The NARMA10 task (Atiya and Parlos 2000) constists
in emulating a nonlinear system of order 10. The performance is measured in terms of Normalised Mean Square

Experimental setup
Our experimental setup, which we simulate numerically, is
schematised in ﬁgure 1. It consists of the opto-electronic
reservoir (a replica of (Paquot et al. 2012)), the analogue
readout layer, based on previous works (Smerieri et al. 2012;
Duport et al. 2016), and the FPGA board, performing the online training (Antonik et al. 2016a). The readout layer uses a
dual-output Mach-Zehnder modulator in order to apply both
positive and negative readout weights, and the integration
(summation) of the weighted states is carried out by a lowpass RC ﬁlter.

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4899

