Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Vision-Language Fusion for Object Recognition
Sz-Rung Shiang, Stephanie Rosenthal, Anatole Gershman, Jaime Carbonell, Jean Oh
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 15213
sshiang@andrew.cmu.edu, {srosenth, anatoleg, jgc, jeanoh}@cs.cmu.edu

perfect accuracy. Suppose that a human issues a command
to the robot “Pick up the cup on the dishwasher.” In order
to perform the given command, the robot needs to recognize those objects mentioned in the command, namely cup
and dishwasher, in its environment. Here, we investigate
how to improve the recognition performance after receiving the command, by utilizing the information embedded in
the command itself, e.g., a spatial relation between the two
objects. We also take advantage of additional information
mined from the Web, where extra human labeling is not required during run time. For example, from user-tagged images on the Web, we can learn that certain objects tend to
co-occur frequently, e.g., dishwasher and stove.
For the learning and the interpretation of spatial relations,
we use an approach described in (Boularias et al. 2015) that
has been extensively evaluated on ground robots for semantic navigation in unknown outdoor environments (Oh et al.
2015; 2016); the details are omitted here due to space limitation. The main focus of this paper is on efﬁciently integrating several types of information for better overall perception, reporting how much improvement can be achieved
speciﬁcally on the object recognition task.
We take a probabilistic approach to fuse such information. We introduce MultiRank, an information fusion algorithm that uses the label probabilities for bounding boxes
obtained from computer vision (CV) as priors and computes
posteriors based on object co-occurrence statistics and verbal descriptions. We create a multi-layered graph from the
bounding boxes to represent general co-occurrence relationships between labels and also spatial relations speciﬁc to
each image. We then use a Random Walk algorithm (Hsu,
Kennedy, and Chang 2007) to solve for the object label for
each bounding box. We show that our algorithm increases
the accuracy of the vision-only algorithm by 9.41% and
16.67% in the oracle (ground-truth) and detected (Lin, Fidler, and Urtasun 2013) bounding box cases, respectively,
on the NYU Depth V2 datasets (Silberman et al. 2012). For
the objects that are mentioned in commands (that are thus
more relevant to the task), further improvement is observed;
the accuracy improves by 15.24% and 17.46% in the oracle
and detected bounding box cases, respectively. We conclude
that our vision-language fusion approach for incorporating
contextual information from humans signiﬁcantly improves
the performance of object recognition over the vision-only

Abstract
While recent advances in computer vision have caused
object recognition rates to spike, there is still much
room for improvement. In this paper, we develop an
algorithm to improve object recognition by integrating human-generated contextual information with vision algorithms. Speciﬁcally, we examine how interactive systems such as robots can utilize two types of context information–verbal descriptions of an environment
and human-labeled datasets. We propose a re-ranking
schema, MultiRank, for object recognition that can efﬁciently combine such information with the computer
vision results. In our experiments, we achieve up to
9.4% and 16.6% accuracy improvements using the oracle and the detected bounding boxes, respectively, over
the vision-only recognizers. We conclude that our algorithm has the ability to make a signiﬁcant impact on
object recognition in robotics and beyond.

1

Introduction

The growth of social media and crowdsourcing platforms
has opened access to compound descriptions for images in
addition to simple labels, e.g., textual descriptions associated with an image posted on social media may contain contextual information beyond the labels of image regions. An
ability to digest this type of context-rich information in a
perception system can be extremely useful in problem domains such as disaster response where humanitarian volunteers assess damages by looking through a plethora of images of an affected area and textual descriptions from social
media (Hörler 2014). In addition, robots interacting with humans via natural language would also need such an ability
to integrate what has been seen and what has been told. In
this context, our research broadly addresses a problem of
fusing information available in various modalities including
vision and language to provide enhanced overall perception.
Toward this general goal, this paper is speciﬁcally focused
on fusing information from three types of sources–i.e., computer vision, textual descriptions and Web data mining–for
the object recognition problem.
For example, consider a robot that can recognize certain
objects using a computer vision system, albeit with an imc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4603

