Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Self-Paced Learning: An
Implicit Regularization Perspective
Yanbo Fan,1,4 Ran He,1,2,3,4∗ Jian Liang,1,2,4 Baogang Hu1,4
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
{yanbo.fan, rhe, jian.liang, hubg}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

of the SPL regularizer during the optimization, more samples are included into training from easy to hard by a selfpaced manner. Due to its ability of avoiding bad local minima and improving the generalization performance, many
works have been developed based on SPL (Li et al. 2016;
Liang et al. 2016; Jiang et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2015;
Supancic and Ramanan 2013; Lee and Grauman 2011).
One key issue in SPL is to obtain better weighting strategy that is determined by the minimizer functions, and existing methods usually pursue this by artiﬁcially designing
the explicit form of SPL regularizers (Zhang et al. 2016;
Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015; Zhao et al. 2015; Jiang et al. 2014a;
2014b). Some examples can be found in the supplementary
material. Though shown to be effective in many applications
experimentally, the underlying working mechanism of SPL
is still unclear and is heavily desired for its future development. One attempt in this aspect is (Meng and Zhao 2015),
they show that the ASS method used for SPL accords with
the majorization minimization (Vaida 2005) algorithm implemented on a latent SPL objective, and deduce the latent
objective of hard, linear and mixture regularizers.
In this paper we study a group of new regularizer (named
self-paced implicit regularizer) for SPL based on the convex
conjugacy theory. Comparing with existing SPL regularizers, self-paced implicit regularizer is deduced from robust
loss function and its analytic form can be even unknown.
Its properties and corresponding minimizer function can be
learned from the latent loss function directly. Besides, the
proposed self-paced implicit regularizer is independent of
the learning objective and thus leads to a general framework (named SPL-IR) for SPL. SPL-IR can be optimized
via ASS algorithm. More importantly, we demonstrate that
the learning procedure of SPL-IR is indeed associated with
latent robust loss functions, thus may provide some theoretical insights for its working mechanism (e.g. its robustness
to outliers and heavy noise). We further analyze the relations between SPL-IR and half-quadratic (HQ) optimization
and provide a group of self-paced implicit regularizer accordingly. Such relations can be beneﬁcial to both SPL and
HQ optimization. Finally, we implement SPL-IR to three
classical tasks (i.e. matrix factorization, clustering and classiﬁcation). Experimental results corroborate our ideas and
demonstrate the correctness and effectiveness of SPL-IR.
Our work has three main contributions: (1) We pro-

Abstract
Self-paced learning (SPL) mimics the cognitive mechanism
of humans and animals that gradually learns from easy to hard
samples. One key issue in SPL is to obtain better weighting
strategy that is determined by the minimizer function. Existing methods usually pursue this by artiﬁcially designing the
explicit form of SPL regularizer. In this paper, we study a
group of new regularizer (named self-paced implicit regularizer) that is deduced from robust loss function. Based on
the convex conjugacy theory, the minimizer function for selfpaced implicit regularizer can be directly learned from the
latent loss function, while the analytic form of the regularizer
can be even unknown. A general framework (named SPL-IR)
for SPL is developed accordingly. We demonstrate that the
learning procedure of SPL-IR is associated with latent robust
loss functions, thus can provide some theoretical insights for
its working mechanism. We further analyze the relation between SPL-IR and half-quadratic optimization and provide a
group of self-paced implicit regularizer. Finally, we implement SPL-IR to both supervised and unsupervised tasks, and
experimental results corroborate our ideas and demonstrate
the correctness and effectiveness of implicit regularizers.

Introduction
Inspired by the learning process and cognitive mechanism
of humans and animals, Bengio et al. (2009) propose a new
learning strategy called curriculum learning (CL), which
gradually includes more and more hard samples into training
process. A curriculum can be seen as a sequence of training criteria. For example, in the training of a shape recognition system, images that exhibit less variability such as
squares and circles are considered ﬁrst, followed by hard
shapes like ellipses. The curriculum in CL is usually determined by some certain priors and thus is problem speciﬁc and lacks generalizations. To alleviate this, Kumar,
Packer, and Koller (2010) propose a new learning strategy
named self-paced learning (SPL) that incorporates curriculum updating in the process of model optimization. General SPL model consists of a problem speciﬁc weighted
loss term on all samples and a SPL regularizer on sample weights. Alternative search strategy (ASS) is generally
used for optimization. By gradually increasing the penalty
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1877

