Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Joint Learning of Structural and Textual
Features for Web Scale Event Extraction
Julia Wiedmann
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Wolfson Building, Parks Road, OX1 3QD Oxford
julia.wiedmann@cs.ox.ac.uk

Introduction

Each website may require a different access pattern to obtain
the pages describing a single event (“single event page”).
Within a given single event page, the event attributes have
to be located, both within the structure of the page template
and within the event description.
Such single event pages are typically split into a textual
event description and a set of core event attributes, such as
title, location, or time, that are highlighted and presented in
the same template for all events of a particular source. In this
work, I aim to learn a joint model for the extraction of event
attributes from both event descriptions and templates.
The discovery of single event pages requires automated
interaction with the website, such as form ﬁlling, to obtain all the relevant events hosted by the website. Different
event aggregator websites are used by organisers to sell tickets, individual users to resell their tickets and in general to
distribute information about events. Yet, there are not only
big aggregators, such as Ticketweb.com, Eventbrite.com and
Ticketmaster, but also a long tail of small event websites
which host smaller and more local events. Thus,in addition
to the extraction of event attributes, I also investigate the automatic discovery of event sources and single event pages
within event sources. By considering all three problems as
part of an integral system, I can exploit mutual reinforcement between the models derived for each sub problem.
In order to approach this problem, I have designed a
framework for jointly learning models for extracting structural and textual event attributes from single event pages
with minimal supervision. Unfortunately, labeled training
data for this process is hard to come by and expensive to create. Therefore, the framework is complemented by a semisupervised process for reducing the cost of acquiring labeled example pages. This process is a bootstrapping approach that uses seed values for each event attribute to annotate structural event attributes, eliminating noise by exploiting techniques from unsupervised template discovery
(Crescenzi, Mecca, and Merialdo 2001).

The web has become the central platform and marketplace
for the organization, propagation of events and sale of tickets
of any kind. Such events range from concerts, workshops,
sport events, professional events to small local events. Individual’s event choices vary tremendously based on preferences and lifestyle. Online users use the web to inform
themselves about new events near their location of choice,
and potentially use the website to purchase tickets or make a
reservation for such events. Event Extraction from the web is
a particularly difﬁcult type of information extraction, dealing with the detection of speciﬁc types of events and its attributes mentioned in source language data. Traditional research in event extraction focuses on the extraction of political, cultural, or other general interest events from text. Such
text is typically editorial news content, e.g (Kuzey, Vreeken,
and Weikum 2014), or more lately from social media such
as Twitter, e.g. (Ritter, Etzioni, and Clark 2012). This research, however, covers events presented in tables, lists, or
most crucially on single pages devoted to that event. This
thesis focuses on both the discovery and extraction of such
“single event pages”.
This work is inspired by a series of works on inducing
wrappers for the extraction of speciﬁc document types from
the web. For example, (Wang et al. 2009) proposes an approach for learning to extract news articles and their basic
attributes from a very small training corpus. Though inspired
by this work, the approach presented here differs considerably, in scope and techniques used. In scope, I am targeting events, which carry many more attributes than the document types targeted in the above work, and where attributes
may occur both in the template structure (as in (Wang et al.
2009)) and in the event descriptions. Further, my approach
balances the need for more training data due to the more
complex domain with semi-supervised methods for acquiring that training data.

Problem Statement and Proposed Approach

Event Page Discovery

The problem of event discovery and extraction is multifold:
Events and their attributes are buried in the depth of event
aggregators, spread across the web and thus hard to ﬁnd.

The event page discovery phase consists of ﬁnding relevant
websites (“sources”) for events and locating single event
pages within those websites. Multiple approaches are combined in this step, to minimize supervision.
First, a seed set of events and event attribute instances is

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5056

