Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Causal Discovery Using Regression-Based
Conditional Independence Tests
†

Hao Zhang,† Shuigeng Zhou,†∗ Kun Zhang,‡ Jihong Guan§
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University, China.
‡
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
§
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
†
{haoz15, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; ‡ kunz1@cmu.edu; § jhguan@tongji.edu.cn
is easier to handle discrete cases), or impose simpliﬁed assumptions to deal with the continuous cases. For example,
under the assumption of Gaussian variables with linear dependence relationships, partial correlation can be used to
test CI (Baba, Shibata, and Sibuya 2004). In such a situation, X ⊥ Y |Z reduces to zero partial correlation or zero
correlation between X and Y given Z, which can be easily
tested. Nevertheless, nonlinearity and non-Gaussian noises
are popular in practice, hence this assumption is not always
reasonable, and often leads to incorrect results.
Most existing methods are based on explicit estimation
of conditional densities or their variants, or discretize the
conditional set Z to a set of bins, and transform CI to unconditional independence in each bin. Due to the curse of
dimensionality, the conditional set becomes very large, inevitably the required sample size increases dramatically. For
example, in (Su and White 2008) the authors used a characterization of CI, PX|Y Z = PX|Z , to determine CI by measuring the distance between estimates of conditional densities. However, accurate estimation of conditional densities
or related quantities is not easy, which deteriorates the testing result, especially when the conditional set is too large.
Generally speaking, CI testing is a nontrivial task, and
the “curse of dimensionality” of the conditional variable Z
makes it even more challenging. When Z takes a ﬁnite number of values {z1 , ..., zk }, then X ⊥ Y |Z iff X ⊥ Y |Z = zi
for each value zi . Given a sample of size n, even if the data
points are distributed evenly on the values of Z, we must
show the independence within each subset of the sample
with the same Z value by using only approximately n/k
points in each subset. When Z is real-valued and Pz is continuous, the observed values of Z are almost surely unique.
To extend the above procedure to the continuous cases, we
must infer conditional independence using nonidentical but
neighboring values of Z, where “neighboring” is quantiﬁed
by some distance metric. Finding neighboring points becomes more difﬁcult as the dimensionality of Z grows. To
approximate CI to unconditional independence between X
and Y in each subset, we need a large number of subsets of
Z. However, with too many subsets, the subsets may have
not enough data points to evaluate independence.
Recently, kernel-based tests were proposed for conditional and unconditional independence testing. With the
ability to represent high order moments, mapping of vari-

Abstract
Conditional independence (CI) testing is an important tool
in causal discovery. Generally, by using CI tests, a set of
Markov equivalence classes w.r.t. the observed data can be
estimated by checking whether each pair of variables x and
y is d-separated, given a set of variables Z. Due to the curse
of dimensionality, CI testing is often difﬁcult to return a reliable result for high-dimensional Z. In this paper, we propose a regression-based CI test to relax the test of x ⊥ y|Z
to simpler unconditional independence tests of x − f (Z) ⊥
y − g(Z), and x − f (Z) ⊥ Z or y − g(Z) ⊥ Z under the
assumption that the data-generating procedure follows additive noise models (ANMs). When the ANM is identiﬁable,
we prove that x − f (Z) ⊥ y − g(Z) ⇒ x ⊥ y|Z. We also
show that 1) f and g can be easily estimated by regression,
2) our test is more powerful than the state-of-the-art kernel
CI tests, and 3) existing causal learning algorithms can infer
much more causal directions by using the proposed method.

Introduction
Statistical independence and conditional independence (CI)
are important concepts in statistics, artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) and other related ﬁelds. In causal discovery, we consider such a scenario: let X, Y and Z denote sets of random
variables, if the CI between X and Y given Z holds, denoted
by X ⊥ Y |Z, then it means that given Z, further knowing X (or Y ) does not provide any additional information
about Y (or X), thus we can deduce that X and Y have no
directed causality. Independence and CI play a central role
in causal discovery. Generally speaking, the CI relationship
X ⊥ Y |Z allows us to separate X − Y when constructing a probabilistic model for P (X, Y, Z), which results in a
parsimonious representation. By using CI tests, the PC algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000), for example,
can determine a set of Markov equivalence classes (Pearl
2009).
However, CI testing is much more difﬁcult than unconditional independence testing (Bergsma 2004). For CI tests,
traditional methods either focus on the discrete cases (the
conditional set can be combined into a variable according
to the corresponding conditional probability table, hence it
∗

Correspondence author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1250

