Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Algorithms for Deciding Counting
Quantiﬁers over Unary Predicates
Marcelo Finger
Department of Computer Science
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil

Glauber De Bona
Department of Computer Science
University College London, UK
This paper aims at presenting an expressive fragment of
ﬁrst-order logic with counting quantiﬁers over unary predicates called CQU, developing decision algorithms for it and
providing an effective implementation using open-source
software. This fragment is more expressive than Syllogistic
Logic and bears considerable similarity in format to that of
Probabilistic Satisﬁability (PSAT) problems (Nilsson 1986),
an NP-complete problem (Georgakopoulos, Kavvadias, and
Papadimitriou 1988) for which there has been considerable
algorithmic development in the literature (Hansen and Jaumard 2000; Finger and De Bona 2011; 2015). The algorithms rely on an Integer Linear Programming presentation
of CQU satisﬁability; a viable implementation is obtained
with a SAT-based column generation strategy.
We start by describing an example of reasoning on the
CQU fragment.
Example 1 Consider the following statements about people’s hobbies

Abstract
We study algorithms for fragments of ﬁrst order logic extended with counting quantiﬁers, which are known to be
highly complex in general. We propose a fragment over unary
predicates that is NP-complete and for which there is a normal form where Counting Quantiﬁcation sentences have a
single Unary predicate, thus call it the CQU fragment. We
provide an algebraic formulation of the CQU satisﬁability
problem in terms of Integer Linear Programming based on
which two algorithms are proposed, a direct reduction to
SAT instances and an Integer Linear Programming version
extended with a column generation mechanism. The latter is
shown to lead to a viable implementation and experiments
shows this algorithm presents a phase transition behavior.

1

Introduction

The need to combine deductive reasoning with counting and
cardinality capabilities in a principled way has been recognized since the beginning of automated reasoning. However,
the complexity of the resulting systems has perhaps precluded a wider presence of deductive systems that provide
those counting capabilities.
The basic approach for adding counting capabilities extends ﬁrst-order logic with some Lindström-type generalized quantiﬁers (Lindström 1966) that could express at least
the counting notions of “there are at least/most n elements
with property P ”. The satisﬁability of a logic with that expressivity, but limited to fragments with at most binary predicates was ﬁrst shown to be decidable (Grädel and Otto
1999) and was later shown in NEXPTIME (Pratt-Hartmann
2005) with an EXPTIME-hard lower bound (Baader, Buchheit, and Hollander 1996); related studies are found in (Martin, Madelaine, and Stacho 2015; Bulatov and Hedayaty
2015).
If the attention is reduced to counting quantiﬁers over
unary predicates, the decision problem was shown to be
“only” NP-complete, even when restricted only to a fragment called Syllogistic Logic (Pratt-Hartmann 2008). However, the algorithm presented for that complexity proof was
intrinsically non-deterministic, with no clear reduction to
known feasible algorithms.

(i) At most 15 people are astronomers, ball players, choir
singers or dancers
(ii) At least 12 astronomers are not dancers
(iii) At least 10 astronomers play ball or sing
(iv) All ball players dance
(v) At least 7 astronomers sing in a choir
(vi) At most 6 astronomers sing in a choir

We would like to reason that (i)–(iv) are satisﬁable and that
from them one can infer (v) or, equivalently, as (vi) is the
negation of (v), that (i)–(iv) and (vi) are unsatisﬁable.
2
An implementation of a CQU decision procedure should
allow us to solve problems like the one in Example 1 and,
furthermore, it should also allows us to empirically investigate if a phase-transition phenomenon occurs for CQU decision problems. Cheeseman et al. (Cheeseman, Kanefsky,
and Taylor 1991) conjectured that a phase-transition phenomenon is a property of all NP-complete problems. Hard
and easy instances of SAT distributions problems were described by (Mitchell, Selman, and Levesque 1992). Gent and
Walsh (Gent and Walsh 1994) described a phase transition
for SAT problems dependent on the rate m/n, where m
is the number of clauses in a 3-SAT instance and n is the
number of variables, describing that the hardest instances
concentrate around the phase transition point, at which the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3878

