Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Taming the Matthew Effect in Online Markets with Social Inﬂuence
Franco Berbeglia

Pascal Van Hentenryck

Carnegie Mellon University
fberbegl@andrew.cmu.edu

University of Michigan
pvanhent@umich.edu

trial and offer markets which are particularly relevant in online settings. The popularity ranking is also widely used by
ﬁrms running such markets in practice.
In recent years, some authors have started revisiting some
of the assumptions in the M USIC L AB experiment and, in
particular, the ranking policy which is the main controllable
action of the ﬁrm running such a market. Van Hentenryck
et al. (2016) showed that, when the products are ranked by
quality instead of popularity, the market becomes asuymptotically predictable and optimal: It leads a monopoly for
the product of highest quality. Abeliuk et al. (2016) also
proved that the dynamic ranking that optimizes the number of downloads at each step, which they called the performance ranking (Abeliuk et al. 2015), leads to the same outcome. These two ranking policies address the unpredictability and inefﬁciency of the market under social inﬂuence
identiﬁed by Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006). However,
they fail to address the market inequalities created by social
inﬂuence: Two products of similar appeals and qualities will
have fundamentally different outcomes with one becoming
a monopoly in the long run. This “winner-takes-all” phenomena, although optimal from an efﬁciency standpoint, is
typically considered undesirable..
This paper proposes a novel strategy that aims at addressing the three problems identiﬁed by Salganik, Dodds,
and Watts (2006) simultaneously: unpredictability, inefﬁciencies, and inequalities. The strategy is a randomized segmentation protocol and is simple to deploy in online settings.
The paper also analyzes its properties both theoretically and
experimentally and shows that the protocol dramatically reduces inequalities among the best products in the market,
while preserving high predictability and efﬁciency. The rest
of the paper brieﬂy reviews trial and offer markets, presents
the new randomized segmentation protocol, and analyzes its
properties both theoretically and experimentally.

Abstract
Social inﬂuence has been shown to create a Matthew effect in online markets, increasing inequalities and leading
to “winner-take-all” phenomena. Matthew effects have been
observed for numerous market policies, including when the
products are presented to consumers by popularity or quality. This paper studies how to reduce Matthew effects, while
keeping markets efﬁcient and predictable when social inﬂuence is used. It presents a market strategy based on randomization and segmentation, that ensures that the best products,
if they are close in quality, will have reasonably close market
shares. The beneﬁts of this market strategy is justiﬁed both
theoretically and empirically and the loss in market efﬁciency
is shown to be acceptable.

Introduction
Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006) wrote a seminal paper on
the negative inﬂuence of social inﬂuence in cultural markets.
They created an experimental virtual market, called the M U SIC L AB , in which participants can listen to songs and then
download them if they like them. The songs are organized in
a list or matrix form, giving different visibilities to the various songs, as is typically the case in online advertisement,
online stores, or physical retail stores (e.g., (Craswell et al.
2008; Lim, Rodrigues, and Zhang 2004)). Each song was
also associated with a popularity signal (e.g., (Engstrom and
Forsell 2014; Viglia, Furlan, and Ladrón-de Guevara 2014)),
i.e., the number of downloads of the song by earlier market
participants. In addition, all the songs were ranked by popularity, which means that the song with the most downloads
received the most visible position (i.e., the top of the list),
the second most popular song the second most visible position, and so on. Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006) showed
that social inﬂuence creates unpredictable markets, as well
as signiﬁcant Matthew effects (Rigney 2010). Indeed, multiple realizations of the M USIC L AB with various sets of participants show signiﬁcantly different outcomes and strong
inequalities in market shares between the songs. Those results have been reproduced by many authors in subsequent
experiments or simulations (e.g., (Hu, Milner, and Wu 2016;
Lerman and Hogg 2014; Muchnik, Aral, and Taylor 2013;
van de Rijt et al. 2014)). The M USIC L AB is an example of

Trial and Offer Markets
Following Krumme et al. (2012), this paper considers trial
and offer markets modeled with an extended multinomial
logit that includes product visibilities and social inﬂuence.
In these markets, an incoming consumer observes n products in a list and a social inﬂuence vector dt , where dti is
the number of purchases of product i at time t. She can then
sample one product (e.g., listening to a song) and then de-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10

