Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Revenue Maximization for Finitely Repeated Ad Auctions
1

Jiang Rong,1 Tao Qin,2 Bo An,3 Tie-Yan Liu2

The Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, ICT, CAS
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
rongjiang13@mails.ucas.ac.cn
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing 100080, China
{taoqin, tyliu}@microsoft.com
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
boan@ntu.edu.sg
much to charge the advertiser. In these applications, Generalized Second Price1 (GSP) is the most popularly used
auction mechanism and has attracted a lot of research attention in recent years (Caragiannis et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2014;
Ma et al. 2014; Rong et al. 2016).
In ad auctions, revenue maximization is a very important goal of the auctioneer and many research works have
been conducted on this topic (Xiao, Yang, and Li 2009;
Radovanovic and Heavlin 2012; Caragiannis et al. 2014;
Yuan et al. 2014). The famous Myerson’s theory (Myerson
1981; Nisan et al. 2007; Hartline and Roughgarden 2009)
reveals how to achieve the optimal revenue in the setting of
a single item for sale and independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) values of the bidders: one just needs to adopt
a second-price auction with an optimal reserve price that
is the zero point of the virtual value function. This result
has been extended to GSP. Edelman and Schwarz (2010)
proved that GSP with the optimal reserve price is an optimal mechanism under the regularity assumption. Thompson
and Leyton-Brown (2013) investigated how to optimally set
the reserve price when squashing is considered. Sun, Zhou,
and Deng (2014) showed that the optimal reserve price of
weighted GSP depends on bidders’ ad qualities.
All the above works on revenue maximization rely on the
knowledge about the value distribution of bidders. However,
bidders’ valuations are private information and are invisible to the auctioneer. In practice, auctioneers usually need
to collect information about the value distribution using the
auction mechanism with a heuristically set reserve price. We
use sampling of bids to refer to this process. With the estimated value distribution, the auctioneer can infer the optimal
reserve price and use it in the future auctions. Ostrovsky and
Schwarz (2011) conducted a ﬁeld experiment on sampling of
bids with Yahoo’s datasets. They assumed the bidders’ values
to be drawn from a log normal distribution and inferred the
parameters by simulation. Sun et al. (2012) estimated the
parameters of the value distribution by maximum likelihood
estimation. Cole and Roughgarden (2014) and Dhangwatnotai, Roughgarden, and Yan (2015) directly estimated the

Abstract
Reserve price is an effective tool for revenue maximization
in ad auctions. The optimal reserve price depends on bidders’
value distributions, which, however, are generally unknown
to auctioneers. A common practice for auctioneers is to ﬁrst
collect information about the value distributions by a sampling
procedure and then apply the reserve price estimated with the
sampled bids to the following auctions. In order to maximize
the total revenue over ﬁnite auctions, it is important for the
auctioneer to ﬁnd a proper sample size to trade off between
the cost of the sampling procedure and the optimality of the
estimated reserve price. We investigate the sample size optimization problem for Generalized Second Price auctions,
which is the most widely-used mechanism in ad auctions, and
make three main contributions along this line. First, we bound
the revenue losses in the form of competitive ratio during and
after sampling. Second, we formulate the problem of ﬁnding
the optimal sample size as a non-convex mixed integer optimization problem. Then we characterize the properties of
the problem and prove the uniqueness of the optimal sample size. Third, we relax the integer optimization problem to
a continuous form and develop an efﬁcient algorithm based
on the properties to solve it. Experimental results show that
our approach can signiﬁcantly improve the revenue for the
auctioneer in ﬁnitely repeated ad auctions.

1

Introduction

Ad auctions have become a major monetization channel for
Internet applications, including sponsored search auctions
(Jansen and Mullen 2008; Milgrom 2010; Qin, Chen, and Liu
2015) and realtime bidding (RTB) (Chakraborty et al. 2010;
Chen et al. 2011; Yuan, Wang, and Zhao 2013). In sponsored search, when a user issues a query to a search engine,
in addition to a list of relevant webpages, a selective set
of ads related to the query will also be shown to the user.
A position auction is used to determine which ads to show
and how much to charge the corresponding advertisers. In
RTB for display advertising, when a user visits a publisher’s
website, an ad impression with related information will be
sent to the advertisers (or ad networks) through an ad exchange. Then the bids from the advertisers are collected and
an auction is used to determine which ad to show and how

1

This paper is based on unweighted GSP (Edelman, Ostrovsky,
and Schwarz 2007; Edelman and Schwarz 2010; Ostrovsky and
Schwarz 2011) where bidders are ranked and charged by bids. We
discuss how to extend our results to weighted GSP (Varian 2007;
Sun, Zhou, and Deng 2014) in Section 7.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

663

