Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Asynchronous Stochastic Proximal
Optimization Algorithms with Variance Reduction
Qi Meng,1∗ Wei Chen,2 Jingcheng Yu,3∗ Taifeng Wang,2 Zhi-Ming Ma,4 Tie-Yan Liu2
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, qimeng13@pku.edu.cn
2
Microsoft Research, {wche, taifengw, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com
3
Carnegie Mellon University, jingchey@cs.cmu.edu
4
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, mazm@amt.ac.cn
of the model x on training data (ai , bi ). Different learning tasks may use different loss functions, such as the least
square loss 12 (aTi x − bi )2 for regression and the logistic loss
log(1 + exp(−bi aTi x)) for classiﬁcation. The regularization term is used to constrain the capacity of the hypothesis
space. For example, the non-smooth L1 regularization term
is widely used.
In order to solve the R-ERM problem, the proximal
stochastic gradient descent method (ProxSGD) has been
widely used, which exploits the additive nature of the empirical risk function and updates the model based on the gradient which is calculated at randomly sampled training data.
However, the random sampling in ProxSGD introduces nonnegligible variance, which makes that we need to use a decreasing step size to guarantee the algorithm’s convergence,
and the convergence rate is only sublinear (Langford, Li,
and Zhang 2009; Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2011). To
tackle this problem, people have developed a set of new technologies. For example, in (Xiao and Zhang 2014), a variance
reduction technique was introduced to improve ProxSGD
and a new algorithm called ProxSVRG was proposed. It has
been proven that even with a constant step size, ProxSVRG
can achieve linear convergence rate.
Proximal stochastic coordinate descent (ProxSCD) is another method which is used to solve the R-ERM problem
(Shalev-Shwartz and Tewari 2011). Since the variance introduced by the coordinate sampling asymptotically goes to
zero, the ProxSCD attains linear convergence rate when the
objective function P (x) is strongly convex (Wright 2015).
However, ProxSCD still requires that all component functions in the empirical risk are accessible in each iteration,
which is time consuming. In (Zhao et al. 2014), a new algorithm called ProxSVRCD (also known as MRBCD) was
proposed to improve ProxSCD. This algorithm, in addition
to randomly samples a block of coordinates, also randomly
samples training data in each iteration and uses the variance
reduction technique. It has been proven that ProxSVRCD
can achieve linear convergence rate and outperform ProxSCD by a lower iteration complexity.
While the aforementioned new algorithms (i.e., ProxSVRG and ProxSVRCD) have both good theoretical properties and empirical performances, the investigations on them
were mainly conducted in the sequential (single-machine)
setting. In this big data era, we usually need to deal with

Abstract
Regularized empirical risk minimization (R-ERM) is an important branch of machine learning, since it constrains the
capacity of the hypothesis space and guarantees the generalization ability of the learning algorithm. Two classic proximal
optimization algorithms, i.e., proximal stochastic gradient descent (ProxSGD) and proximal stochastic coordinate descent
(ProxSCD) have been widely used to solve the R-ERM problem. Recently, variance reduction technique was proposed
to improve ProxSGD and ProxSCD, and the corresponding
ProxSVRG and ProxSVRCD have better convergence rate.
These proximal algorithms with variance reduction technique
have also achieved great success in applications at small and
moderate scales. However, in order to solve large-scale RERM problems and make more practical impacts, the parallel
versions of these algorithms are sorely needed. In this paper,
we propose asynchronous ProxSVRG (Async-ProxSVRG)
and asynchronous ProxSVRCD (Async-ProxSVRCD) algorithms, and prove that Async-ProxSVRG can achieve near
linear speedup when the training data is sparse, while AsyncProxSVRCD can achieve near linear speedup regardless of
the sparse condition, as long as the number of block partitions are appropriately set. We have conducted experiments
on a regularized logistic regression task. The results veriﬁed
our theoretical ﬁndings and demonstrated the practical efﬁciency of the asynchronous stochastic proximal algorithms
with variance reduction.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on the regularized empirical risk minimization (R-ERM) problem, whose objective is a ﬁnite sum
of smooth convex loss functions fi (x) plus a non-smooth
regularization term R(x), i.e.,
1
fi (x) + R(x).
n i=1
n

min P (x) = F (x) + R(x) =

x∈Rd

(1)

In particular, in the context of machine learning, fi (x)
and R(x) are deﬁned as follows. Suppose we are given a
collection of training data (a1 , b1 ),...,(an , bn ), where each
ai ∈ Rd is an input feature vector and bi ∈ R is the output variable. The loss function fi (x) measures the ﬁtness
∗
This work was done when the author was visiting Microsoft
Research Asia.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2329

