Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Incorporating Expert Knowledge into Keyphrase Extraction
Sujatha Das Gollapalli, Xiao-Li Li

Peng Yang

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{gollapallis,xlli}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
yangpeng1985521@gmail.com

keyphrases. Linguistic ﬁlters effectively reduce the number of possible n-grams that need to be considered by subsequent scoring and classiﬁcation modules. Typically, the
value of n is set to {1,2,3} based on the observation that
author-speciﬁed keyphrases tend to be uni/bi/tri-grams in
practice (Caragea et al. 2014).
In unsupervised models, candidate phrases are scored
based on individual tokens comprising them.1 Various
“goodness” or “interestingness” measures that reﬂect
document-level, corpus-level, and external statistics are used
in this scoring (Hasan and Ng 2010). For example, the TextRank algorithm builds a graph based on neighboring words
in a document and computes the score of each word as the
PageRank centrality measure of its corresponding node in
the word graph (Mihalcea and Tarau 2004).
In contrast, supervised models use known (“correct”)
keyphrases to frame keyphrase identiﬁcation as a binary
classiﬁcation task. Candidate phrases from the training set
of documents are assigned positive and negative labels and
features such as part-of-speech (POS) tags, phrase length,
occurrence frequency, and position information in the document are used for learning keyphrase classiﬁers (Hasan and
Ng 2014). Ranking approaches which use ordering information among candidate phrases to train extraction models
were also investigated previously (Jiang, Hu, and Li 2009).
In this paper, we avoid the candidate phrase extraction
step by formulating keyphrase extraction as a sequence tagging/labeling task. Given a stream of tokens corresponding
to the content of a document,2 a keyphrase tagger assigns to
each token position a tag/label from the set {KP, O} where
the label KP corresponds to a keyphrase token and O refers
to a non-keyphrase token. An example is shown in Table 1.
Unlike phrase-based approaches where candidate phrases
comprise (multiple) training/test instances for a document,
the entire content of the document comprises a single instance for a sequence tagging model.
The example in Table 1 refers to the title of a research
paper published in the World Wide Web conference in the
year 2010 and is part of the recently-compiled datasets for
keyphrase extraction described further in the Experiments
section. We highlight some shortcomings of existing sys-

Abstract
Keyphrases that efﬁciently summarize a document’s content are used in various document processing and retrieval
tasks. Current state-of-the-art techniques for keyphrase extraction operate at a phrase-level and involve scoring candidate phrases based on features of their component words.
In this paper, we learn keyphrase taggers for research papers
using token-based features incorporating linguistic, surfaceform, and document-structure information through sequence
labeling. We experimentally illustrate that using withindocument features alone, our tagger trained with Conditional
Random Fields performs on-par with existing state-of-the-art
systems that rely on information from Wikipedia and citation
networks. In addition, we are also able to harness recent work
on feature labeling to seamlessly incorporate expert knowledge and predictions from existing systems to enhance the
extraction performance further. We highlight the modeling
advantages of our keyphrase taggers and show signiﬁcant performance improvements on two recently-compiled datasets of
keyphrases from Computer Science research papers.

Introduction
Keyphrases (or keywords) that provide a concise representation of the topical content of a document are used in various data mining and web-related tasks (Hammouda, Matute,
and Kamel 2005; Bao et al. 2007; Xu et al. 2008; Li et al.
2010). Keyphrase extraction, the challenging task of automatically extracting a small set of representative keyphrases
continues to garner research interest in AI and natural language processing (NLP) communities (Wan and Xiao 2008;
Hasan and Ng 2010).
Various supervised and unsupervised techniques are available for keyphrase extraction (Hasan and Ng 2014). Most
state-of-the-art systems ﬁrst extract a set of candidate
phrases for a given document during keyphrase extraction (Frank et al. 1999; Medelyan, Frank, and Witten
2009; Gollapalli and Caragea 2014). These systems employ
phrase-ﬁltering on the set of all n-grams of an input document to remove phrases that are unlikely to be humangenerated keyphrases. For instance, n-grams ending in stopwords or prepositions are unlikely to be author-speciﬁed

1

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

3180

We use “token” and “word” interchangeably.
We assume textual content and whitespace tokenization.

