Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Bayesian Networks
with Incomplete Data by Augmentation
Tameem Adel

Cassio P. de Campos

University of Manchester, UK
tameem.hesham@gmail.com

Queen’s University Belfast, UK
c.decampos@qub.ac.uk

ering 1996), and the task becomes even harder with incomplete data. In spite of that, the problem of learning a Bayesian
network from incomplete data by (an optimistic) augmentation belongs to the same complexity class, as we will show
later on. Because of such result, we investigate and obtain a
new exact algorithm for the problem, based on reformulating
it into a standard structure learning without missing data.
This is the ﬁrst exact algorithm for the problem, to the best of
our knowledge. In contrast to previous work, our algorithm
performs both tasks, namely structure learning and data imputation, in a single shot rather than learning the Bayesian
network and then dealing with the missing data, possibly in
an iterative manner (Friedman 1998). Based on the optimization that is required to solve the problem and on the exact
algorithm, we devise a hill-climbing approximate algorithm.
The hill-climbing regards the completions of the missing
values only, while the structure optimization is performed
by any off-the-shelf algorithm for structure learning under
complete data.

Abstract
We present new algorithms for learning Bayesian networks
from data with missing values using a data augmentation approach. An exact Bayesian network learning algorithm is obtained by recasting the problem into a standard Bayesian network learning problem without missing data. As expected, the
exact algorithm does not scale to large domains. We build on
the exact method to create an approximate algorithm using
a hill-climbing technique. This algorithm scales to large domains so long as a suitable standard structure learning method
for complete data is available. We perform a wide range of
experiments to demonstrate the beneﬁts of learning Bayesian
networks with such new approach.

Introduction
Missing entries in real-world data exist due to various reasons.
For instance, it can be due to damage of the device used to
record feature values; a metal detector might fail to produce
a signal denoting the existence of a metal due to a certain
malfunction. Results can be incomplete in an industrial experiment due to mechanical breakdowns not necessarily related
to the performed experiment (Little and Rubin 1987). Recommendation data can have missing values since participants
in the recommendation system did not rate all the available
songs, ﬁlms, books, etc. While data missingness in the above
examples can mostly be assumed to be generated by a random
process which depends only on the observed data, usually
referred to as missing at random (MAR) (Little and Rubin
1987), this assumption might fail in other examples. People
seeking for health insurance might refuse to give an answer
to certain questions in order to reduce the costs, e.g. ‘do you
smoke?’, and in many cases this can be seen as an indication
of one speciﬁc answer. In such cases we say that data are
missing not at random, or MNAR (see for instance (Van den
Broeck et al. 2014)).
Given a dataset with categorical random variables, the
Bayesian network structure learning problem refers to ﬁnding
the best network structure (a directed acyclic graph, or DAG)
according to a score function based on the data (Heckerman,
Geiger, and Chickering 1995). As well known, learning a
Bayesian network from complete data is NP-complete (Chick-

Most previous work to learn the structure of Bayesian
networks from incomplete data has focused on MAR. The
seminal algorithm of Friedman (1998) introduced an iterative method based on the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
technique, referred to as structural EM. Implementation of
structural EM begins with an initial graph structure, followed
by steps where the probability distribution of variables with
missing values is estimated by EM, alternated with steps
in which the expectation of the score of each neighbouring
graph is computed. After convergence, the graph maximizing
the score is chosen. Many other algorithms have used ideas
from structural EM and deal separately with the missing values and the structure optimization using complete data (Borchani, Amor, and Mellouli 2006; Leray and Francois 2005;
Meila and Jordan 1998; Ramoni and Sebastiani 1997;
Riggelsen 2006; Riggelsen and Feelders 2005). In (Rancoita
et al. 2016), structures are learned from incomplete data using a structural EM whose maximization step is performed
by an anytime method, and the ‘expectation’ step imputes
the missing values using expected means, or modes, of the
current estimated joint distribution. By using modes in each
iteration (Ramoni and Sebastiani 1997), the EM method is
sometimes called hard EM, and is close to our work. In some
sense, we work with a global optimization version of hard
EM. While this is not exactly considering data to be MNAR,

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1684

