Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Near-Optimal Active Learning of Halfspaces
via Query Synthesis in the Noisy Setting
1

Lin Chen,1,2 Hamed Hassani,3 Amin Karbasi1,2

Department of Electrical Engineering, 2 Yale Institute for Network Science, Yale University
3
Computer Science Department, ETH Zürich
{lin.chen, amin.karbasi}@yale.edu, hamed@inf.ethz.ch

consuming or expensive to acquire (as they require asking
an expert).
Throughout this paper, our objective is to actively learn an
unknown halfspace H ∗ = {x ∈ Rd ∶ ⟨h∗ , x⟩ > 0} via query
synthesis (a.k.a. membership queries), where ⟨⋅, ⋅⟩ denotes
the standard inner product of the Euclidean space and h∗ is
the unit normal vector of the halfspace we want to learn. We
would like to note that learning the halfspace H ∗ is mathematically equivalent to learning its unit normal vector h∗ ;
therefore we focus on learning h∗ hereinafter. In addition,
it should be noted that using the kernel trick we can easily
extend the halfspace learning to more complex (e.g., nonlinear) decision boundaries (Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini
2004).
The hypothesis space H, which consists of all possibilities
of unit normal vectors, is the unit sphere S d−1 = {x ∈ Rd ∶
∥x∥ = 1}, where ∥ ⋅ ∥ denotes the standard Euclidean norm.
In active learning of halfspaces via query synthesis, the
algorithm is allowed to query whether any point x in Rd
resides in the true halfspace. When the algorithm queries
x, the true outcome is sign(⟨h∗ , x⟩) ∈ {1, −1}. When
sign(⟨h∗ , x⟩) = 1, it means that x ∈ H ∗ ; otherwise, x ∉ H ∗ .
We should note here that the only information we obtain
from a query is the sign of the inner product rather than the
value. For example, the queries of the form sign(⟨h∗ , ei ⟩),
where ei is the ith standard basis vector, will only reveal the
sign of the ith component of h∗ (and nothing further about
its value).
In the noiseless setting, we observe the true outcome of
the query, i.e. sign ⟨h∗ , x⟩ ∈ {1, −1}. In the noisy setting, the
outcome is a ﬂipped version of the true sign with independent ﬂip probability ρ. That is, denoting the outcome by y
we have y ∈ {−1, 1} and Pr[y ≠ sign ⟨h∗ , x⟩] ≜ ρ < 1/2.
Since the length of the selected vector x will not affect
the outcome of the query, we only query the points on the
unit sphere S d−1 = {x ∈ Rd ∶ ∥x∥ = 1}. Hence, we term
X = S d−1 as the query space.
Given , δ > 0, we would like to seek an active learning algorithm that (i) adaptively selects vectors x1 , x2 , . . . ∈ X , (ii)
observes the (noisy) responses to each query sign⟨h∗ , xi ⟩,
(iii) and outputs, using as few queries as possible, an estimate ĥ of h∗ such that ∥ĥ − h∗ ∥ <  with probability at least
1 − δ.
Our main contribution in this paper is to develop a noise

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of actively learning a
linear classiﬁer through query synthesis where the learner can
construct artiﬁcial queries in order to estimate the true decision boundaries. This problem has recently gained a lot of interest in automated science and adversarial reverse engineering for which only heuristic algorithms are known. In such
applications, queries can be constructed de novo to elicit information (e.g., automated science) or to evade detection with
minimal cost (e.g., adversarial reverse engineering). We develop a general framework, called dimension coupling (DC),
that 1) reduces a d-dimensional learning problem to d−1 lowdimensional sub-problems, 2) solves each sub-problem efﬁciently, 3) appropriately aggregates the results and outputs a
linear classiﬁer, and 4) provides a theoretical guarantee for
all possible schemes of aggregation. The proposed method
is proved resilient to noise. We show that the DC framework avoids the curse of dimensionality: its computational
complexity scales linearly with the dimension. Moreover, we
show that the query complexity of DC is near optimal (within
a constant factor of the optimum algorithm). To further support our theoretical analysis, we compare the performance of
DC with the existing work. We observe that DC consistently
outperforms the prior arts in terms of query complexity while
often running orders of magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

In contrast to the passive model of supervised learning,
where all the labels are provided without any interactions
with the learning mechanism, the key insight in active learning is that the learning algorithm can perform signiﬁcantly
better if it is allowed to choose which data points to label. This approach has found far-reaching applications, including the classical problems in AI (e.g., classiﬁcation
(Tong and Koller 2002), information retrieval (Tong and
Chang 2001), speech recognition (Hakkani-Tur, Riccardi,
and Gorin 2002)) as well as the modern ones (e.g., interactive recommender systems (Karbasi, Ioannidis, and Massoulie 2012), optimal decision making (Javdani et al. 2014)),
and optimal information gathering (Chen et al. 2015). In all
the above applications, the unlabeled data are usually abundant and easy to obtain, but training labels are either timeCopyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1798

