Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Proto-Role Labeling
Adam Teichert

Adam Poliak

Benjamin Van Durme

Matthew R. Gormley

Johns Hopkins University
teichert@jhu.edu

Johns Hopkins University
azpoliak@cs.jhu.edu

Johns Hopkins University
vandurme@cs.jhu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
mgormley@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

AWARENESS

-

EXISTED AFTER +

The semantic function tags of Bonial, Stowe, and Palmer
(2013) and the ordinal, multi-property annotations of
Reisinger et al. (2015) draw inspiration from Dowty’s semantic proto-role theory. We approach proto-role labeling as a
multi-label classiﬁcation problem and establish strong results
for the task by adapting a successful model of traditional semantic role labeling. We achieve a proto-role micro-averaged
F1 of 81.7 using gold syntax and explore joint and conditional models of proto-roles and categorical roles. In comparing the effect of Bonial, Stowe, and Palmer’s tags to PropBank ArgN-style role labels, we are surprised that neither annotations greatly improve proto-role prediction; however, we
observe that ArgN models beneﬁt much from observed syntax
and from observed or modeled proto-roles while our models
of the semantic function tags do not.

1

...
VOLITION

California

led

...
-

the nation

in sales.

L EAD .01:A RG 1-PPT

Figure 1: SPRL (top) vs SRL (bottom).

In what follows we:
• specify a multi-label classiﬁcation evaluation for SPRL
appropriate for joint labeling of entire input sentences;
• establish a strong SPRL result backed by an SRL model
with reasonable performance on a standard dataset;
• evaluate a variety of models with SPRL and SRL;
• report SRL results on the new PropBank semantic function
tags for Ontonotes 5, contrasting the tagset to PropBank
ArgN labels via their impact on our models.

Introduction

Dowty (1991) argued against the categorical notion of semantic (thematic) roles, suggesting instead a multi-faceted
relationship between an argument and a predicate which he
termed proto-roles. Traditional categories such as AGENT
or PATIENT were replaced with prototypical assumptions
of underlying semantic properties; e.g. a P ROTO -AGENT is
likely to be aware and volitional. This led Reisinger et al.
(2015) to construct a dataset supporting the task of semantic
proto-role labeling (SPRL): predicting human responses to
questions on individual properties. For example, after reading the examples below, consider properties of what was led:
Was the argument aware of being led? Was it sentient? Was
it willing? Did it instigate the leading?
a) The ofﬁcer led the convict to the car.
b) California led the nation in sales.
c) The guide led John past the danger.
The SPRL task pursued in this paper is a departure from
PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, and Kingsbury 2005) semantic
role labeling (SRL) which would annotate all of the above
examples with the same verb sense (LEAD .01) and argument
role (A RG 1). The SPRL questions, however, distinguish between these examples without assigning a categorical label.
We expect this contrast to provide an opportunity for synergistic joint modeling of SPRL and SRL.

2

Tasks

Figure 1 demonstrates the varieties of semantic labeling that
we explore in this paper. SRL is traditionally a multi-class
classiﬁcation problem where predicate-argument pairs are
assigned a label describing the role of the argument in the
event. We investigate two label sets for SRL: ArgN labels
(e.g. Arg0, Arg1) associate the argument to numbered slots
for the particular predicate (the numbers tend to hold similar
meaning across predicates, but this is not guaranteed); the
semantic function tags (SFT) of Bonial, Stowe, and Palmer
(e.g. PPT, GOL) associate the argument with a coarse-grained
role that has meaning across all predicates.
We also investigate proto-role models. We cast SPRL as
a multi-label classiﬁcation task where each pair is assigned
a set of properties (e.g. {awareness, volition}). In the data
collected by Reisinger et al., each predicate-argument pair
is labeled with two judgments for each SPRL property:
1. Boolean applicability: is the question asked by the property applicable to the given pair?

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. A ﬁve-way likert response: how likely is it that the property holds in the given context?

4459

