Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Systematic Exploration of Larger Local Search
Neighborhoods for the Minimum Vertex Cover Problem
Maximilian Katzmann, Christian Komusiewicz
Institut für Informatik
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Jena, Germany
{maximilian.katzmann, christian.komusiewicz}@uni-jena.de

approximation in polynomial time for any  > 0 (Zuckerman
2007).
Despite these hardness results for both problems, heuristic algorithms have a very good performance in practice.
One approach that has been applied successfully is local
search: state-of-the art heuristic solvers for M INIMUM
V ERTEX C OVER such as EWCC (Cai, Su, and Sattar
2011), NuMVC (Cai et al. 2013), and FastVC (Cai 2015)
are based on local search strategies. The main focus in this
line of research has been to investigate heuristic approaches
that prevent cycling during the local search algorithm and
avoid being stuck in a bad local optimum.
Here, we study the performance of local search in a strict
hill-climbing setting. In hill-climbing, cycling is not an issue
but it is crucial to avoid bad local optima. To this end, we
exhaustively examine larger neighborhoods of the current
solution. More precisely, we follow the approach of parameterized local search (Fellows 2001; Fellows et al. 2012;
Gaspers et al. 2012), where the radius k of the neighborhood is used as a parameter of the algorithm and the aim is
to obtain fast algorithms for searching the k-neighborhood
of the solution. Here, when searching for an improvement
of a current vertex cover C, we consider the k-swap neighborhood which precisely contains all vertex sets that can be
obtained from C by adding and removing a set S (the swap)
of altogether at most k vertices. In other words, we aim to
solve the following problem.

Abstract
We investigate the potential of exhaustively exploring larger
neighborhoods in local search algorithms for M INIMUM V ER TEX C OVER . More precisely, we study whether, for moderate
values of k, it is feasible and worthwhile to determine, given
a graph G with vertex cover C, if there is a k-swap S such
that (C \ S) ∪ (S \ C) is a smaller vertex cover of G. First, we
describe an algorithm running in ΔO(k) · n time for searching
the k-swap neighborhood on n-vertex graphs with maximum
degree Δ. Then, we demonstrate that, by devising additional
pruning rules that decrease the size of the search space, this
algorithm can be implemented so that it solves the problem
quickly for k ≈ 20. Finally, we show that it is worthwhile
to consider moderately-sized k-swap neighborhoods. For our
benchmark data set, we show that when combining our algorithm with a hill-climbing approach, the solution quality
improves quickly with the radius k of the local search neighborhood and that in most cases optimal solutions can be found
by setting k = 21.

Introduction
M INIMUM V ERTEX C OVER and its sister problem M AX IMUM I NDEPENDENT S ET are fundamental NP-hard optimization problems, their decision versions being among
Karp’s classic 21 NP-complete problems (Karp 1972).
In M INIMUM V ERTEX C OVER we aim to ﬁnd a smallest
vertex set covering all edges of a graph.

LS-V ERTEX C OVER
Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E), a vertex
cover C of G, and an integer k.
Task: Find a swap S of size at most k, that is, a vertex
set S ⊆ V such that C ⊕ S := (C \ S) ∪ (S \ C) is
a vertex cover, |C ⊕ S| < |C|, and |S| ≤ k.

M INIMUM V ERTEX C OVER
Input: An undirected graph G = (V, E).
Task: Find a minimum-cardinality set C ⊆ V such
that ∀ {u, v} ∈ E : u ∈ C ∨ v ∈ C.
Equivalently, there should be no edges among vertices
in V \ C, that is, V \ C should be an independent set of maximum size. Both problems are also hard from the viewpoint
of polynomial-time approximation algorithms: M INIMUM
V ERTEX C OVER is NP-hard to approximate within a factor
of 1.36 (Dinur and Safra 2005) and there is evidence that even
improving upon the trivial factor-2 approximation might be
impossible (Khot and Regev 2008). For M AXIMUM I NDE PENDENT S ET it is even NP-hard to obtain a factor-|V |1−

Solving LS-V ERTEX C OVER for larger k is commonly assumed to be infeasible: The straightforward algorithm trying
all possible k-swaps runs in nΘ(k) time. Moreover, there is
complexity-theoretic evidence that a (much more desirable)
running time of f (k) · nO(1) where f is some computable
function depending only on k cannot be achieved (Fellows
et al. 2012). Due to this assumed hardness of the problem,
implementations of hill-climbing local search use small kswap neighborhoods such as 3-swap and 5-swap neighborhoods (Andrade, Resende, and Werneck 2012).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

846

