Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

PAC Identiﬁcation of a Bandit Arm
Relative to a Reward Quantile
Arghya Roy Chaudhuri, Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 400076, India
{arghya, shivaram}@cse.iitb.ac.in

et al. 2003)). The predominant body of work in the stochastic setting addresses regret minimisation, which amounts to
maximising the expected sum of rewards from the pulls of
the arms. Naturally a successful strategy here must explore
the arms sufﬁciently to infer their mean rewards, but also
exploit proﬁtable arms enough to reap high rewards.

Abstract
We propose a PAC formulation for identifying an arm in an
n-armed bandit whose mean is within a ﬁxed tolerance of the
mth highest mean. This setup generalises a previous formulation with m = 1, and differs from yet another one which
requires m such arms to be identiﬁed. The key implication of
our proposed approach is the ability to derive upper bounds
on the sample complexity that depend on n/m in place of n.
Consequently, even when the number of arms is inﬁnite, we
only need a ﬁnite number of samples to identify an arm that
compares favourably with a ﬁxed reward quantile. This facility makes our approach attractive to applications such as drug
discovery, wherein the number of arms (molecular conﬁgurations) may run into a few thousands.
We present sampling algorithms for both the ﬁnite- and
inﬁnite-armed cases, and validate their efﬁciency through theoretical and experimental analysis.We also present a lower
bound on the worst case sample complexity of PAC algorithms for our problem, which matches our upper bound up
to a logarithmic factor.

1

More recently, applications such as product testing (Audibert, Bubeck, and Munos 2010)—wherein there is a
dedicated experimentation period before the product is
launched—have also motivated the study of the pure exploration setting. In this setting, the rewards accrued while
experimenting are immaterial; the objective is to either (1)
minimise the number of pulls required to identify an arm that
satisﬁes a reward constraint (Even-Dar, Mannor, and Mansour 2002; Kalyanakrishnan et al. 2012; Mannor et al. 2004),
or to (2) maximise the expected reward of an arm that is returned after a speciﬁed number of pulls (Audibert, Bubeck,
and Munos 2010; Carpentier and Valko 2015). Our contributions, which we introduce below, fall in the ﬁrst category.
Background. Let us consider an arbitrary instance of
an n-armed bandit, n ≥ 2, with a set of arms A =
{a1 , a2 , · · · , an }. Each pull of an arm returns a reward
drawn i.i.d. from a corresponding distribution; for simplicity we assume that reward distributions have their support
in [0, 1]. Let the mean reward of arm a ∈ A be μa . Without loss of generality, assume μai ≥ μaj if i < j, for
i, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. The means of the bandit arms are not
known to the experimenter, who must implement an algorithm. Based on the historical sequence of pulls and rewards,
an algorithm either (1) terminates and returns an answer, or
(2) speciﬁes an arm to be pulled next. Algorithms can be
either deterministic or randomised.

Introduction

The Multi-armed bandit (Berry and Fristedt 1985) is a wellstudied abstraction of decision making under uncertainty.
Each arm of a bandit may be pulled in order to obtain a
reward. The experimenter, based on his/her objective, must
decide which arm to pull at every round. He/she may consult
the preceding history of pulls and rewards in order to make
this decision. Bandits were originally introduced as an abstraction of clinical drug testing (Robbins 1952), with each
arm corresponding to a drug, a pull its administration to a
particular patient, and the reward the success of the treatment. Subsequently, the formalism has also found application in simulation optimisation (Amaran et al. 2015), gameplaying (Goschin et al. 2012), and on-line advertising (Li et
al. 2010).
We consider the stochastic multi-armed bandit (Auer,
Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Robbins 1952), wherein
the rewards from each arm come as i.i.d. samples from a corresponding distribution (by contrast, the rewards may come
from an arbitrary sequence in the adversarial setting (Auer

Given a “tolerance”  ∈ [0, 1], and given m ∈
{1, 2, . . . , n}, we deﬁne an arm a ∈ A to be (, m)-optimal
if μa ≥ μam − . The earliest treatment of the pure exploration setting, by Even-dar et al. (2002), considers the design of algorithms, which, for a given mistake probability
δ ∈ (0, 1], must return an (, 1)-optimal arm with probability at least 1 − δ. This Probably Approximately Correct
(PAC) formulation to identify a near-optimal arm was subsequently generalised by Kalyanakrishnan and Stone (2010)
to the problem of ﬁnding a near-optimal subset of arms, as
deﬁned below.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1777

