Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Complexity of Succinct Elections
Zack Fitzsimmons

Edith Hemaspaandra

College of Computing and Inf. Sciences
Rochester Inst. of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623
zmf6921@rit.edu

Dept. of Computer Science
Rochester Inst. of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623
eh@cs.rit.edu

2011). We explain this phenomenon by showing that many
common proof techniques that show that election problems
are in P can be adapted to the succinct case. We found only
one natural case where the complexity increases: The complexity of determining the winner in a Kemeny election.
For details, see the full version (Fitzsimmons and
Hemaspaandra 2016).

Abstract
The computational study of elections generally assumes that
the preferences of the electorate come in as a list of votes.
Depending on the context, it may be much more natural to
represent the preferences of the electorate succinctly, as the
distinct votes and their counts. Though the succinct representation may be exponentially smaller than the nonsuccinct, we
ﬁnd only one natural case where the complexity increases,
in sharp contrast to the case where each voter has a weight,
where the complexity usually increases.

1

2

Preliminaries

A (nonsuccinct) election is deﬁned as a set of candidates
C, and a list of voters V , where each voter v ∈ V has a
preference order over the candidates. In a succinct election
V is not a list of voters, but instead a list of distinct votes
v (preference orders) and their positive integer count κ(v).
In a weighted election, V is a list of voters and each v ∈ V
has a positive integer weight ω(v) and can be thought of as
a coalition of ω(v) voters all voting the same. We assume
each voter has total order preferences, i.e., he or she strictly
ranks each candidate from most to least preferred.
An election system E maps an election to set of winners, where the winners can be any subset of the candidate
set. The problem E-Winner is deﬁned in the following way.
Given an election (C, V ) and a candidate p ∈ C, is p a winner of (C, V ) using election system E?
For E-Succinct-Winner, V is represented succinctly, and
for E-Weighted-Winner, the election is weighted.
A scoring vector α1 , α2 , . . . , αm , αi ≥ αi+1 deﬁnes an
election system over m candidates. Each candidate receives
αi points for each vote where they are ranked ith, and the
candidate(s) with the highest score win.
A pure scoring rule deﬁnes a family of scoring vectors
where the m-candidate scoring vector can be computed in
polynomial time in m, and the m + 1-candidate scoring vector can be obtained from the m-candidate scoring vector by
adding a single coefﬁcient (Betzler and Dorn 2009).
Control denotes the family of manipulative actions that
consider an agent with control over the structure of the
election who wants to ensure his or her preferred outcome (Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1992). Constructive control by adding voters (CCAV) is a very natural case of control and can be thought of as modeling get-out-the-vote
drives, and is deﬁned as follows: Given a set of candidates
C, a list of registered voters V , a list of unregistered voters
U , an add limit k, and a preferred candidate p ∈ C, does

Introduction

Elections are an important and widely used tool for determining an outcome given the preferences of several agents.
It is well known that every reasonable election system is manipulable, however, it may be computationally infeasible to
determine if such a manipulation exists. Bartholdi, Tovey,
and Trick (1989) started the computational study of manipulation problem and later introduced the study of a family
of manipulative attacks, denoted control, which models the
actions of an election chair with control over the structure
of the election who wants to ensure his or her preferred outcome (Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick 1992).
In most of the computational studies on elections, the
preferences of the voters are represented as a list of votes.
Though this may be a reasonable representation for paper
ballots in political elections, in artiﬁcial intelligence applications a more succinct representation where the preferences
of the electorate are represented as a list of distinct votes
and their counts may be more natural. For example, this
representation is used by the online preference repository
P REF L IB for election data (Mattei and Walsh 2013).
We consider how this succinct representation of the votes
can affect the complexity of different election problems, and
contrast this with the case of weighted voters.
Though the succinct representation may be exponentially
smaller than the nonsuccinct representation, we ﬁnd that
in surprisingly few cases the complexity increases. Related
work that considers succinct votes did not ﬁnd a case where
the complexity increases (Faliszewski et al. 2009; Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2009; Hemaspaandra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe 2009; Faliszewski et al.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4921

