Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Parallel Asynchronous Stochastic
Variance Reduction for Nonconvex Optimization
Cong Fang, Zhouchen Lin∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, P. R. China
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, P. R. China
fangcong@pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn

where fi (i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}) have L-Lipschitz continuous
gradient (L > 0) but can be nonconvex and n is the number
of functions. A large number of models can be formulated as
Eq. (1), such as neural networks, dictionary learning, and inference in graphical models (Allen-Zhu and Hazan 2016). In
this paper, we focus on algorithms that can efﬁciently reach
a stationary point satisfying ∇f (x)2 ≤  , which is a common benchmark for nonconvex algorithms.
The standard method to solve Eq. (1) is through Gradient
Descent (GD) and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In
large-scale problems, SGD is faster in practice, since it randomly chooses only one sample to estimate the gradient during each update. However, its provable convergence rate is
slower than GD. The Incremental First-order Oracles (IFOs)
complexity for GD and SGD to reach a stationary point are
O( n ) and O( σ2 ), respectively, where σ is the variance of
stochastic gradient (Ghadimi and Lan 2013).
Variance Reduction (VR) methods are one of the great
varieties of SGD methods which ensure the descent direction to have a bounded variance and so can achieve a much
faster convergence rate compared with SGD. (Johnson and
Zhang 2013) ﬁrst propose the Stochastic Variance Reduced
Gradient (SVRG) algorithm and prove that the algorithm
has a linear convergence rate instead of a sublinear rate for
SGD, for strongly convex problems. They have also done a
compelling experiment on neural networks to demonstrate
the advantage on nonconvex problems. Recently, there are
much research (Reddi et al. 2016), (Allen-Zhu and Hazan
2016) that carefully analyse SVRG on nonconvex optimization problems. They both prove that SVRG convergences in

Abstract
Nowadays, asynchronous parallel algorithms have received
much attention in the optimization ﬁeld due to the crucial demands for modern large-scale optimization problems. However, most asynchronous algorithms focus on convex problems. Analysis on nonconvex problems is lacking. For the Asynchronous Stochastic Descent (ASGD) algorithm, the best result from (Lian et al. 2015) can only
achieve an asymptotic O( 12 ) rate (convergence to the stationary points, namely, ∇f (x)2 ≤ ) on nonconvex
problems. In this paper, we study Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient (SVRG) in the asynchronous setting. We propose the Asynchronous Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient (ASVRG) algorithm for nonconvex ﬁnite-sum problems. We develop two schemes for ASVRG, depending on
whether the parameters are updated as an atom or not. We
prove that both of the two schemes can achieve linear speed
2

up1 (a non-asymptotic O( n3 ) rate to the stationary points)
1
for nonconvex problems when the delay parameter τ ≤ n 3 ,
where n is the number of training samples. We also estab2

1

lish a non-asymptotic O( n 3τ 3 ) rate (convergence to the stationary points) for our algorithm without assumptions on τ .
This further demonstrates that even with asynchronous updating, SVRG has less number of Incremental First-order Oracles (IFOs) compared with Stochastic Gradient Descent and
Gradient Descent. We also conduct experiments on a shared
memory multi-core system to demonstrate the efﬁciency of
our algorithm.

Introduction

2

We study nonconvex ﬁnite-sum problems of the form:
1
fi (x),
n i=1
n

min f (x) =

x∈Rd

1

O( n3 ) for nonconvex problems, which is at least O(n 3 )
faster than GD.
On the other hand, to meet the requirement for modern
large-scale problems, asynchronous parallel algorithms have
received much attention, e.g., Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (ASGD) (Niu et al. 2011),(Agarwal and Duchi
2011), (Lian et al. 2015), Asynchronous Coordinate Descent (Liu et al. 2015), Asynchronous Dual Coordinate Descent (Hsieh, Yu, and Dhillon 2015), and Asynchronous Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (Zhang and Kwok
2014). Most existing asynchronous methods focus on convex optimization. So the analysis on large-scale nonconvex
problems, such as neural networks, is lacking. On nonconvex problems, the ASGD algorithm (Lian et al. 2015) can

(1)

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The linear speed up means that if we use τ cores to solve a
problem, it will be at least ατ times faster than using only one core
to solve this problem (α > 0). It indicates that the asynchronous
algorithm can still maintain the same convergence rate with the
serial algorithm when we ignore the constant in the convergence
rate.

794

