Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Proper Proxy Scoring Rules
Jens Witkowski

Pavel Atanasov

Lyle H. Ungar

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
jensw@inf.ethz.ch

Pytho LLC
pavel@pytho.io

University of Pennsylvania
ungar@cis.upenn.edu

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Yemen (Atanasov et al. 2016). Here, proper scoring is important to incentivize forecasters to invest effort and report
truthfully, and to judge the relative accuracy of forecasts.
For proper scoring rules to be applicable, the forecasting system requires the resolved outcomes of the events that
forecasters reported on. In this paper, we introduce proxy
scoring rules, which generalize proper scoring rules and,
given access to an appropriate proxy, allow for immediate
scoring of probabilistic forecasts, i.e., right after elicitation
and before outcome resolution. This is important for a number of applications. In forecast aggregation, for example, it is
known that using weighted averages, where more weight is
put on more accurate forecasters, outperforms simple averaging of forecasts (Atanasov et al. 2016). To make this work
with proper scoring rules, one requires early-closing questions, which can then inform the weighting of forecasters
for other questions. Often, however, many questions close at
the same time. Consider for example forecasting the majority party in each of the 50 US states in a presidential election.
Voting closes on the same day in all states, and so the system
does not obtain forecaster accuracy information in time to
improve aggregation through forecaster weighting. Or consider the challenge of scoring long-term questions, such as
“Will humanity have traveled to Mars by 2030?” Applying
proper scoring rules to such questions would require forecasters to wait for payment until 2030. It is unlikely that
forecasters have the patience and trust in the continued existence of the system that this would require. Or consider
the problem of hiring intelligence agents based on their accuracy in forecasting geopolitical events. It is not feasible
to wait until a sufﬁcient number of questions have been resolved before making a hiring decision. Instead, the intelligence agency requires immediate feedback on the accuracy
of the candidate.
In addition to proper scoring rules, proxy scoring rules
are related to peer prediction mechanisms (Miller, Resnick,
and Zeckhauser 2005; Prelec 2004; Jurca 2007; Witkowski
2014; Waggoner and Chen 2014), where the system seeks
to incentivize agents to report private information without
being able to verify the truthfulness of their reports. Peer
prediction is related to our approach in that agents are not
scored against an outcome of ground truth but a proxy event
(in the case of peer prediction, this is another agent’s report). The boundary between this work and peer prediction

Abstract
Proper scoring rules can be used to incentivize a forecaster
to truthfully report her private beliefs about the probabilities
of future events and to evaluate the relative accuracy of forecasters. While standard scoring rules can score forecasts only
once the associated events have been resolved, many applications would beneﬁt from instant access to proper scores.
In forecast aggregation, for example, it is known that using
weighted averages, where more weight is put on more accurate forecasters, outperforms simple averaging of forecasts.
We introduce proxy scoring rules, which generalize proper
scoring rules and, given access to an appropriate proxy, allow
for immediate scoring of probabilistic forecasts. In particular, we suggest a proxy-scoring generalization of the popular
quadratic scoring rule, and characterize its incentive and accuracy evaluation properties theoretically. Moreover, we thoroughly evaluate it experimentally using data from a large real
world geopolitical forecasting tournament, and show that it
is competitive with proper scoring rules when the number of
questions is small.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of evaluating the accuracy of probabilistic forecasts. This is typically done using proper scoring rules (Brier 1950; Good 1952; Gneiting and Raftery
2007), which are used in two ways. First, they are used as
incentive mechanisms that truthfully elicit an agent’s private belief about the outcome of a future event. Second,
they are used as an accuracy evaluation mechanism to judge
the accuracy of probabilistic forecasts even if incentives are
not a concern. The incentive and the evaluation aspect of
proper scoring rules are two sides of the same coin, and
often both are required. For example, proper scoring rules
have a long history in meteorology for comparing the relative accuracy of competing weather forecasters (Brier 1950;
Good 1952). While the primary goal is evaluating accuracy, it is important that weather services are not incentivized to misreport their true estimates. Another example
is geopolitical forecasting, where forecasters are asked to
report probabilistic estimates of the likelihood of geopolitical events, such as the probability of a military coup in
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

743

