Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multivariate Hawkes Processes for Large-Scale Inference
Rémi Lemonnier,1,2 Kevin Scaman,1,3 Argyris Kalogeratos1
1

CMLA – ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, France
2
Numberly, 1000Mercis group, Paris, France
3
Microsoft Research – Inria Joint Center, Palaiseau, France
{lemonnier,scaman,kalogeratos}@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

MHP, an event of type u (e.g. a visit to a product’s website) occurring at time t, will increase the conditional occurrence rate of events of type v at time s ≥ t (e.g. purchases of
that product in the future) by a rate guv (s − t). Despite these
processes have been extensively studied from the probabilistic point of view (stability (Brémaud and Massoulié 1996),
cluster representation (Bordenave and Torrisi 2007)), their
application to real-scale datasets remains quite challenging.
For instance, social interactions data is at the same time big
(large number of posts), high-dimensional (large number of
users), and structured (social network).
Several nonparametric estimation procedures have been
proposed for MHP. relying on approaches such as moment
matching (Bacry and Muzy 2014; 2016), least-squares error minimization (Hansen, Reynaud-Bouret, and Rivoirard
2015), or log-likelihood maximization (Zhou, Zha, and Song
2013b). Regardless to the approach each of those works
adopts, the dependence of the stochastic occurrence rate at
a given time on all past occurrences, and the fact that all
d2 triggering kernels guv need to be estimated, do imply
that all these methods are quadratic in the number of events
n as well as the number of dimensions d. Therefore, they
quite impractical for large datasets. Subsequent works aimed
naturally at increasing scalability. In order to reduce complexity towards O(n), a nonparametric estimation procedure
linear in the number of events was proposed in (Lemonnier and Vayatis 2014), relying on the memoryless property of Hawkes processes with exponential triggering kernels, thus achieving an overall complexity of O(nd2 ). Moreover, several other works (Tran et al. 2015; Du et al. 2015;
Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016) managed a complexity in
O(n2 d) by imposing a low-rank structure to the amplitude of
the mutual excitation, while keeping a ﬁxed temporal excitation pattern. Although these methods may exhibit a linear
complexity in d, they only impose a community structure to
the network via a low-rank assumption on the adjacency matrix, instead of learning an excitation function for each group
independently. Note that this difference is signiﬁcant since
learning independent excitation functions allows to uncover
groups of users sharing a similar “role” (e.g. inﬂuencer vs
inﬂuencee), instead of mere clusters of densely connected
nodes in the network.
In this paper we introduce the Scalable Low-Rank Hawkes
Processes (SLRHP) model for structured point processes,

Abstract
In this paper, we present a framework for ﬁtting multivariate
Hawkes processes for large-scale problems, both in the number of events in the observed history n and the number of
event types d (i.e. dimensions). The proposed Scalable LowRank Hawkes Process (SLRHP) framework introduces a lowrank approximation of the kernel matrix that allows to perform the nonparametric learning of the d2 triggering kernels
in at most O(ndr2 ) operations, where r is the rank of the approximation (r  d, n). This comes as a major improvement
to the existing state-of-the-art inference algorithms that require O(nd2 ) operations. Furthermore, the low-rank approximation allows SLRHP to learn representative patterns of interaction between event types, which is usually valuable for
the analysis of complex processes in real-world networks.

Introduction
In many real-world phenomena, such as product adoption or
information sharing, events exhibit a mutually-exciting behavior, in the sense that the occurrence of one event can increase the occurrence rate of other events. In the ﬁeld of internet marketing, a client’s purchasing behavior on one online shopping website can be, to a large extent, predicted
by his past navigation history on other websites. In ﬁnance,
arrivals of buying and selling orders for different stocks
convey information about macroscopic market tendencies.
In the study of information propagation, users of a social
network share information, which leads to information cascades spreading throughout the social graph. Over the past
few years, the study of point processes gained attention
as the acquisition of such datasets by companies and research laboratories became simpler. However, the traditional
models for time series analysis, such as discrete-time autoregressive models, do not apply in this context due to the
fact that events happen in a continuous way.
Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHP) (Oakes 1975; Liniger 2009) have emerged in several ﬁelds as the gold standard to deal with such data, e.g. earthquake prediction (VereJones 1978), biology (Reynaud-Bouret et al. 2014), ﬁnancial
(Bauwens and Hautsch 2009; Alfonsi and Blanc 2015), and
social interactions studies (Crane and Sornette 2008). For
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2168

