Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Latent Tree Analysis
Nevin L. Zhang

Leonard K. M. Poon

Department of Computer Science & Engineering Department of Mathematics & Information Technology
The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology
The Education University of Hong Kong
lzhang@cse.ust.hk
kmpoon@eduhk.hk

variables have the same number of possible states.
LTA also provides new and fruitful perspectives on a number of machine learning areas. One area is cluster analysis. Here ﬁnite mixture models such as LCMs are commonly used. A ﬁnite mixture model has one latent variable and consequently it gives one soft partition of data.
An LTM typically has multiple latent variables and hence
LTA yields multiple soft partitions of data simultaneously.
In other words, LTA performs multidimensional clustering
(Chen et al. 2012), (Liu et al. 2013). It is interesting because
complex data usually have multiple facets and can be meaningfully clustered in multiple ways.
Another area is topic detection. Applying LTA to text
data, we can partition a collection of documents in multiple ways. The document clusters in the partitions can be interpreted as topics. Furthermore, it is possible to learn hierarchical LTMs where the latent variables are organized
into multiple layers. This leads to an alternative method for
hierarchical topic detection (Liu, Zhang, and Chen 2014;
?), which has been shown to ﬁnd more meaningful topics
and topic hierarchies than the state-of-the-art method based
on latent Dirichlet allocation (Paisley et al. 2015).
The third area is deep probabilistic modeling. Hierarchical LTM and deep belief network (DBN) (Hinton, Osindero,
and Teh 2006) are similar in that they both consist of multiple layers of variables, with an observed layer at the bottom and multiple layers of hidden units on top of it. One
difference is that, in DBN, units from adjacent layers are
fully connected, while HLTM is tree-structured. It would be
interesting to explore the middle ground between the two
extreme and develop algorithms for learning what might be
called sparse DBNs. Learning structures for deep models is
an interesting open problem. Extension of LTA might offer
one solution (Chen et al. 2017).
The concept of latent tree models was introduced
in (Zhang 2002), (Zhang 2004), where they were referred
to as hierarchical latent class models. The term “latent tree
models” ﬁrst appeared in (Zhang et al. 2008), (Wang, Zhang,
and Chen 2008). (Mourad et al. 2013) surveyed the research
on latent tree models as of 2012 in details. This paper provides a concise overview of the methodology. The exposition are more conceptual and less technical than (Mourad et
al. 2013). Developments after 2012 are also included.

Abstract
Latent tree analysis seeks to model the correlations among
a set of random variables using a tree of latent variables. It
was proposed as an improvement to latent class analysis — a
method widely used in social sciences and medicine to identify homogeneous subgroups in a population. It provides new
and fruitful perspectives on a number of machine learning
areas, including cluster analysis, topic detection, and deep
probabilistic modeling. This paper gives an overview of the
research on latent tree analysis and various ways it is used in
practice.

Much of machine learning is about modeling and utilizing
correlations among variables. In classiﬁcation, the task is to
establish relationships between attributes and class variables
so that unseen data can be classiﬁed accurately. In Bayesian
networks, dependencies among variables are represented as
directed acyclic graphs and the graphs are used to facilitate
efﬁcient probabilistic inference. In topic models, word cooccurrences are accounted for by assuming that all words are
generated probabilistically from the same set of topics, and
the generation process is reverted via statistical inference to
determine the topics. In deep belief networks, correlations
among observed units are modeled using multiple levels of
hidden units, and the top-level hidden units are used as a
representation of the data for further analysis.
Latent tree analysis (LTA) seeks to model the correlations
among a set of observed variables using a tree model, called
latent tree model (LTM), where the leaf nodes represent observed variables and the internal nodes represent latent variables.The dependence between two observed variables is explained by the path between them.
Despite their simplicity, LTMs subsume two classes of
models widely used in academic research. The ﬁrst one is
latent class models (LCMs) (Lazarsfeld and Henry 1968),
(Knott and Bartholomew 1999), which are LTMs with a single latent variable. They are used for categorical data clustering in social sciences and medicine. The second class is
probabilistic phylogenetic trees (Durbin et al. 1998), which
are a tool for determining the evolution history of a set
of species. Phylogenetic trees are special LTMs where the
model structures are binary (bifurcating) trees and all the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4891

