Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Crowdsourced Outcome Determination in Prediction Markets
Rupert Freeman

Sébastien Lahaie

David M. Pennock

Duke University
rupert@cs.duke.edu

Microsoft Research
slahaie@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research
dpennock@microsoft.com

own stake in the market; this is known as outcome manipulation (Shi, Conitzer, and Guo 2009; Berg and Rietz 2006;
Chakraborty and Das 2016). Additionally, by allowing anyone to create a market, there is no longer any guarantee that
all questions will be sensible, or even have a well-deﬁned outcome. In this paper, we propose a speciﬁc prediction market
mechanism with crowdsourced outcome determination that
addresses several challenges faced by decentralized markets
of this sort.

Abstract
A prediction market is a useful means of aggregating information about a future event. To function, the market needs
a trusted entity who will verify the true outcome in the end.
Motivated by the recent introduction of decentralized prediction markets, we introduce a mechanism that allows for the
outcome to be determined by the votes of a group of arbiters
who may themselves hold stakes in the market. Despite the
potential conﬂict of interest, we derive conditions under which
we can incentivize arbiters to vote truthfully by using funds
raised from market fees to implement a peer prediction mechanism. Finally, we investigate what parameter values could be
used in a real-world implementation of our mechanism.

1

First is the issue of outcome ambiguity. At the time the
market closes, it might be unreasonable to assign a binary
value to the event outcome due to lack of clarity in the outcome. In a centralized market, it may be possible to postpone
the market closing date to allow for rare cases of ambiguity,
but it is not clear who should make such decisions in a decentralized marketplace. Therefore, it may be more ﬁtting to
allow outcomes to be non-binary, reﬂecting some level of disagreement. Outcomes in our mechanism are determined by
the fraction of arbiters that report an event to have occurred.
This also guarantees that every market is well-deﬁned, by
having traders explicitly trade on their expectations of the
arbiter reports, not the actual event.

Introduction

Prediction markets are commonly used to elicit information about some future event. The market operates by allowing participants to buy and sell securities which pay
off according to the outcome of the event, and participants with an informational edge are able to place profitable trades when the market price disagrees with their
own forecast. Through this trading process, the market
price can be construed as a consensus forecast of the underlying event probability. Prediction markets have proven
effective at forecasting events in a variety of domains,
including business and politics (Spann and Skiera 2003;
Berg and Rietz 2006).
A key challenge in implementing and scaling prediction
markets is the question of outcome determination (i.e., closing markets for events). Traditional prediction markets are
centralized, in the sense that there exists a trusted center that
creates markets, oversees transactions, and closes the market
appropriately. The trusted center is a bottleneck for deﬁning
and closing markets, limiting the scope of what can be predicted. However, there has recently been a rise of interest in
decentralized prediction markets, where any user may create
a market for an event. The markets are closed by consensus
among a group of arbiters rather than by a center.
A decentralized platform removes the requirement for a
highly trusted center, but it also allows each arbiter to directly
inﬂuence the outcome of the market, in much the same way
that agents may deliberately manipulate an event due to their

Second is the problem of peer prediction. For the credibility of the market, it is essential that arbiters are incentivized
to truthfully report their opinion as to the realized outcome.
If, for instance, we reward arbiters for agreeing with the majority opinion, then they are forced to anticipate the reports of
other arbiters, not their independent opinion. We address this
problem by making a technical change to an existing peer
prediction mechanism, the 1/prior mechanism.
Third is the inherent conﬂict of interest that arises by combining prediction markets and peer prediction mechanisms.
Even if arbiters can be incentivized to report truthfully in
isolation, there is no way to prevent them also having a stake
in the market. An arbiter holding securities that pay off in a
particular event will be incentivized to report that the event
has occurred, even if they do not genuinely believe it to be
the case, as long as they have a chance of affecting the market
outcome. We tackle this issue by charging a trading fee that
is later used to pay the arbiters. We show that, as long as
each agent is responsible for a limited fraction of trading, and
questions are clear enough, realistic trading fees can fully
subsidize truthful reporting on the part of the arbiters.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

523

