Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Auto-Annotation of 3D Objects via ImageNet
Huan Luo, Cheng Wang, Jonathan Li
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities
School of Information Science and Engineering
Xiamen University, Xiamen, FJ 361005
scholar.luo@gmail.com, {cwang, junli}@xmu.edu.cn

High-resolution
Camera

Abstract
Automatic annotation of 3D objects in cluttered scenes shows
its great importance to a variety of applications. Nowadays,
3D point clouds, a new 3D representation of real-world objects, can be easily and rapidly collected by mobile LiDAR
systems, e.g. RIEGL VMX-450 system. Moreover, the mobile LiDAR system can also provide a series of consecutive
multi-view images which are calibrated with 3D point clouds.
This paper proposes to automatically annotate 3D objects of
interest in point clouds of road scenes by exploiting a multitude of annotated images in image databases, such as LabelMe and ImageNet. In the proposed method, an object detector trained on the annotated images is used to locate the
object regions in acquired multi-view images. Then, based
on the correspondences between multi-view images and 3D
point clouds, a probabilistic graphical model is used to model
the temporal, spatial and geometric constraints to extract the
3D objects automatically. A new dataset was built for evaluation and the experimental results demonstrate a satisﬁed
performance on 3D object extraction.

Laser Scanner

GPS Antenna

(b)

(a)

Figure 1: (a) mobile LiDAR system with four highresolution cameras and two laser scanners; (b) multi-view
images taken from distinctive angles and distances.
cameras, a series of consecutive images (calibrated with 3D
point clouds) are captured to provide textual/color information of objects in a scene from different viewpoints and distinctive points in time.
This paper presents a method to automatically annotate
3D objects from point clouds by building a bridge to connect the image databases with 3D point clouds. More specifically, we ﬁrstly use Faster-RCNN (Ren et al. 2015) to train
an object-speciﬁc detector on ImageNet for transferring category labels from ImageNet to reference images (the multiview images registered with 3D point clouds). Then, the
trained object detector is used to locate the object regions in
the reference images. After that, through correspondences
between superpixels from reference images and the supervoxel from 3D point clouds, we impose the temporal, spatial and geometric constraints on labels of 3D objects by exploiting a probabilistic graphical model. Finally, the graphical model is effectively solved to generate the annotated 3D
objects.

Introduction
Nowadays, along with the booming of deep learning used in
3D applications, such as 3D object classiﬁcation and detection, the need for large amounts of annotated 3D data becomes increasingly urgent for model learning. Commonly,
the acquisition of such annotations is time-consuming and
labor-intensive. Fortunately, web image databases, such as
LableMe and ImageNet, provide abundant annotations for a
multitude of digital images which cover a variety of scenarios. Exploiting these tagged image databases to accomplish
automatic annotation of 3D objects in cluttered scenes shows
a bright prospect in many applications.
In recent years, with the rapid development of Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) technologies, large-scale road
scenes are now depicted by large volumes of highly dense
and accurate 3D point clouds that are collected by mobile LiDAR systems. By smoothly integrating laser scanners with position and orientation systems, mobile LiDAR
systems can rapidly capture undistorted 3D point clouds
with real-world coordinates (See Fig. 1). Moreover, with
complementary onboard multi-view high-resolution digital

Method
The whole processing ﬂow of our proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 2. The remaining section focuses on building a
probabilistic graphical model among the superpixels and supervoxels. Let P and L denote the set of superpixels generated from reference images and the set of supervoxels generated from point clouds scenes, respectively. For each superpixel i ∈ P and each supervoxel l ∈ L, we denote variables
si and sl taking values from the category labels S = {1, 0}.
Here, 1 and 0 represent the category of object of
interest and
background, respectively. Let s = {si |i ∈ P} {sl |l ∈ L},

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4965

