Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Weakly-Supervised Deep Nonnegative Low-Rank
Model for Social Image Tag Reﬁnement and Assignment
Zechao Li, Jinhui Tang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
No. 200 Xiaolingwei Road, Nanjing, China 210094
{zechao.li, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn

images. The tag relevance is estimated based on the neighbor voting model (Li, Snoek, and Worring 2009). The low
rank model is exploited in (Zhu, Yan, and Ma 2010) by
considering the semantic consistency and the visual consistency while a latent space is uncovered based on low
rank approximation to connect the visual features of images and tags in (Qi et al. 2012). In (Wu, Jin, and Jain
2013), the relevance between images and tags is estimated
by considering the observed image-tag relation and the visual information. Tag completion is implemented by two
types of linear sparse reconstructions in (Feng et al. 2014).
Social image metadata is used to ﬁnd neighborhoods and
a deep neural network is utilized to blend visual information from the image and its neighbors in (Johnson, Ballan, and Fei-Fei 2015). This work focuses on the lowrank model for social image tag reﬁnement and assignment. The most works are ones in (Zhu, Yan, and Ma 2010;
Feng et al. 2014). However, they are not able to link the visual information and the learned low-rank space. That is, the
scalability of these methods is limited.

Abstract
It has been well known that the user-provided tags of social images are imperfect, i.e., there exist noisy, irrelevant
or incomplete tags. It heavily degrades the performance of
many multimedia tasks. To alleviate this problem, we propose
a Weakly-supervised Deep Nonnegative Low-rank model
(WDNL) to improve the quality of tags by integrating the
low-rank model with deep feature learning. A nonnegative
low-rank model is introduced to uncover the intrinsic relationships between images and tags by simultaneously removing noisy or irrelevant tags and complementing missing tags.
The deep architecture is leveraged to seamlessly connect the
visual content and the semantic tag. That is, the proposed
model can well handle the scalability by assigning tags to
new images. Extensive experiments conducted on two realworld datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method compared with some state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Image Tagging (or automatic image annotation) is an essential component of image search systems by estimating
the semantic relationships between tags and images. Traditional methods (Barnard et al. 2003; Wong and Leung 2008;
Makadia, Pavlovic, and Kumar 2010; Li et al. 2010; Yang,
Jing, and Ng 2015) are always based on huge human-labeled
training images and difﬁcult to scale. Recent years have witnessed the proliferation of digital images on the social media
websites, which poses a great challenge for the traditional
image tagging. This challenge can be somewhat alleviated
by the user-provided tags. Unfortunately, these tags are often incomplete or inaccurate in describing the visual content
of images. That is, the user-provided tags are weakly supervised. What is more, a large fraction (over 50% in Flickr)
of images have no tags at all (Chen, Zheng, and Weinberger
2013). Therefore, it is necessary to improve the quality of
tags by complementing relevant tags and removing irrelevant tags, and assign tags to new images.
Some works (Li, Snoek, and Worring 2009; Zhu, Yan,
and Ma 2010; Qi et al. 2012; Wu, Jin, and Jain 2013;
Feng et al. 2014; Johnson, Ballan, and Fei-Fei 2015; Tang
et al. 2016a) have been proposed to reﬁne tags of social

Towards this end, this work tries to simultaneously addresses the problems of image tag reﬁnement and tag
assignment assigning tags to new images, and proposes
a novel Weakly-supervised Deep Nonnegative Low-rank
Model (WDNL) as shown in Figure 1. The proposed model
can seamlessly bridge the visual information and the semantic tags. To learn better relationships between images and
tags, an ideal image-tag relation matrix is introduced by requiring that it should be low rank and each element is nonnegative. It is natural and reasonable because tags as one
kind of text information are subject to the low-rank property (Zhao and Grosky 2002) and the intrinsic relationships
between images and tags are nonnegative according to its
deﬁnition. Thus, a nonnegative low-rank model is proposed
to formulate the above motivation. To link the visual information and the ideal tags, a deep architecture is leveraged by
learning discriminative features from images, and the ideal
tags can be easily predicted with the learned features using
a linear transformation matrix. The above components are
formulated into a joint deep learning framework. Extensive
experiments are conducted on two widely used datasets, and
the results compared with some state-of-the-arts verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method. Generally, the main
contributions of this work are summarized as follows.

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4154

