Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Online Model Adaptation
by Incremental Simplex Tableau
Zhixian Lei,1 Xuehan Ye,2 Yongcai Wang,2∗ Deying Li,2 Jia Xu3
1

2

Department of Computer Sciences, Harward University, USA;
Department of Computer Sciences, Renmin University of China, Beijing;
3
Department of Computer Sciences, City University of New York, USA

ple sources or in different metric spaces, requiring adaptive
feature selection and weighting (Hong, Suh, and Kim 2009).
Model learning from multiple features of different metric
spaces, was traditionally, mainly studied in ofﬂine feature
selection (Baram 2005) (Huang and Chow 2005). Automatic
and adaptive feature weighting was proposed by multikernel learning (MKL)(Sonnenburg et al. 2006) (Gönen and
Alpaydin 2011), which learns an optimal linear or non-linear
combination of a set of predeﬁned kernels to reduce the bias
of manually weighting.
The ﬂexibility of adaptively multiple feature weighting by
combining multiple kernels enables recent studies for online
multiple kernel learning (OMKL) (Martins et al. 2011)(Hoi
et al. 2012)(Wang et al. 2015). OMKL generally composes
two online learning sub-problems: 1) perception (Freund
and Schapire 1999) , to train a basic classiﬁer (BC) for each
given kernel; and 2) combination, which is to weight and
combine the BCs to generate a combined, more accurate
classiﬁer. Since the training of the BCs and the optimization of the combining weights for BCs are generally coupled, which involves quadratic programming(Lanckriet et al.
2004) or semi-inﬁnite linear programming (Sonnenburg et
al. 2006)(Rakotomamonjy et al. 2007), OMKL is generally
computation extensive, even in ofﬂine training. Therefore,
seeking efﬁciency is the major focus of current OMKL algorithms.
A major approach for efﬁciency is to decouple the perception and the classiﬁer combination steps by training the BCs
ofﬂine. This reduces the online learning problem to only
adapt the combination weights based on the online training
data (Kembhavi et al. 2009) (Orabona et al. 2010) (Jin, Hoi,
and Yang 2010). The key idea is to increase the weights for
the BCs whose outputs coincide with the online collected
training data, and to decrease if inconsistent (Chaudhuri,
Freund, and Hsu 2009)(Kembhavi et al. 2009).
But a key challenge of focusing on efﬁciency is the lack
of guarantee on the responding speed. Like in hedge(Chaudhuri, Freund, and Hsu 2009)(Freund and Schapire 1997), the
model coefﬁcients are updated only one time when a training
data is applied. The accurate adaptation thus requires corrections by many training instances, leading to slow adaptation.
This paper, instead, seeks efﬁcient, speedy, and optimal online adapation. It at ﬁrst proposes an incremental simplex
tableau (IST) algorithm, which can produce the optimal lin-

Abstract
Online multi-kernel learning is promising in the era of mobile
computing, in which a combined classiﬁer with multiple kernels are ofﬂine trained, and online adapts to personalized features for serving the end user precisely and smartly. The online adaptation is mainly carried out at the end-devices, which
requires the adaptation algorithms to be light, efﬁcient and
accurate. Previous results focused mainly on efﬁciency. This
paper proposes an novel online model adaptation framework
for not only efﬁciency but also optimal online adaptation.
At ﬁrst, an online optimal incremental simplex tableau (IST)
algorithm is proposed, which approaches the model adaption
by linear programming and produces the optimized model update in each step when a personalized training data is collected. But keeping online optimal in each step is expensive
and may cause over-ﬁtting especially when the online data
is noisy. A Fast-IST approach is therefore proposed, which
measures the deviation between the training data and the current model. It schedules updating only when enough deviation is detected. The efﬁciency of each update is further enhanced by running IST only limited iterations, which bounds
the computation complexity. Theoretical analysis and extensive evaluations show that Fast-IST saves computation cost
greatly, while achieving speedy and accurate model adaptation. It provides better model adaptation speed and accuracy
while using even lower computing cost than the state-of-theart.

Introduction
Online adaptive learning is widely required in the era of mobile and wearable computing(Song et al. 2014), in which a
classiﬁer, generally trained ofﬂine, needs to adapt to the personalized features after being delivered to end users. The
goal is to serve the end users precisely and smartly (Gu,
Pung, and Zhang 2005).
Challenges are posed from three aspects: 1) the online
model adaptation is mainly carried out at the end devices,
requiring the adaptation algorithms to be efﬁcient for energy efﬁciency etc. 2) The personalized online training data
is generally noisy, challenging the adaptation speed and the
risk of over-ﬁtting. 3) The training data comes from multi∗

corresponding author: Yongcai Wang, ycw@ruc.edu.cn
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2161

