Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Neural Machine Translation with Reconstruction
Zhaopeng Tu,† Yang Liu,‡ Lifeng Shang,† Xiaohua Liu, † Hang Li†
†

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Hong Kong
{tu.zhaopeng,shang.lifeng,liuxiaohua3,hangli.hl}@huawei.com
‡
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn

duoge jichang beipo guanbi .

Abstract
Although end-to-end Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has
achieved remarkable progress in the past two years, it suffers
from a major drawback: translations generated by NMT systems often lack of adequacy. It has been widely observed that
NMT tends to repeatedly translate some source words while
mistakenly ignoring other words. To alleviate this problem,
we propose a novel encoder-decoder-reconstructor framework for NMT. The reconstructor, incorporated into the NMT
model, manages to reconstruct the input source sentence from
the hidden layer of the output target sentence, to ensure that
the information in the source side is transformed to the target
side as much as possible. Experiments show that the proposed
framework signiﬁcantly improves the adequacy of NMT output and achieves superior translation result over state-of-theart NMT and statistical MT systems.

reconstructor

reconstruction

Many airports were forced to close .
encoder-decoder


R(x|s)


P(y|x)

translation

duoge jichang beipo guanbi .





Figure 1: Example of NMT with reconstruction. Our idea
is to leverage reconstruction score R(x|s) as an auxiliary
objective to measure the adequacy of translation candidate,
where s is the target-side hidden layer in decoder for generating the translation y. Linear interpolation of likelihood
score P (y|x) and reconstruction score is used to (1) improve
parameter learning for generating better translation candidates in training, and (2) conduct better rerank of generated
candidates in testing.

Introduction
Past several years have observed a signiﬁcant progress
in Neural Machine Translation (NMT) (Kalchbrenner and
Blunsom 2013; Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). Particularly, NMT
has signiﬁcantly enhanced the performance of translation
between a language pair involving rich morphology prediction and/or signiﬁcant word reordering (Luong and Manning
2015; Bentivogli et al. 2016). Long Short-Term Memory
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) enables NMT to conduct long-distance reordering, which is a signiﬁcant challenge for Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) (Brown et
al. 1993; Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003).
Unlike SMT which employs a number of components,
NMT adopts an end-to-end encoder-decoder framework to
model the entire translation process. The role of encoder is
to summarize the source sentence into a sequence of latent
vectors, and the decoder acts as a language model to generate a target sentence word by word by selectively leveraging the information from the latent vectors at each step.
In learning, NMT essentially estimates the likelihood of a
target sentence given a source sentence.
However, conventional NMT faces two main problems:
1 Translations generated by NMT systems often lack of adequacy. When generating target words, the decoder often

repeatedly selects some parts of the source sentence while
ignoring other parts, which leads to over-translation and
under-translation (Tu et al. 2016b). This is mainly due to
that NMT does not have a mechanism to ensure that the
information in the source side is completely transformed
to the target side.
2 Likelihood objective is suboptimal in decoding. NMT
utilizes a beam search to ﬁnd a translation that maximizes the likelihood. However, we observe that likelihood favors short translations, and thus fails to distinguish good translation candidates from bad ones in a large
decoding space (e.g., beam size = 100). The main reason is that likelihood only captures unidirectional dependency from source to target, which does not correlate
well with translation adequacy (Li and Jurafsky 2016;
Shen et al. 2016).
While previous work partially solves the above problems, in this work we propose a novel encoder-decoderreconstructor model for NMT, aiming at alleviating these
problems in a uniﬁed framework. As shown in Figure 1,
given a Chinese sentence “duoge jichang beipo guanbi .”, the
standard encoder-decoder translates it into an English sentence and assigns a likelihood score. Then, the newly added

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3097

