Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Latent Subevents in Activity Videos
Using Temporal Attention Filters
A. J. Piergiovanni,∗ Chenyou Fan,∗ Michael S. Ryoo
School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408
{ajpierg,fan6,mryoo}@indiana.edu

for videos. Some approaches directly took advantage of
image-based CNN architectures by applying them to every
video frame (Jain, van Gemert, and Snoek 2014; Ng et al.
2015), while some tried to learn 3-D XYT spatio-temporal
convolutional ﬁlters from short video segments (Tran et al.
2015). In order to represent each video, temporal pooling
(e.g., max/average pooling) were often applied on top of
multiple (sampled) per-frame or per-video-segment CNNs
(Jain, van Gemert, and Snoek 2014; Karpathy et al. 2014;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Ng et al. 2015; Tran et al.
2015). Similar to the object recognition, these approaches
obtained superior results compared to traditional approaches
of using hand-crafted features.
However, in terms of learning and considering activities’ temporal structure in videos, previous CNN approaches
were limited. Many high-level activities are often composed of multiple temporal parts (i.e., sub-events) with different duration/speed, but approaches to learn explicit activity temporal structure together with CNN parameters
have not been studied in depth. For instance, the typical strategy of taking max (or average) pooling over sampled per-frame or per-segment CNN responses (Jain, van
Gemert, and Snoek 2014; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Ng et al. 2015; Tran et al. 2015) completely ignores such
temporal structure in longer activity videos. (Ryoo, Rothrock,
and Matthies 2015) showed a potential that making the
system consider multiple video sub-intervals using a temporal pyramid beneﬁts the recognition, but it was done
with predetermined intervals without any learning. LSTMbased recurrent neural network approaches (Ng et al. 2015;
Yeung et al. 2016) were able to process per-frame CNN responses sequentially, but no explicit sub-event or interval
learning was attempted.
What we need instead is an approach that explicitly ‘learns’
to focus on important sub-intervals of the activity videos
while also optimizing their temporal resolution for the recognition. This is a challenging problem since we want to make
this sub-event learning done in an end-to-end fashion together
with the training of underlying CNN parameters. Furthermore, it is often the case that ground truth labels of sub-events
to be learned are not provided, making them latent variables.
This paper presents a new video classiﬁcation approach
that overcomes such limitations using temporal attention
ﬁlters. We newly introduce the concept of fully differen-

Abstract
In this paper, we newly introduce the concept of temporal
attention ﬁlters, and describe how they can be used for human
activity recognition from videos. Many high-level activities are
often composed of multiple temporal parts (e.g., sub-events)
with different duration/speed, and our objective is to make the
model explicitly learn such temporal structure using multiple
attention ﬁlters and beneﬁt from them. Our temporal ﬁlters
are designed to be fully differentiable, allowing end-of-end
training of the temporal ﬁlters together with the underlying
frame-based or segment-based convolutional neural network
architectures. This paper presents an approach of learning a set
of optimal static temporal attention ﬁlters to be shared across
different videos, and extends this approach to dynamically
adjust attention ﬁlters per testing video using recurrent long
short-term memory networks (LSTMs). This allows our temporal attention ﬁlters to learn latent sub-events speciﬁc to each
activity. We experimentally conﬁrm that the proposed concept
of temporal attention ﬁlters beneﬁts the activity recognition,
and we visualize the learned latent sub-events.

Introduction
Human activity recognition is the problem of identifying
events performed by humans given a video input. It is formulated as a binary (or multiclass) classiﬁcation problem of
outputting activity class labels, and researchers have been
studying better features, representations, and learning algorithms to improve the classiﬁcation (Aggarwal and Ryoo
2011). Such classiﬁcation not only allows categorization of
videos pre-segmented to contain one single activity, but also
enables the ‘detection’ of activities from streaming videos together with temporal window proposal methods like the sliding window or selective search (Ryoo et al. 2015). Activity
recognition is an important problem with many societal applications including smart surveillance, video search/retrieval,
intelligent robots, and other monitoring systems.
Particularly, in the past 2-3 years, activity recognition
approaches taking advantage of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have received a great amount of attention.
Motivated by the success of image-based object recognition using CNNs, researchers attempted developing CNNs
∗

These authors contributed equally to the paper.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4247

