Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Manifold Learning of Symmetric Positive Deﬁnite
Matrices with Application to Face Recognition
Zhen Dong,1 Su Jia,2 Chi Zhang,1 Mingtao Pei,1 Yuwei Wu1∗
1. Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2. Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, USA
dongzhen@bit.edu.cn, su.jia@stonybrook.edu, {zhangchi, peimt, wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn
Abstract
log(<)

In this paper, we aim to construct a deep neural network
which embeds high dimensional symmetric positive deﬁnite
(SPD) matrices into a more discriminative low dimensional
SPD manifold. To this end, we develop two types of basic layers: a 2D fully connected layer which reduces the dimensionality of the SPD matrices, and a symmetrically clean layer
which achieves non-linear mapping. Speciﬁcally, we extend
the classical fully connected layer such that it is suitable for
SPD matrices, and we further show that SPD matrices with
symmetric pair elements setting zero operations are still symmetric positive deﬁnite. Finally, we complete the construction of the deep neural network for SPD manifold learning by
stacking the two layers. Experiments on several face datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Tangent Space

R D1

kernel

S n
SPD Manifold

RKHS

R D2

(a)
deep
network

S n

Introduction

S m
SPD Manifold

SPD Manifold

Symmetric positive deﬁnite (SPD) matrices have shown
powerful representation abilities of encoding image and
video information. In computer vision community, the SPD
matrix representation has been widely employed in many
applications, such as face recognition (Pang, Yuan, and Li
2008; Huang et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2015; Li et al. 2015),
object recognition (Tuzel, Porikli, and Meer 2006; Jayasumana et al. 2013; Harandi, Salzmann, and Hartley 2014;
Yin et al. 2016), action recognition (Harandi et al. 2016),
and visual tracking (Wu et al. 2015).
The SPD matrices form a Riemannian manifold, where
the Euclidean distance is no longer a suitable metric. Previous works on analyzing the SPD manifold mainly fall
into two categories: the local approximation method and
the kernel method, as shown in Figure 1(a). The local
approximation method (Tuzel, Porikli, and Meer 2006;
Sivalingam et al. 2009; Tosato et al. 2010; Carreira et al.
2012; Vemulapalli and Jacobs 2015) locally ﬂattens the
manifold and approximates the SPD matrix by a point of
the tangent space. The kernel method (Harandi et al. 2012;
Wang et al. 2012; Jayasumana et al. 2013; Li et al. 2013;
Quang, San Biagio, and Murino 2014; Yin et al. 2016) embeds the manifold into a higher dimensional Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) via kernel functions. On new

(b)

Figure 1: The comparison between our method and previous
methods on analyzing the SPD manifold. (a) Previous methods either locally ﬂatten the SPD manifold via tangent space
approximation, or embed the manifold into a higher dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert space. (b) Our method
aims to ﬁnd a non-linear mapping that projects high dimensional SPD matrices into a lower dimensional SPD manifold.

spaces, both methods convert the SPD matrix into a vector and learn a corresponding discriminative representation.
However, both local approximation and kernel methods face
two problems. First, the SPD matrices are high dimensional,
which brings the problem of high computational cost. Second, the vectorization operation on SPD matrices might give
rise to the distortion of the manifold geometrical structure.
To overcome the two problems mentioned above, we focus on learning a non-linear mapping which projects high dimensional SPD matrices to a low dimensional discriminative
SPD manifold, as shown in Figure 1(b). Recently, the deep
neural network has shown strong capability of describing
complex non-linear maps and been successfully applied on
many vision tasks, such as image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky,

∗

corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4009

