Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Importance Sampling with Unequal Support
Philip S. Thomas, Emma Brunskill
{philipt,ebrun}@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

More precisely, we consider the problem of estimating
θ := E[h(X)], where h is a real-valued function and the
expectation is over the random variable X, which is a sample from the target distribution. As input we assume access to n i.i.d. samples from a sampling distribution that is
different from the target distribution. A classical approach
to this problem is to use importance sampling (IS), which
reweights the observed samples to account for the difference
between the target and sampling distributions (Kahn 1955).
Importance sampling produces an unbiased but often highvariance estimate of θ.
We introduce importance sampling with unequal support
(US)—a simple new importance sampling estimator that can
drastically reduce the variance of importance sampling when
the supports of the sampling and target distributions differ.
This setting with unequal support can occur, for example,
in our earlier example where German documents might include symbols like ß, that the classiﬁer will not encounter.
US essentially performs importance sampling only on the
data that falls within the support of the target distribution,
and then scales this estimate by a constant that reﬂects the
relative support of the target and sampling distributions.
US typically has lower variance than ordinary importance
sampling (sometimes by orders of magnitude), and is unbiased in the important setting where at least one sample falls
within the support of the target distribution. If no samples
do, then none of the available data could have been generated by the target distribution, and so it is unclear what
would make for a reasonable estimate. Furthermore, the conditionally unbiased nature of US is sufﬁcient to allow for
its use with concentration inequalities like Hoeffding’s inequality to construct conﬁdence bounds on θ. By contrast,
weighted importance sampling (Rubinstein 1981) is another
variant of importance sampling that can reduce variance, but
which introduces bias that makes it incompatible with Hoeffding’s inequality.

Abstract
Importance sampling is often used in machine learning when
training and testing data come from different distributions.
In this paper we propose a new variant of importance sampling that can reduce the variance of importance samplingbased estimates by orders of magnitude when the supports
of the training and testing distributions differ. After motivating and presenting our new importance sampling estimator,
we provide a detailed theoretical analysis that characterizes
both its bias and variance relative to the ordinary importance
sampling estimator (in various settings, which include cases
where ordinary importance sampling is biased, while our new
estimator is not, and vice versa). We conclude with an example of how our new importance sampling estimator can be
used to improve estimates of how well a new treatment policy for diabetes will work for an individual, using only data
from when the individual used a previous treatment policy.

Introduction
A key challenge in artiﬁcial intelligence is to estimate the
expectation of a random variable. Instances of this problem
arise in areas ranging from planning and decision making
(e.g., estimating the expected sum of rewards produced by
a policy for decision making under uncertainty) to probabilistic inference. Although the estimation of an expected
value is straightforward if we can generate many independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples from the relevant probability distribution (which we refer to as the target distribution), we may not have generative access to the
target distribution. Instead, we might only have data from a
different distribution that we call the sampling distribution.
For example, in off-policy evaluation for reinforcement
learning, the goal is to estimate the expected sum of rewards
that a decision policy will produce, given only data gathered
using some other policy. Similarly, in supervised learning,
we may wish to predict the performance of a regressor or
classiﬁer if it were to be applied to data that comes from
a distribution that differs from the distribution of the available data (e.g., we might predict the accuracy of a classiﬁer
for hand-written letters given that observed letter frequencies come from English, using a corpus of labeled letters
collected from German documents).

Problem Setting and Importance Sampling
Let f and g be probability density functions (PDFs) for two
distributions that we call the target distribution and sampling distribution, respectively. Let h : R → R be called
the evaluation function. Let θ := Ef [h(X)], where Ef denotes the expected value given that f is the PDF of the random variable(s) in the expectation (in this case, just X). Let

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2646

