Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

OFFER: Off-Environment
Reinforcement Learning
Kamil Ciosek, Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
{kamil.ciosek,shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk

affect expected performance. For example, some rare wind
conditions may increase the risk of crashing the helicopter.
Since crashes are so catastrophic, avoiding them is key to
maximising expected performance, even though the wind
conditions contributing to the crash occur only rarely. In
such cases, the conventional approach does not see such rare
events often enough to learn an appropriate response.
In this paper, we propose a new policy gradient method
called off-environment reinforcement learning (OFFER) that
aims to address this deﬁciency. The main idea is to couple
the primary optimisation of the policy with the secondary
optimisation of a proposal distribution governing the environment variables. Since environment variables can be controlled in simulation, we are free to sample from the proposal
distribution when generating data for the primary optimisation. Thanks to importance sampling, the primary optimisation can retain unbiased gradient estimates. Just as off-policy
RL learns about a target policy while using a behaviour policy, off-environment RL learns about a target environment
(the true distribution over environment variables) while generating data from another environment (the proposal distribution). By learning a proposal distribution that minimises
the variance in the gradient estimate used during primary
optimisation, OFFER can automatically discover and focus
on the SREs that any robust policy must address.
We show that OFFER is guaranteed to converge to a locally optimal policy. In addition, we present empirical results on several tasks showing that it greatly outperforms
existing policy gradient methods in the presence of significant rare events.

Abstract
Policy gradient methods have been widely applied in reinforcement learning. For reasons of safety and cost, learning
is often conducted using a simulator. However, learning in
simulation does not traditionally utilise the opportunity to improve learning by adjusting certain environment variables –
state features that are randomly determined by the environment in a physical setting but controllable in a simulator. Exploiting environment variables is crucial in domains containing signiﬁcant rare events (SREs), e.g., unusual wind conditions that can crash a helicopter, which are rarely observed
under random sampling but have a considerable impact on
expected return. We propose off environment reinforcement
learning (OFFER), which addresses such cases by simultaneously optimising the policy and a proposal distribution over
environment variables. We prove that OFFER converges to a
locally optimal policy and show experimentally that it learns
better and faster than a policy gradient baseline.

Introduction
When applying reinforcement learning (RL) to physical systems, a major issue is the cost and risk of running trials, e.g.,
when learning a control policy for a robot. Hence, learning
is often performed using a simulator, to which off-line RL
(i.e., sample-based planning) can be applied. Although this
is cheaper and safer than physical trials, the computational
cost of each trial can still be considerable. It is therefore important to develop algorithms that minimise this cost. Policy
gradient methods (Sutton et al. 2000) are popular in such
settings as they cope well with continuous action spaces,
which often occur in physical systems such as robots.
However, existing policy gradient methods do not exploit an important opportunity presented by simulators: the
chance to adjust certain environment variables, i.e., state features that cannot be controlled in a physical setting but are
(stochastically) determined by the environment. For example, if we learn to ﬂy a helicopter under varying wind conditions (Koppejan and Whiteson 2011), we cannot control the
wind in physical trials but can easily do so in simulation.
A conventional application of policy gradient methods to
such settings is not robust to signiﬁcant rare events (SREs),
i.e., it fails any time there are rare events that substantially

Related Work
Our approach is related to existing work on adaptive importance sampling (Ahamed, Borkar, and Juneja 2006; Frank,
Mannor, and Precup 2008; Desai and Glynn 2001), which
also seeks to optimise proposal distributions. However, most
work focuses on Markov reward processes, i.e., the evaluation of a ﬁxed policy. By contrast, our work considers how
to learn a good proposal distribution for a policy that is itself
changing.
As in our work, Frank, Mannor, and Precup (2008) consider a full Markov decision process and aim to learn using
a proposal distribution that takes rare events into account.
However, they assume prior knowledge of what the signif-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1819

