Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Local Discriminant Hyperalignment for
Multi-Subject fMRI Data Alignment
Muhammad Yousefnezhad, Daoqiang Zhang
College of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China.
{myousefnezhad, dqzhang}@nuaa.edu.cn

surfaces to distinguish different stimuli for decoding the
brain and understanding how it works (Haxby et al. 2011;
Haxby, Connolly, and Guntupalli 2014). MVP analysis can
be used to ﬁnd novel treatments for mental diseases or even
to create a new generation of the user interface.
One of the main challenges in fMRI studies, especially
MVP analysis, is using multi-subject datasets. On the one
hand, the multi-subject analysis is critical to ﬁgure out the
generality and validity of the generated results across subjects. On the other hand, analyzing multi-subject fMRI data
requires accurate functional and anatomical alignments between neuronal activities of different subjects in order to
increase the performance of the ﬁnal results (Haxby et al.
2011; Chen et al. 2014). Indeed, the fMRI datasets must
be aligned across subjects in multi-subject studies in order
to take between-subject variability into account. As mentioned before, there are two main alignment approaches, i.e.
anatomical alignment and functional alignment, which can
work in unison. The anatomical alignment is the most common method for aligning fMRI images based on anatomical features by employing structural MRI images, e.g. Talairach alignment (Talairach and Tournoux 1988). However,
this method generated limited accuracy since the size, shape
and anatomical location of functional loci differ across subjects (Watson et al. 1993; Rademacher et al. 1993). Indeed,
anatomical alignment is just used in many fMRI studies as a
preprocessing step. By contrast, functional alignment seeks
to directly align the brain neural responses across subjects.
Hyperalignment (HA) (Haxby et al. 2011) is one of the
most famous methods for functional alignment. HA can be
mathematically formulated by Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). As a result, HA for multi-subject fMRI studies can be deﬁned as a multiple-set CCA (Xu et al. 2012;
Lorbert and Ramadge 2012; Chen et al. 2014). Since the unsupervised CCA techniques are employed for solving HA
problems, the solution may not be optimized for MVP analysis. In other words, CCA just ﬁnds a set of mappings to maximize the correlation between same time-points of functional
activities (in voxel-level) for all subjects, while it must maximize the correlation between homogeneous stimuli (from
the same category) and also remove the correlation between
different categories of stimuli. Indeed, this is a common
problem in Machine Learning. For instance, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is mostly used rather than Principal

Abstract
Multivariate Pattern (MVP) classiﬁcation can map different
cognitive states to the brain tasks. One of the main challenges in MVP analysis is validating the generated results
across subjects. However, analyzing multi-subject fMRI data
requires accurate functional alignments between neuronal activities of different subjects, which can rapidly increase the
performance and robustness of the ﬁnal results. Hyperalignment (HA) is one of the most effective functional alignment
methods, which can be mathematically formulated by the
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) methods. Since HA
mostly uses the unsupervised CCA techniques, its solution
may not be optimized for MVP analysis. By incorporating the
idea of Local Discriminant Analysis (LDA) into CCA, this
paper proposes Local Discriminant Hyperalignment (LDHA)
as a novel supervised HA method, which can provide better
functional alignment for MVP analysis. Indeed, the locality is
deﬁned based on the stimuli categories in the train-set, where
the correlation between all stimuli in the same category will
be maximized and the correlation between distinct categories
of stimuli approaches to near zero. Experimental studies on
multi-subject MVP analysis conﬁrm that the LDHA method
achieves superior performance to other state-of-the-art HA algorithms.

Introduction
As an imaging technology, functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) measures neural activity by employing
the Blood-Oxygen-Level-Dependent (BOLD) contrast as a
proxy for neural activation. The main idea is utilizing these
measurements of neural activities to shed light on cognitive processes. Indeed, fMRI enables us to ask what information is represented in a region of the human brain and
how that information is encoded, instead of asking what is
a regions function (Haxby, Connolly, and Guntupalli 2014).
Multivariate Pattern (MVP) classiﬁcation is one of the main
techniques in fMRI analysis, which can extract and decode
brain patterns by applying the classiﬁcation methods (Haxby
et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2015; Oswal et al. 2016). In fact, it
can predict patterns of neural activities associated with different cognitive states (Mohr et al. 2015; Chen et al. 2015;
Figueiredo and Nowak 2016) and also can deﬁne decision
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

59

