Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Redesigning Stochastic Environments for Maximized Utility
Sarah Keren, Avigdor Gal, Erez Karpas

Luis Pineda, Shlomo Zilberstein

Technion — Israel Institute of Technology

University of Massachusetts Amherst

agents. The setting we propose takes as input a stochastic
environment, a set of allowed modiﬁcations, a set of constraints and a system utility criteria. It then ﬁnds an optimal
set of modiﬁcations to apply to the environment for maximizing expected utility under the constraints.

Abstract
We present the Utility Maximizing Design (UMD) model
for optimally redesigning stochastic environments to achieve
maximized performance. This model suits well contemporary applications that involve the design of environments
where robots and humans co-exist an co-operate, e.g., vacuum cleaning robot. We discuss two special cases of the
UMD model. The ﬁrst is the equi-reward UMD (ER-UMD)
in which the agents and the system share a utility function,
such as for the vacuum cleaning robot. The second is the goal
recognition design (GRD) setting, discussed in the literature,
in which system and agent utilities are independent. To ﬁnd
the set of optimal modiﬁcations to apply to a UMD model, we
present a generic method, based on heuristic search. After
specifying the conditions for optimality in the general case,
we present an admissible heuristic for the ER-UMD case.
We also present a novel compilation that embeds the redesign
process into a planning problem, allowing use of any off-theshelf solver to ﬁnd the best way to modify an environment
when a design budget is speciﬁed. Our evaluation shows the
feasibility of the approach using standard benchmarks from
the probabilistic planning competition.

Example 1 Consider Figure 1(left), where a vacuum cleaning robot is placed in a living room. The utility of the
robot may be expressed in various ways; it may try to clean
an entire room as quickly as possible or cover as much
space as possible before its battery runs out. In any case,
(re)moving a piece of furniture from or within the room (Figure 1(center)) may increase the robot’s utility. Accounting
for uncertainty, there may be speciﬁc locations in which the
robot tends to slip, ending up in a different location than
intended. Increasing friction, e.g., by introducing a high
friction tile (Figure 1(right)), may reduce the probability of
undesired outcomes in particular locations. Both types of
modiﬁcations are applied ofﬂine (since such robots typically
perform their task unsupervised) and should be applied economically in order to maintain usability of the environment.
The proposed Utility Maximizing Design (UMD) model
is a general model whose instantiations provide common
grounds for comparative analysis and identiﬁcation of efﬁcient methods for special cases. A key observation with
the UMD model is that utility may differ between the system and the agents acting in it. While Example 1 illustrates
an Equi-Reward UMD(ER-UMD) case where agent and system share a utility function, earlier works on goal recognition design (Keren, Gal, and Karpas 2014; Wayllace et al.
2016)(GRD) assumed optimal agents while the system aims
at minimizing expected goal recognition time. We show that
different assumptions on the relation between agent and system utility induce different solution techniques.
To support various assumptions on the model, the Utility Maximizing Design (UMD) model we propose consists
of four elements. The environment component describe the
possible settings in which agents act by applying stochastic actions. The agents component describes the different
types of agents that may act in the environment. The system
component speciﬁes both the way the system accumulates
rewards and the ways by which it can redesign the environment. Finally, the initial environment describes the environment that is modiﬁed for maximizing system utility.

Introduction
We are surrounded by environments that are designed and
manipulated with the intention of maximizing some beneﬁt.
Hospitals may be designed to minimize the daily distance
covered by staff, supermarkets are constantly rearranged to
make sure users buy as much as possible, airports may be designed to increase passenger spending, computer networks
are structured to maximize message throughput, etc.
Common to all these environments is that their design is
controllable. Such environments can be designed and often later redesigned to accommodate a speciﬁc objective. In
addition, such environments need to account for different
forms of uncertainty.
We aim at providing a generic model to support the ofﬂine design of such environments. Therefore, we present
a model of Utility Maximizing Design in which a problem
of redesigning non-deterministic environments in order to
maximize system utility is speciﬁed. Non-determinism is
expressed by stochastic outcomes of actions performed by
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4947

