Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Proximity Search on
Heterogeneous Graph by Proximity Embedding

1

3

Zemin Liu,1 Vincent W. Zheng,2 Zhou Zhao,1 Fanwei Zhu,3
Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang,4 Minghui Wu,3∗ Jing Ying1

Zhejiang University, China;
Zhejiang University City College, China;

2

Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore;
4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

UCLA
(college)

Abstract
Alice
(user)

Many real-world networks have a rich collection of objects.
The semantics of these objects allows us to capture different classes of proximities, thus enabling an important task of
semantic proximity search. As the core of semantic proximity search, we have to measure the proximity on a heterogeneous graph, whose nodes are various types of objects.
Most of the existing methods rely on engineering features
about the graph structure between two nodes to measure their
proximity. With recent development on graph embedding, we
see a good chance to avoid feature engineering for semantic proximity search. There is very little work on using graph
embedding for semantic proximity search. We also observe
that graph embedding methods typically focus on embedding
nodes, which is an “indirect” approach to learn the proximity. Thus, we introduce a new concept of proximity embedding, which directly embeds the network structure between
two possibly distant nodes. We also design our proximity embedding, so as to ﬂexibly support both symmetric and asymmetric proximities. Based on the proximity embedding, we
can easily estimate the proximity score between two nodes
and enable search on the graph. We evaluate our proximity
embedding method on three real-world public data sets, and
show it outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines. We release
the code for proximity embedding1 .

Facebook
(employer)
Bob
(user)

Donna
(user)

Chris
(user)

L.A.
(location)

Apple
(employer)
Frances
(user)

Emily
(user)

UIUC
(college)

Glen
(user)

Google
(employer)

(a) Symmetric proximity (e.g., schoolmate, colleague)
AAAI
(conference)

Paper A
(paper)
embedding
(keyword)

Paper C
(paper)

graph
(keyword)

Paper B
(paper)

Helen
(user)

Paper D
(paper)

Karl
(user)

Paper F
(paper)

Larry
(user)

2016
(year)
Ivan
(user)

Paper E
(paper)

Jane
(user)

(b) Asymmetric proximity (e.g., advisor, advisee)

Figure 1: Examples of semantic proximity search.

useful. For example, we can do circle-based friend suggestion (e.g., who is my schoolmate / colleague?) in the social
network, and author role prediction (e.g., who is my advisor
/ advisee?) in the bibliography network.
In this paper, we study an important task, semantic proximity search on the graph (Sun et al. 2011; Fang et al.
2016b). Speciﬁcally, given a proximity class (e.g., schoolmate) and a query node (e.g., Bob) of a particular type (e.g.,
“user”) on the graph, semantic proximity search aims to output a ranking list of other nodes of the same types. It is worth
noting that, the proximity can be either symmetric, such as
schoolmate and colleague in Fig. 1(a), or asymmetric, such
as advisor and advisee in Fig. 1(b).
The core problem of semantic proximity search is how to
measure the proximity on a heterogeneous graph with various types of objects. Most existing methods try to measure
the proximity between a query node q and a target node v
by engineering features about the graph structure. For example, Metapath (Sun et al. 2011) counts the number of
meta-paths, which match some deliberately designed path
patterns based on the node types (e.g., “author”–“paper”–
“author”), between q and v. Metagraph (Fang et al. 2016b)
counts the number of meta-graphs, which match some deliberately designed subgraph patterns based on the node

Introduction
Many real-world networks have a rich collection of objects.
For example, in the social networks such as Facebook or
LinkedIn, there are “users”, “locations”, “employers”, “colleges”. In the academic networks such as DBLP, there are
“authors”, “papers”, “conferences” and “years”. Such objects can be linked together to form a heterogeneous graph.
For example, in Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b), we show two object
graphs based on LinkedIn data and DBLP data, respectively.
The rich semantics of objects allows us to capture multiple classes of proximity on the graph. For example, in
Fig. 1(a) Bob and Alice are schoolmates as they are attending the same college, whereas Glen and Donna are colleagues as they are working for the same company. Being
able to differentiate multiple classes of proximity is very
∗
Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://bitbucket.org/vwz/aaai2017-proxembed/

154

