Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Read the Silence: Well-Timed Recommendation
via Admixture Marked Point Processes
Hideaki Kim, Tomoharu Iwata, Yasuhiro Fujiwara, Naonori Ueda
Ueda Research Laboratory, NTT Communication Science Laboratories
2–4 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0237, Japan
{kin.hideaki, iwata.tomoharu, fujiwara.yasuhiro, ueda.naonori}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Kurashima et al. 2010; Ye et al. 2011; Cheng et al. 2012),
and the temporal information of user behavior is entirely ignored. As a result, they never revise their recommendations
until the user visits the next POI. To address this limitation,
some pioneering methods take the circadian periodicity of
user behavior or the time drift factor of user preferences into
account (Iwata et al. 2009; Koren 2010; Gao et al. 2013;
Yuan et al. 2013). Although these methods can change their
suggestions hourly in a day, they ignore the periods in which
the user doesn’t visit any place. In other words, these methods do not consider the user’s silent periods as being informative.
Recently in the ﬁeld of e-commerce, some innovative recommendation approaches have been proposed that employ
point process techniques (Wang, Sarwar, and Sundaresan
2011; Zhao et al. 2012; Wang and Zhang 2013). Because
the point process provides the probability of each item being purchased at each point in time, item ranking for the user
can be updated depending on not only the items purchased
in the past, but also the temporal duration since the last (or
some trigger) purchase time-point, that is, “silence”. In these
approaches, however, to address the sparsity in transaction
data, all items are categorized into groups in advance, and a
set of covariates related to the user and items should be prepared. Such requirements strongly limit their application to
check-in data.
In this paper, by extending marked point processes (Jacobsen 2006) through the addition of the admixture or
mixed-membership structure (Airoldi et al. 2014), we propose a novel probabilistic model to predict the joint probabilities of the user visiting POIs and their time-points. We
use the proposed model to construct a well-timed recommender system that uses silent periods (no user visit activity) to update its recommendations. By virtue of its admixture structure, the proposed model obtains a low dimensional
representation for each user, leading to robust recommendations against sparse observations without any recourse to
category information or covariates. We call the proposed
model, the admixture Marked Point Process (adMPP).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we outline related work. In Section 3, we propose the admixture marked point process, and construct a well-timed recommendation system by using adMPP. Also, we develop an
efﬁcient estimation algorithm based on collapsed Gibbs and

Abstract
Everything has its time, which is also true in the point-ofinterest (POI) recommendation task. A truly intelligent recommender system, even if you don’t visit any sites or remain
silent, should draw hints of your next destination from the
“silence”, and revise its recommendations as needed. In this
paper, we construct a well-timed POI recommender system
that updates its recommendations in accordance with the silence, the temporal period in which no visits are made. To
achieve this, we propose a novel probabilistic model to predict the joint probabilities of the user visiting POIs and their
time-points, by using the admixture or mixed-membership
structure to extend marked point processes. With the admixture structure, the proposed model obtains a low dimensional
representation for each user, leading to robust recommendation against sparse observations. We also develop an efﬁcient
and easy-to-implement estimation algorithm for the proposed
model based on collapsed Gibbs and slice sampling. We apply the proposed model to synthetic and real-world check-in
data, and show that it performs well in the well-timed recommendation task.

1

Introduction

Everything has its time, a verity that also applies to pointof-interest (POI) recommendations. Places you want to visit
today are not necessarily where you are likely to go tomorrow. Thus recommender systems should update recommendations daily or even hourly, by monitoring your behavior.
Upon observing your visit to a site, a well-trained recommender system will update candidates for the next destination based on your visit history. But for a system to be truly
intelligent, it should be able to draw hints of your next destination even if you are “silence”, that is, don’t visit any site
or keep silent. We draw a parallel with your old friend who
can read between the lines of your behavior, and kindly give
well-timed suggestions despite your silence.
POI recommender systems usually predict the probability of a user visiting each of the candidates, rank them in
the descending order, and recommend the higher ranked
ones as the next destination. Traditional approaches calculate the ranking based on a user model, which essentially counts the POIs visited in the past (Koren et al. 2009;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

132

