Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Collaborative Company Proﬁling:
Insights from an Employee’s Perspective
Hao Lin,1 Hengshu Zhu,2∗ Yuan Zuo,1 Chen Zhu,2 Junjie Wu,1 Hui Xiong3∗
1

2

Beihang University, {linhao2014, zuoyuan, wujj}@buaa.edu.cn
Baidu Talent Intelligence Center, {zhuhengshu, zhuchen02}@baidu.com
3
Rutgers University, hxiong@rutgers.edu

locks et al. 1997), and company benchmarking (Knuf 2000;
Alling 2002; Seong Leem et al. 2008; Kerschbaum 2008;
Zhu et al. 2016).
In the past decades, traditional approaches for company
proﬁling rely heavily on the availability of the rich ﬁnance
information about the company, such as ﬁnance reports and
SEC ﬁlings, which may not be readily available for many
private companies. Recently, with the rapid prevalence of
online employment services, such as Glassgdoor, Indeed,
and Kanzhun, a new paradigm is enabled for obtaining the
variety of company’s information from their (former) employees anonymously via the reviews, ratings and salaries
of speciﬁc job positions. This, in turn, raises the question
whether it is possible to develop company proﬁles from an
employee’s perspective. For example, we can help companies to identify their advantages and disadvantages, and to
predict the expected salaries of different job positions for
rival companies.
However, the heterogeneous characteristic of this public
information imposes signiﬁcant challenges to discover typical patterns of companies during proﬁling. To this end, in
this paper we propose a model named Company Proﬁling
based Collaborative Topic Regression (CPCTR) to formulate a joint optimization framework for learning the latent
patterns of companies, which can collaboratively model both
the textual information (e.g., review) and numerical information (e.g., salary and rating). With the identiﬁed patterns,
including the positive/negative opinions and the latent variable that inﬂuences salary, we can effectively carry out opinion analysis and salary predictions for different companies.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on a real-world
data set. The results show that our algorithm provides a comprehensive interpretation of company characteristics and a
more effective salary prediction than other baselines. Particularly, by analyzing the results obtained by CPCTR, many
meaningful patterns and interesting discoveries can be observed, such as welfare and technology are the typical pros
of Baidu, while those of Tencent are training and learning.

Abstract
Company proﬁling is an analytical process to build an indepth understanding of company’s fundamental characteristics. It serves as an effective way to gain vital information of
the target company and acquire business intelligence. Traditional approaches for company proﬁling rely heavily on the
availability of rich ﬁnance information about the company,
such as ﬁnance reports and SEC ﬁlings, which may not be
readily available for many private companies. However, the
rapid prevalence of online employment services enables a
new paradigm — to obtain the variety of company’s information from their employees’ online ratings and comments.
This, in turn, raises the challenge to develop company proﬁles from an employee’s perspective. To this end, in this paper, we propose a method named Company Proﬁling based
Collaborative Topic Regression (CPCTR), for learning the latent structural patterns of companies. By formulating a joint
optimization framework, CPCTR has the ability in collaboratively modeling both textual (e.g., reviews) and numerical information (e.g., salaries and ratings). Indeed, with the identiﬁed patterns, including the positive/negative opinions and the
latent variable that inﬂuences salary, we can effectively carry
out opinion analysis and salary prediction. Extensive experiments were conducted on a real-world data set to validate the
effectiveness of CPCTR. The results show that our method
provides a comprehensive understanding of company characteristics and delivers a more effective prediction of salaries
than other baselines.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of technologies related to enterprise management, which can help
organizations to keep up with the continuously changing
business world. Along this line, a crucial demand is to
build effective strategies for company proﬁling, which is
an analytical process that results in an in-depth understanding of company’s fundamental characteristics, and can
therefore serve as an effective way to gain vital information of the target company and acquire business intelligence. With the help of proﬁling, a wide range of applications could be enabled including organization risk management (Martin and Rice 2007), enterprise integration (Hol-

Related Work
The related work of this paper can be grouped into two categories, namely topic modeling for opinion analysis and matrix factorization for prediction.
Probabilistic topic models are capable of grouping seman-

∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1417

