Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Self-Paced Multi-Task Learning
Changsheng Li12 , Junchi Yan12∗ , Fan Wei,3∗
Weishan Dong,2 Qingshan Liu,4 Hongyuan Zha51
1

East China Normal University 2 IBM Research – China
Stanford University
Nanjing University of Info. Science & Tech 5 Georgia Institute of Technology
{lcsheng,dongweis}@cn.ibm.com, {jcyan,zha}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, fanwei@stanford.edu, qsliu@nuist.edu.cn
3

4

Kim and Xing 2010), and the other class of methods assumes that the model parameters used by the tasks are related to each other (Schwaighofer, Tresp, and Yu 2004;
Ando and Zhang 2005; Yang et al. 2016; Zhang and Yeung 2010). In these methods, the assumption that common
information is shared across all tasks is strong in certain
cases. Thus recent methods propose to group tasks or detect outlier tasks, which assume that there exists common
information only within a subset of tasks, or exist outlier
tasks having no relation with other tasks (Jalali et al. 2010;
Kumar and Daume III 2012). However, when learning the
related information across tasks, the algorithms above treat
all tasks equally and all instances per task equally, in other
words, there is no mechanism to control the order of the
tasks and the instances to learn among these methods.
Different from previous methods, in this paper, we propose a novel MTL framework by simultaneously taking into
consideration the complexities of both instances and tasks
during learning. This idea is inspired by the fact that humans
often learn from easy concepts to hard ones in the cognitive
process (Elman 1993; Bengio et al. 2009). For example, a
student often starts with easier concepts (e.g. recognizing
objects in simple scenes where an object is clearly visible)
and builds up to more complex ones (e.g. cluttered images
with occlusions). Such a learning process is inherently essential for human education and cognition. Similarly, in the
regime of MTL, not only do there exist ‘easy’ to ‘hard’ instances, but also ‘easy’ to ‘hard’ tasks. For instance, recognizing monkeys from the image set consisting of monkeys and tigers is a relatively ‘easy’ task, while recognizing baboons from the image set consisting of baboons and
orangutans is a relatively ‘hard’ task. In the ﬁrst task, an image of monkey with plain background is a relatively ‘easy’
positive instance, while one with complex background is relatively ‘hard’ positive. If a multi-task learner can learn the
related information among tasks by ﬁrst using ‘easy’ tasks
and instances and then gradually involving ‘hard’ ones, as
human brain does, then it can beneﬁt more with less effort.
We name the proposed MTL framework, Self-Paced
Multi-Task Learning (SPMTL), which aims to learn the
multi-task model in a self-paced regime. The contributions
of this paper are threefold:

Abstract
Multi-task learning is a paradigm, where multiple tasks are
jointly learnt. Previous multi-task learning models usually
treat all tasks and instances per task equally during learning. Inspired by the fact that humans often learn from easy
concepts to hard ones in the cognitive process, in this paper, we propose a novel multi-task learning framework that
attempts to learn the tasks by simultaneously taking into consideration the complexities of both tasks and instances per
task. We propose a novel formulation by presenting a new
task-oriented regularizer that can jointly prioritize tasks and
instances. Thus it can be interpreted as a self-paced learner
for multi-task learning. An efﬁcient block coordinate descent
algorithm is developed to solve the proposed objective function, and the convergence of the algorithm can be guaranteed. Experimental results on the toy and real-world datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, compared to the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
The paradigm of multi-task learning (MTL) involves learning several prediction tasks simultaneously. One basic assumption in MTL is that there exists common or related information among tasks, and learning such information can
result in better prediction performance than learning each
task independently (Caruana 1997). It is particularly desirable to share such information across tasks, when there are
many related tasks but the available training data are limited.
Due to its empirical success and good theoretical foundations, MTL has been applied to various domains, including
disease modeling and prediction (Zhou et al. 2011), web image and video search (Wang, Zhang, and Zhang 2009), and
relative attributes learning (Chen, Zhang, and Li 2014).
Many MTL methods have been proposed, which in general can be categorized into two classes based on the principal way to learn the relatedness (Kang, Grauman, and
Sha 2011; Pu et al. 2013; 2016; Zhong et al. 2016). The
ﬁrst class assumes that all the tasks share common yet lowrank feature representations (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008; Zhang, Yeung, and Xu 2010; Yang et al. 2014;
∗

Contributed equally. Junchi Yan is the corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• It is the ﬁrst work, to our best knowledge, where a principled MTL model jointly takes into consideration the com-

2175

