Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Exploring Commonality and Individuality
for Multi-Modal Curriculum Learning
†

Chen Gong†,
Pattern Computing and Applications (PCA) Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
E-mail: chen.gong@njust.edu.cn

CL was usually realized under two frameworks: Self-Paced
Learning (SPL) and Teaching-to-Learn and Learning-toTeach (TLLT). SPL was formally developed in (Kumar,
Packer, and Koller 2010), which employs latent SVMs as a
learner and considers an example as simple if it lies far from
the margin. Apart from selecting the simple examples for
training, Jiang et al. (Jiang et al. 2014b) also require that the
selected curriculum examples to be diverse. Furthermore,
they also favor of harnessing the dynamic example difﬁculty
revealed during learning in addition to the estimation of difﬁculty before learning (Jiang et al. 2015). Up to now, SPL
has been widely used in various learning problems such as
clustering (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015), domain adaptation (Tang
et al. 2012a), dictionary learning (Tang et al. 2012b), and
zero-shot learning (Jiang et al. 2014a).
The TLLT framework (Gong et al. 2016a) was speciﬁcally designed for graph-based label propagation (Zhu and
Ghahramani 2002). It is composed of two stages named
teaching-to-learn and learning-to-teach. In teaching-tolearn, the “teacher” (i.e. a teaching algorithm) chooses
the simplest examples for the “learner” (i.e. a propagation
algorithm) by assessing their reliability and discriminability.
In learning-to-teach, the learner delivers a learning feedback
to the teacher to help it decide the suitable curriculum for
the next learning round. This basic TLLT framework has
been further extended to multi-label cases (Gong et al.
2016c) and multi-modal cases (Gong et al. 2016b).
The multi-modal setting assumes that every example can
be characterized by different modalities (Xu, Tao, and Xu
2013). As the pioneering work of adapting CL to multimodal setting, Gong et al. (Gong et al. 2016b) demonstrate that integrating the curriculums generated by different modalities helps to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy.
This is because the curriculums from various modalities can
complement to each other to yield an overall good curriculum. However, this method directly minimizes the error between the curriculum of every modality and the central optimal curriculum, which is a “hard” constraint suppressing
the individuality possessed by every modality. Such imperfect fusion scheme degrades the curriculum quality and is
unfavorable to obtaining satisfactory classiﬁcation results.
To address this defect, this paper explicitly models the commonality among all modalities as well as their individualities to achieve a “soft” curriculum fusion, so our algo-

Abstract
Curriculum Learning (CL) mimics the cognitive process of
humans and favors a learning algorithm to follow the logical learning sequence from simple examples to more difﬁcult ones. Recent studies show that selecting the simplest curriculum examples from different modalities for graph-based
label propagation can yield better performance than simply
leveraging single modality. However, they forcibly require
the curriculums generated by all modalities to be identical
to a common curriculum, which discard the individuality of
every modality and produce the inaccurate curriculum for the
subsequent learning. Therefore, this paper proposes a novel
multi-modal CL algorithm by comprehensively investigating
both the individuality and commonality of different modalities. By considering the curriculums of multiple modalities
altogether, their common preference on selecting the simplest
examples can be explored by a row-sparse matrix, and their
distinct opinions are captured by a sparse noise matrix. As
a consequence, a “soft” fusion of multiple curriculums from
different modalities is achieved and the propagation quality
can thus be improved. Comprehensive empirical studies reveal that our method can generate higher accuracy than the
state-of-the-art multi-modal CL approach and label propagation algorithms on various image classiﬁcation tasks.

Introduction
Curriculum Learning (CL) (Bengio et al. 2009) advocates
logically training a classiﬁer by gradually leveraging the examples from simple to difﬁcult. In contrast to massive existing classiﬁers (e.g. Support Vector Machines and Naive
Bayesian Classiﬁer) that are trained on all examples at one
time, CL establishes a sequence of curriculums so that only
the optimal curriculum containing the simplest examples
are invoked to train the classiﬁer in each learning round.
Such “starting small” strategy is very similar to the human’s
knowledge acquisition process from childhood to adulthood,
and also has been demonstrated to be effective in machine
learning (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010; Jiang et al. 2015;
Gong et al. 2016a) and computer vision (Lee and Grauman 2011; Supancic and Ramanan 2013; Gong et al. 2015;
Pentina, Sharmanska, and Lampert 2015).
The concept of curriculum learning was originally proposed by Bengio et al. (Bengio et al. 2009). After that,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1926

