Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Computational Complexity of Weighted Greedy Matching
Argyrios Deligkas

George B. Mertzios

Paul G. Spirakis∗

Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool, UK.
a.deligkas@liverpool.ac.uk

School of Engineering and
Computing Sciences
Durham University, UK.
george.mertzios@durham.ac.uk

Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool, UK
and
Computer Technology Institute, Greece.
p.spirakis@liverpool.ac.uk

neighborhood. Traditionally in two-sided matchings, every
player is associated with an ordering over its neighbors that
correspond to its preferences. The goal is to decide whether
a stable matching exists and, if it does, to ﬁnd one.
Recently, a line of research has emerged that studies the
quality of stable matchings (Anshelevich and Das 2010).
In this setting, each match is associated with a utility and
the goal is to ﬁnd a stable matching where the social welfare in this matching, i.e. the sum of the utilities, is as large
as possible. Extreme Programming (Dawande et al. 2008)
is a prominent example. In this case, the players are programmers and the utility of a match corresponds to the productivity of the pair of programmers. The goal is to maximize the productivity while keeping the individual programmers happy. Another application where a stable matching
with high quality is desired, is kidney exchange. Traditionally only compatibility constraints were imposed for kidney exchange problems (Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004),
(Roth, Snmez, and Utku nver 2005), but recently other factors which give a score to each possible match were considered too (DL et al. 2005), (Held et al. 1994). For this reason,
recent AI literature on kidney exchange tried to optimize the
overall social welfare of the matching instead of the number of compatible matches (Abraham, Blum, and Sandholm
2007), (Awasthi and Sandholm 2009).
The simplest and probably the most well-studied problem regarding the quality of the stable matching is known as
correlated stable matching (Hoefer 2011). This model can
be represented by an edge-weighted graph, where the players who are matched together obtain the same utility speciﬁed by the weight of the edge between them. Apart from
the extreme programming and the kidney exchange problems, the correlated stable matching problem ﬁnds applications in social networks (Hoefer 2011), job markets (Arcaute
and Vassilvitskii 2009), distributed networks (Goemans et
al. 2006), (Mathieu 2008), and market sharing (Goemans et
al. 2006). Furthermore, a potential function exists for this
model which in turn guarantees the existence of at least one
stable matching even in non-bipartite graphs with ties (Abraham et al. 2008), (Mathieu 2008). Thus, an immediate question is to understand the quality of a stable matching compared to the “best” one and to compute a stable matching
of high quality. Anshelevich, Das, and Naamad (Anshelevich, Das, and Naamad 2013) and Anshelevich, Bhardwaj,

Abstract
Motivated by the fact that in several cases a matching in a
graph is stable if and only if it is produced by a greedy algorithm, we study the problem of computing a maximum weight
greedy matching on weighted graphs, termed G REEDYM ATCHING. In wide contrast to the maximum weight matching problem, for which many efﬁcient algorithms are known,
we prove that G REEDY M ATCHING is strongly NP-hard and
APX-complete, and thus it does not admit a PTAS unless
P=NP, even on graphs with maximum degree at most 3 and
with at most three different integer edge weights. Furthermore we prove that G REEDY M ATCHING is strongly NP-hard
if the input graph is in addition bipartite. Moreover we consider three natural parameters of the problem, for which we
establish a sharp threshold behavior between NP-hardness
and computational tractability. On the positive side, we
present a randomized approximation algorithm (R GMA) for
G REEDY M ATCHING on a special class of weighted graphs,
called bush graphs. We highlight an unexpected connection
between R GMA and the approximation of maximum cardinality matching in unweighted graphs via randomized greedy algorithms. We show that, if the approximation ratio of R GMA
is ρ, then for every  > 0 the randomized M RG algorithm
of (Aronson et al. 1995) gives a (ρ − )-approximation for
the maximum cardinality matching. We conjecture that a tight
bound for ρ is 23 ; we prove our conjecture true for four subclasses of bush graphs. Proving a tight bound for the approximation ratio of M RG on unweighted graphs (and thus also
proving a tight value for ρ) is a long-standing open problem (Poloczek and Szegedy 2012). This unexpected relation
of our R GMA algorithm with the M RG algorithm may provide
new insights for solving this problem.

Introduction
Stable matching problems lie in the intersection of AI,
economics and social choice theory and have been studied extensively over the years. Originally, two-sided matchings were studied (Gusﬁeld and Irving 1989), (Roth and
Oliveira Sotomayor 1990). In a two-sided matching problem
there is an underlying graph where the vertices correspond
to players that want to be matched with a vertex from their
∗
The work was supported partially by the EU ERC Project ALGAME.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

466

