Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Grid Pathﬁnding on the 2k Neighborhoods
Nicolás Rivera

Carlos Hernández

Jorge A. Baier

Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK

Depto. de Ciencias de la Ingenierı́a
Universidad Andrés Bello
Concepción, Chile

Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile
Center for the Semantic Web Research
Santiago, Chile

Although distance functions on the 16-neighborhoods have
been discovered and studied by researchers of the Computer
Vision community (Marchand-Maillet and Sharaiha 1997),
to our knowledge, evaluations of grid pathﬁnding over 16neighborhoods (e.g., Nash 2012, Aine and Likhachev 2016)
have never considered these heuristics and, rather, have used
the Euclidean distance (ED).
Perfect heuristics for obstacle-free grids do not only allow algorithms like A* to ﬁnd solutions quickly but they
are a key enabler of other techniques for grid pathﬁnding. One example is the approach by Uras, Koenig, and
Hernández (2013), winner of the 2013 GPPC, optimal track,
which relies heavily on the Octile distance to compute subgoal graphs that are later exploited for fast pathﬁnding. Another example is FRIT (Rivera et al. 2014), the state-of-theart real-time heuristic search pathﬁnding algorithm that uses
the Octile/Manhattan distance to build an initial ideal tree.
In this paper we study grid pathﬁnding on the 2k neighborhoods. Our ﬁrst contribution is a deﬁnition of
such neighborhoods. A rather notable property we prove
is that the radius of the smaller square that contains the
movements is given by the Fibonacci series. Furthermore,
we derive a distance function for the 2k -neighborhood, the
2k -tile heuristic, and prove its correctness. Our proof and
construction works for any k, thus generalizing the Manhattan and Octile distances, and the distance function of
Marchand-Maillet and Sharaiha. Our proof, however, seems
much shorter and simpler than the one given by MarchandMaillet and Sharaiha for the 16-neighborhood. Finally,
we deﬁne canonical orderings (Harabor and Grastien 2011;
Sturtevant and Rabin 2016) for the 2k -neighborhood. These
orderings are at the core of fast pathﬁnding algorithms.
We implemented two 2k -grid path planners: regular A*
and A* with our canonical orderings. We evaluated them
over standard benchmarks. We tested different values of k
and compared our 2k -tile heuristic with the ED. Runtime
of Canonical A* scales with k while this does not hold for
regular A*. Our heuristics yield faster search compared to
the ED, for every neighborhood with regular A*, and up
to the 32-neighborhood with Canonical A*. We compared
also with the any-angle path planner Theta*, and found that
Theta* is outperformed by regular A* when k = 32.
Next we introduce background and then deﬁne the 2k neighborhood. Then we derive our 2k -tile heuristic. We

Abstract
Grid pathﬁnding, an old AI problem, is central for the development of navigation systems for autonomous agents. A
surprising fact about the vast literature on this problem is
that very limited neighborhoods have been studied. Indeed,
only the 4- and 8-neighborhoods are usually considered, and
rarely the 16-neighborhood. This paper describes three contributions that enable the construction of effective grid path
planners for extended 2k -neighborhoods. First, we provide a
simple recursive deﬁnition of the 2k -neighborhood in terms
of the 2k−1 -neighborhood. Second, we derive distance functions, for any k > 1, which allow us to propose admissible
heurisitics which are perfect for obstacle-free grids. Third,
we describe a canonical ordering which allows us to implement a version of A* whose performance scales well when
increasing k. Our empirical evaluation shows that the heuristics we propose are superior to the Euclidean distance (ED)
when regular A* is used. For grids beyond 64 the overhead
of computing the heuristic yields decreased time performance
compared to the ED. We found also that a conﬁguration of
our A*-based implementation, without canonical orders, is
competitive with the “any-angle” path planner Theta∗ both in
terms of solution quality and runtime.

Introduction
Grid pathﬁnding is one of the most well-known problems in
AI. It is important because of its applications, which include
robotics (Lee and Yu 2009) and videogames (Björnsson et
al. 2005). Furthermore, it still captures signiﬁcant attention
from the community. Notably, three editions of the Grid
Path Planning Competition (GPPC) have been recently held
(Sturtevant et al. 2015), putting to test latest advances in the
area (Botea and Harabor 2013; Harabor and Grastien 2011;
Uras, Koenig, and Hernández 2013).
Research on grid pathﬁnding has focused on simple 4neighbor grids, in which cardinal movements are allowed,
and 8-neighbor grids, which extend 4-neighbor movements
with diagonal movements. Besides their simplicity, perhaps
the main reason to focus on these grids is that good heuristics
are well-known for them. Indeed, the Manhattan and Octile distances (Sturtevant and Buro 2005) are perfect heuristics for, respectively, 4- and 8-neighbor obstacle-free grids.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

891

