Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast-Tracking Stationary MOMDPs for Adaptive Management Problems
1

Martin Péron,1,2 Kai Helge Becker,3 Peter Bartlett,1,4 Iadine Chadès2
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane QLD 4000, Australia (m.peron@qut.edu.au)
2
CSIRO, Dutton Park QLD 4102, Australia (iadine.chades@csiro.au)
3
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow G1 1XQ, United Kingdom (kai.becker@strath.ac.uk)
4
University of California, Berkeley, CA, United States (peter@berkeley.edu)

Moore and Conroy 2006). Chadès et al. (2012) showed
that this problem can be formulated as a mixed observability Markov decision process (MOMDP), a special case of
POMDP (partially observable MDP). An optimal MOMDP
policy accomplishes the best trade-off between informative
and rewarding actions, with regard to a precise management
objective (Chadès et al. 2012).
Researchers from other ﬁelds have also looked at variations of the same problems: model-based Bayesian reinforcement learning aims to ﬁnd the best trade-off (Vlassis et
al. 2012), but does not assume the transition matrix to belong
to a ﬁnite given set - instead probabilities are often assumed
to follow a Dirichlet distribution (Duff 2003).
In adaptive management, the true transition matrix is
commonly assumed to be stationary, i.e. it does not change
over time (Walters and Hilborn (1978), Chadès et al. (2012),
Runge (2013) to cite a few). We will make this assumption
too and will refer to the problem as a stationary MOMDP.
Most MOMDP solvers are α-vector-based, i.e. they update
a piecewise linear value function converging to the optimal
value function (Ong et al. 2010). In practice, the high complexity of stationary MOMDPs (PSPACE-complete; Chadès
et al. 2012) leads to very slow convergence for all but trivial
problems.
Based on the properties of stationary MOMDPs, we propose an algorithm generating a lower bound of the value
function (Proposition 1). We show that it runs in polynomial
time (Proposition 2). Any α-vector-based MOMDP solver
can be initialized with this lower bound, with a potentially
signiﬁcant reduction of the computation time. Additionally,
our lower bound is provably optimal in the corners of the
domain of the value function (Proposition 3). Finally, we
demonstrate in Theorems 1 and 2 that, under some assumptions, the derivatives of the optimal value function exist and
are equal to those of our lower bound in neighborhoods
around the corners of the domain, i.e. our lower bound is
a linear approximation of the optimal value function.
The paper is organized as follows: we ﬁrst introduce
MOMDPs formally. We then describe our approach to speed
up MOMDP solvers. We illustrate the efﬁciency of our approach on the management of the invasive mosquito Aedes
albopictus in an Australian archipelago and on case studies
taken from Nicol et al. (2013). The data is freely available at
goo.gl/6f4Rh0. In the last section we discuss our approach

Abstract
Adaptive management is applied in conservation and natural resource management, and consists of making sequential
decisions when the transition matrix is uncertain. Informally
described as ’learning by doing’, this approach aims to trade
off between decisions that help achieve the objective and decisions that will yield a better knowledge of the true transition matrix. When the true transition matrix is assumed to
be an element of a ﬁnite set of possible matrices, solving
a mixed observability Markov decision process (MOMDP)
leads to an optimal trade-off but is very computationally demanding. Under the assumption (common in adaptive management) that the true transition matrix is stationary, we propose a polynomial-time algorithm to ﬁnd a lower bound of
the value function. In the corners of the domain of the value
function (belief space), this lower bound is provably equal to
the optimal value function. We also show that under further
assumptions, it is a linear approximation of the optimal value
function in a neighborhood around the corners. We evaluate
the beneﬁts of our approach by using it to initialize the solvers
MO-SARSOP and Perseus on a novel computational sustainability problem and a recent adaptive management data challenge. Our approach leads to an improved initial value function and translates into signiﬁcant computational gains for
both solvers.

Introduction
Adaptive management is an approach tailored for achieving
a management objective in environmental problems when
the system dynamics is partially unknown (Walters and
Hilborn 1978; Chadès et al. 2016), with applications in conservation (Chadès et al. 2012; Runge 2013), ﬁsheries (Frederick and Peterman 1995), natural resource management
(Johnson, Kendall, and Dubovsky 2002) and forest management (Moore and Conroy 2006). Over time, we can learn
about the system dynamics by analyzing how the system
has responded to our actions so far. Some actions might not
seem optimal to achieve the management objective given our
current knowledge but might be more informative about the
system dynamics than others, potentially resulting in better
decisions in the future.
The uncertainty about the system dynamics is often modeled by a ﬁnite set of scenarios (Walters and Hilborn 1976;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4531

