Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cross-View People Tracking by
Scene-Centered Spatio-Temporal Parsing∗
1

Yuanlu Xu,1 Xiaobai Liu,2 Lei Qin,1,3 Song-Chun Zhu1

Dept. Computer Science and Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
2
Dept. Computer Science, San Diego State University (SDSU)
3
Inst. Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
yuanluxu@cs.ucla.edu, xiaobai.liu@mail.sdsu.edu, qinlei@ict.ac.cn, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Spatio-temporal Attributed Parse
Graph (ST-APG) to integrate semantic attributes with trajectories for cross-view people tracking. Given videos from multiple cameras with overlapping ﬁeld of view (FOV), our goal
is to parse the videos and organize the trajectories of all targets into a scene-centered representation. We leverage rich
semantic attributes of human, e.g., facing directions, postures
and actions, to enhance cross-view tracklet associations, besides frequently used appearance and geometry features in
the literature. In particular, the facing direction of a human in
3D, once detected, often coincides with his/her moving direction or trajectory. Similarly, the actions of humans, once recognized, provide strong cues for distinguishing one subject
from the others. The inference is solved by iteratively grouping tracklets with cluster sampling and estimating people semantic attributes by dynamic programming. In experiments,
we validate our method on one public dataset and create another new dataset that records people’s daily life in public,
e.g., food court, ofﬁce reception and plaza, each of which
includes 3-4 cameras. We evaluate the proposed method on
these challenging videos and achieve promising multi-view
tracking results.

;ĂͿ

;ďͿ

;ĐͿ

;ĚͿ

Figure 1: An example of cross-view data association for target tracking. (a)-(d) represents four different camera views
of the same scene. Each color of the bounding box represents a unique person.

Introduction
In this paper, we study a novel cross-view tracklet association algorithm for multi-view person tracking. We consider
surveillance scenarios where there are 3-4 cameras looking at a target area (e.g., parking-lot, garden) from different viewpoints. The task is to compute the scene-centered
overall trajectory of all the people within the scene. In comparison with the single-view setting (Liu, Lin, and Jin 2013;
Andriyenko and Schindler 2011; Wu, Betke, and Kunz 2011;
Dehghan, Assari, and Shah 2015), it remains unclear how to
associate people trajectories across views, especially when
the cameras have wide baselines or large view changes.
• Large appearance variations. A person is assumed to
have similar appearance across space and time. Nevertheless, large camera view and scale changes compromise such

assumption. For example, Fig. 1 shows a garden covered by
four cameras. From these camera view snapshots, the person
in navy blue looks different in front and back view.
• Inaccurate geo-localization. A common way for solving the task is to calibrate camera parameters and utilize cross-camera ground homographs, with which a person detected in one viewpoint can be registered in another
view. However, the registration results are often not accurate
enough to separate humans in the proximity because of the
calibration errors or the inaccuracy of footprint estimation.
For example, in Fig. 1 (c-d), people’s feet are occluded by
the wall and so it is difﬁcult to register the detected human
feet positions in other views.
The main idea of our approach is to leverage semantic
attributes, e.g., facing orientations, poses and actions (standing, running, etc.), for cross-view tracklet association. Taking Fig. 1 for example, attributes of person can help prune
the ambiguities in cross-view data association. Speciﬁcally,

∗
This work is supported by DARPA SIMPLEX Award N6600115-C-4035, ONR MURI project N00014-16-1-2007, and NSF IIS
1423305. Lei Qin is a visiting scholar at UCLA and the correspondence author is Xiaobai Liu.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4299

