Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Strategic Social Network Analysis
Tomasz P. Michalak,1,2∗ Talal Rahwan,3∗ Michael Wooldridge2
1

2

Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
3
Masdar Institute of Science and Technology, United Arab Emirates

Naturally, various countermeasures supporting privacy
and security that have been proposed including strict legal
controls (EU: 2015), algorithmic solutions (Kearns et al.
2016), and market-like mechanisms with which the participants are able to monetize their personal information (Lane
et al. 2014). They are, however, difﬁcult to implement in
practice, especially at a global scale. For instance, it is highly
unlikely that legal privacy-protection mechanisms will be
enforced by authoritarian regimes who typically censor internet content including social media (King et al. 2013).
Against this background, we ask the following question:
How can members of a social network strategically manipulate their online data in an attempt to evade SNA tools? Addressing this question may help members of the general public to better protect their online privacy and security. It may
also help activists groups in avoiding censorship. Furthermore, it may assist security agencies and counter-terrorism
units in understanding the strategies that covert organizations use to escape detection. In particular, recent ﬁndings
on covert organizations—especially with respect to the techsavvy ISIS—clearly demonstrate their ability to neutralize
counter-terrorism efforts by the authorities. The known evasion techniques used by ISIS range from changing aliases
and keeping personal proﬁles private (Nordrum 2016) to using encrypted communication platforms (such as Telegraf
(Khayat 2015)) and staging the disappearance of an entire
group from social media only to pop up again in a different
place under alternative aliases (Nordrum 2016). In fact, it
is believed that the evasion capabilities of ISIS signiﬁcantly
increased after Edward Snowden’s disclosure of classiﬁed
information on the SNA techniques used by US intelligence
(Scarborough 2014).
Unfortunately, neither do we have sufﬁcient understanding of such evasion techniques nor do existing SNA tools
have the ability to internalize them. This is because most
SNA tools were built around the assumption that individuals
or groups in a network do not act strategically to evade those
tools. Even the more advanced tools that are especially designed for analysing covert networks (Perliger and Pedahzur
2011) typically assume that the network under investigation
is not subject to strategic manipulation. Given this, we believe that the literature has now reached a point where serious attention should be directed towards the strategic evasion of SNA tools and building new strategy-proof tools.

Abstract
How can individuals and communities protect their privacy
against social network analysis tools? How do criminals or
terrorists organizations evade detection by such tools? Under which conditions can these tools be made strategy proof?
These fundamental questions have attracted little attention in
the literature to date, as most social network analysis tools
are built around the assumption that individuals or groups in
a network do not act strategically to evade such tools. With
this in mind, we outline in this paper a new paradigm for social network analysis, whereby the strategic behaviour of network actors is explicitly modeled. Addressing this research
challenge has various implications. For instance, it may allow two individuals to keep their relationship secret or private. It may also allow members of an activist group to conceal their membership, or even conceal the existence of their
group from authoritarian regimes. Furthermore, it may assist
security agencies and counter terrorism units in understanding the strategies that covert organizations use to escape detection, and give rise to new strategy-proof countermeasures.

Introduction
Many problems in social network analysis (SNA) have received considerable attention in recent years across various disciplines, including Artiﬁcial Intelligence and MultiAgent Systems (Sabater and Sierra 2002; Nguyen, Kowalczyk, and Chen 2009). Scientists, developers, and analysts
have focused on improving the performance of various SNA
tools, such as centrality measures (Koschützki et al. 2005),
community-detection algorithms (Orman and Labatut 2009)
or link-prediction algorithms (Getoor and Diehl 2005) just
to name a few.
Unfortunately, while such tools have many legitimate applications, they can be also used to invade privacy or even
undermine security of individuals and groups. For instance,
by analysing Facebook’s topology as well as the attributes
of some users, it is possible to infer attributes of other users
(Mislove et al. 2010). Furthermore, such an “attribute inference attack” (Zheleva and Getoor 2009) can be strengthened
if it is preceded by a “link prediction attack” which aims at
revealing the links that appear to be missing—either deliberately or otherwise—from the topology of the social network.
∗

Both ﬁrst authors contributed equally to this paper.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4841

