Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Should Algorithms for Random SAT
and Max-SAT Be Different?
Sixue Liu

Gerard de Melo

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ, USA

at all within a given time. Incomplete algorithms, in contrast,
can deliver a solution within a given time but do not guarantee
its optimality.
Within the paradigm of incomplete algorithms, a common
strategy is to rely on local search. Given an objective function,
local search algorithms begin with a candidate assignment
and traverse the candidate space by iteratively moving to
neighboring ones, while keeping track of the best solution
encountered in the course of this traversal (Hoos and Stützle
2004). If the objective is to minimize the number of unsatisﬁed clauses, then the incremental nature of such a search
implies that local search algorithms for Max-SAT can essentially be used to solve SAT, while SAT algorithms are
empirically expected to deliver somewhat reasonable solutions when applied to Max-SAT problem instances.
A number of local search algorithms have been proposed.
For SAT, the inﬂuential GSAT and WalkSAT algorithms pursue a local search in a greedy or probabilistic manner (Selman, Levesque, and Levesque 1992; Selman, Kautz, and Cohen 1994). More recently, conﬁguration checking (CC) (Cai
and Su 2012) and probSAT (Balint and Schöning 2012) have
made important advances, scoring highest in the random
tracks at the SAT competitions 2012 and 2013, respectively.
Additionally, a breakthrough on random k-SAT at the phase
transition point has been made by polyLS (Liu and Papakonstantinou 2016). For Max-SAT speciﬁcally, Iterated Robust
Tabu Search (Smyth, Hoos, and Stützle 2003) was ranked
ﬁrst in the Max-SAT Evaluation 2012. Later, a variant of
CC named CCLS (Luo et al. 2015) was highest-ranked in
the Unweighted Random track of the Max-SAT Evaluations
2013 and 2015, respectively, improving considerably over
previous results.
Contributions. Our main contribution is to shed new light
on the different nature of SAT and Max-SAT when faced with
random formulae with different ratios. This theory also has
practical implications bearing on the choice of heuristics employed in local search algorithms. We instantiated and empirically evaluated these in a new probabilistic algorithm, called
ProMS (Probability Distribution-based Max-SAT Solving),
which is shown to outperform the previous state-of-the-art
on random instances. The signiﬁcance of these results also
stems from the observation that, despite the success of purely
probabilistic strategies for SAT, to the best of our knowledge,
no one has previously succeeded in adopting such a strategy

Abstract
We analyze to what extent the random SAT and Max-SAT
problems differ in their properties. Our ﬁndings suggest that
for random k-CNF with ratio in a certain range, Max-SAT can
be solved by any SAT algorithm with subexponential slowdown, while for formulae with ratios greater than some constant, algorithms under the random walk framework require
substantially different heuristics. In light of these results, we
propose a novel probabilistic approach for random Max-SAT
called ProMS. Experimental results illustrate that ProMS outperforms many state-of-the-art local search solvers on random
Max-SAT benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Given a number of Boolean variables and constraint clauses
in conjunctive normal form (CNF), the classic SAT problem consists in determining whether an assignment exists
that satisﬁes all constraints. Its optimization variant, MaxSAT, in contrast, aims to ﬁnd an assignment that maximizes
the number of satisﬁed clauses. Unfortunately, both problems are NP-hard, and for the Max-3-SAT variant, it is
hard to approximate optimal solutions within a factor of
more than 7/8 (Håstad 2001). This can also be viewed
from the perspective of a worst-case upper bound analysis:
The time complexity for Max-k-SAT (i.e., Max-SAT with
clauses of up to k variables) on n variables is Õ(2(1−μ)n ).
Although an asymptotic lower bound for μ has been proven,
for k > 2, no speciﬁc constants are known (Williams 2005;
Chen and Santhanam 2015).
In the context of random formulae, which have also been
the subject of extensive study, the main focus is on the satisﬁability threshold and algorithmic polynomial upper bounds
for low ratios of clauses to variables (Achlioptas and Moore
2006; Coja-Oghlan and Frieze 2014). Recent theory shows
that there exist thresholds for satisfying any large constant
fraction of clauses (Achlioptas, Naor, and Peres 2007). However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no algorithm
tailored to random Max-k-SAT.
Algorithms for SAT and Max-SAT are often categorized
as either complete or incomplete. The former guarantee the
optimality of the output but may fail to deliver any solution
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3915

