Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

How to Train a Compact Binary
Neural Network with High Accuracy?
1

2

Wei Tang,1∗ Gang Hua,4 Liang Wang1,2,3

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{wei.tang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn ganghua@microsoft.com

Abstract

Table 1: Comparison of different methods on ImageNet
dataset. The compression rate (denoted as Comp. rate in the
table) considers the overall parameters of the network. Both
top-5 and top-1 accuracies are presented in the last column.
Methods
Model size Comp. rate Accuracy(%)

How to train a binary neural network (BinaryNet) with both
high compression rate and high accuracy on large scale
datasets? We answer this question through a careful analysis
of previous work on BinaryNets, in terms of training strategies, regularization, and activation approximation. Our ﬁndings ﬁrst reveal that a low learning rate is highly preferred
to avoid frequent sign changes of the weights, which often
makes the learning of BinaryNets unstable. Secondly, we propose to use PReLU instead of ReLU in a BinaryNet to conveniently absorb the scale factor for weights to the activation
function, which enjoys high computation efﬁciency for binarized layers while maintains high approximation accuracy.
Thirdly, we reveal that instead of imposing L2 regularization,
driving all weights to zero which contradicts with the setting
of BinaryNets, we introduce a regularization term that encourages the weights to be bipolar. Fourthly, we discover that
the failure of binarizing the last layer, which is essential for
high compression rate, is due to the improper output range.
We propose to use a scale layer to bring it to normal. Last
but not least, we propose multiple binarizations to improve
the approximation of the activations. The composition of all
these enables us to train BinaryNets with both high compression rate and high accuracy, which is strongly supported by
our extensive empirical study.

AlexNet
BNN
XNOR-net
DoReFa-net
Our Method

232 MB1
22.6 MB
22.6 MB
22.6 MB
1.23 MB

1×
10.3×
10.3×
10.3×
23.6×

80.2/56.6
50.4/27.9
69.2/44.2
− /49.82
75.6/51.4

2016) and DoReFa-net (Zhou et al. 2016), have achieved
promising results. However, just as shown in Table 1, there
is still a huge hurdle to put these methods in practice due
to the limited compression rate and accuracy on large scale
datasets such as ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
For the issue of compression rate, to make the network
easier to train and guarantee reasonable accuracy, all previous methods kept both the ﬁrst and last layers in full precision. Of course when the trained model is used as a feature
extractor, the compression rate is not affected. But once it is
utilized for classiﬁcation in real scenarios, the overall compression rate is severely degraded just as shown in Table 1.
For the issue of accuracy, previous works (Rastegari et
al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016) have attempted to directly apply
BNN to large datasets such as ImageNet, but only poor performance is obtained. Since then, much attention has been
paid to relaxing the binary constraints, such as introducing
scale factors (Rastegari et al. 2016) or using more bits with
activations (Zhou et al. 2016). Although obvious accuracy
gain is achieved, a careful analysis on the failure of BNN
on large datasets has been largely overlooked. We argue that
clearly ﬁguring out the reason why BNN failed to obtain
high accuracy on large datasets is important because it can
guide us to design better training strategies for BinaryNets.
In this paper, we simultaneously address the low compression rate and the low accuracy of previous works on

Introduction
Research on binary neural network, which binarizes both the
weights and activations of a full precision neural network,
has been an active topic (Kim and Smaragdis 2016; Lin et al.
2015; Courbariaux and Bengio 2016; Rastegari et al. 2016;
Zhou et al. 2016). The BinaryNet has demonstrated to be
quite effective as it can
• compress the network by 32× theoretically, when compared with full precision networks in ﬂoat point;
• reduce the computation and accelerate the inference speed
since the 32-bit ﬂoating point multiply accumulations can
be replaced by 1-bit xnor-popcnt operations.
Recent methods along this line, such as BNN (Courbariaux and Bengio 2016), XNOR-net (Rastegari et al.

Model size of AlexNet is 249 MB reported in previous work,
our result is calculated based on the conﬁguration in Caffe.
2
The accuracy with activations of 2 bits is adopted for fair comparison because we approximate the activations two times.
1

∗

This work was done when W. Tang was an intern at MSR supervised by G. Hua.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2625

