Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Project Scheduling in
Complex Business Environments
Wen Song
Rolls-Royce@NTU Corp Lab
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
songwen@ntu.edu.sg

Introduction

this background, the Decentralized Resource-Constrained
Multi-Project Scheduling Problem (DRCMPSP) has been
proposed (Confessore, Giordani, and Rismondo 2007). DRCMPSP models a decentralized decision making environment, where each project is controlled by a Project Agent
(PA), who need to compete for some shared global resources
with limited capacities. Usually the PAs are coordinated by a
Mediator Agent (MA) to ﬁnd a conﬂict-free global resource
allocation. However, PAs may be reluctant to share information of their projects (e.g. activity durations and resource
requirements), since they could be rivals in the same market.
Market-based approach, especially Combinatorial Auction (CA), is an ideal paradigm for solving DRCMPSP,
since it only requires PAs’ high-level values on the resources, instead of low-level project details. However, existing CA based approaches, e.g. (Wellman et al. 2001;
Confessore, Giordani, and Rismondo 2007), all suffer from
scalability issue. Several approaches are scalable (Adhau,
Mittal, and Mittal 2012; Zheng et al. 2014), but they are
based on activity-level adjustment techniques, which inevitably require activity level information.
In (Song et al. 2016), we design a scalable approach for
solving large DRCMPSP instances based on multi-unit CA,
where PAs act as bidders, the MA acts as the auctioneer,
and the selling items are the global resources in each time
slot. The allocation problem of CA is well known to be NPComplete. When apply CA to DRCMPSP, additional complexity is introduced due to the intractability for a PA to evaluate the combinations of items (multisets)1 . To alleviate the
computational burden of the agents, our approach employs
an iterative auction process. In each auction round, each PA
submits a bid that maximizes its utility. We show that it is
sufﬁcient for a PA to bid for a special type of multisets called
cores, which is a compact resource utilization proﬁle and
can be easily generated from a feasible schedule obtained
by solving a bidding problem using a fast polynomial-time
algorithm we designed. Then, MA grants the bid according
to the descending order of the average price heuristic (Gonen
and Lehmann 2000), until no feasible allocation is available.
The iterative auction process terminates when all PAs are allocated. Our approach runs in polynomial-time, and can pro-

Project scheduling is a common management problem for
modern business organizations to deal with on a daily basis,
to arrange, control and optimize their business processes.
Schedule quality has a direct impact on the business competitiveness. Unfortunately, it is well known that project
scheduling problems are hard to be solved optimally, especially for large-scale practical problem instances. Driven by
the scientiﬁc and business value, project scheduling has been
widely studied by researchers from the communities of both
Operations Research (OR) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI),
and a variety of approaches have been successfully developed and applied to solve real-world problems.
Traditionally, project scheduling is considered as a centralized and deterministic problem. However, today’s manufacturing and management have entered into a more open
and dynamic environment, which jeopardizes the effectiveness of traditional approaches and makes scheduling problems even harder to solve. My thesis aims at addressing several variations of the Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP) in complex real-world environments.
Till now, we have been working on solving two speciﬁc
problems: 1) decentralized multi-project scheduling, and 2)
proactive project scheduling under time-dependent activity
duration uncertainty. We tackle the ﬁrst problem by designing an efﬁcient multi-unit combinatorial auction based approach to handle the decentralized scheduling requirement,
while for the second problem, we employ a sampling based
approach to exploit the probability knowledge of the uncertainties. In the remaining part of this abstract, I will give a
brief introduction of these problems and our approaches.

Decentralized Multi-Project Scheduling
Most corporations need to manage multiple projects in parallel. If all projects are controlled by a single manager,
the problem of multi-project scheduling can be simply reduced to a RCPSP. However, this centralization assumption is violated quite often nowadays, since multiple selfinterested decision makers with different individual objectives may be involved in the decision making process, due
to the frequent intra- and inter-ﬁrm collaborations. Against
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Essentially, this is because to compute an exact value of a
given multiset, a bidder need to solve a RCPSP which is NP-hard.

5052

