Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Minimal Undeﬁnedness for Fuzzy Answer Sets
Mario Alviano, Giovanni Amendola

Rafael Peñaloza

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Calabria, Italy
{alviano,amendola}@mat.unical.it

KRDB Research Centre
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
rafael.penaloza@unibz.it

bility (J, or foundedness), and the closed world assumption (C, or CWA). Brieﬂy, for normal ASP programs, justiﬁability requires that every true atom is derived from
the input program under the assumption provided for the
negated formulas, and the CWA constrains to false any atom
whose deﬁning rules have false bodies (You and Yuan 1994;
Eiter, Leone, and Saccà 1997). For FASP programs, these
two principles can be recast in terms of truth degrees:

Abstract
Fuzzy Answer Set Programming (FASP) combines the nonmonotonic reasoning typical of Answer Set Programming
with the capability of Fuzzy Logic to deal with imprecise
information and paraconsistent reasoning. In the context of
paraconsistent reasoning, the fundamental principle of minimal undeﬁnedness states that truth degrees close to 0 and 1
should be preferred to those close to 0.5, to minimize the ambiguity of the scenario. The aim of this paper is to enforce
such a principle in FASP through the minimization of a measure of undeﬁnedness. Algorithms that minimize undeﬁnedness of fuzzy answer sets are presented, and implemented.

(JC) Any truth degree x ∈ (0, 1] for an atom p is derived
from the input program under the assumption provided
for the negated formulas.
Minimal undeﬁnedness (U) is another fundamental principle introduced in the context of paraconsistent reasoning, imposing a minimization on the number of undeﬁned
atoms (You and Yuan 1994). For example, the FASP program Π = {p ← ∼q, q ← ∼ p} has three answer set candidates, namely I = {(p, 1), (q, 0)}, J = {(p, 0), (q, 1)}, and
K = {(p, 0.5), (q, 0.5)}, but K has to be discarded because
it contains two undeﬁned atoms. In terms of truth degrees,
minimal undeﬁnedness imposes the following preference:

Introduction
Fuzzy Answer Set Programming (FASP) (Nieuwenborgh,
Cock, and Vermeir 2007; Janssen et al. 2012a; 2012b; Blondeel et al. 2013; Lee and Wang 2014; Mushthofa, Schockaert, and Cock 2015) is a successfully combination of Fuzzy
Logic (Cintula, Hájek, and Noguera 2011) and Answer Set
Programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991; Marek
and Truszczyński 1999; Niemelä 1999), which resulted in
a declarative framework supporting non-monotonic reasoning on propositional formulas interpreted by truth degrees in
the interval [0, 1]. As in ASP, reasoning on unknown knowledge is eased by the use of default negation, whose semantics is elegantly captured by the notion of answer set, or stable model: in a model, truth of unknown knowledge may be
assumed as soon as there is no evidence of the contrary, and
the model is discarded when the truth of some propositions
is not necessary in order to satisfy the input program under the assumption for the unknown knowledge provided by
the model itself. Moreover, as in Fuzzy Logic, non-Boolean
truth degrees are useful to handle vague information, but
also to deal with inconsistencies that may arise from mathematical abstractions of real phenomena. In this respect, the
truth degree 0.5 is analogous to the truth value undeﬁned
used by many paraconsistent logics and paracoherent answer set semantics (Przymusinski 1991; You and Yuan 1994;
Sakama and Inoue 1995; Eiter, Leone, and Saccà 1997;
Amendola et al. 2016).
Fuzzy answer sets satisfy two fundamental principles
shared by several semantics for logic programs: justiﬁa-

(U) Truth degrees close to 0 or 1 should be preferred to
those close to 0.5.
However, minimal undeﬁnedness is not enforced by the current notion of fuzzy answer set, as for example K is among
the fuzzy answer sets of the program Π above. In fact,
Π has uncountably many fuzzy answer sets of the form
{(p, x), (q, 1 − x)}, x ∈ [0, 1]. I and J should be the preferred
two fuzzy answer sets for being undeﬁnedness-free.
The previous example also highlights that fuzzy answer
sets do not possess another important principle known as
congruence (Co): The extension of a semantics must coincide with the original semantics on coherent theories. In
terms of fuzzy ASP, congruence can be stated as follows:
(Co) Fuzzy answer sets of coherent ASP programs coincide
with crisp answer sets.
Principles (U) and (Co) are useful in abduction processes
 circuits.
 For example, the designer of a
involving fuzzy
fuzzy controller may be interested in computing input conﬁgurations producing a given output. This abduction process
can be improved by focusing on minimal undeﬁned interpretations, as those are the simplest to explain in the real world.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3694

