Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Latent Dirichlet Allocation for Unsupervised
Activity Analysis on an Autonomous Mobile Robot
Paul Duckworth, Muhannad Alomari,
James Charles, David C. Hogg, Anthony G. Cohn
School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
{p.duckworth, scmara, j.charles, d.c.hogg, a.g.cohn}@leeds.ac.uk

single activity instance is present in each (Duckworth et al.
2016). We generalise that work with a method allowing for
use of full length observations recorded from a mobile robot
with no human ﬁltering or segmentation. We propose a probabilistic generative approach that models each observation
as a mixture of latent topics, where each topic recovered is a
distribution over a vocabulary of discrete descriptors and is
considered as a human activity class. Removing the requirement for temporal segmentation of the recorded observations,
our robot is able to more quickly access larger quantities of
data which otherwise would need human annotation to select interesting sequences of frames. Our work moves away
from using a standard dataset, where each example contains
a single pruned activity instance, to a more realistic setting
where the robot is not told which sub-sequence of the observations to learn from. This loosely translates as removing
the assumption that humans continuously perform interesting
activities when being observed. We replace it with a more
reasonable assumption that a human detection is modelled as
a probabilistic mixture over an underlying number of latent
topics, where some topics can be considered “interesting”
human activities, and others more “mundane”; the deﬁnitions
of these rely on the task-speciﬁcs of the mobile robot.
Further challenges when using human activity data captured from a mobile robot include: i) The robot’s on-board
sensors only grant a partial and changing viewpoint of the
world, i.e. it obtains incomplete and noisy observations. ii)
Each observed activity is likely to be carried out with particular variations, e.g. opening a door with different hands.
Our framework helps alleviate these problems in two phases;
ﬁrst by utilising a state-of-the-art human pose estimator to
improve the quality of observations, and secondly we use
a qualitative spatial representation (QSR), which abstracts
quantitative data to a discrete set of qualitative values, thus
converting somewhat noisy observations of arbitrary spatial
positions into semantic low level actions. For example, if a
person reaches for a mug, the exact spatial position of the
hand or mug are not as useful for learning the human activity
“making coffee”, as a qualitative representation of the hand
approaching the mug.
Our methodology consists of ﬁrst detecting and tracking
humans from a mobile robot, then abstracting their pose
estimates using multiple QSRs and encoding them as the occurrences of discrete qualitative descriptors. We analyse the

Abstract
For autonomous robots to collaborate on joint tasks with humans they require a shared understanding of an observed scene.
We present a method for unsupervised learning of common
human movements and activities on an autonomous mobile
robot, which generalises and improves on recent results. Our
framework encodes multiple qualitative abstractions of RGBD
video from human observations and does not require external
temporal segmentation. Analogously to information retrieval
in text corpora, each human detection is modelled as a random
mixture of latent topics. A generative probabilistic technique
is used to recover topic distributions over an auto-generated
vocabulary of discrete, qualitative spatio-temporal code words.
We show that the emergent categories align well with human
activities as interpreted by a human. This is a particularly
challenging task on a mobile robot due to the varying camera
viewpoints which lead to incomplete, partial and occluded
human detections.

Introduction
Advancements in the reliability of autonomous mobile robot
platforms means they are well suited to continuously update
their own knowledge of the world based upon their many
observations and interactions (Marder-Eppstein et al. 2010;
Hawes et al. 2016). Unsupervised learning frameworks over
such long durations of time have the potential to allow mobile
robots to become more helpful, especially when cohabiting
human populated environments. By removing humans from
the learning process, i.e. with no time-consuming data annotation, such robots can cheaply learn from greater quantities
of available data (observations), allowing them to adapt to
their surroundings and save time/effort hard-coding speciﬁc
information. Understanding what human activities occur in
which regions and when, allows the robot to adjust its own
behaviour, or assist in a task it believes is being undertaken.
The contribution of this work is in unsupervised activity
analysis on continuous, unsegmented video sequences using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003). We focus on simple human activities for daily living
observable by a mobile robot in a human work place environment. Our framework outperforms recent work in the
literature which uses manually segmented videos, where a
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3819

