Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Incorporating Knowledge Graph Embeddings into Topic Modeling
Liang Yao, Yin Zhang,* Baogang Wei, Zhe Jin, Rui Zhang, Yangyang Zhang, Qinfei Chen
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{yaoliang, yinzh, wbg, shrineshine, iamzhangrui, zhyy, chenqinfei}@zju.edu.cn
*Corresponding Author

(KGE-LDA), which combines topic model and knowledge
graph embeddings. The proposed method explicitly models
document-level word co-occurrence in a corpus with knowledge encoded by entities’ vectors automatically learned
from a knowledge graph in a uniﬁed model, which could
extract more coherent topics and better representation of a
document in the topic space.
The contributions of the paper are threefold:

Abstract
Probabilistic topic models could be used to extract lowdimension topics from document collections. However, such
models without any human knowledge often produce topics that are not interpretable. In recent years, a number
of knowledge-based topic models have been proposed, but
they could not process fact-oriented triple knowledge in
knowledge graphs. Knowledge graph embeddings, on the
other hand, automatically capture relations between entities
in knowledge graphs. In this paper, we propose a novel
knowledge-based topic model by incorporating knowledge
graph embeddings into topic modeling. By combining latent
Dirichlet allocation, a widely used topic model with knowledge encoded by entity vectors, we improve the semantic coherence signiﬁcantly and capture a better representation of
a document in the topic space. Our evaluation results will
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

• It proposes a novel knowledge-based topic model based
on multi-relational knowledge graphs.
• It provides a Gibbs sampling inference method which
could handle the knowledge encoded by knowledge graph
embeddings properly.
• Experimental results on three widely used datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms several stateof-the-art knowledge-based topic models and entity topic
models on two tasks.

Introduction
Probabilistic topic models such as PLSA and latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Hofmann 1999; Blei, Ng, and Jordan
2003) are widely used for text modeling and analysis. However, these unsupervised models without any human knowledge often result in topics that are difﬁcult to interpret. In
other words, they could not produce semantically coherent
concepts (Chang et al. 2009; Mimno et al. 2011).
To overcome the drawback of interpretability in topic
model, especially in LDA, some previous works incorporate prior domain knowledge in different forms into topic
model. Although these efforts incorporate knowledge in
many ways, they could not process knowledge in the form of
fact-oriented triples in knowledge graphs, which is the main
knowledge form for machines (Wang et al. 2014c).
Recently a new research direction called knowledge graph
embedding has gained much attention (Bordes et al. 2011;
2013; Wang et al. 2014b; Guo et al. 2015). It aims at embedding components of a knowledge graph like WordNet
and Freebase into continuous vectors, so as to simplify
the knowledge representation while preserving the inherent
structure of the original knowledge graph.
In this work, we propose a new knowledge-based
topic model, called Knowledge Graph Embedding LDA

Related Work
Knowledge-based Topic Models
To overcome the drawback of interpretability in topic model,
especially in LDA, some previous works incorporated prior
domain knowledge into topic model in different forms.
Word Correlation Knowledge The DF-LDA (Dirichlet
Forest LDA) model in (Andrzejewski, Zhu, and Craven
2009) could incorporate knowledge in the form of mustlinks and cannot-links input by users. A must-link states that
two words should share the same topic, while a cannot-link
indicates two words should not be in the same topic. (Newman, Bonilla, and Buntine 2011) put forward two Bayesian
regularization methods to improve topic coherence. Both
methods exploited additional word co-occurrence data to
improve the interpretability of learned topics.
Lately, General Knowledge based LDA (GK-LDA) (Chen
et al. 2013) was put forward. GK-LDA could use must-link
knowledge from multiple domains. (Xie, Yang, and Xing
2015) incorporated word correlation into LDA by building a
Markov Random Field regularization. To learn word correlation knowledge automatically, AMC (topic modeling with
Automatically generated Must-links and Cannot-links) was
proposed (Chen and Liu 2014). AMC could learn must-link

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3119

