Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Building Task-Oriented Dialogue Systems for Online Shopping
Zhao Yan§∗ , Nan Duan‡ , Peng Chen , Ming Zhou‡ , Jianshe Zhou¶ and Zhoujun Li§†
§

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

Microsoft Xiaoice Team, Beijing, China
¶
BAICIT, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China
{yanzhao, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {nanduan, peche, mingzhou}@microsoft.com {zhoujs}@cnu.edu.cn
Deng, and Acero 2005; Rieser and Lemon 2010), have focused on developing natural language understanding (NLU)
techniques for parsing utterance from user into predeﬁned
semantic slots. Developing a structured ontology for NLU
can be very difﬁcult in cold-start stage where domain experts have to deﬁne the slot and possible values for speciﬁc
domain. One of the biggest challeng for shopping scenario
is that an E-commerce store usually contains hundreds even
more product categories. Moreover, there are enormous differences between the semantic slots of various categories.
For example, we usually talk about volume for refrigerator but screen size for cell phone. Previous data-driven
works for slot induction are mostly based upon humanhuman dialogue corpus (Tür et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2013;
Chen, Wang, and Rudnicky 2014). However, it is hard to
collect a large scale human-human dialogue data in shopping scenario.
To deal with the problem we mentioned, our work focus
on using three kinds of data resources that are common to
most E-commerce web service provider or easily crawled
from webs, including: (i) product knowledge base, which is
provided by the E-commerce partner and contains structured
product information; (ii) search log, which is closely linked
with products, natural language queries and user selection
behaviors (mouse click); (iii) community sites, where user
post their intents in natural language and can be used to mine
purchase-related intents and paraphrases of product-related
terms. Besides, we show that crowd sourcing is necessary to
build such AI bot.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
an AI bot is built as a shopping assistant and embed into a
mobile online shopping application of our E-commerce partner. All consumers can communicate with our AI bot via
natural language within the application, and the bot tries to
either help consumers complete their purchase-related tasks
based on session-level understanding of user utterances, or
chit-chat with them. By analyzing the human-bot conversation log, we demonstrate interesting ﬁndings, point out current issues and future work.
Our proposed approach differs previous work on dialogue
system from two aspects:

Abstract
We present a general solution towards building task-oriented
dialogue systems for online shopping, aiming to assist online customers in completing various purchase-related tasks,
such as searching products and answering questions, in a natural language conversation manner. As a pioneering work, we
show what & how existing natural language processing techniques, data resources, and crowdsourcing can be leveraged
to build such task-oriented dialogue systems for E-commerce
usage. To demonstrate its effectiveness, we integrate our system into a mobile online shopping application. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that an dialogue system in Chinese is practically used in online shopping scenario
with millions of real consumers. Interesting and insightful observations are shown in the experimental part, based on the
analysis of human-bot conversation log. Several current challenges are also pointed out as our future directions.

Introduction
One goal of Dialogue Systems (DS) is to enable communication between human and computer in natural language,
instead of complex commands or procedures. Dialogue systems can be broadly divided into two categories (Su et al.
2016): chat-oriented systems which aim to converse with
users and provide interesting and reasonable contextually
relevant responses (Banchs and Li 2012; Ji, Lu, and Li 2014;
Yan et al. 2016) and task-oriented systems designed to assist
users to achieve speciﬁc goals (e.g. ﬁnd products, restaurants or ﬂights) (Henderson, Thomson, and Williams 2014;
Bohus and Rudnicky 2009). We propose to build a taskoriented dialogue system for online shopping where the goal
is to recommend more relevance products and provide informations about product to user. Our system also support
to response chit-chat utterance which makes it more like a
human shopping assistant.
A large number of recent task-oriented dialogue systems
in both industry (Apple Siri, Microsoft Cortana, Google
Now, Amazon Echo, Baidu Duer and Facebook M) and
academia (Young et al. 2013; Gupta et al. 2006; Wang,
∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research Asia
Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Training data. Most of previous dialogue system works
rely on labeled data as supervision to train statistical
models for slot ﬁlling, dialog state tracking, police se-

†

4618

