Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Between Subgraph Isomorphism
and Maximum Common Subgraph
Ruth Hoffmann, Ciaran McCreesh,∗ Craig Reilly∗
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland
ruth.hoffmann@glasgow.ac.uk and {c.mccreesh.1,c.reilly.2}@research.gla.ac.uk

into the target as possible. In the induced case, this is
known as the maximum common induced subgraph problem (we discuss the non-induced case in Section 1.1). However, although recent subgraph isomorphism algorithms are
comfortable working with graphs with thousands of vertices, the state of the art for the maximum common subgraph problem (McCreesh et al. 2016) becomes computationally infeasible at only 35 vertices when working with
unlabelled graphs. This is largely because strong inference,
based upon the degrees of vertices (Solnon 2010) and the
distances or paths between them (Audemard et al. 2014;
McCreesh and Prosser 2015), is possible with subgraph isomorphism, but not maximum common subgraph, and so the
state space in the former is much more restricted, whilst ﬁltering during search is vastly stronger.
In this work we discuss an intermediate problem, where
we must map all but k vertices of the pattern graph into
the target—we show an example in Figure 1. This in some
ways resembles the approximate subgraph matching model
of Zampelli, Deville, and Dupont (2005), although we allow
any vertex to be removed. We show that if k is reasonably
small (say, between 1 and 5), then weakened forms of degree
and path based ﬁlterings are still effective in pruning the initial search space and in providing additional constraints respectively. We then show that combining these techniques
leads to a practical algorithm which can scale to work with
the families of graphs commonly used to benchmark subgraph isomorphism algorithms: depending upon the benchmark family, we can close a substantial portion of the instances, and in many more cases, we can at least obtain an
upper bound. This is a signiﬁcant improvement over state
of the art maximum common subgraph solvers, which cannot even ﬁt many of these instances in 64 GBytes of RAM.
Finally, we show that starting with k = 0 and iteratively in-

Abstract
When a small pattern graph does not occur inside a larger target graph, we can ask how to ﬁnd “as much of the pattern as
possible” inside the target graph. In general, this is known
as the maximum common subgraph problem, which is much
more computationally challenging in practice than subgraph
isomorphism. We introduce a restricted alternative, where
we ask if all but k vertices from the pattern can be found in
the target graph. This allows for the development of slightly
weakened forms of certain invariants from subgraph isomorphism which are based upon degree and number of paths.
We show that when k is small, weakening the invariants
still retains much of their effectiveness. We are then able to
solve this problem on the standard problem instances used to
benchmark subgraph isomorphism algorithms, despite these
instances being too large for current maximum common subgraph algorithms to handle. Finally, by iteratively increasing
k, we obtain an algorithm which is also competitive for the
maximum common subgraph problem.

1

Introduction

The subgraph isomorphism problem is to ﬁnd a copy of a
small pattern graph inside a larger target graph. The problem arises in many areas, including bioinformatics (Bonnici
et al. 2013), computer vision (Damiand et al. 2011; Solnon et al. 2015), malware detection (Bruschi, Martignoni,
and Monga 2006), compilers (Murray and Franke 2012;
Blindell et al. 2015), model checking (Sevegnani and Calder
2015), and pattern recognition (Conte et al. 2004), which
has lead to substantial research into how best to solve
the problem in practice (McGregor 1979; Ullmann 1976;
Cordella et al. 2004; Solnon 2010; Audemard et al. 2014;
McCreesh and Prosser 2015, and more). The problem comes
in two forms: in the non-induced variant, edges must be
mapped to edges, but the target may have “extra edges”,
whilst in the induced variant, non-edges must be mapped
to non-edges.
When a pattern cannot be found, we may wish to be
given a result which maps as many vertices of the pattern

P:

T:

∗

This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council [grant numbers EP/K503058/1 and
EP/M506539/1]
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: The pattern graph P on the left cannot be found in
the target graph T , but if the central vertex in P is removed,
then a subgraph isomorphism exists.

3907

