Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Visual Tracking via Local-Global Correlation Filter
1

Heng Fan,1 Jinhai Xiang2,∗
Computer & Information Sciences Department, Temple University, Philadelphia 19122, USA
2
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China
hengfan@temple.edu, jimmy xiang@mail.hzau.edu.cn

proposed and achieve good performance to some extend.
Nevertheless, due to the sensitivity of correlation ﬁlter to
occlusion, these trackers are prone to result in drift problem
and even tracking failure in presence of occlusion. To deal
with this problem, there are some attempts to apply partbased strategy to correlation ﬁlter for tracking (Liu, Wang,
and Yang 2015; Li, Zhu, and Hoi 2015). This kind of trackers partition the object into multiple local parts, and each
part corresponds with an independent correlation ﬁlter to estimate position. The ﬁnal position of object is determined by
combining the positions of all parts. Although these trackers can deal with occlusion in some degree, they still fail
to track object in the situation of heavy occlusion or deformation because they ignore the spatial structure of object.
(Liu et al. 2016) incorporates structure information by taking
into account the motion model of each local part, however
this method ignores the fact that the motion models of parts
are constrained to that of global target and thus global appearance should be embedded into the model. In addition, it
does not consider the temporal consistency of motion model
which helps to alleviate the problem of drift away from object.

Abstract
Correlation ﬁlter has drawn increasing interest in visual tracking due to its high efﬁciency, however, it is sensitive to partial occlusion, which may result in tracking failure. To address this problem, we propose a novel local-global correlation ﬁlter (LGCF) for object tracking. Our LGCF model utilizes both local-based and global-based strategies, and effectively combines these two strategies by exploiting the relationship of circular shifts among local object parts and global
target for their motion models to preserve the structure of object. In speciﬁc, our proposed model has two advantages: (1)
Owing to the beneﬁts of local-based mechanism, our method
is robust to partial occlusion by leveraging visible parts. (2)
Taking into account the relationship of motion models among
local parts and global target, our LGCF model is able to capture the inner structure of object, which further improves its
robustness to occlusion. In addition, to alleviate the issue of
drift away from object, we incorporate temporal consistencies of both local parts and global target in our LGCF model.
Besides, we adopt an adaptive method to accurately estimate
the scale of object. Extensive experiments on OTB15 with
100 videos demonstrate that our tracking algorithm performs
favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

Inspired by these motivations, we in this paper propose a
novel local-global correlation ﬁlter (LGCF) model for visual
tracking. Our LGCF combines local and global appearance
models by exploiting the circular shifts of global target and
local parts for motion models to preserve the inner structure
of object. For each local part, its motion model is represented
by circular shifts and consistent with the motion model of
global target. In this way, the spatial structure of target can
be preserved. Due to self-deformation of object, however,
the motion models of some parts may have slight discrepancies with that of global target. Therefore, we introduce the
sparse constraint to model the relationship of motion models
among global target and local parts, which helps our LGCF
model tolerate outliers of local parts. To further improve the
robustness of our model, we take into consideration temporal consistencies in both local parts and global target, and incorporate them into our model to alleviate the issue of drift
away from object. In addition, to adapt our tracker to scale
changes, we adopt an adaptive mechanism to estimate the
scale of object, which is different from aforementioned partbased correlation ﬁlter trackers. Both qualitative and quantitative experiments on large-scale benchmark prove the ef-

1. Introduction
Visual tracking plays a crucial role in computer vision and
has a variety of applications such as robotics, surveillance,
human-computer interaction and so forth (Wu, Lim, and
Yang 2015). Despite great progress in recent years, object
tracking remains a challenging problem due to appearance
variations caused by partial occlusion, illumination changes,
deformations and so on. To address these issues, numerous
methods have been proposed (Fan and Xiang 2015; Cong et
al. 2015; Gao et al. 2014; Bao et al. 2012; Wu et al. 2011;
Fan et al. 2015; Possegger, Mauthner, and Bischof 2015;
Mei and Ling 2011; Kwak et al. 2015; Hare, Saffari, and
Torr 2011; Zhang, Ma, and Sclaroff 2014).
Recently, correlation ﬁlter has drawn increasing attention in computer vision due to its high efﬁciency and robust performance. Inspired by this, many correlation ﬁlter
based trackers (Bolme et al. 2010; Danelljan et al. 2014a;
Henriques et al. 2015; Ma et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2016) are
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4025

