Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Hashing: A Joint Approach
for Image Signature Learning
1

Yadong Mu,1 Zhu Liu2
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China
2
Multimedia Department, AT&T Labs, U.S.A.
Email: myd@pku.edu.cn, zliu@research.att.com

theoretic discovery sheds light on trading similarity preservation for high compression of large data set. The classic
locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) (Indyk and Motwani 1998)
is a good demonstration for above tradeoff, instantiated in
various similarity metrics such as Hamming distance (Indyk
and Motwani 1998), cosine similarity (Charikar 2002), p
distance with p ∈ (0, 2] (Datar et al. 2004), and Euclidean
distance (Andoni et al. 2013).
Images are often accompanied with supervised information in various forms, such as semantically similar / dissimilar data pairs. Supervised hash code learning (Mu, Shen,
and Yan 2010; Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012) harnesses
such supervisory information during parameter optimization and has demonstrated superior image search accuracy compared with unsupervised hashing algorithms (Andoni and Indyk 2008; Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008;
Gong et al. 2013). Exemplar supervised hashing schemes include LDAHash (C. Strecha and Fua 2012), two-step hashing (Lin, Shen, and van den Hengel 2015), and kernel-based
supervised hashing (Liu et al. 2012) etc. Importantly, two
factors crucially affect the accuracy of a supervised hashing algorithm: the discriminative power of the features and
the choice of hashing functions. Conventionally, these two
factors are separately treated. Images are often represented
by hand-crafted visual features (such as SIFT-based bag-ofwords feature or sparse codes). Regarding hash functions, a
large body of existing works have adopted linear functions
owing to the simplicity. More recently, researchers have also
explored a number of non-linear hashing functions, such as
anchor-based kernalized hashing function (Liu et al. 2012)
and decision tree based function (Lin, Shen, and van den
Hengel 2015).
This paper attacks supervised hashing by concurrently
conducting visual feature engineering and hash function
learning. Most of existing image features are designated
for generic computer vision tasks. Intuitively, by unifying
these two sub-tasks in the same formulation, one can expect
the extracted image features to be more amenable for the
hashing purpose. Our work is inspired by recent prevalence
and success of deep learning techniques (Lecun et al. 1998;
Bengio 2009; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012).
Though the unreasonable effectiveness of deep learning has
been successfully demonstrated in tasks like image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and face

Abstract
Similarity-based image hashing represents crucial technique
for visual data storage reduction and expedited image search.
Conventional hashing schemes typically feed hand-crafted
features into hash functions, which separates the procedures
of feature extraction and hash function learning. In this paper,
we propose a novel algorithm that concurrently performs feature engineering and non-linear supervised hashing function
learning. Our technical contributions in this paper are twofolds: 1) deep network optimization is often achieved by gradient propagation, which critically requires a smooth objective function. The discrete nature of hash codes makes them
not amenable for gradient-based optimization. To address this
issue, we propose an exponentiated hashing loss function and
its bilinear smooth approximation. Effective gradient calculation and propagation are thereby enabled; 2) pre-training is
an important trick in supervised deep learning. The impact
of pre-training on the hash code quality has never been discussed in current deep hashing literature. We propose a pretraining scheme inspired by recent advance in deep network
based image classiﬁcation, and experimentally demonstrate
its effectiveness. Comprehensive quantitative evaluations are
conducted. On all adopted benchmarks, our proposed algorithm generates new performance records by signiﬁcant improvement margins.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed spectacular progress on similarity based hash code learning in a variety of computer
vision tasks, such as image search (Chum, Philbin, and
Zisserman 2008), object recognition (Torralba, Fergus, and
Weiss 2008) and local descriptor compression (C. Strecha
and Fua 2012) etc. The hash codes are highly compact
(e.g., several bytes for each image) in most cases, which
signiﬁcantly reduces the overhead of storing visual big
data and also expedites similarity-based image search. The
theoretic ground of similarity-oriented hashing is rooted
from Johnson-Lindenstrause theorem (Dasgupta and Gupta
2003), which elucidates that for arbitrary n samples, some
O(log(n))-dimensional subspace exists and can be found in
polynomial time complexity. When embedded into this subspace, pairwise afﬁnities among these n samples are preserved with tight approximation error bounds. This seminal
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2380

