Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Distributed Negative Sampling for Word Embeddings
Stergios Stergiou

Zygimantas Straznickas

Yahoo Research
stergios@yahoo-inc.com

MIT
zygi@mit.edu

Rolina Wu

Kostas Tsioutsiouliklis

University of Waterloo
rolina.wu@uwaterloo.ca

Yahoo Research
kostas@yahoo-inc.com
Training for such large vocabularies presents several challenges. Word2Vec needs to maintain two d-dimensional vectors of single-precision ﬂoating point numbers for each vocabulary word. All vectors need to be kept in main memory
to achieve acceptable training latency, which is impractical
for contemporary commodity servers. As a concrete example, Ordentlich et al. (Ordentlich et al. 2016) describe an
application in which they use word embeddings to match
search queries to online ads. Their dictionary comprises ≈
200 million composite words which implies a main memory requirement of ≈ 800 GB for d = 500. A complementary challenge is that corpora sizes themselves increase. The
largest reported dataset that has been used was 100 billion
words (Mikolov and Dean 2013) which required training
time in the order of days. Such training speeds are impractical for web-scale corpus sizes or for applications that require
frequent retraining in order to avoid staleness of the models.
Even for smaller corpora, reduced training times shorten iteration cycles and increase research agility.
Word2Vec is an umbrella term for a collection of word
embedding models. The focus of this work is on the SkipGrams with Negative Sampling (SGNS) model that has been
shown (Mikolov and Dean 2013) experimentally to perform
better, especially for larger corpora. The central component
of SGNS is Negative Sampling (NS). Our main contributions are: (1) a novel large-scale distributed SGNS training system developed on top of a custom graph processing framework; (2) a collection of approximation algorithms
for NS that maintain the quality of single-node implementations while offering signiﬁcant speedups; and (3) a novel
hierarchical distributed algorithm for sampling from a discrete distribution. We obtain results on a corpus created from
the top 2 billion web pages of Yahoo Search, which includes 1.066 trillion words and a dictionary of 1.42 billion
words. Training time per epoch is 2 hours for typical hyperparameters. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
work that has been shown to scale to corpora of more than 1
trillion words and out-of-memory dictionaries.

Abstract
Word2Vec recently popularized dense vector word representations as ﬁxed-length features for machine learning algorithms and is in widespread use today. In this paper we investigate one of its core components, Negative Sampling, and
propose efﬁcient distributed algorithms that allow us to scale
to vocabulary sizes of more than 1 billion unique words and
corpus sizes of more than 1 trillion words.

Introduction
Recently, Mikolov et al (Mikolov et al. 2013; Mikolov and
Dean 2013) introduced Word2Vec, a suite of algorithms
for unsupervised training of dense vector representations of
words on large corpora. Resulting embeddings have been
shown (Mikolov and Dean 2013) to capture semantic word
similarity as well as more complex semantic relationships
through linear vector manipulation, such as vec(“Madrid”)
- vec(“Spain”) + vec(“France”) ≈ vec(“Paris”). Word2Vec
achieved a signiﬁcant performance increase over the stateof-the-art while maintaining or even increasing quality of
the results in Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications.
More recently, novel applications of word2vec involving composite “words” and training corpora have been proposed. The unique ideas empowering the word2vec models have been adopted by researchers from other ﬁelds to
tasks beyond NLP, including relational entities (Bordes et
al. 2013; Socher et al. 2013), general text-based attributes
(Kiros, Zemel, and Salakhutdinov 2014), descriptive text of
images (Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2014), nodes in
graph structure of networks (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014), queries (Grbovic et al. 2015) and online ads (Ordentlich et al. 2016). Although most NLP applications of
word2vec do not require training of large vocabularies,
many of the above-mentioned real-world applications do.
For example, the number of unique nodes in a social network (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), or the number of
unique queries in a search engine (Grbovic et al. 2015), can
easily reach few hundred million, a scale that is not achievable using existing word2vec systems.

Related Work
Dense word embeddings have a rich history (Hinton, Mcclelland, and Rumelhart 1986; Elman 1990; Hinton, Rumelhart, and Williams 1985), with the ﬁrst popular Neural Network Language Model (NNLM) introduced in (Bengio et

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2569

