Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

What Do Multiwinner Voting Rules Do?
An Experiment Over the Two-Dimensional Euclidean Domain
Edith Elkind

Piotr Faliszewski

Jean-François Laslier

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

AGH University
Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Paris School of Economics
Paris, France
jean-francois.laslier@ens.fr

Piotr Skowron

Arkadii Slinko

Nimrod Talmon

University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
piotr.skowron@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Auckland
Auckland, New Zealand
a.slinko@auckland.ac.nz

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
nimrod.talmon@weizmann.ac.il

The goal of this paper is to develop a better understanding
of a number of well-known multiwinner voting rules, by analyzing their behavior in elections where voters’ preferences
are generated according to a two-dimensional spatial model.
By focusing on this preference domain, we can visualize the
election results and check if they agree with the intuition
and motivation behind these rules. Our study can be seen
as an experimental counterpart of the work of of Elkind et
al. (2014; 2017), who analyze multiwinner rules axiomatically.
In a multiwinner election, the goal is to select a size-k
committee (i.e., a set of k candidates, where k ∈ N is part
of the input) based on the voters’ preferences. Usually, voters can express their preferences by listing the candidates
from best to worst or by indicating which candidates they
approve; we focus on the former setting, as it ﬁts the spatial
preference model better.
Applications of multiwinner voting range from choosing
a parliament through preparing a portfolio of company’s
products (Lu and Boutilier 2011; 2015) or choosing movies
to offer to passengers on a long ﬂight (Elkind et al. 2014;
2017; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016) to shortlisting runners-up for an award (Barberà and Coelho 2008;
Elkind et al. 2014; 2017). As a consequence, there is also

quite a variety of different multiwinner voting rules. For instance, for parliamentary elections an important desideratum is proportional representation of the voters, and there
are voting rules such as STV or the Monroe rule (we deﬁne all rules considered in this paper in the next section)
that have been designed with this idea in mind. On the
other hand, in the context of portfolio or movie selection we primarily care about the diversity of the selected
committee, and it has been argued that the Chamberlin–
Courant rule is good for this purpose (Lu and Boutilier 2011;
Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2016). For shortlisting, our
primary concern is fairness: if there are two similar candidates, we want to select both or neither, and increasing the
target committee size should not result in any of the selected
candidates being dropped; these requirements are satisﬁed
by k-Borda. Naturally, there are other scenarios which require other normative properties.
The examples above indicate that choosing a good multiwinner rule is not a trivial task. It is therefore natural to
ask how we can facilitate the decision-making process of a
user who is facing this choice. There are several good answers to this question. First, some rules are speciﬁcally designed for certain tasks. For example, STV and the Monroe
rule have explicit built-in mechanisms ensuring that every
sufﬁciently large group of like-minded voters is represented.
Second, we can analyze axiomatic properties of the rules.
This line of work, was extensively pursued for single-winner
rules; for the case of multiple winners in was initiated by
Felsenthal and Maoz (1992) and Debord (1992), with recent contributions including the work of Elkind et al. (2014;
2017) and Aziz et al. (2015a; 2017). Finally, one can use empirical analysis to compare different rules under particular
conditions. For example, Diss and Doghmi (2016) consider
a few multiwinner voting rules and experimentally investigate how frequently they pick Condorcet committees.1 All
these approaches are useful, and the choice of a voting rule
should take all of them into account.
Nonetheless, a non-expert user may still feel ill at ease
when deciding which rule to choose for his or her particu-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In a Condorcet committee, every committee member is preferred to every non-member by a majority of the voters.

Abstract
We visualize aggregate outputs of popular multiwinner voting
rules—SNTV, STV, Bloc, k-Borda, Monroe, Chamberlin–
Courant, and PAV—for elections generated according to the
two-dimensional Euclidean model. We consider three applications of multiwinner voting, namely, parliamentary elections, portfolio/movie selection, and shortlisting, and use our
results to understand which of our rules seem to be best suited
for each application. In particular, we show that STV (one
of the few nontrivial rules used in real high-stake elections)
exhibits excellent performance, whereas the Bloc rule (also
often used in practice) performs poorly.

Introduction

494

