Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Dancing with Decision Diagrams: A Combined Approach to Exact Cover
Masaaki Nishino,1 Norihito Yasuda,1 Shin-ichi Minato,2 Masaaki Nagata1
1

2

NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University
nishino.masaaki@lab.ntt.co.jp

e.g., non-linear or multiple objectives. The exact cover problem appears in designing combinatorial objects like electric
circuits (Chang and Jiang 2016) and 3D shapes (Hu et al.
2014), that made from small fragments. In these situations,
it is beneﬁcial to output many candidates and allow designers to interactively select from them.
Since DLX is a depth-ﬁrst-search-based method, it may
encounter the same sub-problems several times. We can accelerate DLX if we can avoid solving such duplicate subproblems. A naive approach is to use memo cache to store
the solutions of sub-problems. However, since the number
of solutions to sub-problems can be exponentially many,
storing them into memo cache requires a huge amount of
memory. Moreover, we have to combine solutions of subproblems to construct the solution of the main-problem. This
procedure incurs computation complexity proportional to
the size of the solution. These points make it inefﬁcient to
naively introduce memo cache into DLX.
In this paper, we enable the efﬁcient use of memo caching
on DLX by using Zero-suppressed Binary Decision Diagrams (ZDDs) (Minato 1993) to represent the set of exact covers. ZDDs, a variant of Binary Decision Diagrams
(BDDs) (Akers 1978; Bryant 1986), represent a family of
sets as a directed acyclic graph (DAG). We modify DLX to
output the ZDD representing the set of exact covers. Since
we can make ZDDs that contain solutions to sub-problems,
sub-ZDDs (subgraphs), memo cache only requires constant
memory for each problem by storing the address of the
root node of the sub-ZDD representing the set of solutions.
Moreover, combining solutions of sub-problems can be done
in constant time if they are represented as ZDDs. Thus using
ZDD with DLX enables the effective use of memo caching
and can accelerate the search. To our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst work to improve DLX. We conduct experiments with
a wide range of benchmark instances of exact cover problems, and conﬁrm that our proposal is up to several orders
of magnitude faster than DLX.
In addition to accelerating DLX, our proposal has the
virtue that it outputs ZDDs. ZDDs support useful operations
that can run in time proportional to ZDD size. For example, ZDDs support model counting, enumeration of subsets,
ﬁnding the best subset that maximizes an objective function (Darwiche and Marquis 2002; Knuth 2011), and efﬁcient binary operations over families of sets, called family

Abstract
∗

Exact cover is the problem of ﬁnding subfamilies, S , of a
family of sets, S, over universe U , where S ∗ forms a partition of U . It is a popular NP-hard problem appearing in a
wide range of computer science studies. Knuth’s algorithm
DLX, a backtracking-based depth-ﬁrst search implemented
with the data structure called dancing links, is known as stateof-the-art for ﬁnding all exact covers. We propose a method
to accelerate DLX. Our method constructs a Zero-suppressed
Binary Decision Diagram (ZDD) that represents the set of solutions while running depth-ﬁrst search in DLX. Constructing
ZDDs enables the efﬁcient use of memo cache to speed up
the search. Moreover, our method has a virtue that it outputs
ZDDs; we can perform several useful operations with them.
Experiments conﬁrm that the proposed method is up to several orders of magnitude faster than DLX.

Introduction
The exact cover problem is the problem of ﬁnding subfamily S ∗ of a family of sets, S, over universe U , that forms
a partition of U . The exact cover problem is a popular NPhard problem that appears in a wide range of computer science studies. For example, it is known that some puzzles
including pentominoes, n-queen problems (Knuth 2000),
and Sudoku (Gunther and Moon 2012) can be formulated
and solved as exact cover problems or slightly generalized
forms. Moreover the perfect matching problem (Korte and
Vygen 2012) is a special case of exact cover, and the graph
coloring problem can be solved by converting it into an exact
cover problem (Koivisto 2006).
Knuth’s algorithm X (Knuth 2000) is a dedicated algorithm that can ﬁnd all exact covers. It is a simple depthﬁrst backtracking-based search algorithm, but it runs efﬁciently when implemented with a data structure called
dancing links. Dancing links represent a binary matrix as
doubly-linked lists. Knuth calls algorithm X implemented
with dancing links algorithm DLX. DLX has been empirically conﬁrmed to be the fastest for solving the problem of
ﬁnding all exact covers (Junttila and Kaski 2010).
Finding all exact covers are beneﬁcial for several reasons: we can ﬁnd exact covers which allows maximization
of an objective function even if the objective is complex,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

868

