Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Distant Domain Transfer Learning
Ben Tan,* Yu Zhang,* Sinno Jialin Pan,** Qiang Yang*
*

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
**
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{btan,zhangyu,qyang}@cse.ust.hk, sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we study a novel transfer learning problem
termed Distant Domain Transfer Learning (DDTL). Different
from existing transfer learning problems which assume that
there is a close relation between the source domain and the
target domain, in the DDTL problem, the target domain can
be totally different from the source domain. For example, the
source domain classiﬁes face images but the target domain
distinguishes plane images. Inspired by the cognitive process
of human where two seemingly unrelated concepts can be
connected by learning intermediate concepts gradually, we
propose a Selective Learning Algorithm (SLA) to solve the
DDTL problem with supervised autoencoder or supervised
convolutional autoencoder as a base model for handling different types of inputs. Intuitively, the SLA algorithm selects
usefully unlabeled data gradually from intermediate domains
as a bridge to break the large distribution gap for transferring
knowledge between two distant domains. Empirical studies on
image classiﬁcation problems demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm, and on some tasks the improvement in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy is up to 17% over
“non-transfer” methods.

Figure 1: The tag distribution of the uploaded images at
Qzone. In the ﬁrst task, we transfer knowledge between
cat and tiger images. A transfer learning algorithm achieves
much better performance than some supervised learning algorithm. In the second task, we transfer knowledge between
face and airplane images. The transfer learning algorithm
fails as it achieves worse performance than the supervised
learning algorithm. When applying our proposed SLA algorithm, however, we ﬁnd that our model achieves much better
performance.

Introduction
Transfer Learning, which borrows knowledge from a source
domain to enhance the learning ability in a target domain,
has received much attention recently and has been demonstrated to be effective in many applications. An essential
requirement for successful knowledge transfer is that the
source domain and the target domain should be closely related. This relation can be in the form of related instances,
features or models, and measured by the KL-divergence
or A-distnace (Blitzer et al. 2008). For two distant domains where no direct relation can be found, transferring
knowledge between them forcibly will not work. In the
worst case, it could lead to even worse performance than
‘non-transfer’ algorithms in the target domain, which is
the ‘negative transfer’ phenomena (Rosenstein et al. 2005;
Pan and Yang 2010). For example, online photo sharing communities, such as Flickr and Qzone1 , generate vast amount
of images as well as their tags. However, due to the diverse

interests of users, the tag distribution is often long-tailed,
which can be veriﬁed by our analysis in Figure 1 on the tag
distribution of the uploaded images at Qzone from January
to April in 2016. For the tags in the head part, we can build
accurate learners as there are plenty of labeled data but in
the tail part, due to the scarce labeled data, the learner for
each tag usually has no satisfactory performance. In this case,
we can adopt transfer learning algorithms to build accurate
classiﬁers for tags in the tail part by reusing knowledge in the
head part. When the tag in the tail part is related to that in the
head part, this strategy usually works very well. For example,
as shown in Figure 1, we can build an accurate tiger classiﬁer
by transferring knowledge from cat images when we have few
labeled tiger images, where the performance improvement is
as large as 24% compared to some supervised learning algorithm learned from labeled tiger images only. However, if the
two tags (e.g., face and airplane images) are totally unrelated
from our perspective, existing transfer learning algorithms
such as (Patel et al. 2015) fail as shown in Figure 1. One
reason for the failure of existing transfer learning algorithms

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://qzone.qq.com

2604

