Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

What Happens Next? Future Subevent Prediction
Using Contextual Hierarchical LSTM
Linmei Hu,1 Juanzi Li,1 Liqiang Nie,2 Xiao-Li Li,3 Chao Shao1

1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, China
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{hulinmei1991, lijuanzi2008, nieliqiang}@gmail.com, xlli@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, birdlinux@gmail.com
describes a possible future subevent. It is consistent with a
later news report “The Egyptian protest has caused 32 people dead and more than 2000 people injured”. This demonstrates our model can predict a future subevent that has not
yet happened. Clearly, predicting future subevents in advance is of great importance to governments, companies and
news agencies. Governments can beneﬁt from it by taking
proactive actions to avoid damages and deaths based on predicted subevents. Companies can better control their potential crisis of public relations. News agencies can pay their
close attention to news topics that the public are particularly
interested in.
This problem is, however, challenging due to the following three challenges. Firstly, it is hard to accurately represent
a subevent. Constructing hand-crafted features for subevent
representation often needs domain knowledge and cannot
be well generalized to other applications. Secondly, events
usually exhibit sequential structures at two levels: 1) words
describing a particular subevent are semantically positioned
in order, and 2) multiple subevents belonging to the same
event temporally progress in a sequential order. It is hard, if
not impossible, to build a uniﬁed predictive model to seamlessly capture the two-level dependencies. Finally, the topic
of the future subevent is likely to be closely related to the
topics of previous subevents. How can we incorporate the
topics, i.e. context-aware features, in our model?
Although great effort has been dedicated to event detection using social media (Sakaki, Okazaki, and Matsuo 2010)
and search engines (Ginsberg et al. 2009), a relatively few
work have been proposed to predict future events. Different from existing work that focused on target (known) event
prediction (Radinsky, Davidovich, and Markovitch 2012),
we focus on non-targeted (unknown) event prediction. For
example, Radinsky et al. (2012) extracted causality relations between two events and generalized them using ontology for prediction. Granroth-Wilding et al. (2016) extracted
event chains (Chambers and Jurafsky 2008) from texts and
learned the coherence score of two events using a compositional neural network. Manshadi et al. (2008) learned a probabilistic language model of the event sequences. Pichotta
and Mooney (2016) described a model for statistical script
learning using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). All these
work need hand-crafted features to represent events and can
only predict the future events from a given set of candidate

Abstract
Events are typically composed of a sequence of subevents.
Predicting a future subevent of an event is of great importance for many real-world applications. Most previous work
on event prediction relied on hand-crafted features and can
only predict events that already exist in the training data. In
this paper, we develop an end-to-end model which directly
takes the texts describing previous subevents as input and automatically generates a short text describing a possible future
subevent. Our model captures the two-level sequential structure of a subevent sequence, namely, the word sequence for
each subevent and the temporal order of subevents. In addition, our model incorporates the topics of the past subevents
to make context-aware prediction of future subevents. Extensive experiments on a real-world dataset demonstrate the superiority of our model over several state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

As deﬁned in (Allan et al. 1998), an event refers to a particular thing that happens at a speciﬁc time and place. Typically, an event is composed of a sequence of subevents.
For instance, an earthquake event may consist of sequential subevents such as omen, quake, damages, rescue efforts,
lack of food and water, chaos and outbreak of epidemics.
A subevent is usually described by a news article. Over
years, tens of thousands of news events have been reported
and archived with the progression of their corresponding
subevents.
As Mark Twain said “the past does not repeat itself, but
it often rhymes”. In the spirit of this reﬂection, in this paper, given a sequence of a few subevents, we aim to automatically predict the future subevent by leveraging largescale historical events. Take the event “Egyptian revolution
of 2011” as an example, given its sequential subevents described by the headlines of news articles1 , namely, “Conﬂict occurred again in Egypt on 22nd, and people plan to
hold a million-people march’’, “Egypt’s military will deliver a speech to respond to the conﬂict between demonstrators and police”, our model outputs “protests”, “burst”,
“chaos”, “cause”, “deaths”, “injuries” word by word, which
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

The headlines and model outputs are actually in Chinese. We have translated
them into English.

3450

