Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Recovering True Classiﬁer Performance
in Positive-Unlabeled Learning
Shantanu Jain, Martha White, Predrag Radivojac
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
{shajain, martha, predrag}@indiana.edu

(pr-rc) curve, a plot of precision as a function of recall.
The precision-recall evaluation, including summary statistics derived from the pr-rc curve, may be preferred to ROC
curves when classes are heavily skewed (Davis and Goadrich 2006).
Although model learning and performance evaluation in a
supervised setting are well understood (Hastie et al. 2001),
the availability of unlabeled data gives additional options
and also presents new challenges. A typical semi-supervised
scenario involves the availability of positive, negative and
(large quantities of) unlabeled data. Here, the unlabeled data
can be used to improve training (Blum and Mitchell 1998) or
unbias the labeled data (Cortes et al. 2008); e.g., to estimate
class proportions that are necessary to calibrate the model
and accurately estimate precision when class balances (but
not class-conditional distributions) in labeled data are not
representative (Saerens et al. 2002). This is often the case
when it is more expensive or difﬁcult to label examples of
one class than the examples of the other. A special case
of the semi-supervised setting arises when the examples of
only one class are labeled. It includes open-world domains
such as molecular biology where, for example, wet lab experiments determining a protein’s activity are generally conclusive; however, the absence of evidence about a protein’s
function cannot be interpreted as the evidence of absence.
This is because, even when the labeling is attempted, a functional assay may not lead to the desired activity for a number
of experimental reasons. In other domains, such as social
networks, only positive examples can be collected (such as
‘liking’ a particular product) because, by design, the negative labeling is not allowed. The development of classiﬁcation models in this setting is often referred to as positiveunlabeled learning (Denis et al. 2005).
State-of-the-art techniques in positive-unlabeled learning
tackle this problem by treating the unlabeled sample as negatives and training a classiﬁer to distinguish between labeled (positive) and unlabeled examples. Following Elkan
and Noto (2008), we refer to the classiﬁers trained on a
labeled sample from the true distribution of inputs, containing both positive and negative examples, as traditional
classiﬁers. Similarly, we refer to the classiﬁers trained on
the labeled versus unlabeled data as non-traditional classiﬁers. In theory, the true performance of both traditional and
non-traditional classiﬁers can be evaluated on a labeled sam-

Abstract
A common approach in positive-unlabeled learning is to train
a classiﬁcation model between labeled and unlabeled data.
This strategy is in fact known to give an optimal classiﬁer
under mild conditions; however, it results in biased empirical estimates of the classiﬁer performance. In this work, we
show that the typically used performance measures such as
the receiver operating characteristic curve, or the precisionrecall curve obtained on such data can be corrected with the
knowledge of class priors; i.e., the proportions of the positive
and negative examples in the unlabeled data. We extend the
results to a noisy setting where some of the examples labeled
positive are in fact negative and show that the correction also
requires the knowledge of the proportion of noisy examples
in the labeled positives. Using state-of-the-art algorithms to
estimate the positive class prior and the proportion of noise,
we experimentally evaluate two correction approaches and
demonstrate their efﬁcacy on real-life data.

Introduction
Performance estimation in binary classiﬁcation is tightly related to the nature of the classiﬁcation task. As a result,
different performance measures may be directly optimized
during training. When (mis)classiﬁcation costs are available, the classiﬁer is ideally trained and evaluated in a costsensitive mode to minimize the expected cost (Whalen 1971;
Elkan 2001). More often, however, classiﬁcation costs are
unknown and the overall performance is assessed by averaging the performance over a range of classiﬁcation modes.
The most extensively studied and widely used performance
evaluation in binary classiﬁcation involves estimating the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve that plots
the true positive rate of a classiﬁer as a function of its false
positive rate (Fawcett 2006). The ROC curve provides insight into trade-offs between the classiﬁer’s accuracies on
positive versus negative examples over a range of decision
thresholds. Furthermore, the area under the ROC curve
(AUC) has a meaningful probabilistic interpretation that correlates with the ability of the classiﬁer to separate classes
and is often used to rank classiﬁers (Hanley and McNeil
1982). Another important performance criterion generally
used in information retrieval relies on the precision-recall
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2066

