Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Pairwise Relationship Guided Deep Hashing for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Erkun Yang,1 Cheng Deng,1 Wei Liu,2 Xianglong Liu,3 Dacheng Tao,4 Xinbo Gao1
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
4
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
ekyang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {chdeng, xbgao}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, wliu@ee.columbia.edu,
xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au
which compress high-dimensional data instances into compact binary codes with similar binary codes produced for
similar data samples. However, due to the heterogeneity
across different modalities and the semantic gap between
low-level features and high-level semantics, developing effective and efﬁcient cross-modal hashing methods remains a
challenge problem.
To date, most of existing Cross-Modal Hashing (CMH)
methods focus on embedding instances from different
modalities into a uniﬁed Hamming code space to conduct search (Ding, Guo, and Zhou 2014; Zhang, Wang,
and Si 2011; Kumar and Udupa 2011; Wang et al. 2015;
Irie, Arai, and Taniguchi 2015; Liu et al. 2014). Specifically, these methods use shallow architectures to project
high-dimensional features into a low-dimensional space,
and then generate compact hash codes. A common problem of these CMH methods using shallow architectures is
their incapability of capturing heterogeneous correlations effectively to bridge different modalities, so these methods
cannot achieve satisfactory search quality. Several recent
deep models for multimodal embedding (Frome et al. 2013;
Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2014; Long et al. 2015;
Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Donahue et al. 2015; Gao et
al. 2015; Andreas et al. 2015) have proven that deep learning can discover heterogeneous correlations across different modalities more effectively than shallow learning methods. As a representative work, Deep Cross-Modal Hashing (DCMH) (Jiang and Li 2016) extends traditional deep
models for cross-modal retrieval, but it can only capture
intra-modal information and ignores inter-modal correlations, which makes the retrieved results suboptimal. Deep
Visual-Semantic Hashing (DVSH) (Cao et al. 2016) utilizes
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) to separately learn uniﬁed binary
codes for each modality. However, the textual modality in
DVSH is constrained to sentences or other sequence texts,
which is too strict in practice and greatly limits its applications.
In this paper, we propose a novel Pairwise Relationship Guided Deep Hashing (PRDH) method for cross-modal
retrieval, which adopts deep CNN models to simultaneously learn feature representations and hash codes for each
modality seamlessly in an end-to-end architecture. In this
deep architecture, we integrate two types of pairwise la-

Abstract
With beneﬁts of low storage cost and fast query speed, crossmodal hashing has received considerable attention recently.
However, almost all existing methods on cross-modal hashing
cannot obtain powerful hash codes due to directly utilizing
hand-crafted features or ignoring heterogeneous correlations
across different modalities, which will greatly degrade the retrieval performance. In this paper, we propose a novel deep
cross-modal hashing method to generate compact hash codes
through an end-to-end deep learning architecture, which can
effectively capture the intrinsic relationships between various modalities. Our architecture integrates different types of
pairwise constraints to encourage the similarities of the hash
codes from an intra-modal view and an inter-modal view, respectively. Moreover, additional decorrelation constraints are
introduced to this architecture, thus enhancing the discriminative ability of each hash bit. Extensive experiments show
that our proposed method yields state-of-the-art results on
two cross-modal retrieval datasets.

Introduction
With the fast development of information retrieval techniques and the popularity of social media in the past decades,
there exists a tremendous amount of multimodal data being
generated on the Internet everyday, such as texts, images,
and videos. To take advantage of such massive yet heterogeneous data, a great deal of effort has been invested in
approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search across different modalities (Liu, He, and Lang 2013; Liu et al. 2015;
Deng et al. 2013; 2016). Since data from different modalities may have strong semantic correlations, it is essential to support cross-modal retrieval (Song et al. 2013;
Zhang and Li 2014; Lin et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2012;
2009) that returns relevant results of one modality when
querying another modality, e.g., retrieving images with textual queries. Considering massive volumes and high dimensions of multimodal data, traditional methods designed for
single-modal data are not suitable for the cross-modality retrieval scenario. To address this issue, cross-modal retrieval
methods relying on hashing techniques have recently attracted much attention in the ANN research community,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1618

