Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Coherent Dialogue with Attention-Based Language Models
Hongyuan Mei

Mohit Bansal

Matthew R. Walter

Johns Hopkins University
hmei@cs.jhu.edu

UNC Chapel Hill
mbansal@cs.unc.edu

TTI-Chicago
mwalter@ttic.edu

information from one modality to another, e.g., in machine
translation and image captioning.
We improve the coherence of such neural dialogue language models by developing a generative dynamic attention
mechanism that allows each generated word to choose which
related words it wants to align to in the increasing conversation history (including the previous words in the response
being generated). Neural attention (or alignment) has proven
very successful for various sequence-to-sequence tasks by
associating salient items in the source sequence with the
generated item in the target sequence (Mnih et al. 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Xu et al. 2015; Mei,
Bansal, and Walter 2016a; Parikh et al. 2016). However,
such attention models are limited to a ﬁxed scope of history, corresponding to the input source sequence. In contrast, we introduce a dynamic attention mechanism to a recurrent neural network (RNN) language model in which the
scope of attention increases as the recurrence operation progresses from the start through the end of the conversation.

Abstract
We model coherent conversation continuation via RNNbased dialogue models equipped with a dynamic attention
mechanism. Our attention-RNN language model dynamically increases the scope of attention on the history as the
conversation continues, as opposed to standard attention (or
alignment) models with a ﬁxed input scope in a sequence-tosequence model. This allows each generated word to be associated with the most relevant words in its corresponding conversation history. We evaluate the model on two popular dialogue datasets, the open-domain MovieTriples dataset and the
closed-domain Ubuntu Troubleshoot dataset, and achieve signiﬁcant improvements over the state-of-the-art and baselines
on several metrics, including complementary diversity-based
metrics, human evaluation, and qualitative visualizations. We
also show that a vanilla RNN with dynamic attention outperforms more complex memory models (e.g., LSTM and GRU)
by allowing for ﬂexible, long-distance memory. We promote
further coherence via topic modeling-based reranking.

Introduction

The dynamic attention model promotes coherence of the
generated dialogue responses (continuations) by favoring
the generation of words that have syntactic or semantic associations with salient words in the conversation history. Our
simple model shows signiﬁcant improvements over state-ofthe-art models and baselines on several metrics (including
complementary diversity-based metrics, human evaluation,
and qualitative visualizations) for the open-domain MovieTriples and closed-domain Ubuntu Troubleshoot datasets.
Our vanilla RNN model with dynamic attention outperforms
more complex memory models (e.g., LSTM and GRU) by
allowing for long-distance and ﬂexible memory. We also
present several visualizations to intuitively understand what
the attention model is learning. Finally, we also explore a
complementary LDA-based method to re-rank the outputs
of the soft alignment-based coherence method, further improving performance on the evaluation benchmarks.1

Automatic conversational models (Winograd 1971), also
known as dialogue systems, are of great importance to a
large variety of applications, ranging from open-domain entertaining chatbots to goal-oriented technical support agents.
An increasing amount of research has recently been done
to build purely data-driven dialogue systems that learn from
large corpora of human-to-human conversations, without using hand-crafted rules or templates. While most work in
this area formulates dialogue modeling in a sequence-tosequence framework (similar to machine translation) (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Shang, Lu, and Li 2015;
Vinyals and Le 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015; Li et al. 2016a;
Dušek and Jurčı́ček 2016), some more recent work (Serban
et al. 2016; Luan, Ji, and Ostendorf 2016) instead trains a
language model over the entire dialogue as one single sequence. In our work, we empirically demonstrate that a
language model is better suited to dialogue modeling, as
it learns how the conversation evolves as information progresses. Sequence-to-sequence models, on the other hand,
learn only how the most recent dialogue response is generated. Such models are better suited to converting the same

Related Work
A great deal of attention has been paid to developing datadriven methods for natural language dialogue generation.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Arxiv version with appendices: https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.
06997

3252

