Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Incentivising Monitoring in Open Normative Systems
Natasha Alechina

Joseph Y. Halpern∗

Ian A. Kash

Brian Logan

University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
nza@cs.nott.ac.uk

Cornell University
Ithaca, USA
halpern@cornell.edu

Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
iankash@microsoft.com

University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
bsl@cs.nott.ac.uk

In this paper, we focus on the question of how to ensure the community standards are applied and offending behaviour is detected. We do not consider enforcement here,
that is, what should be done about someone who violates
the community standards; our focus is only on detection of
a violation. A key problem is that the community standards
that govern the behaviour of agents are typically not hard
and fast rules—they require interpretation in each particular case to determine whether a violation has occurred. We
assume that the standards are broadly accepted, but agents
may legitimately disagree about borderline cases.
The problem of incentivising agents to provide accurate
answers in settings where there is no ground truth has been
extensively studied in the literature on peer prediction (see,
e.g., (Miller, Resnick, and Zeckhauser 2005)). The key idea
is that, while there is no certain way to tell whether an agent
has answered correctly, agents doing their best to make a
determination will tend to agree with each other much of
the time, so we can use agreements with other agents as a
measure of how good a job an agent is doing. Recently, these
techniques have seen use in crowdsourcing settings as a way
to reward people for quality work and deter behaviours such
as spamming (Kamar and Horvitz 2012).
Prior work on peer prediction has studied settings where
agents are incentivised with money; these techniques are not
immediately applicable to settings where monetary incentives cannot be used (as is typically the case for collectively
maintained resources). Alechina et al. (2016) showed how
incentives can be supplied for detecting violated norms without the use of money in settings where (1) if a violation is
detected, there is an easily-checkable incontestable ‘witness’
to the violation, that is, an easy way to convince others that
there was indeed a violation (e.g., an inappropriate piece of
text) and (2) that the violation would be found if an agent
checked (even though checking might take time). In this paper, we show how the approach of Alechina et al. can be
extended to allow us to use peer prediction without reliance
on money. While, for concreteness, we focus on the speciﬁc problem of determining whether a norm has been violated, our techniques are equally applicable to other tasks
for which agents have no access to ground truth, a common
occurrence in crowdsourcing settings (e.g. labelling data).
In (Alechina et al. 2016), agents are incentivised to monitor by payments in scrip, which the agents use in turn to pay

Abstract
We present an approach to incentivising monitoring for norm
violations in open multi-agent systems such as Wikipedia. In
such systems, there is no crisp deﬁnition of a norm violation; rather, it is a matter of judgement whether an agent’s
behaviour conforms to generally accepted standards of behaviour. Agents may legitimately disagree about borderline
cases. Using ideas from scrip systems and peer prediction,
we show how to design a mechanism that incentivises agents
to monitor each other’s behaviour for norm violations. The
mechanism keeps the probability of undetected violations
(submissions that the majority of the community would consider not conforming to standards) low, and is robust against
collusion by the monitoring agents.

Introduction
Consider a setting in which agents contribute to and collectively maintain a shared resource. Such settings arise frequently. Examples include a collectively authored encyclopedia (such as Wikipedia), a community-authored street map
(such as OpenStreetMap), an open source software project,
and a discussion forum in which people comment on news
stories. Agents can make changes to the resource, for example, by writing a new article in the encyclopedia or by making a series of edits to an existing article. We assume that
there are generally accepted community standards governing what constitutes acceptable behaviour. These standards
may, for example, regulate the content of articles that can
be posted or require that articles must be balanced.1 The
community in general beneﬁts if the standards are upheld.
However, the actions of some agents may occasionally violate the community standards. Such violations may be inadvertent (the agent does not realise his behaviour is noncompliant) or malicious (the agent knows his behaviour is
non-compliant).
∗
Supported in part by NSF grants IIS-0534064, IIS-0812045,
IIS-0911036, and CCF-1214844, and by AFOSR grants FA955008-1-0438, FA9550-09-1-0266, and FA9550-12-1-0040, and ARO
grant W911NF-09-1-0281.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Examples of standards applying to Wikimedia projects can be
found at meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia principles.

305

