Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Collaborative Planning with Encoding of Users’ High-level Strategies
Joseph Kim

Christopher J. Banks

Julie A. Shah

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
joseph kim@csail.mit.edu

Norfolk State University
700 Park Ave
Norfolk, VA 23504
cjbanks@mit.edu

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
julie a shah@csail.mit.edu

plan is generated, users may have difﬁculty interpreting the
reason why the plan performs well and trusting it.
Such challenges motivate the development of a form of
collaborative planning, where instead of treating the planner as a “black box,” users are actively involved in the plan
generation process. Results from prior research have indicated that human experts can positively aid machine learning classiﬁers by providing feedback about feature selection (Cheng, Wei, and Tseng 2006; Raghavan, Madani, and
Jones 2006), scheduling algorithms (by dynamically modifying weights of objective functions) (Clare et al. 2012)
and search algorithms (by highlighting local search regions)
(Anderson et al. 2000). Similarly, we expect that users can
augment automated planners — for example, by providing
insights gained from spatial reasoning or by communicating strategies that generalize across problems — in order to
produce higher-quality plans than those generated by an automated planner alone.
In this work, we explore a type of interaction through
which users provide high-level strategies to a planner. Humans can readily describe their dominant strategies during problem-solving scenarios (Hayes-Roth 1980; Nielsen
1994), and such communication at a strategic level is more
succinct than explicitly enumerating the steps of a plan. This
method of communication is similar to the way in which
a supervisor would instruct his or her subordinates about a
new problem (Du Boulay and Luckin 2001). The strategies
derived for a speciﬁc problem could also generalize across
other problem instances, potentially improving learner’s performance in different circumstances.
We encoded users’ strategies using preferences, which are
composed of soft goals and soft trajectory constraints, using the Planning Domain Descriptional Language (PDDL)
3.0 (Gerevini and Long 2006). Trajectory constraints incorporate linear temporal logic to constrain the plan structure.
We used soft constraints, as opposed to hard constraints, because the latter could over-constrain the problem and potentially render it unsolvable — circumstances we would want
to avoid when users’ elicited strategies are infeasible or poor.
Preferences also allow for the association of a reward for
preserving user’s strategies, or a penalty for breaking them.
The quality of the resulting plan is then assessed quantitatively in terms of its net beneﬁt — minimizing the original
problem cost while maximizing reward associated with the

Abstract
The generation of near-optimal plans for multi-agent systems
with numerical states and temporal actions is computationally
challenging. Current off-the-shelf planners can take a very
long time before generating a near-optimal solution. In an effort to reduce plan computation time, increase the quality of
the resulting plans, and make them more interpretable by humans, we explore collaborative planning techniques that actively involve human users in plan generation. Speciﬁcally,
we explore a framework in which users provide high-level
strategies encoded as soft preferences to guide the low-level
search of the planner. Through human subject experimentation, we empirically demonstrate that this approach results
in statistically signiﬁcant improvements to plan quality, without substantially increasing computation time. We also show
that the resulting plans achieve greater similarity to those generated by humans with regard to the produced sequences of
actions, as compared to plans that do not incorporate userprovided strategies.

Introduction
Automated planning is an important ﬁeld of AI research that
addresses many real-world optimization problems, including vehicle routing, job-shop scheduling, and mission planning for military engagements and disaster response. Substantial research efforts have focused on improving the performance of domain-independent generative planners. These
planners automatically produce plans, or sequences of actions that transform the initial state into a state that satisﬁes
the goal speciﬁcation.
Even in its simplest form, automated planning is computationally hard — to be precise, it is PSPACE-complete (Bylander 1991). With the inclusion of numerical variables and
temporal actions, the computational complexity increases
further to EXPSPACE-complete (Rintanen 2007). Currently,
there are only a small number of planners available that
can handle numerical and temporal problems, and designing planners that generate high-quality plans and perform
efﬁciently across various domains remains an open challenge (Chrpa, Vallati, and McCluskey 2014). Greedy search
heuristics often yield low-quality plans that can result in
wasted resources; also, even in the event that an adequate
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

955

