Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Ontology Materialization by Abstraction Reﬁnement in Horn SHOIF
Birte Glimm and Yevgeny Kazakov and Trung-Kien Tran
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Ulm, Germany
<ﬁrst name>.<last name>@uni-ulm.de

checking and query answering for a large ABox by computing a so-called ‘summary ABox’ in which several original individuals are merged into one. If the resulting ABox is
found consistent, then so is the original ABox. If not, then
explanations (Kalyanpur et al. 2007) are used to pinpoint
the contradictory axioms or relax the summary to avoid inconsistency. Similar to SHER, the abstraction reﬁnement
method for Horn ALCHOI (Glimm et al. 2014) represents
several individuals of the original ABox by one individual
in a corresponding ‘abstract ABox’. In contrast to the summary ABox, the abstract ABox, however, provides an underapproximation rather than an over-approximation of entailments. That is, whereas the summary ABox entails at least
assertions entailed in the original ABox (when individuals
are replaced with their representatives), the abstract ABox
can entail at most such assertions. To ensure completeness
of the method, the so-called reﬁnement step is used that recomputes the abstraction based on new (sound) entailments
obtained from a previous abstraction. This has the added
beneﬁt that not only consistency but also the full materialization of the ABox can be computed without (rather expensive) explanation computations or repeated consistency
checks. This paper signiﬁcantly advances the abstraction reﬁnement method in several directions:

Abstract
Abstraction reﬁnement is a recently introduced technique using which reasoning over large ABoxes is reduced to reasoning over small ‘abstract’ ABoxes. Although the approach is
sound for any classical Description Logic such as SROIQ,
it is complete only for Horn ALCHOI. In this paper, we
propose an extension of this method that is now complete
for Horn SHOIF and also handles role- and equalitymaterialization. To show completeness, we use a tailored set
of materialization rules that loosely decouple the ABox from
the TBox. An empirical evaluation demonstrates that, despite the new features, the abstractions are still signiﬁcantly
smaller than the original ontologies and the materialization
can be computed efﬁciently.

Introduction
Description Logics (DLs) are popular languages for knowledge representation and reasoning. They are the underlying formalism for the standardized Web Ontology Language
OWL, which is widely used in many application areas. Recent years have also seen an increasing interest in ontologybased data access, where a TBox with background knowledge, often expressed in a DL language, is used to enrich
datasets (ABoxes), which are then accessible via queries.
Ontology materialization is a reasoning task that computes
logical consequences of the dataset w.r.t. the TBox and it is
the most important task in some languages, e.g. OWL 2 RL.
In other languages, e.g., those that allow existential quantiﬁcation, materialization is a stepping stone for query answering via rewriting (Kontchakov et al. 2011).
To make ontology materialization useful in practice, especially for large datasets, scalable materialization is of
great importance. Several approaches have been proposed
to achieve this goal. The RDFox (Motik et al. 2014) and
WebPIE (Urbani et al. 2012) systems operate on the entire dataset and utilize parallel computing to perform a rulebased materialization for OWL 2 RL. Other approaches try
to reduce the size of the dataset. Modules or so-called ‘individual islands’ (Wandelt and Möller 2012) are used for reducing the set of ABox assertions to those that are sufﬁcient
for computing the entailed assertions for a given individual.
The SHER system (Dolby et al. 2009) improves consistency

1. We extend the approach to guarantee completeness in the
presence of transitive and functional roles, thus fully supporting Horn SHOIF ontologies. Reasoning with nominals, inverse roles, and functionality is known to be challenging due to the loss of the tree-model property and the
existence of implicitly cardinality constrained concepts
(implicit nominals).
2. We materialize not only concept assertions, but also role
and equality assertions. In ALCHOI, role and equality
assertions can be computed by expanding the role hierarchy and analyzing assertions of nominals. In SHOIF
special techniques are needed to properly handle functionality and the consequences of implicit nominals.
3. We present a new set of materialization rules, which
loosely decouple the ABox from the TBox. Although we
use them only for proving completeness of the method,
these rules can be of interest on its own, e.g., as a basis
of an efﬁcient implementation for ABox reasoning. This
provides a fresh view of the approach as the completeness

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1114

