Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Mechanism-Aware Neural Machine
for Dialogue Response Generation
Ganbin Zhou,1,2 Ping Luo,1 Rongyu Cao,1,2 Fen Lin,3 Bo Chen,3 Qing He1
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China.
{zhouganbin, caory}@ics.ict.ac.cn, {luop, heqing}@ict.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
3
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat Technical Architecture Department, Tencent, China.
another, they “translate” an input post x to a response y via
maximizing the probability of p(y|x). However, since the
generic responses such as “I see”, “that’s OK” and “that’s
great” appear quite frequently in the corpus, the training
objective of maximum likelihood tends to produce highfrequency responses, which might be meaningless and lack
of diversity (Li et al. 2016).
In this study, we ﬁnd that the training corpus for conversational models is intrinsically different from the one for
translation models in terms of output diversity. In translation corpus, since every sentence in a language and its translation in another language are semantically equivalent, there
exists a 1-to-1 relationship between them. However, in conversation corpus, an input post might correspond to multiple responses with different semantics and speaking styles.
For example, in free-chat corpus used in this study the input
sentence “how could you be so silly” includes 62 different
responses. It means that a 1-to-n relationship between a post
to its responses actually exists in open-domain conversation.
Furthermore, we argue that this issue of response diversity mainly comes from the different language mechanisms
people use in responding the same utterance. For example, considering the input “have you eaten yet?” (a widelyused sentence in Chinese for greeting), the respondent who
prefers rhetorical questions could response with “how about
you?”. In contrary, the respondent who prefers declarative
sentences could response afﬁrmatively with “yes, I have”.
Hence, even for the same input the responses generated by
different mechanisms may be largely dissimilar in terms of
language style and response content.
To address this issue of response diversity, we explicitly
consider the multiplicity of responding mechanisms in modeling dialogues and propose a probabilistic framework of
Mechanism-Aware Responding Machine (MARM). Specifically, we model the responding mechanisms as latent embeddings, and represent the mapping from an post x to its response y as a mixture of these responding mechanisms. Different from the conventional neural encoder-decoder (Cho et
al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) for response generation (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Yin et al. 2016), a framework of encoder-diverter-decoder is developed, where the
module of diverter is used to generate mechanism-aware
context. After the model parameters are learned, the most
likely mechanisms to an input post x are selected to encode

Abstract
To the same utterance, people’s responses in everyday dialogue may be diverse largely in terms of content semantics,
speaking styles, communication intentions and so on. Previous generative conversational models ignore these 1-to-n relationships between a post to its diverse responses, and tend
to return high-frequency but meaningless responses.
In this study we propose a mechanism-aware neural machine
for dialogue response generation. It assumes that there exists some latent responding mechanisms, each of which can
generate different responses for a single input post. With this
assumption we model different responding mechanisms as
latent embeddings, and develop a encoder-diverter-decoder
framework to train its modules in an end-to-end fashion.
With the learned latent mechanisms, for the ﬁrst time these
decomposed modules can be used to encode the input into
mechanism-aware context, and decode the responses with the
controlled generation styles and topics. Finally, the experiments with human judgements, intuitive examples, detailed
discussions demonstrate the quality and diversity of the generated responses with 9.80% increase of acceptable ratio over
the best of six baseline methods.

Introduction
Conversational models, aiming at generating relevant and
ﬂuent responses in free-form natural language, have attracted increasing studies for the dialogue-based interface
with its wide application ﬁelds from customer service to user
entertainment (Abu Shawar and Atwell 2007; Grosz 2016).
Previous rule-based (Williams and Young 2007; Misu et al.
2012; Young et al. 2013) and retrieval-based (Ji, Lu, and Li
2014) conversational models requires manual efforts in rule
developing and feature engineering, or can only response the
posts in pre-existing cases, thus are difﬁcult to be extended
to open domains. Recently, the vast amount of dialogue text
generated by social media provides the data basis for generative models of dialogue systems, which are promising to
outperform the conventional ones (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015).
Generative conversational models, which learn the mapping from an input post x to its response y, are typically
motivated by the previous studies in statistic machine translation (SMT). Instead of translating from one language to
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3400

