Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Nash Stability in Social Distance Games
Alkida Balliu

Michele Flammini

Gran Sasso Science
Institute, Italy.
alkida.balliu@gssi.infn.it

DISIM - University of
L’Aquila & Gran Sasso
Science Institute, Italy.
michele.ﬂammini@univaq.it

Giovanna Melideo

Dennis Olivetti

DISIM - University
of L’Aquila, Italy.
giovanna.melideo@univaq.it

Gran Sasso Science
Institute, Italy.
dennis.olivetti@gssi.infn.it
A clustering is Nash stable, or it is a Nash equilibrium,
if no agent can improve her utility by unilaterally changing her own cluster. In this setting, one of the main tools
for evaluating the degradation of the system performance
induced by the selﬁsh behavior of its agents is the price
of anarchy (PoA) (Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou 1999;
Papadimitriou 2001), deﬁned as the worse-case ratio between the social welfare (i.e., the sum of the agents utilities) of a best clustering and the social welfare of a Nash
stable clustering. A related optimistic measure for evaluating the welfare of the best possible equilibrium is the price
of stability (PoS) (Anshelevich et al. 2004), that is the bestcase ratio between the social welfare of a best clustering and
the social welfare of a Nash stable clustering. A growing
interest in HGs has concerned subclasses in which agents
entertain preferences over the other agents, which are then
naturally lifted to preferences over coalitions, additivelyseparable HGs being a noticeable example (Olsen 2009).
In this paper we focus on Social Distance Games (SDGs),
an important subclass of HGs introduced in (Brânzei and
Larson 2011) where agent utilities are based on the concept
of social distance (i.e., the number of hops required to reach
one node from another), which has become famous since
Milgram’s study on six degrees of separation. In SDGs the
utility of an agent is given by the average inverse distance
from all the other nodes in her coalition, that is by her harmonic centrality (Boldi and Vigna 2014) divided by the size
of the coalition. The basic idea is that the agents prefer to
maintain ties with other agents who are close to them. The
utility formulation is a variant of the closeness centrality and
reﬂects the principle of homophily, that similarity breeds
connection and people tend to form communities with similar others (McPherson, Lovin, and Cook 2001). Moreover,
it is related to several other classical measures from network
analysis, such as degree, closeness, betweenness, and eigenvector centrality (Gomez et al. 2003), all of which are used
to determine how a node is embedded in the network.

Abstract
We consider Social Distance Games (SDGs), that is cluster
formation games in which agent utilities are proportional to
their harmonic centralities in the respective coalitions, i.e., to
the average inverse distance from the other agents. We adopt
Nash stable outcomes, that is states in which no agent can improve her utility by unilaterally changing her coalition, as the
target solution concept. Although SDGs always admit a Nash
equilibrium, we prove that it is NP-hard to ﬁnd a social welfare maximizing one and obtain a negative result concerning
the game convergence. We then focus on the performance of
Nash equilibria and provide matching upper bound and lower
bounds on the price of anarchy of Θ(n), where n is the number of nodes of the underlying graph, and a lower bound on
the price of stability of 6/5 − . Finally, we characterize the
price of stability of SDGs for graphs with girth 4 and girth at
least 5.

1

Introduction

Coalition formation is a pervasive aspect of social life and
it has been studied extensively in algorithmic game theory
using the natural model of Hedonic Games (HGs), introduced in (Dreze and Greenberg 1980) and further explored
in (Aziz, Brandt, and Harrenstein 2011; Aziz, Brandt, and
Seedig 2013; Banerjee, Konishi, and Sönmez 2001; Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002; Elkind and Wooldridge 2009;
Elkind, Fanelli, and Flammini 2016; Gairing and Savani
2010). A HG consists of a set of selﬁsh agents (humans,
robots, software agents, etc.) having preferences over coalitions that might include them, regardless of which other
coalitions may or may not be present. The outcome is a partition of the agent set into disjoint coalitions (or clusters),
referred to as a clustering or coalition structure.
Stability is the main criterion that has been used to analyze which coalition structures will arise: an outcome should
be resistant to individual/group deviations, with different
types of deviations giving rise to different notions of stability (such as core stability, individual stability, Nash stability). See (Aziz and Savani 2016) for a survey from a more
computational point of view.

Related Work In the literature, an extensive research considered HGs from a strategic cooperative point of view
(Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002; Banerjee, Konishi, and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

342

