Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

State Projection via AI Planning
Shirin Sohrabi, Anton V. Riabov, and Octavian Udrea
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Rd, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{ssohrab, riabov, udrea}@us.ibm.com

Consider the following energy domain example, where
the objective is to project the price of oil and volume of
oil produced 2 years into the future. Our objective is not
to ﬁnd a precise estimate of the price of oil, but rather to
project the possible range of values and provide an explanation that led to those values. The Planning Projector relies on domain knowledge that can either be provided by the
domain experts, or encoded by non-experts after reviewing
various sources of available knowledge, such as research papers, textbooks or Wikipedia. The domain knowledge in this
example describes possible actions affecting the oil price directly or indirectly, for example by affecting supply levels.
For instance, the decision of the leaders of Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to meet is an
action that is likely to affect both the price and the supply
of oil, depending on the outcome of such a meeting. The
decision to limit production will decrease the supply and increase the price, or the decision to increase production can
lead to lower prices. The observations associated with these
actions, conﬁrming or contradicting them, can be derived
from news reports. Similarly, several other events or actions
can be modeled: the discovery of a new oil ﬁeld, drilling activity in known ﬁelds, hurricanes or other natural disasters
affecting oil production, and changes in currency rates.
We present the Planning Projector system prototype that
integrates multiple components in order to explain the observations and generate future trajectories. The components
include: (1) knowledge engineering: the process to encode
the domain knowledge in planning terms; (2) data transformation: the component required to transform the raw data
into a sequence of observations; (3) trajectory computation:
the component responsible to compute a set of trajectories
given no planning goals as the input; (4) user interface: the
component needed in order to present the space of possibilities in a compact and efﬁcient way.
Figure 1 shows the system architecture of the Planning
Projector. The system takes as input news articles and social media posts, analyses and transforms the raw data via
the Data Transformation component and sends selected analytic results as a sequence of observations into the Trajectory
Computation component, which produces a set of trajectories. The Knowledge Engineering component ensures that
the required domain knowledge is captured and available to
the Trajectory Computation component. The User Interface

Abstract
Imagining the future helps anticipate and prepare for what is
coming. This has great importance to many, if not all, human endeavors. In this paper, we develop the Planning Projector system prototype, which applies plan-recognition-asplanning technique to both explain the observations derived
from analyzing relevant news and social media, and project
a range of possible future state trajectories for human review. Unlike the plan recognition problem, where a set of
goals, and often a plan library must be given as part of the
input, the Planning Projector system takes as input the domain knowledge, a sequence of observations derived from
the news, a time horizon, and the number of trajectories to
produce. It then computes the set of trajectories by applying
a planner capable of ﬁnding a set of high-quality plans on a
transformed planning problem. The Planning Projector prototype integrates several components including: (1) knowledge
engineering: the process of encoding the domain knowledge
from domain experts; (2) data transformation: the problem of
analyzing and transforming the raw data into a sequence of
observations; (3) trajectory computation: characterizing the
future state projection problem and computing a set of trajectories; (4) user interface: clustering and visualizing the trajectories. We evaluate our approach qualitatively and conclude
that the Planning Projector helps users understand future possibilities so that they can make more informed decisions.

Introduction
Being prepared for the future is of great importance to many,
if not all, human endeavors. In this paper, we develop the
Planning Projector system prototype that helps users (e.g.,
analysts) to not only explain the past, based on the observed events, but also project the future by providing a
range of possible trajectories, where each trajectory consists of a future state, and an explanation (i.e., an action sequence) that led to that state. The Planning Projector applies
plan-recognition-as-planning technique to explain the observations, derived from relevant news and social media posts,
and projects alternative trajectories, in accordance with a
planning domain deﬁnition that captures the expert knowledge. Hence, the Planning Projector infers (or recognizes)
plans for the past and projects the future.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4611

