Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Spatial Projection of Multiple Climate Variables
Using Hierarchical Multitask Learning
André R. Gonçalves

Arindam Banerjee

Fernando J. Von Zuben

Center for Research and Development
in Telecommunication (CPqD), Brazil
andrerg@cpqd.com.br

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Engg.
University of Minnesota, USA
banerjee@cs.umn.edu

School of Elec. and Comp. Eng.
University of Campinas, Brazil
vonzuben@dca.fee.unicamp.br

built as a combination (ensemble) of multiple ESMs simulations (Tebaldi and Knutti 2007; McQuade and Monteleoni
2013; Sanderson, Knutti, and Caldwell 2015).
Recently, the problem of constructing ESMs ensemble
was approached from a multitask learning (MTL) perspective (Gonçalves et al. 2014), where building an ESMs ensemble for each geographical location was viewed as a
learning task. The joint estimation of the ESM ensemble
produced more accurate projections than when independent estimation was performed for each location. The MTL
method was able to capture the relationship among geographical locations (tasks) and used it to guide information
sharing among tasks.
Modeling task relationship in multitask learning has
been the focus of recent research (Zhang and Schneider
2010; Zhang and Yeung 2010; Yang, Li, and Zhang 2013;
Gonçalves, Von Zuben, and Banerjee 2016). This is a fundamental step to promote information sharing only among
related tasks, while avoiding the unrelated ones. Besides estimating task speciﬁc parameters (Θ), the task dependency
structure (Ω) is also estimated from the data. The latter is
usually estimated from the former, i.e., task dependency is
deﬁned based on the relation of the task parameters. Two
tasks are said to be related if their parameters are related in
some sense.
Inconsistently estimated task dependency structure in
MTL can misguide information sharing and, hence, can be
harmful to the MTL method performance. The problem of
estimating statistical dependency structure of a set of random variables is known as structure learning (Meinshausen
and Buhlmann 2006). Existing methods for the problem
guarantee to recover the true underlying dependence structure given a sufﬁcient amount of data samples. In the MTL
case (Gonçalves, Von Zuben, and Banerjee 2016), the random variables are tasks parameters and, depending on the
ratio between dimensionality and the number of tasks, the
amount of data samples may not be sufﬁcient.
In this paper, we introduce the Hierarchical Multitask
Learning (HMTL) method that jointly learn multiple tasks
by letting each task be, by itself, a MTL problem. The associated hierarchical multitask learning problem is then said to
be composed of super-tasks and the tasks involved in each
super-task as sub-tasks. Our formulation is motivated by the
problem of constructing ESM ensembles for multiple cli-

Abstract
Future projection of climate is typically obtained by combining outputs from multiple Earth System Models (ESMs)
for several climate variables such as temperature and precipitation. While IPCC has traditionally used a simple model
output average, recent work has illustrated potential advantages of using a multitask learning (MTL) framework for
projections of individual climate variables. In this paper we
introduce a framework for hierarchical multitask learning
(HMTL) with two levels of tasks such that each super-task,
i.e., task at the top level, is itself a multitask learning problem
over sub-tasks. For climate projections, each super-task focuses on projections of speciﬁc climate variables spatially using an MTL formulation. For the proposed HMTL approach,
a group lasso regularization is added to couple parameters
across the super-tasks, which in the climate context helps exploit relationships among the behavior of different climate
variables at a given spatial location. We show that some recent works on MTL based on learning task dependency structures can be viewed as special cases of HMTL. Experiments
on synthetic and real climate data show that HMTL produces better results than decoupled MTL methods applied
separately on the super-tasks and HMTL signiﬁcantly outperforms baselines for climate projection.

Introduction
Future projections of climate variables such as temperature,
precipitation, and pressure are usually produced by physicsbased models known as Earth System Models (ESMs).
ESMs consist of four components and their interactions,
viz. atmosphere, oceans, land, and sea ice (Tebaldi and
Knutti 2007; IPCC 2013). Climate projections generated
from ESMs form the basis for understanding and inferring future climate change, global warming, greenhouse gas
concentration and its impact on Earth systems and other
complex phenomena such as El Niño Southern Oscillation
(ENSO). ENSO, for instance, has a global impact, ranging
from droughts in Australia and northeast Brazil to heavy
rains over Malaysia, the Philippines, and Indonesia (IPCC
2013). Then, producing accurate projections of climate variables is essential to anticipate extreme events.
Many ESMs have been developed by climate research institutes. A single and possibly more robust projection can be
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4509

