Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bootstrapping Distantly Supervised IE Using
Joint Learning and Small Well-Structured Corpora
Lidong Bing,,§ Bhuwan Dhingra,§ Kathryn Mazaitis,§ Jong Hyuk Park,§ William W. Cohen§


AI Platform Department, Tencent Inc., Shenzhen 518000, China
lyndonbing@tencent.com
§
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{bdhingra, krivard, jp1, wcohen}@cs.cmu.edu
label propagation (LP) (Bing et al. 2015; 2016). Label propagation is a family of graph-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods in which “nearby” instances in the graph
are encouraged to have similar labels. Depending on the
LP method, agreement with seed labels can be imposed as
a hard constraint (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003) or
a soft constraint (Lin and Cohen 2010; Talukdar and Cohen
2014). When seed-label agreement is a soft constraint, then
LP can be viewed as a way of smoothing the seed labels, so
that labels for groups of “similar” instances (i.e., instances
nearby in the graph) are upweighted if they agree, and downweighted if they disagree (Bing et al. 2015).
In combining distant supervision with LP, one must build
a graph that connects instances that are likely to have the
same label. Previous systems have constructed graphs
which connect mentions appearing in the same coordinatelist structure—e.g., the underlined noun phrases in “Get
medical help if you experience chest pain, weakness, or
shortness of breath” (Bing et al. 2015). This approach was
shown to improve performance in recognizing instances of
certain medical noun-phrase (NP) categories, such as drug
names and disease names. An extension of this approach
(Bing et al. 2016) learned extract relations, using a more
complex graph structure.
This paper presents three new contributions extending this
line of work. First, we combine the concept-instance extraction and relation-extraction tasks, in the process greatly simplifying the relation-extraction LP step. The combination of
the tasks is simple but effective. In (Bing et al. 2016), relation extraction was performed on an “entity centric” corpus,
where each document is primarily concerned with a particular “title entity”, and the ﬁrst argument of each relation is always the title entity: hence relation extraction can be viewed
as classiﬁcation, where an entity mention is labeled with its
slot ﬁlling role, i.e., its relation to the title entity. The intuition behind combining concept extraction and relation extraction is that relation arguments are often constrained to
be of a particular type; for example, the sideEffect of
a drug is necessarily of the type symptom. Hence, incorporating type constraints in relation extraction can improve
performance.
The second contribution is a novel use of document structure; in particular, we exploit the fact that in some small,
well-structured corpora, sections can be identiﬁed that cor-

Abstract
We propose a framework to improve the performance of
distantly-supervised relation extraction, by jointly learning to
solve two related tasks: concept-instance extraction and relation extraction. We further extend this framework to make
a novel use of document structure: in some small, wellstructured corpora, sections can be identiﬁed that correspond
to relation arguments, and distantly-labeled examples from
such sections tend to have good precision. Using these as
seeds we extract additional relation examples by applying label propagation on a graph composed of noisy examples extracted from a large unstructured testing corpus. Combined
with the soft constraint that concept examples should have
the same type as the second argument of the relation, we
get signiﬁcant improvements over several state-of-the-art approaches to distantly-supervised relation extraction, and reasonable extraction performance even with very small set of
distant labels.

Introduction
In distantly-supervised information extraction (IE), a knowledge base (KB) of relation or concept instances is
used to train an IE system.
For example, a set
of facts like sideEffect(meloxicam, stomachBleeding), interactsWith(meloxicam, ibuprofen), etc are matched against a corpus, and the matching sentences are then used to generate training data consisting of labeled relation mentions. Distant supervision
is less expensive to obtain than directly supervised labels,
but produces noisy training data whenever matching errors occur. This causes problems especially when few distant labels are available. Hence distant supervision is often coupled with learning methods that allow for noise,
e.g., by introducing latent variables for each entity mention
(Hoffmann et al. 2011; Riedel, Yao, and McCallum 2010;
Surdeanu et al. 2012); by carefully selecting the entity mentions from contexts likely to include speciﬁc KB facts (Wu
and Weld 2010); or by careful ﬁltering of the KB strings
used as seeds (Movshovitz-Attias and Cohen 2012).
Another recently-introduced approach to reducing the
noise in distant supervision combines distant labeling with
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3408

