Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Two-Stage Approach for Learning a
Sparse Model with Sharp Excess Risk Analysis
1

2

Zhe Li,1 Tianbao Yang,1 Lijun Zhang,2 Rong Jin3

Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
3
Alibaba Group, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
{zhe-li-1,tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com
where w∗ is an optimal model that minimizes the expected
error in the domain D = {w : w1 ≤ B}, i.e.,

Abstract
This paper aims to provide a sharp excess risk guarantee for
learning a sparse linear model without any assumptions about
the strong convexity of the expected loss and the sparsity of
the optimal solution in hindsight. Given a target level  for
the excess risk, an interesting question to ask is how many
examples and how large the support set of the solution are
enough for learning a good model with the target excess risk.
To answer these questions, we present a two-stage algorithm
that (i) in the ﬁrst stage an epoch based stochastic optimization algorithm is exploited with an established O(1/) bound
on the sample complexity; and (ii) in the second stage a distribution dependent randomized sparsiﬁcation is presented with
an O(1/) bound on the sparsity (referred to as support complexity) of the resulting model. Compared to previous works,
our contributions lie at (i) we reduce the order of the sample
complexity from O(1/2 ) to O(1/) without the strong convexity assumption; and (ii) we reduce the constant in O(1/)
for the sparsity by exploring the distribution dependent sampling.

w∗ = arg min

1

w1 ≤B 2

EP [(w x − y)2 ]

(1)

The parameter B is usually determined by cross-validation.
As a result, although there is an 1 norm constraint in the
above problem, the optimal solution w∗ is not necessarily
sparse. Our goal is to learn a sparse model to achieve a small
excess risk ER(w, w∗ ) ≤ . The question then boils down to
(i) How to learn such a sparse model? (ii) What is the sample complexity in order to guarantee a small excess risk?
and (iii) What is the support complexity of w to sufﬁce for
an  excess risk? In this paper, we answer these questions
in the afﬁrmative. It is notable that our work differentiates
from previous work on sparse learning in that we do not assume the optimal model is a sparse model, which has several
implications on the theoretical guarantee as we discuss later.
We develop our algorithms based on an approach presented in (Shalev-Shwartz, Srebro, and Zhang 2010), which
studied a similar problem in a pure optimization context. In
particular, they established the optimization error of an optimization problem versus the sparsity of the resulting model.
They presented and analyzed two approaches: (i) the ﬁrst
approach is a two-stage approach that in the ﬁrst stage minimizes the objective function under 1 constraint and the second stage uses a randomized sparsiﬁcation approach to ﬁnd
a sparse model; (ii) the second approach is a direct optimization approach based on the forward greedy selection. We notice that 1 the two-stage approach combined with empirical
risk minimization (ERM) or stochastic optimization for minimizing EP [(w x − y)2 ] can potentially resolve our problem. By existing theory of excess risk for ERM or stochastic
optimization (Hazan and Kale 2011; Nemirovski et al. 2009;
Sridharan, Shalev-Shwartz, and Srebro 2008; Srebro, Sridharan, and Tewari 2010), we can obtain an O(1/2 ) sample
complexity without strong convexity and an O(1/) sample
complexity with strong convexity. Considering the objective
function in (1):

Sparse learning is a fundamental problem in machine learning and statistics for high dimensional data analysis. Most
previous studies, including literature on LASSO (Tibshirani
1996; Zhao and Yu 2006)and compressed sensing (Candès
and Wakin 2008; Donoho 2006; Candés and Romberg
2007), have been devoted to the recovery analysis that provide theoretical guarantees on the recovery error of the
learned model with respect to the underlying true sparse
model under certain assumptions or conditions (e.g., Gaussian noise model, RIP conditions, coherence, etc). In all of
these studies, they assume the underlying model is a sparse
vector and try to recover the sparse model from limited measurements. In this paper, we are interested in the excess risk
of learning a sparse model without assuming the optimal solution is sparse. This problem has a variety of applications
in practice. A sparse model is preferred when computational
resources are limited and features are expensive to obtain
(e.g., in medical diagnostic). In particular, if we let x ∈ Rd
and y ∈ R denote an input and output pair that follow an
unknown distribution P, and let w ∈ Rd denote a linear
model, we deﬁne the following excess risk of w:

L(w) =

ER(w, w∗ ) = EP [(w x − y)2 ] − EP [(w∗ x − y)2 ]
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
1 
w EP [xx ]w − w EP [yx] + EP [y 2 ]
2
2

1
The second approach is not appropriate here since it assumes
the objective function can be evaluated exactly.

2224

