Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Distinguish Polarity in Bag-of-Words Visualization
Yusheng Xie,1,2 Zhengzhang Chen,2 Ankit Agrawal,2 Alok Choudhary2
1

Baidu Research, Sunnyvale, CA USA
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL USA
1
xieyusheng@baidu.com
2
{yxi389,zzc472,ankitag,choudhar}@eecs.northwestern.edu
2

hashing (Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009) effectively address model’s semantic ignorance as well as increasing dimensionality. In distributed vector representation (i.e., wordembedding vectors), each word in the vocabulary W is transformed into a real vector w ∈ Rd . the dimension of this
representation, d, grows only logarithmically with respect to
the size of vocabulary |W |. Even for very large web-scale
text corpus, d = 200 is typical and effective (Mikolov et
al. 2013). As a result, distributed representation can encode
word semantics as (cosine) similarity between the vectors
and does not suffer from exceedingly high dimensionality.

Abstract
Neural network-based BOW models reveal that wordembedding vectors encode strong semantic regularities. However, such models are insensitive to word polarity. We show
that, coupled with simple information such as word spellings,
word-embedding vectors can preserve both semantic regularity and conceptual polarity without supervision. We then
describe a nontrivial modiﬁcation to the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) algorithm that visualizes
these semantic- and polarity-preserving vectors in reduced
dimensions. On a real Facebook corpus, our experiments show
signiﬁcant improvement in t-SNE visualization as a result of
the proposed modiﬁcation.

Introduction
The word “word” refers to the smallest linguistic unit that
conveys nontrivial semantic meaning. In English, word is the
bridge from 26 simple letters to everything readable: literature, news, tweets, etc. Learning word meaning is fundamental to understanding language for both human and computer.
Bag-of-words (BOW) models become widely popular thanks
to their simple nature and good performance. For example,
latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) and
tf-idf (Manning and Schütze 1999) rely on the BOW representation.
In spite of its practical success, BOW has received two
major criticisms. First, simple BOW models ignore word semantics. Words like hotel, hotels, and motel are just different
words with no connections. Second, vocabulary size dictates
the complexity of a BOW model. Unfortunately, vocabulary
size usually grows really fast with respect to text corpus size.
For example, the Brown corpus (Francis and Kucera 1979)
contains 1 million English words from a 50,000 vocabulary.
But the 1-trillion-word Google Web n-gram English corpus
has a vocabulary greater than 13 million (Lin et al. 2012). In
addition to data sparsity, it is impractical for most machine
learning algorithms to handle 13 million feature dimensions.
BOW model has received many improvements addressing
the two issues mentioned above. Distributed vector representation for words (Bengio et al. 2000; Morin and Bengio 2005;
Mikolov et al. 2013; Le and Mikolov 2014) and semantic

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) 2d t-SNE plots of word vectors. Clustered words
for months are shown in zoomed-in details within red rectangles. (b) Detail of the blue rectangular area in (a): words in
blue circles are related to people.
However, word polarity information is elusive in wordembedding representations. More speciﬁcally, The authors
in (Nguyen, im Walde, and Vu 2016) recently reveal that
unsupervised embedding vectors cannot represent global or
local polarity via point-wise similarity (e.g., cosine similarity between word vectors wa and wb ). We train a set of
word vectors on standard Wikipedia corpus using the popular

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3344

