Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-Task Deep Learning for User Intention
Understanding in Speech Interaction Systems

1

Yishuang Ning,1,2 Jia Jia,1,2 Zhiyong Wu,1,2,3,∗ Runnan Li,1,2
Yongsheng An,1 Yanfeng Wang,4 Helen Meng3

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
2
Tsinghua-CUHK Joint Research Center for Media Sciences, Technologies and Systems,
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
4
Beijing Sougou Science and Technology Development Co., Ltd.
{ningys13,lirn15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
these systems more than once a week4 . In these systems, the
key point to determine quality of service (QoS) and user experience is to understand user intention accurately and provide more satisfactory responses (Chen 2004). At present,
these systems mainly generate responses by text-based natural language processing (NLP) (Bellegarda 2013). The focus determined by keywords of text is among the main features in most studies to understand user intention (Duan et
al. 2008). However, the utterance with the same texts may
carry different user intentions. As the example shows in Figure 1, two users’ speech utterances have different acoustic
emphasis but have the same texts. For case 1, the user emphasizes the word ‘iPhone 7’, the corresponding intention is
‘I want to buy iPhone 7 at Xidan, but stores at other places
are OK if iPhone 7 is not on sale at Xidan’. For case 2, the
user expresses the intention ‘I want to buy iPhone 7 at Xidan, but other mobile phones are OK if iPhone 7 is not on
sale’ by emphasizing the word ‘Xidan’. For speech interaction systems, the incorporation of acoustic emphasis can
provide more accurate understanding of the user’s underlying intention, thus providing more related responses. This
semantic supplementation phenomenon expressed by emphasis has also been reported in (Chakravartty 2001), which
inspires us to consider whether we can combine focus with
emphasis to improve the accuracy of user intention understanding.
Motivated by this, in this paper, we deﬁne Intention
Prominence (IP) as the semantic combination of focus by
text and emphasis by speech that determines the underlying intention within an utterance. However, integrating focus and emphasis is a non-trivial task. To incorporate these
heterogeneous attributes for user intention understanding,
we propose a multi-task deep learning framework to predict IP from speech, as illustrated in Figure 2. In particular, we use long short-term memory (LSTM) to model the
textual and acoustic information for focus and emphasis detection, respectively. LSTM has achieved state-of-the-art re-

Abstract
Speech interaction systems have been gaining popularity in
recent years. The main purpose of these systems is to generate more satisfactory responses according to users’ speech
utterances, in which the most critical problem is to analyze
user intention. Researches show that user intention conveyed
through speech is not only expressed by content, but also
closely related with users’ speaking manners (e.g. with or
without acoustic emphasis). How to incorporate these heterogeneous attributes to infer user intention remains an open
problem. In this paper, we deﬁne Intention Prominence (IP)
as the semantic combination of focus by text and emphasis
by speech, and propose a multi-task deep learning framework
to predict IP. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst use long short-term memory (LSTM) which is capable of modeling long short-term
contextual dependencies to detect focus and emphasis, and
incorporate the tasks for focus and emphasis detection with
multi-task learning (MTL) to reinforce the performance of
each other. We then employ Bayesian network (BN) to incorporate multimodal features (focus, emphasis, and location
reﬂecting users’ dialect conventions) to predict IP based on
feature correlations. Experiments on a data set of 135,566
utterances collected from real-world Sogou Voice Assistant
illustrate that our method can outperform the comparison
methods over 6.9-24.5% in terms of F1-measure. Moreover,
a real practice in the Sogou Voice Assistant indicates that our
method can improve the performance on user intention understanding by 7%.

Introduction
Recently speech interaction systems such as Apple Siri1 ,
Google Now2 and Sogou Voice Assistant3 have become
widespread in all segments of society. Statistics from Microsoft indicate that more than 70% of the subscribers use
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.apple.com/ios/siri
2
http://www.google.com/landing/now
3
http://yy.sogou.com

4

161

http://www.wtoutiao.com/p/ob5qG4.html

