Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scanpath Complexity: Modeling Reading Effort Using Gaze Information
Abhijit Mishra,† Diptesh Kanojia,†,♣ Seema Nagar,  Kuntal Dey, Pushpak Bhattacharyya†
†

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India
♣
IITB-Monash Research Academy, India

IBM Research, India
†
{abhijitmishra, diptesh, pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in

{senagar3, kuntadey}@in.ibm.com
expensive. Our method, on the other hand, relies on readers’
eye-movement data which could be easily obtained using
low cost eye-tracking machinery, for example, front webcameras of hand held devices that are used to capture eyemovement behavior.
Our work is based on the eye-mind hypothesis (Just and
Carpenter 1980) which states that when a subject is views a
word/object, he or she also processes it cognitively, for approximately the same amount of time he or she ﬁxates on it.
Though debatable (Anderson, Bothell, and Douglass 2004),
the hypothesis has been considered useful in explaining
theories associated with reading (Rayner and Duffy 1986;
Irwin 2004; von der Malsburg and Vasishth 2011). The core
idea of our work is the hypothesis that, gaze patterns indicate the conceptual difﬁculty the reader experiences (which,
in turn, is linked with the cognitive effort (Sweller 1988)).
Linear and uniform-speed gaze movement is observed over
texts having simple concepts, and often non-linear movement with non-uniform speed over more complex concepts (Rayner 1998). We take a reader’s eye-movement data
in the form of scanpath1 as input. The complexity of the
scanpath, termed as Scanpath Complexity, is measured as
a function of various properties of gaze ﬁxations, saccades,
and constituents of the input scanpath. Scanpath complexity
is taken as a measure of reading effort.
To validate our scanpath complexity measure, we examine the correlation of scanpath complexity with different
quantiﬁcation of lexical and syntactic complexity and standard readability scores. For most of the participants whose
eye tracking behaviour form our dataset, scanpath complexity correlates better with most of such complexity measures
than does “total reading/annotation time” (or sum of ﬁxation durations in an eye-tracking setup), which is often
considered as a measure of effort (Tomanek et al. 2010;
Mishra, Bhattacharyya, and Carl 2013; Joshi et al. 2014).
For our setup, we assume the reading direction to be leftto-right without loss of generality. The language under consideration for our experiments and analysis is English.

Abstract
Measuring reading effort is useful for practical purposes such
as designing learning material and personalizing text comprehension environment. We propose a quantiﬁcation of reading
effort by measuring the complexity of eye-movement patterns
of readers. We call the measure Scanpath Complexity. Scanpath complexity is modeled as a function of various properties of gaze ﬁxations and saccades- the basic parameters of
eye movement behavior. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our scanpath complexity measure by showing that its correlation with different measures of lexical and syntactic complexity as well as standard readability metrics is better than
popular baseline measures based on ﬁxation alone.

1

Introduction

In settings that require reading and understanding text, the
effort spent by the reader is a factor of primary importance.
In most scenarios, the reward associated with the task is often controlled by the effort spent on the task. For example,
in education, the reading effort controls the motivation and
learning experience of a student reading educational material. For text annotation that involves reading, reading effort
during annotation controls the ﬁnancial incentives. Measuring reading effort reliably is, therefore, an important task.
From an individual’s perspective, it provides insights into
one’s cognitive capabilities, making it useful in designing
personalized applications for learning (Sweller 1994) and
optimizing learning material design (Mayer and Moreno
2003). From the perspective of Natural Language Processing, quantifying reading effort for text-annotation tasks may
give rise to better annotation-cost-models vis-à-vis ones that
rely on word and sentence counts, for incentivizing annotators (Tomanek et al. 2010).
Psychologists have attempted to create formalisms that
capture the cognitive effort of reading processes using
biological and psychological frameworks (Schnotz and
Kürschner 2007). Exploratory work has been carried out
under controlled environments, using Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) (Paas et al. 2003), Electro- encephalography
(Antonenko et al. 2010), etc. However, such techniques cannot be used outside laboratory settings, and are prohibitively

Terminology: Fixation → relatively long stay of gaze on a visual object (like words in text), Sacccade → quick shifting of gaze
between two positions of rest. Forward and Backward saccades are
called Progressions and Regressions respectively. Scanpath → a
line graph that contains ﬁxations as nodes and saccades as edges
1

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4429

