Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

What’s Hot in Evolutionary Computation
Tobias Friedrich,1,2 Frank Neumann2
1

2

Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany
Optimisation and Logistics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

and use an evolutionary multi-objective algorithm to optimize the coverage degree and the energy usage at the same
time. The energy usage is relatively simple to compute and
the estimated coverage of a plan is the computationally expensive part as it has to take geometry of the 3D object (in
this case a 3D Warehouse) into account.
Finally, the area of bilevel optimization has received a lot
of attention in recent years. In (Lu, Deb, and Sinha 2016),
a new approach for dealing with bilevel problems having
uncertainties is presented. The authors study the interactions
of uncertainties in the upper and lower level variables and
show that their new approach performs well on a wide range
of benchmark test case as well as a real-world Navy ship
design problem.

Abstract
We provide a brief overview on some hot topics in the
area of evolutionary computation. Our main focus is on recent developments in the areas of combinatorial optimization and real-world applications. Furthermore, we highlight
recent progress on the theoretical understanding of evolutionary computing methods.

Introduction
There are a large variety of high performing optimization
methods available for convex optimization problems. However, many problems arising in important application domains such as supply chain management and planning pose
non-convex problems. In particular, these problems are often noisy, stochastic and/or have dynamically changing constraints. This is where evolutionary computation methods
are often applied as they have been shown to be highly successful when dealing with such difﬁcult problem domains.
We will highlight some important recent real-world application techniques of evolutionary computing, discuss recent
developments in the area of combinatorial optimization, and
ﬁnally report on recent theoretical studies on the foundations
of evolutionary computing.

Combinatorial Optimization
In the area of combinatorial optimization multi-component
problems are a hot topic. Multi-component problems arise
frequently in real-world applications such as supply chain
management and the goal is to study the interactions arising from the combination of different combinatorial problems in a systematic way. A prominent problem which has
gained signiﬁcant attention during the last three years is
the traveling thief problem (TTP). TTP combines the classical traveling salesperson problem (TSP) and the standard
knapsack problem (KP) in a non-linear way. Given that
both TSP and KP have been widely studied in the literature, this knowledge sets the basis for dealing with the interactions arising in TTP. Different heuristic approaches have
been proposed for variants of TTP (Yafrani and Ahiod 2016;
Chand and Wagner 2016; Mei, Li, and Yao 2014) and a large
benchmark set to compare these algorithms has been established in (Polyakovskiy et al. 2014; Przybylek, Wierzbicki,
and Michalewicz 2016). Recent investigations have considered the impact of the renting rate which connects the TSP
and KP part of the problem (Wu, Polyakovskiy, and Neumann 2016).
Furthermore, the features and their impact on the performance of different evolutionary computation methods are an
research area of high interest. Features occur in different areas. On the one hand, ﬁtness landscape analysis has a long
tradition in the area of evolutionary computation. Here one
studies the landscape deﬁned by search points and “natural" neighbourhoods of an underlying combinatorial opti-

Real-World Applications
In the area of real-world applications, evolutionary algorithms have been used for a wide range of planning tasks. In
particular, Unmanned Aircraft Vehicles (UAVs) have gained
increasing attention. The evolutionary planner presented in
(Perez-Carabaza et al. 2016) optimizes the target detection
time taking into account the uncertainty of the target location and the UAV motion and sensory model. To do this, the
approach uses a Bayesian approach to handle uncertainty
and a kinematic model taking into account environmental
effects. The planning process is carried out by splitting the
planning task into subsequences and optimizing each subsequence by an evolutionary algorithm based on the ending
state of the previous subsequence. Furthermore, evolutionary algorithms have been considered in (Ellefsen, Lepikson,
and Albiez 2016) for 3D path planning. The authors investigate the problem of inspecting three dimensional structures
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5064

