Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and
the Impact of Residual Connections on Learning
Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, Alexander A. Alemi
Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA

same neural network architecture “AlexNet” (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) has been applied to a large
number of application domains with good results.
The same architectures that work well for object detection
can be applied successfully to a wide variety of computer vision tasks, including object-detection (Girshick et al. 2014),
segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), human
pose estimation (Toshev and Szegedy 2014), video classiﬁcation (Karpathy et al. 2014), object tracking (Wang and Yeung 2013), and super-resolution (Dong et al. 2014). These
examples are but a few of the multitude of applications to
which deep convolutional networks have been very successfully applied ever since. Moreover it has been demonstrated
that architectural improvements of convolutional networks
that target recognition performance tend to translate to performance gains for the other tasks as well.
This universal applicability motivates our focus on recognition models for the widely used ILSVRC12 objectrecognition benchmark (Russakovsky et al. 2014) on which
the task is to classify the images into one (or ﬁve) of a
thousand different classes. The dataset comprises of 1.2 million training images, 50,000 validation images and 100,000
test images. All of them are divided up equally between the
1000 classes. This benchmark has been a very popular task
to measure the quality of object recognition solutions since
2010.
In this work we study the combination of two of the most
recent ideas: Residual connections (He et al. 2015) and the
latest revised version of the Inception architecture (Szegedy
et al. 2015b). In (He et al. 2015), it is argued that residual
connections are inherently important for training very deep
architectures. Since Inception networks tend to be very deep,
it is natural to replace the ﬁlter concatenation stage of the
Inception architecture with residual connections. This would
allow Inception to reap the beneﬁts of the residual approach
while retaining its computational efﬁciency.
Besides a straightforward integration, we have also studied whether Inception without residual connections can be
made more efﬁcient by making it deeper and wider. For
that purpose, we evaluated a new version named Inceptionv4 which has a more uniform simpliﬁed architecture and
more inception modules than Inception-v3. Historically,
Inception-v3 had inherited a lot of the baggage of the earlier
incarnations. The technical constraints chieﬂy came from

Abstract
Very deep convolutional networks have been central to the
largest advances in image recognition performance in recent
years. One example is the Inception architecture that has
been shown to achieve very good performance at relatively
low computational cost. Recently, the introduction of residual connections in conjunction with a more traditional architecture has yielded state-of-the-art performance in the 2015
ILSVRC challenge; its performance was similar to the latest generation Inception-v3 network. This raises the question: Are there any beneﬁts to combining Inception architectures with residual connections? Here we give clear empirical evidence that training with residual connections accelerates the training of Inception networks signiﬁcantly. There
is also some evidence of residual Inception networks outperforming similarly expensive Inception networks without
residual connections by a thin margin. We also present several new streamlined architectures for both residual and nonresidual Inception networks. These variations improve the
single-frame recognition performance on the ILSVRC 2012
classiﬁcation task signiﬁcantly. We further demonstrate how
proper activation scaling stabilizes the training of very wide
residual Inception networks. With an ensemble of three residual and one Inception-v4 networks, we achieve 3.08% top-5
error on the test set of the ImageNet classiﬁcation (CLS) challenge.

Introduction
Object recognition is a central task for computer vision and
artiﬁcial intelligence in general. Strong vision models are
key enabling components of AI systems that can process
visual inputs. Their applications include computer user interfaces (gesture recognition), web search, OCR systems,
autonomous transportation, medical imaging, areal imaging, robotics and image processing. Before 2012, specialized solutions were required for each speciﬁc application domain. Since then, deep convolutional neural networks have
become mainstream to address these tasks. Convolutional
neural networks go back to the 1980s (Fukushima 1980)
and (LeCun et al. 1989), but recent good results (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) on the large scale ImageNet
image-recognition benchmark ILSVRC (Russakovsky et al.
2014) has lead to a revived interest in their use. The
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4278

