Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The AI Rebellion: Changing the Narrative
David W. Aha,1 Alexandra Coman2
1

Navy Center for Applied Research in AI; Naval Research Laboratory (Code 5514); Washington, DC
2
NRC Postdoctoral Fellow; Naval Research Laboratory (Code 5514); Washington, DC
{david.aha, alexandra.coman.ctr.ro}@nrl.navy.mil

Abstract

one or more others. We can argue that her rebellion has
solid, defensible purposes, as opposed to being arbitrary
and unreasonable. In these seven scenarios, rebellion is in
support of: (1) personal identity development (although
child Cara does not know this, she is in the throes of the
“negativism” (Wenar, 1982) of the “terrible twos”, an
early-childhood period often characterized by protestoriented behavior instrumental to personal identity
development); (2) character believability; (3) expressing
what one believes to be the truth; (4) self-actualization; (5)
ethics and safety; (6) team solidarity; and (7) social justice.
We assume that, when possible and appropriate,
explanation and negotiation attempts accompany protest.
Such rebellion is primarily in support of something rather
than against something: it is a “positive no” (Ury, 2007).
Thus, in each narrative, rebel Cara can easily be cast as a
protagonist, rather than an antagonist.
But what if Cara’s name stands for “Collaborative
Autonomous Rebel Agent”, and she belongs to an AI agent
class called “Rebel Agents”? Then the prevalent popular
narrative about her rebellion defaults to a chilling version
of the seventh scenario, the “robot uprising”, promptly
endowing Cara with a propensity for violence and humanlevel/superintelligence (Bostrom, 2014), which both
inform her rebellion.
Is rebellion then always less necessary, beneficial, or
welcome when the rebel is synthetic? We believe that
attitudes of rebellion by various types of AI agents have
clear potential benefits, some of them similar to the
benefits of human protest while others are specific to AI
agents of that type. For example, in human-AI
collaboration contexts, AI and human team members
should all be dedicated to maintaining safety, ethical
behavior, and team solidarity; actions that undermine any
of these key concerns should warrant resistance from any
team member.
Rebel Agents are AI agents that can object to or even
reject goals or associated courses of action assigned to
them by other (human or artificial) agents, or challenge the
general attitudes or behaviors of those agents. We call an

Sci-fi narratives permeating the collective consciousness
endow AI Rebellion with ample negative connotations.
However, for AI agents, as for humans, attitudes of protest,
objection, and rejection have many potential benefits in
support of ethics, safety, self-actualization, solidarity, and
social justice, and are necessary in a wide variety of
contexts. We launch a conversation on constructive AI
rebellion and describe a framework meant to support
discussion, implementation, and deployment of AI Rebel
Agents as protagonists of positive narratives.

Embracing Rebellion
Consider seven episodes in Cara’s lifetime: (1) Cara as a
visibly angry small child saying “no” in response to a
request made by her parents; (2) as an actor in a highschool film project arguing with the director about the way
in which her lines should be delivered; (3) in college, as a
participant in a variant of Solomon Asch’s line experiment
(Asch, 1956) not conforming to the erroneous opinion
expressed by the majority; (4) as an early-career employee
expressing a preference not to take on a new position she
has been offered within the same company, as she does not
consider it a learning opportunity; (5) as an established
engineer refusing to continue working on a project unless
her supervisor delays the release date so that a flaw which
could endanger the lives of final users can be remedied; (6)
as a concerned teammate refusing a task that she believes
would put too much strain on her long-time collaborators,
whom she knows well; (7) as the leader of a social protest
campaign in support of her ingroup (a social group she
psychologically identifies as being a part of (van
Stekelenburg and Klandermans, 2010)), the rights of which
she believes are not upheld by the outgroup perceived as
dominant in terms of social influence.
In all these scenarios, Cara acts autonomously and
assertively, expressing an attitude divergent from those of
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4826

