Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Balanced Clustering with Least Square Regression
1

2

Hanyang Liu,1 Junwei Han,1∗ Feiping Nie,2∗ Xuelong Li3

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
3
Center for OPTIMAL, State Key Laboratory of Transient Optics and Photonics, Xi’an Institute of Optics
and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an, 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{ericstarkhan, junweihan2010, feipingnie}@gmail.com, xuelong li@ieee.org
In many data mining applications, it is often required to
have balanced clusters, and ordinary clustering algorithms
are unable to meet the requirement. Examples can be found
in photo query systems (Althoff, Ulges, and Dengel 2011)
and retail chain problems. Another promising application
is in the energy load balance of wireless sensor networks
(Du, Liu, and Qian 2009), where unbalanced cluster structure may cause unbalanced energy consumption and shorten
the network lifetime. Moreover, balanced clustering tends to
avoid forming outlier clusters, and thus has beneﬁcial regularizing effect (Zhong and Ghosh 2003). Despite the wide
and essential application of balanced clustering, it seems to
have drawn no continuous attention from the community.
A few early proposed clustering algorithms are able to
produce balanced clusters. These balanced algorithms can
be categorized into two types: a) hard-balanced clustering,
in which cluster size is strictly required by setting ﬁxed number of samples in clusters; b) soft-balanced clustering, in
which balance is an aim but not a mandatory requirement.
Constraint K-means (Bradley, Bennett, and Demiriz 2000)
and a lately proposed method, balanced K-means (Malinen and Fränti 2014) are based on K-means and the number of data points in clusters is set as a parameter. They
are both hard-balanced clustering. Actually in many situations, absolute balance is not required. The method in
(Banerjee and Ghosh 2002) is based on a three step sampling procedure, and their subsequent work (Banerjee and
Ghosh 2004) utilizes the penalty strategy to increase the distance from the data points to the centroid that has already
won data points. In the works (Zhong and Ghosh 2003;
Chang et al. 2014) the balance degree can be adjusted. These
algorithms are all soft-balanced clustering methods.
Balance is a global property, therefore it is very difﬁcult
to guarantee both a balanced result and high cluster quality.
In our work, we aim to integrate the two goals, rather than
compromise either one. We consider a balance constraint to
regularize the clustering model, which belongs to the softbalanced algorithms, in order to have a balanced result and
maintain good clustering performance simultaneously. This
is the ﬁrst motivation of our proposed method.
Linear regression plays an essential role in supervised
learning tasks, such as classiﬁcation, and demonstrates
tremendously excellent performance as a learning model in
processing high dimensional data, such as in face recogni-

Abstract
Clustering is a fundamental research topic in data mining.
A balanced clustering result is often required in a variety of
applications. Many existing clustering algorithms have good
clustering performances, yet fail in producing balanced clusters. In this paper, we propose a novel and simple method for
clustering, referred to as the Balanced Clustering with Least
Square regression (BCLS), to minimize the least square linear
regression, with a balance constraint to regularize the clustering model. In BCLS, the linear regression is applied to estimate the class-speciﬁc hyperplanes that partition each class of
data from others, thus guiding the clustering of the data points
into different clusters. A balance constraint is utilized to regularize the clustering, by minimizing which can help produce
balanced clusters. In addition, we apply the method of augmented Lagrange multipliers (ALM) to help optimize the objective model. The experiments on seven real-world benchmarks demonstrate that our approach not only produces good
clustering performance but also guarantees a balanced clustering result.

Introduction
Clustering has been widely studied for decades and plays
an essential role in many ﬁelds, such as statistics and artiﬁcial intelligence. The objective of clustering is to group
the data points that have similar patterns into the same cluster and discover the data structure. Over the past decades,
many clustering algorithms have been proposed and extended, such as K-means, fuzzy C-means (Bezdek 2013),
spectral clustering methods (Ng et al. 2002; Nie, Wang,
and Huang 2016), and projected clustering (Nie, Wang, and
Huang 2014).
Given data points with balanced distribution (each class
has approximately the same number of samples), usually we
would expect the clustering result to reﬂect such balance.
In other words, a good clustering algorithm is supposed to
prevent a too small or too great number of data points from
being partitioned into a cluster. Nevertheless, prevalent clustering algorithms like K-means, spectral clustering, and etc.,
do not produce a balanced clustering result, especially when
the data points need to be grouped into a large number of
clusters.
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2231

