Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multimodal Fusion of EEG and Musical
Features in Music-Emotion Recognition
Ken-ichi Fukui and Masayuki Numao

Nattapong Thammasan

Graduate school of Information Science and Technology, Institute of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan
nattapong@ai.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
{fukui,numao}@ai.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

rate. A 0.5-60 Hz bandpass ﬁlter was also applied. Each
subject was also asked to keep his eyes close and minimize
body movement during EEG recording to reduce any effect
of unrelated artifacts. After music listening, each subject was
instructed to annotate his felt emotions in the previous session by continuously clicking at a corresponding point in
the arousal-valence emotion space, a continuous space actively used to describe emotions (Russell 1980), shown on a
monitor screen using a mouse. Arousal describes emotional
intensity ranging from calm (-1) to activated (+1) emotion whereas valence describes positivity of emotion ranging
from unpleasant (-1) to pleasant (+1).

Abstract
Multimodality has been recently exploited to overcome the
challenges of emotion recognition. In this paper, we present
a study of fusion of electroencephalogram (EEG) features
and musical features extracted from musical stimuli at decision level in recognizing the time-varying binary classes of
arousal and valence. Our empirical results demonstrate that
EEG modality was suffered from the non-stability of EEG
signals, yet fusing with music modality could alleviate the
issue and enhance the performance of emotion recognition.

Electroencephalogram (EEG), a tool to capture brainwaves,
has been recently used tool to estimate human emotional
states but confronts with a variety of challenges. Recent
efforts to reinforce the emotion recognition model include
using EEG features in conjunction with other information
sources (D’mello and Kory 2015), such as facial expression,
and peripheral signals. One possible solution is to exploit information regarding the felt emotion in conjunction with the
expressed emotion in music to estimate emotional states. In
this paper, we propose a methodology to fuse dynamic information from physiological signals and musical contents
at decision level (or late integration) based on the assumption that both modalities could play a complementary role
in music-emotion recognition model. We found that the performance of continuously estimating emotional response in
music listening using both modalities outperformed that using only EEG unimodality.

EEG and Musical Features
To extract features from EEG signals, we applied the fractal dimension (FD) approach. FD is a non-negative real
value that quantiﬁes the complexity and irregularity of
data and can be used to reveal the complexity of a timevarying EEG signal. We applied Higuchi algorithm (Higuchi
1988) to derive FD features from each particular window,
namely F DF p1 , F DF p2 , F DF 3 , F DF 4 , F DF 7 , F DF 8 ,
F DC3 , F DC4 , F DT 3 , F DT 4 , F DF z , and F DP z named
in accordance with electrode name. Based on previous
study (Thammasan et al. 2016), asymmetry indexes, namely
F DF p1 –F DF p2 , F DF 3 –F DF 4 , F DF 7 –F DF 8 , F DC3 –
F DC4 , and F DT 3 –F DT 4 , were also added into our original feature set.
To extract musical features from MIDI songs, we employed the MIRtoolbox (Lartillot and Toiviainen 2007). A
dynamic feature of a song was derived from the framebased root mean square of the amplitude. Rhythm is the
pattern of pulses/note of varying strength. We extracted
the frame-based tempo estimation and the attack times and
slopes of the onsets from songs. Timbre reﬂects the spectrotemporal characteristics of sound. We extracted the spectral roughness that measures the noisiness of the spectrum,
13 Mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients and their derivatives
up to the 1st order. In addition, we extracted the framedecomposed zero-crossing rate, the low energy rate and the
frame-decomposed spectral ﬂux from songs. To extract tonal
characteristics, we calculated the frame-decomposed key
clarity, mode, and the harmonic change detection function
from songs. Afterward, we calculated the means of features
in each window and retrieved 37 musical features in total.

Research Methodology
Experimental Protocol
Twelve healthy male volunteers (averaged age = 25.59 y, SD
= 1.69 y) were recruited to participate in our experiment.
Each subject was instructed to listen to the self-selected 16
MIDI songs. Simultaneously, EEG signals were acquired
from the 12 electrodes of Waveguard EEG cap placed in
accordance with the 10-20 international system. The positions of the selected electrodes were nearby the frontal lobe.
Throughout EEG recording, Cz electrode was used as a reference and the impedance of each electrode was kept below
20 kΩ. EEG signals were recorded at a 250 Hz sampling
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4991

