Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Volumetric ConvNets with Mixed Residual Connections for
Automated Prostate Segmentation from 3D MR Images
∗

Lequan Yu,∗ Xin Yang,∗ Hao Chen,∗ Jing Qin,† Pheng-Ann Heng∗,‡

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
†
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
‡
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{lqyu,xinyang,hchen,pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk{harry.qin}@polyu.edu.hk
Abstract
Automated prostate segmentation from 3D MR images is
very challenging due to large variations of prostate shape and
indistinct prostate boundaries. We propose a novel volumetric convolutional neural network (ConvNet) with mixed residual connections to cope with this challenging problem. Compared with previous methods, our volumetric ConvNet has
two compelling advantages. First, it is implemented in a 3D
manner and can fully exploit the 3D spatial contextual information of input data to perform efﬁcient, precise and volumeto-volume prediction. Second and more important, the novel
combination of residual connections (i.e., long and short) can
greatly improve the training efﬁciency and discriminative capability of our network by enhancing the information propagation within the ConvNet both locally and globally. While
the forward propagation of location information can improve
the segmentation accuracy, the smooth backward propagation
of gradient ﬂow can accelerate the convergence speed and
enhance the discrimination capability. Extensive experiments
on the open MICCAI PROMISE12 challenge dataset corroborated the effectiveness of the proposed volumetric ConvNet
with mixed residual connections. Our method ranked the ﬁrst
in the challenge, outperforming other competitors by a large
margin with respect to most of evaluation metrics. The proposed volumetric ConvNet is general enough and can be easily extended to other medical image analysis tasks, especially
ones with limited training data.

Figure 1: Example of prostate MR images displaying large
variations (only show the center slice of prostates in 3D MR
images and the yellow contours indicate prostates).

large inter- and intra-observer variations. In this regard, automated segmentation methods are highly demanded in clinical practice.
Automated segmentation of prostate from MR images,
however, is very challenging for several reasons (Mahapatra
and Buhmann 2014). First, different MR images have global
inter-scan variability and intra-scan intensity variation due
to different MR scanning protocols, such as with/without
endorectal coil (a thin wire placed inside the body to generate detailed MR images). Second, the lack of clear prostate
boundaries due to similar appearance of prostate and surrounding tissues (e.g., blood vessels, bladder, rectum and
seminal vessels) makes the automated segmentation even
harder. Third, prostate has a wide variation in size and shape
among different subjects due to pathological changes or different resolutions of images. Figure 1 shows examples of
segmented prostate in different MR images and we can see
the large variation of prostates.
Over the past few years, lots of automated prostate
segmentation methods have been proposed to meet these
challenges, such as atlas (registration) based methods, deformable methods and machine learning based methods. Although great progress is achieved, there still exists an ob-

Introduction
Prostate diseases (e.g., prostate cancer, prostatitis and enlarged prostate) are very common in men. In particular,
prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in
American men. It is estimated to have caused 26,120 deaths
in 2016 according to American Cancer Society (Siegel,
Miller, and Jemal 2016). Due to a huge increase in screening,
prostate cancer is now the most commonly diagnosed cancer in men in American. Accurate segmentation of prostate
from 3D Magnetic Resonance (MR) images is very useful for treatment planning and many other diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures for prostate cancer as well as other
prostate diseases. However, manual segmentation from 3D
MR images is time-consuming and subjective with limited
reproducibility. It heavily depends on experience and has
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

66

