Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cross-Domain Kernel Induction for Transfer Learning
Wei-Cheng Chang∗

Yuexin Wu∗

Carnegie Mellon University
wchang2@andrew.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
yuexinw@andrew.cmu.edu

Hanxiao Liu

Yiming Yang

Carnegie Mellon University
hanxiaol@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
yiming@cs.cmu.edu
lingual settings. Notice an important difference between the
two examples we have introduced, i.e., in the ﬁrst example
both source and target domain share the same feature space
(the same vocabulary of English), while in the second example the two domains have different feature spaces (i.e.,
the vocabularies of two different languages). Nevertheless,
TL across different feature spaces (heterogeneous) is usually a tougher problem than TL within the common feature
space (homogeneous).
The literature of TL methods (Pan and Yang 2010) reveals promising results in a variety of real-world applications, such as text classiﬁcation (Pan et al. 2011; Duan,
Xu, and Tsang 2012), image classiﬁcation (Zhu et al. 2011;
Kulis, Saenko, and Darrell 2011), sentiment analysis (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011; Zhou et al. 2014), recommendation systems (Li, Yang, and Xue 2009), and more. Let
us outline the major differences among existing approaches
based on their basic assumptions in relating source and target domain, as well as on how labeled and unlabeled data in
both domains are jointly leveraged during the TL process.
The Naive Bayes Transfer Classiﬁer (NBTC) (Pan et al.
2011) is a representative work on TL for text classiﬁcation,
under the assumption that source and target domain share
the same feature space as well as the topic labels. However,
the topic distribution and the distributions of topics conditioned on words may differ in two domains. The goal of
NBTC is to adapt source-domain distributions to the targetdomain distributions. A major limitation of the NBTC approach, and any other methods under the same assumption
of a shared feature space between the two domains, is that
they cannot handle TL across heterogeneous feature spaces.
For example, those methods are not applicable for performing TL from text classiﬁcation to image classiﬁcation (and
vice versa), or from classiﬁcation of English documents to
that of other languages.
Yet another kind of approaches, Transductive Transfer
Learning (TTL), tackles TL problem from a different angle. TTL focuses on cross-domain kernel construction and
the utilization of unlabeled data in both source and target
domains during the learning procedure. Adaptation Regularization based Transfer Learning (ARTL)(Long et al. 2014) is
a representative work of TTL methods. It constructs a uniﬁed kernel and applies graph-based label propagation technique under certain regularized constraints to infer labels

Abstract
The key question in transfer learning (TL) research is how to
make model induction transferable across different domains.
Common methods so far require source and target domains to
have a shared/homogeneous feature space, or the projection
of features from heterogeneous domains onto a shared space.
This paper proposes a novel framework, which does not require a shared feature space but instead uses a parallel corpus
to calibrate domain-speciﬁc kernels into a uniﬁed kernel, to
leverage graph-based label propagation in cross-domain settings, and to optimize semi-supervised learning based on labeled and unlabeled data in both source and target domains.
Our experiments on benchmark datasets show advantageous
performance of the proposed method over that of other stateof-the-art TL methods.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning (TL) aims to address the label-sparse problem arising in many real-world applications as acquiring a
large quantity of labeled data is extremely expensive and
labor-intensive. TL methods address this problem by transferring the trained models from label-rich domain (source
domain) to a relevant but label-sparse domain (target domain) according for the task of interest. Using topic classiﬁcation of web blogs as an example (as in (Pan et al. 2011)),
obtaining a large set of labeled instances is often difﬁcult
especially when the web blogs are newly released. On the
other hand, large collections of labeled news stories in relevant topics may be easily found on the internet. Thus if we
can successfully transfer the classiﬁcation models or the induced features from the news-story domain to the web blog
domain, then the label-sparse problem in the target domain
would be effectively addressed. Another motivating example
is to transfer the text classiﬁcation models from a label-rich
language (e.g., English) to a label-sparse or label-sparser
language (e.g., Italian or Turkish). Unlike English or a few
internationally dominating languages, most of the other languages in the world have much less labeled documents in
comparison. This means that TL would have a tremendous
impact on the true success of text classiﬁcation for all languages in the world if we can solve TL in all the cross∗

Both student authors contributed equally.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1763

