Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Number Restrictions on Transitive Roles in Description Logics with Nominals
Vı́ctor Gutiérrez-Basulto

Yazmı́n Ibáñez-Garcı́a

Jean Christoph Jung

Cardiff University, UK
GutierrezBasultoV@cardiff.ac.uk

TU Wien, Austria
yazmin.garcia@tuwien.ac.at

Universität Bremen, Germany
jeanjung@informatik.uni-bremen.de

Kaminski and Smolka 2010) and references therein. In particular, it has been shown that the extensions of SN (ALC
enriched with transitive roles and unqualiﬁed counting) with
role inclusions (SHN ) or inverse roles (SIN ) are undecidable (Horrocks, Sattler, and Tobies 2000; Kazakov, Sattler,
and Zolin 2007). These negative results are, intuitively, explained by the interaction of these two constructors, i.e., by
the possibility of counting over transitive roles. In order to
regain decidability, different restrictions on their interaction
have been proposed, e.g., to completely disallow number restrictions on transitive roles, or impose certain restrictions
on the transitive roles occurring in role inclusions (Horrocks,
Sattler, and Tobies 2000; Kazakov, Sattler, and Zolin 2007).
On the positive side, it was shown that if role inclusions and
inverse roles are not present, as in SN , SQ, SOQ, decidability is then regained (Kazakov, Sattler, and Zolin 2007;
Kaminski and Smolka 2010). However, no (elementary)
complexity bounds are obtained from these results. Interestingly, if we have inverse roles or role inclusions, but only
functionality (counting up to one) is allowed the panorama is
less clear. The only known result is that satisﬁability relative
to SIF-TBoxes is decidable in 2E XP T IME (Tendera 2005),
but decidability of, e.g., SHIF, SHOIF remains an open
problem.
The main contribution of this paper is to establish a complete picture of the complexity of the problem of concept
satisﬁability relative to TBoxes in DLs supporting counting
over transitive roles, by resolving the aforementioned open
problems. Moreover, for all considered DLs including nominals, our upper bound results transfer to knowledge base
satisﬁability.
Our investigation starts (Section 3) with the DL SOQ,
allowing for qualiﬁed counting and nominals. As mentioned above, decidability was shown by Kaminski and
Smolka [2010], and NE XP T IME-hardness is inherited from
graded modal logic (Kazakov and Pratt-Hartmann 2009).1
However, the exact computational complexity of SOQ was
unknown. We close here this gap, by providing a NE XP T IME upper bound. To this aim, we use a two-step approach.
First, we provide a decomposition of SOQ models, permitting us to ‘independently reason’ about the different (transitive) roles. In a second step, carefully adapting a tech-

Abstract
We study description logics (DLs) supporting number restrictions on transitive roles. We ﬁrst take a look at SOQ and
SON with binary and unary coding of numbers, and provide
algorithms for the satisﬁability problem and tight complexity bounds ranging from E XP T IME to NE XP T IME. We then
show that by allowing for counting only up to one (functionality), inverse roles and role inclusions can be added without
losing decidability. We ﬁnally investigate DLs of the DLLite-family, and show that, in the presence of role inclusions,
the core fragment becomes undecidable.

1

Introduction

Description Logics (DLs) are a successful family of logicbased knowledge representation formalisms. The relevance
of DLs comes from the fact that they are arguably the most
popular language for the formulation of ontologies. For instance, they provide the logical basis of the web ontology
language OWL 2, the medical ontology S NOMED CT, and
the NCI thesaurus. One of the main reasons for the takeup of DLs is that, in general, they provide a good trade-off
between expressivity and computational complexity. Unfortunately, in some cases this is not easy to ensure, e.g., the unrestricted interaction of (qualiﬁed) number restrictions and
transitive roles tends to destroy this good balance; in many
cases, leading to undecidability. On the other hand, support of these features is required, e.g., for ontological modeling in the biomedical domain (Rector and Rogers 2006;
Kazakov, Sattler, and Zolin 2007; Stevens et al. 2007). For
instance, in the classiﬁcation of proteins (Wolstencroft et
al. 2005), certain classes of proteins are deﬁned in terms
of their composition: If a protein contains at least n1 X1 components . . . and at least nk Xk components, then it belongs to class B. Moreover, these deﬁnitions require modeling of parthood, which is intended to be a transitive relation. Hence there is need of a clear understanding of the
decidability frontier for DLs supporting these features.
With this in mind, in the last 15 years, the DL community
has developed a vast amount of research on the complexity
of reasoning in the presence of transitive roles and number
restrictions, see, (Horrocks, Sattler, and Tobies 2000; Kazakov, Sattler, and Zolin 2007; Schröder and Pattinson 2008;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1121

Graded modalities correspond to qualiﬁed number restrictions.

