Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automated Design of Robust Mechanisms
Michael Albert, Vincent Conitzer

Peter Stone

Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{malbert,conitzer}@cs.duke.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

mality can lead to millions of dollars worth of lost revenue,
inefﬁciencies in resource allocation, and overspending.
It has long been understood that revenue optimal auction
mechanisms are prior-dependent (also known as Bayesian)
mechanisms (Myerson 1981; Cremer and McLean 1985;
1988; Lopomo 2001), i.e., mechanisms that assume some
knowledge of the kinds of bidders that are likely to participate. For a seller trying to maximize revenue by selling
a single item to independent bidders, she1 needs to set a
reserve price below which she will not sell the item (Myerson 1981), and this reserve price is dependent on her
belief about the bidders she is likely to face. However,
much of the focus of the algorithmic mechanism design
community has been on the approximate optimality of simple mechanisms (Bulow and Klemperer 1996; Hartline and
Roughgarden 2009; Roughgarden and Talgam-Cohen 2013;
Morgenstern and Roughgarden 2015), that is, mechanisms
that are either prior-independent or weakly prior-dependent
(this distinction will be made clear later on). This focus
is due to two factors. First, prior-dependent mechanisms
can be very brittle to mis-speciﬁed priors (Lopomo 2001;
Albert, Conitzer, and Lopomo 2015). That is to say, if a
prior-dependent mechanism is constructed using an incorrect prior it can perform much worse than simple mechanisms (Hartline and Roughgarden 2009). Second, competition can be an effective substitute for knowledge of the
distribution (Bulow and Klemperer 1996), so instead of implementing prior-dependent mechanisms, practitioners generally implement prior-independent mechanisms under the
assumption that there are many bidders, or that it will somehow be possible to acquire new bidders
Unfortunately, in many auctions there is no feasible way
to acquire more bidders. When NASA is awarding contracts
to private space companies, they cannot generate more companies with the expertise to provide lift capacity, nor can
Google ﬁnd more bidders who are interested in advertising
on search results for obscure brand-related keywords. Thin
auctions are an actively recognized concern for many organizations that use auction mechanisms. A Government Ofﬁce
of Accountability report from 2013 (Government Accountability Ofﬁce 2013) examining the use of reverse auctions by

Abstract
We introduce a new class of mechanisms, robust mechanisms, that is an intermediary between ex-post mechanisms
and Bayesian mechanisms. This new class of mechanisms
allows the mechanism designer to incorporate imprecise estimates of the distribution over bidder valuations in a way that
provides strong guarantees that the mechanism will perform
at least as well as ex-post mechanisms, while in many cases
performing better. We further extend this class to mechanisms that are with high probability incentive compatible and
individually rational, -robust mechanisms. Using techniques
from automated mechanism design and robust optimization,
we provide an algorithm polynomial in the number of bidder
types to design robust and -robust mechanisms. We show
experimentally that this new class of mechanisms can significantly outperform traditional mechanism design techniques
when the mechanism designer has an estimate of the distribution and the bidder’s valuation is correlated with an externally
veriﬁable signal.

Introduction
Auctions are one of the fundamental tools of the modern
economy for allocating resources. They are used to allocate online ad space, offshore oil drilling rights, famous
artwork, small and medium lift capacity to planetary orbit, government supply contracts, FCC spectrum licenses,
and almost limitless numbers of other things, large and
small. Further, the sizes of these markets are economically
enormous. In 2014, $10 billion dollars of ad revenue was
generated through automated auctions (Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) 2015). In 2012, just four government
agencies—the Army, the Department of Homeland Security,
the Department of the Interior, and the Department of Veteran Affairs—purchased $800+ million of commercial items
through auctions (Government Accountability Ofﬁce 2013).
In 2014, NASA awarded contracts to Boeing and Space-X
worth $4.2 billion and $2.6 billion respectively through an
implicit auction process (NASA 2014). In an ongoing auction, the FCC is expected to allocate between $60 and $80
billion worth of broadcast spectrum. Given the economic
magnitudes involved, it is crucial that these auctions are implemented optimally, for even small deviations from optic 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this paper, we will use “he” to denote bidders and “she” to
denote mechanism designers/sellers.

298

