Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-Kernel Low-Rank Dictionary Pair Learning
for Multiple Features Based Image Classiﬁcation
Xiaoke Zhu,1,4 Xiao-Yuan Jing,∗,1,2 Fei Wu,2 Di Wu,1 Li Cheng,1 Sen Li,1 Ruimin Hu1,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Engineering, School of Computer, Wuhan University, China
2
College of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Computer School of Wuhan University
4
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Henan University, China. ∗ Corresponding author.
have been presented. (Shi et al. 2013) presents a multimodal
sparse representation based classiﬁcation method for classifying lung needle biopsy images, which aims to select the
topmost discriminative samples for each individual modality as well as to guarantee the large diversity among different
modalities. By designing uncorrelated constraint, uncorrelated multi-view discrimination DL (UMD2 L) method (Jing
et al. 2014) jointly learns multiple uncorrelated discriminative dictionaries from multiple views. (Wu et al. 2016)
presents a multi-view low-rank dictionary learning (MLDL)
approach to cope with the situation where exist large noises.
This family of methods learn the dictionary by regarding the
feature space of samples to be linear for each representation;
however, in many practical applications, samples usually lie
on a non-linear feature space.
Kernel technology is an effective way to deal with nonlinear data (Zhang et al. 2012). Multiple kernel learning
(MKL) has been widely applied to problems involving data
with multiple feature representations (Bucak, Jin, and Jain
2014; Liu et al. 2014). Recently, a few multiple kernel sparse
representation or DL methods have been presented. With
the predeﬁned dictionary, MKL for sparse representation
based classiﬁcation (MKL-SRC) method (Shrivastava, Patel, and Chellappa 2014) uses a two-step training strategy to
learn kernel weights and sparse codes. Multiple instance DL
(MIDL) method (Shrivastava, Pillai, and Patel 2015) formulates multiple instance learning problem as a kernel learning
problem, and separately learns kernel dictionaries for positive and negative bags. Discriminative multiple kernel DL
(DMKDL) method (Thiagarajan, Ramamurthy, and Spanias
2014) performs DL by using multiple levels of 1-D subspace
clustering in kernel space, and optimizes weights of the ensemble kernel based on graph-embedding principles.

Abstract
Dictionary learning (DL) is an effective feature learning technique, and has led to interesting results in many classiﬁcation tasks. Recently, by combining DL with multiple kernel
learning (which is a crucial and effective technique for combining different feature representation information), a few
multi-kernel DL methods have been presented to solve the
multiple feature representations based classiﬁcation problem.
However, how to improve the representation capability and
discriminability of multi-kernel dictionary has not been well
studied. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-kernel DL approach, named multi-kernel low-rank dictionary pair learning
(MKLDPL). Speciﬁcally, MKLDPL jointly learns a kernel
synthesis dictionary and a kernel analysis dictionary by exploiting the class label information. The learned synthesis and
analysis dictionaries work together to implement the coding
and reconstruction of samples in the kernel space. To enhance
the discriminability of the learned multi-kernel dictionaries,
MKLDPL imposes the low-rank regularization on the analysis dictionary, which can make samples from the same class
have similar representations. We apply MKLDPL for multiple features based image classiﬁcation task. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Introduction
Learning effective features plays a crucial role in image
classiﬁcation tasks. Dictionary learning (DL) is an important feature learning technique with state-of-the-art classiﬁcation performance (Yang et al. 2016). Most of existing DL
methods focus on solving single feature representation based
learning problems (Van Nguyen et al. 2013). Some popular single feature representation based DL methods include
ﬁsher discrimination dictionary learning (FDDL) (Yang et
al. 2011), label consistent K-SVD (Jiang, Lin, and Davis
2013), projective dictionary pair learning (DPL) (Gu et al.
2014) and kernelized supervised DL (Gangeh, Ghodsi, and
Kamel 2013).
Since more information exists in multiple feature representations than in a single one, multiple feature representations based learning techniques have attracted a lot of research interests (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013). Nowadays, several
linear multiple feature representations based DL methods

Motivation
Although improved performance has been reported in the
existing multi-kernel DL methods (Thiagarajan, Ramamurthy, and Spanias 2014; Shrivastava, Pillai, and Patel
2015), there still remains several critical issues.
(1) Researches in (Gu et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2016)
demonstrate that analysis-synthesis dictionary could provide
a more complete view of data representation than analysis
dictionary or synthesis dictionary. However, existing multikernel DL methods only investigate the kernel representa-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2970

