Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Neural Bag-of-Ngrams
Bofang Li, Tao Liu, Zhe Zhao, Puwei Wang,∗ Xiaoyong Du
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Key laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, MOE, Beijing, China
{libofang, tliu, helloworld, wangpuwei, duyong}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Bag-of-ngrams (BoN) models are commonly used for representing text. One of the main drawbacks of traditional BoN
is the ignorance of n-gram’s semantics. In this paper, we introduce the concept of Neural Bag-of-ngrams (Neural-BoN),
which replaces sparse one-hot n-gram representation in traditional BoN with dense and rich-semantic n-gram representations. We ﬁrst propose context guided n-gram representation
by adding n-grams to word embeddings model. However, the
context guided learning strategy of word embeddings is likely
to miss some semantics for text-level tasks. Text guided ngram representation and label guided n-gram representation
are proposed to capture more semantics like topic or sentiment tendencies. Neural-BoN with the latter two n-gram representations achieve state-of-the-art results on 4 documentlevel classiﬁcation datasets and 6 semantic relatedness categories. They are also on par with some sophisticated DNNs
on 3 sentence-level classiﬁcation datasets. Similar to traditional BoN, Neural-BoN is efﬁcient, robust and easy to implement. We expect it to be a strong baseline and be used in
more real-world applications.

Figure 1: Example of traditional BoN and Neural-BoN for
representing text “I love this movie”.
considered as an unique token which is different from each
other absolutely. The semantics of n-grams is ignored under
this condition. In this paper, we introduce Neural Bag-ofNgrams (Neural-BoN) to overcome this drawback. It represents n-grams by dense, real-valued vectors instead of sparse
vectors. N-grams with similar semantics are more likely to
be similar in vector space. Text vector generated by summing neural n-gram vectors contains more semantics, which
contributes more to the successive models.
In this paper, three types of neural n-gram representation
(NR) are proposed: Context Guided N-gram Representation
(CGNR), Text Guided N-gram Representation (TGNR) and
Label Guided N-gram representation (LGNR) (Figure 2). As
the name suggests, CGNR utilizes the n-gram co-occurrence
information which lies in context. It is inspired by the recent success of word embeddings and is built on the basis
of Skip-Gram (Mikolov et al. 2013). However, the context
guided learning strategy of word embeddings and CGNR is
likely to miss some semantics for text-level tasks. TGNR
and LGNR are proposed to utilize the n-gram co-occurrence
information which lies in text and texts’ class labels respectively. They can capture more important information such as
the topic or sentiment tendencies.
Neural-BoN inherits the advantages of both traditional
BoN and neural word embeddings. It captures semantics
with dense representation as neural word embeddings while
it remains simple and robust as traditional BoN. Neural-

Introduction
Text representation plays an important role in many natural
language processing tasks. It aims at mapping varied-length
texts (sentences, paragraphs, documents) into ﬁxed-length
vectors. The quality of text vectors will directly affect the
downstream models’ performance. Take text classiﬁcation
tasks for example, the way of representing texts is much
more important than the choice of classiﬁers.
The most commonly used text representation model is
bag-of-words (Joachims 1998), in which text is represented
as the multiset of its belonging words. The grammar and
word order are disregarded. Compared to bag-of-words,
bag-of-ngrams considers not only word, but also consecutive
words (n-gram). These models are often used as baselines in
recent research and preferable in real-world applications due
to their simplicity and robustness.
As shown in Figure 1, traditional bag-of-ngrams (BoN)
can be regarded as the sum of n-gram vectors with onehot representation. In one-hot representation, each n-gram is
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3067

