Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Partitioned Sampling of Public Opinions
Based on Their Social Dynamics∗
Weiran Huang

Liang Li

Wei Chen

IIIS, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
huang.inbox@outlook.com

AI Department, Ant Financial Group
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
liangli.ll@alipay.com

Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

unbiased sampling method. Our motivation is from the fact
that people’s opinions are often correlated, especially among
friends in a social network, due to their social interactions in
terms of the homophily and inﬂuence effects (McPherson,
Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001; Goel, Mason, and Watts 2010;
Crandall et al. 2008). Such correlations are partially known
in the big data era. For example, many online social media
and networking sites provide publicly available social interaction data and user’s sentiment data, and companies also
have large amounts of data about their customers’ preferences and their social interactions. Our idea is to partition
individuals into different groups by utilizing the above prior
knowledge, such that people within a group are likely to hold
the same opinions. We can then sample very few people in
each group and aggregate the sampling results together to
achieve an accurate estimation. We call this the partitioned
sampling method.
We formulate the above idea as an optimization problem.
In particular, we ﬁrst characterize individuals’ opinions as
random variables. We then specify our objective as minimizing the expected sample variance of the estimate, and
deﬁne the statistical measure of pairwise opinion similarity as the input. Our analysis later shows that this input is
enough to fully determine the solution of the optimization
problem, named the Optimal Partitioned Sampling (OPS)
problem (Section 2).
We solve the OPS problem in two steps (Section 3). First,
we show that the best partition is always a simple partition,
meaning that each group contains only one sample. Second,
we use people’s opinion similarities to construct a weighted
graph and reduce the OPS problem to the Min-r-Partition
problem. We adapt a semi-deﬁnite programming algorithm
and a heuristic algorithm to solve the optimization problem. We further show that partitioned sampling using any
balanced simple partition where group sizes are the same
always out-performs naive sampling method, and thus balanced simple partition is always safe to use even if we only
have partial or inaccurate opinion similarity information.
Next, we adapt existing opinion evolution models and
propose the Voter model with Innate Opinions (VIO) based
on social network interactions (Section 4). We provide an
exact computation of opinion similarities in the steady state
of the model, which is novel in the study of such models.
Finally, we conduct experiments on both synthetic and

Abstract
Public opinion polling is usually done by random sampling
from the entire population, treating individual opinions as independent. In the real world, individuals’ opinions are often
correlated, e.g., among friends in a social network. In this paper, we explore the idea of partitioned sampling, which partitions individuals with high opinion similarities into groups
and then samples every group separately to obtain an accurate
estimate of the population opinion. We rigorously formulate
the above idea as an optimization problem. We then show that
the simple partitions which contain only one sample in each
group are always better, and reduce ﬁnding the optimal simple partition to a well-studied Min-r-Partition problem. We
adapt an approximation algorithm and a heuristic to solve the
optimization problem. Moreover, to obtain opinion similarity
efﬁciently, we adapt a well-known opinion evolution model
to characterize social interactions, and provide an exact computation of opinion similarities based on the model. We use
both synthetic and real-world datasets to demonstrate that the
partitioned sampling method results in signiﬁcant improvement in sampling quality and it is robust when some opinion
similarities are inaccurate or even missing.

1

Introduction

Public opinion is essential nowadays for governments, organizations and companies to make decisions on their policies,
strategies, products, etc. The most common way to collect
public opinions is polling, typically done by randomly sampling a large number of individuals from the entire population and then interviewing them by telephone. This naive
method is unbiased, but conducting interviews is very costly.
On the other hand, in recent years, more and more online social media data are available and have been used to predict
public opinions on certain issues. Such predictions cost less
human effort, but they are usually biased and may lead to
incorrect decisions. Thus, keeping the estimation unbiased
while saving the cost becomes an important task to pursue.
In this paper, we utilize individuals’ social interactions
(potentially learned from social media data) to improve the
∗
This work was supported in part by the National Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61033001,
61361136003, 61433014.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

24

