Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automatic Logic-Based Benders
Decomposition with MiniZinc
Toby O. Davies, Graeme Gange, Peter J. Stuckey
Department of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

ically couched in terms of the inference dual (Hooker and
Ottosson 2003). However typical subproblem solvers (in
particular, classical CP solvers) do not provide sufﬁcient information to reconstruct a compact justiﬁcation of failure, so
in practice cuts are derived by exploiting the independence
of the subproblems and knowledge of their structure (Ciré,
Coban, and Hooker 2013).
In this paper, we present a fully automatic approach for
solving constrained optimization problems via logic-based
Benders decomposition. The automated decomposition diverges from typical instances of logic-based Benders decomposition in a key respect: it constructs only a single
complete ‘subproblem’. Rather than explicitly decomposing our problem into independent subproblems (either manually or heuristically), we instead rely on the conﬂict analysis capabilities of lazy clause generation solvers to identify
relevant subsystems.
Though this approach makes the subproblem considerably more difﬁcult, it offers several advantages. Unlike classical LBBD, it can cope with subsystems which are not fully
disjoint. There is no need to design problem- or objectivespeciﬁc cuts; cut derivation is entirely generic. And while
generating cuts, the subproblem solver also acts as a primal
heuristic.
This formulation reveals an interesting duality. From the
perspective of the MIP solver, this is an instance of logic
based Benders decomposition where the subproblem solver
doubles as a primal heuristic. But from the perspective of
the CP solver, our framework is an instance of large neighborhood search (LNS) (Pisinger and Ropke 2010) – the MIP
proposes promising candidate regions, which the CP solver
progressively explores and expands – in which the neighborhood selection heuristic also supplies valid lower bounds.
We will refer to the search space implied by a set of assumptions as a neighborhood throughout this paper.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:

Abstract
Logic-based Benders decomposition (LBBD) is a powerful
hybrid optimisation technique that can combine the strong
dual bounds of mixed integer programming (MIP) with the
combinatorial search strengths of constraint programming
(CP). A major drawback of LBBD is that it is a far more involved process to implement an LBBD solution to a problem
than the ”model-and-run” approach provided by both CP and
MIP. We propose an automated approach that accepts an arbitrary MiniZinc model and solves it using LBBD with no additional intervention on the part of the modeller. The design
of this approach also reveals an interesting duality between
LBBD and large neighborhood search (LNS). We compare
our implementation of this approach to CP and MIP solvers
on 4 different problem classes where LBBD has been applied
before.

1

Introduction

Logic-based Benders decomposition is among the most effective approaches for ﬁnding optimal solutions to complex
conﬁguration and scheduling tasks, frequently two or three
orders of magnitude faster than pure MIP or CP approaches
(Hooker and Ottosson 2003).
The essence of logic-based benders decomposition is to
take the problem P , and derive a relaxed master PM (typically a MIP) which relaxes or omits some constraints in P ,
and a set of independent subproblems P1 , . . . , Pk such that
P ↔ PM ∧ P1 ∧ · · · ∧ Pk . The master solves PM and the
solution μ is checked by each subproblem solver for Pi . If μ
does not satisfy Pi a cut is added to the master to eliminate
μ and othe solutions which will not satisfy Pi for the same
reason.
However, designing a concrete instantiation of this framework is typically nontrivial. The ﬁrst difﬁculty is in choosing the relaxation PM . If the master omits important constraints entirely, the candidate solutions are too optimistic,
and the method converges slowly. Conversely, if the constraint is not substantially relaxed, solving the master becomes unmanageable (effectively regressing to a pure MIP
approach).
A second issue is the extraction of feasibility cuts from
infeasible subproblems. Logic-based Benders cuts are typ-

• A variant of logic-based Benders decomposition which
reveals a duality between LBBD and large-neighborhood
search (LNS)
• An automated approach for applying LBBD techniques to
arbitrary constraint models
• A simple way of integrating traditional CP optimisationas-repeated-satisfaction into the LBBD framework.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

787

