Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

PAG2ADMG: A Novel Methodology
to Enumerate Causal Graph Structures
Nishant Subramani, Doug Downey
Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60201, USA
nishantsubramani2017@u.northwestern.edu
ddowney@eecs.northwestern.edu

a set of independence relationships between variables of interest (a Markov equivalence class), including symptom X.
Although DAGs and PAGs describe causal relationships,
these models fail to capture the full set of causal models
in a speciﬁc Markov equivalence class (Richardson 2003).
Acyclic Directed Mixed Graphs (ADMGs), on the other
hand, provide richer representations: the full set of ADMGs
in a speciﬁc Markov equivalence class provides an explicit
enumeration of the entire causal space.
In this paper, we present a method that enumerates, for a
given PAG (or DAG converted into a PAG), the full set of
ADMGs in the PAG’s Markov equivalence class. Equipped
with the complete set of ADMGs, the physician could use
domain knowledge to eliminate structures that have causal
fallacies, use model-averaging to build better classiﬁers, or
simply choose a single preferred model from the set. Thus,
our method provides a data modeler novel and potentially
valuable model selection choices.

Abstract
Causal graphs, such as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) and
partial ancestral graphs (PAGs), represent causal relationships among variables in a model. Methods exist for learning DAGs and PAGs from data and for converting DAGs to
PAGs. However, these methods only output a single causal
graph consistent with the independencies/dependencies (the
Markov equivalence class M ) estimated from the data. However, many distinct graphs may be consistent with M , and a
data modeler may wish to select among these using domain
knowledge. In this paper, we present a method that makes
this possible. We introduce PAG2ADMG, the ﬁrst method for
enumerating all causal graphs consistent with M , under certain assumptions. PAG2ADMG converts a given PAG into a
set of acyclic directed mixed graphs (ADMGs). We prove the
correctness of the approach and demonstrate its efﬁciency relative to brute-force enumeration.

Introduction
Capturing causal relationships is essential for a comprehensive model of a domain. However, it is difﬁcult to identify
causal relationships from observational data because many
distinct causal models may correspond to the same associative relationships discovered from data. In such a situation,
a data modeler or domain expert may wish to enumerate
all the causal graphs consistent with the probabilistic independencies and dependencies present among variables of a
dataset, in order to (for example) leverage domain knowledge to choose one graph from the consistent set.
Consider a physician in a major hospital who has observed symptom X among many of her patients. Based
on their logs, patients developing symptom X had a much
higher likelihood of mortality. To understand the underlying causes of symptom X, the physician aims to learn a
causal model from her data. We consider causal models
that are graphs, where nodes represent random variables
and edges denote probabilistic relationships between variables. Methods exist to learn models such as directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs) and partial ancestral graphs (PAGs) from
data (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000). Using these
methods, the physician can learn one model that describes

Partial Ancestral Graphs
A PAG P is a causal graph that uniquely represents one
Markov equivalence class M of maximal ancestral graphs
(MAGs), a strict subset of ADMGs. MAGs are a special case
of mixed graphs that must satisfy the ancestral and maximal
properties. Only one of four different edges can exist between a pair of nodes in P: tail-arrow (directed, →), arrowarrow (bi-directed, ↔), circle-arrow (o→), and circle-circle
(o–o) (Zhang 2008). A tail or arrow mark appears at a node
X in P if and only if every MAG in M contains this mark at
X. A circle mark denotes a node at which two MAGs in M
have differing marks. M-separation is a property of causal
mixed graphs that helps to determine independence relationships between nodes. Due to space constraints, we refer to
(Zhang 2008) for more details on MAGs and m-separation.
Arrows on edges represent the direction of causal inﬂuence. The presence of an edge in P between nodes X and
Y indicates that there exists no set of nodes Z, including
the empty set, that m-separates X and Y (Richardson and
Spirtes 2002). X → Y , indicates that X is a causal ancestor
of Y and Y is not an ancestor of X. X ↔ Y , indicates that
X is not an ancestor of Y and Y is not an ancestor of X. X
o→ Y , indicates that X is not an ancestor of Y .

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4987

