Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Regret Ratio Minimization in
Multi-Objective Submodular Function Maximization
Tasuku Soma

Yuichi Yoshida

The University of Tokyo
tasuku soma@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics, and
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

In contrast to maximizing a single submodular function, maximizing multiple submodular functions is not well
understood. The difﬁculty in multi-objective optimization
arises from the fact that there may be no single solution
that maximizes all the objective functions simultaneously.
Hence, preferable solutions can vary from one user to another, depending on which objective function is more important to the user. Moreover, a user often cannot describe
his/her own preference explicitly but can only compare two
solutions based on his/her implicit preference. In such cases,
a natural goal is to precompute a family of “representative”
solutions so that a user with any preference can ﬁnd an (almost) optimal set in the family.
A standard approach for ﬁnding such a family is to enumerate the Pareto optimal solutions. However, this approach
has two drawbacks: (i) The number of Pareto optimal solutions is often massive, and enumerating all of them does not
enable a user to select a solution. (ii) No efﬁcient algorithm
for computing the Pareto optimal solutions is known when
the objective functions are submodular.

Abstract
Submodular function maximization has numerous applications in machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. Many
real applications require multiple submodular objective functions to be maximized, and which function is regarded as important by a user is not known in advance. In such cases, it is
desirable to have a small family of representative solutions
that would satisfy any user’s preference. A traditional approach for solving such a problem is to enumerate the Pareto
optimal solutions. However, owing to the massive number of
Pareto optimal solutions (possibly exponentially many), it is
difﬁcult for a user to select a solution. In this paper, we propose two efﬁcient methods for ﬁnding a small family of representative solutions, based on the notion of regret ratio. The
ﬁrst method outputs a family of ﬁxed size with a non-trivial
regret ratio. The second method enables us to choose the size
of the output family, and in the biobjective case, it has a provable trade-off between the size and the regret ratio. Using real
and synthetic data, we empirically demonstrate that our methods achieve a small regret ratio.

Introduction

Our contributions

Submodular function maximization has numerous applications in machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence, such
as budget allocation (Soma et al. 2014), document summarization (Lin and Bilmes 2010; 2011), maximum entropy sampling (Ko, Lee, and Queyranne 1995), online service privacy (Krause and Horvitz 2008), and sensor placement (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008). Many efﬁcient algorithms have been developed to solve these problems by
maximizing a single submodular function.
However, in real applications, we often face multiple conﬂicting criteria. For example, in data summarization, we are
to select a subset of a data set that maximizes two criteria: coverage and diversity. That is, we are to ﬁnd a subset
that explains the entire data well, and at the same time, elements in the subset are different to each other. Further, in the
budget allocation problem, we are to buy ads to maximize
the expected number of people inﬂuenced by ads, while we
also need to minimize the cost of buying ads. These problems prompt us to consider maximizing multiple submodular functions.

In this paper, we tackle the above-mentioned problem using
the concept of regret ratio, introduced in (Nanongkai et al.
2010). Here, we assume that the preference of a user can
be expressed as a convex combination of the objective functions. Then, intuitively speaking, the regret ratio of a family
of solutions is the (normalized) loss caused by choosing a
solution from the family instead of considering all feasible
solutions. The advantage of introducing such a concept and
optimizing it is that we can control the size of the family.
In this paper, we formalize the concept of regret ratio for
multi-objective submodular function maximization. Then,
to ﬁnd a family of solutions with a small regret ratio, we
propose two methods, namely the coordinate-wise maximum method and the polytope method. The coordinatewise maximum method outputs a family of ﬁxed size with
a non-trivial regret ratio. The polytope method enables us
to choose the size of the output family, and in the biobjective case, it has a provable trade-off between the size and
the regret ratio. Both methods can handle monotone and
non-monotone submodular functions under any constraint
as long as there is an approximation algorithm for the corresponding problem on a single submodular function. In ad-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

905

