Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Polynomial Optimization Methods for Matrix Factorization
Po-Wei Wang

Chun-Liang Li

J. Zico Kolter

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
poweiw@cs.cmu.edu

Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
chunlial@cs.cmu.edu

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

have been used in a number of collaborative ﬁltering and
recommender system applications (Bell and Koren 2007;
Dror et al. 2012) and researchers have developed numerous
optimization approaches to solving these problems, discussed
in more detail below.
Despite it ubiquity, (2) is a non-convex optimization problem as it involves quartic terms in the A and B variables.
A number of approaches can still be used to optimize the
objective — two popular and straightforward approaches, for
example, are to use alternating minimization, since the objective is convex in either A or B separately, or simple gradient
descent in the non-convex objective — but the possibility of
local optima is real and a non-trivial reality of matrix factorization methods. A low-dimension example of (2) is given
in Appendix B, in which both methods stuck if not properly
initialized.
In this paper we propose an approach that both helps to
mitigate the possibility of local optima and speeds up matrix
factorization approaches above the current state of the art.
The basic idea is straightforward: suppose we want to optimize a single pair of coefﬁcient aik and bkj , or more generally suppose we have some joint search direction (ΔA, ΔB)
over A and B (the case of a single set of coordinates simply
being when ΔA and ΔB have only one non-zero component). Then we can consider the problem of optimizing the
objective just over this subspace

Abstract
Matrix factorization is a core technique in many machine
learning problems, yet also presents a nonconvex and often
difﬁcult-to-optimize problem. In this paper we present an
approach based upon polynomial optimization techniques that
both improves the convergence time of matrix factorization
algorithms and helps them escape from local optima. Our
method is based on the realization that given a joint search
direction in a matrix factorization task, we can solve the “subspace search” problem (the task of jointly ﬁnding the steps
to take in each direction) by solving a bivariate quartic polynomial optimization problem. We derive two methods for
solving this problem based upon sum of squares moment relaxations and the Durand-Kerner method, then apply these
techniques on matrix factorization to derive a direct coordinate descent approach and a method for speeding up existing
approaches. On three benchmark datasets we show the method
substantially improves convergence speed over state-of-the-art
approaches, while also attaining lower objective value.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorization has become a foundational operation
in many machine learning tasks. Although there are several
variants of matrix factorization, one of the most common is
the collaborate ﬁltering setting, where we wish to ﬁnd a lowrank reconstruction of some matrix S ∈ RM ×N , where we
only observe the entries Sij at some relatively small number
of points (i, j) ∈ S. The goal is then to ﬁnd some A ∈
RM ×K and B ∈ RN ×K such that
aTi bj ≈ Sij , ∀(i, j) ∈ S

minimize L(A + αΔA, B + βΔB)
α,β

where α, β ∈ R are our optimization variables. This problem
becomes a quartic polynomial in the two variables, α and β,
which can be solved exactly using sum of squares methods
(Parrilo 2003; Blekherman, Parrilo, and Thomas 2013); alternatively, for this particular case we show the problem can
be reduced to ﬁnding the root of a quintic polynomial in a
single variable, and solved exactly using the Durand-Kerner
method (also called the method of Weierstrass) (Durand 1959;
Petkovi et al. 1995) (we show, this approach is often several
orders of magnitude faster than the SOS-based methods). Using this “exact subspace search” technique, we both derive
a pure coordinate descent approach to matrix factorization
and modify existing optimization approaches to incorporate
this subspace search when adjusting the parameters. For the
case of the pure coordinate descent approach, we derive an
efﬁcient caching mechanism that lets us efﬁciently update

(1)

where ai denotes the ith row of A and bj denotes the jth row
of B. Although many methods to perform this factorization
are possible, a natural approach is to solve the optimization
problem
(2)
minimize L(A, B),
A,B

where
L(A, B) ≡



(3)



(aTi bj − Sij )2 + λ A2F + B2F ,

(i,j)∈S

in which A and B are the optimization variables and λ is
a regularization parameter. This approach and extensions
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2710

