Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Dollar Auction with Spiteful Players
Marcin Waniek

Long Tran-Thanh

University of Warsaw
vua@mimuw.edu.pl

University of Southampton
ltt08r@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Tomasz P. Michalak

Nicholas R. Jennings

University of Oxford
& University of Warsaw
tomasz.michalak@cs.ox.ac.uk

Imperial College London
n.jennings@imperial.ac.uk

price to $.10. Player 1 faces the following dilemma: withdraw from the auction and lose $.05 with certainty, or increase the bid to $.15 with the hope of gaining $.85. Since
the same reasoning holds at any stage during the auction, the
bidding may continue well past the bill of $1.00 to be won.
While past this point the bidders can only seek to minimize
losses, they are still incentivized to increase their bids rather
than drop out and lose everything. Indeed, in experiments
with the dollar auction a dollar bill is sold for considerably
more than a dollar (Kagel and Levin 2008).
This “paradox of escalation” (Shubik 1971) can be explained by that a rational strategy for the dollar auction is,
unfortunately, far from obvious. Matter-of-factly, the optimal solution remained unknown for ﬁfteen years after the
publication of Shubik’s original work. A solution was eventually given by O’Neill (1986) who proved that, assuming
pure strategies and ﬁnite budgets of players, there exists the
unique ﬁrst bid (smaller than a dollar) that guarantees winning the dollar. The exact amount of such a “golden” bid is
a non-trivial function of the stake, the budgets, and the minimum allowable increment.
O’Neill’s result implies that, given his assumptions, the
conﬂict in the dollar auction should not escalate: there
should be always a single winner (a player who has a
chance to move ﬁrst). Hence, the escalation observed in
real-life experiments is due to some factors not present in
the model. Given this, O’Neill’s results were reconsidered
by Leininger (1989) who showed that the escalation occurs
when we allow for mixed strategies.1 Next, Demange (1992)
proved the same if there is some uncertainty about the
strength of the players.
Similar concept to the dollar auction is the war of attrition (Smith 1982; Bishop and Cannings 1978; Krishna and
Morgan 1997), although most war of attrition models assume that each player makes only one move. In the dollar
auction players make their moves sequentially, which allows for studying conﬂict escalation. As for experimental
research, Dechenaux et al. (2015) offer a survey of such literature on contests, all-pay auctions, and tournaments.
In this paper, we reconsider O’Neill’s results in pure equilibria from a different perspective. Following recent liter-

Abstract
The dollar auction is an auction model used to analyse the
dynamics of conﬂict escalation. In this paper, we analyse the
course of an auction when participating players are spiteful,
i.e., they are motivated not only by their own proﬁt, but also
by the desire to hurt the opponent. We investigate this model
for the complete information setting, both for the standard
scenario and for the situation where auction starts with nonzero bids. Our results give us insight into the possible effects
of meanness onto conﬂict escalation.

Introduction
More often than not, conﬂict situations require all the opposing parties to commit considerable resources which are then
unrecoverable for those who were unlucky to win the stake.
Such sunk costs occur, for instance, when lobbyist compete
for a public contract (Fang 2002), oligopolists engage in the
R&D race (Dasgupta 1986), or military powers engage in
the arm race (Mahnken et al. 2016). When the conﬂict progresses the resources of all parties deplete but it is typically
only the winner who is able to recover them, and this sometimes only partially.
Shubik (1971) proposed a simple yet powerful model to
study such conﬂict situations. In his so-called dollar auction,
two bidders compete for a dollar bill. Similarly to an English
auction, the highest bidder wins the prize, but, unlike in the
English auction, both the winner and the loser have to pay
their bids to the auctioneer.
Is it not then better not to participate in the above all-pay
auction and to avoid potential conﬂict situations? Unfortunately, while such an approach should certainly be given
a serious consideration, it is not always possible to escape
from conﬂicts. In particular, the possibility that a player may
refrain from bidding creates an incentive for the other player
to bid and to become a winner at a very low cost. For instance, if no other competitor invest in R&D, an oligopolistic company has an incentive to make a small investment and
dominate the market. However, since such a situation can be
life-threatening, the competitors have no choice but to bid
and the conﬂict escalations begins.
To illustrate this point, let us assume that the auction has
started with player 1 bidding $.05, and player 2 raising the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We note that the result very similar to Leininger (1989) were
obtained more recently by Dekel (2007).

736

