Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Covering Codes and Upper Bounds
for the Dimension of Simple Games
Martin Olsen
BTECH, Aarhus University
Denmark
martino@btech.au.dk

weighted games, and the dimension (Taylor and Zwicker
1999) of a simple game is the minimum number of weighted
games that we need to implement the simple game in this
way. The dimension plays a key role with respect to storage
requirements and efﬁciency if the collective decision procedure for a multi-agent system is implemented as the intersection of weighted games. Real-world voting systems can
be seen as simple games, and the dimension aspects of realworld voting systems have been studied intensively within
the ﬁeld of Computational Social Choice (Kilgour 1983;
Taylor and Zwicker 1993; Cheung and Ng 2014; Freixas
2004; Kurz and Napel 2016).
In this paper, we consider the maximum dimension, dn ,
that we can obtain for a simple game with
Tay
 nn players.
is an upper
lor and Zwicker (1999) have shown that n/2
bound for dn by demonstrating how to implement
 sim n any
games
ple game as the intersection of no more than n/2
(details will follow later). The main contribution of this paper is a constructive major improvement of the generic upper
bound provided by Taylor and Zwicker that we present in the
form of two new and stronger upper bounds.
We apply a technique that – to the best of our knowledge
– has not been used before to translate any simple game into
the intersection of relatively few weighted games. Recently,
Olsen, Kurz, and Molinero (2016) demonstrated a major improvement in the lower bound on dn by using theory of error correcting codes. We use a signiﬁcantly different and
novel approach based on covering codes to obtain our upper
bounds. The gap between the upper
√ and lower bound has for
some n gone from a factor n to √n (roughly) through our
improvement and to a factor ln n n in general. We conclude by suggesting a direction that might lead to a further
reduction of the dimensionality gap.

Abstract
Consider a situation with n agents or players, where some of
the players form a coalition with a certain collective objective. Simple games are used to model systems that can decide
whether coalitions are successful (winning) or not (losing).
A simple game can be viewed as a monotone boolean function. The dimension of a simple game is the smallest positive
integer d such that the simple game can be expressed as the
intersection of d threshold functions, where each threshold
function uses a threshold and n weights. Taylor and Zwicker
have shown that d is bounded from above by the number of
maximal losing coalitions. We present two new upper bounds
both containing the Taylor-Zwicker bound as a special case.

n
The Taylor-Zwicker bound implies an upper bound of n/2
.
We improve this upper bound signiﬁcantly by showing constructively that d is bounded from above by the cardinality of
any binary covering code with length n and covering radius
1. This result supplements a recent result where Olsen et al.
showed how to construct simple games with dimension |C|
for any binary constant weight SECDED code C with length
n. Our result represents a major step in the attempt to close
the dimensionality gap for simple games.

Introduction
Consider a multi-agent system, where a coalition of agents
is formed in order to solve a given task and where we have
to predict if the coalition will succeed or not. We restrict
our attention to cases obeying the natural monotonicity condition saying that the superset of any successful coalition
will also succeed. In such a multi-agent system, we need
some sort of system that can compute a prediction: ”yes”
or ”no”. The so-called simple games model such systems,
and simple games can also be viewed as monotone boolean
functions or monotone hypergraphs. The agents in a simple
game are referred to as players, and successful and unsuccessful coalitions will be referred to as winning and losing
coalitions respectively.
A weighted game is a special type of simple game, where
every player is assigned a weight and where a coalition is
successful if and only if the total weight of the players in
the coalition meets or exceeds a given quota. Any simple
game can be implemented as the intersection of one or more

Related Work
Taylor and Zwicker (1999) have constructed
a sequence of
n
games with dimension at least 2 2 −1 for n = 2k with k
odd. The dimension of the simple games presented
by Tayn
lor and Zwicker was later shown to be exactly 2 2 −1 (Olsen,
Kurz, and Molinero 2016). Freixas and Puente (2001) have
shown how ton construct another type of simple games with
dimension 2 2 −1 for all even n. This lower bound on dn
was recently improved signiﬁcantly by Olsen, Kurz, and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

629

