Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Exploiting both Vertical and Horizontal Dimensions of
Feature Hierarchy for Effective Recommendation
∗

Zhu Sun,∗ Jie Yang,† Jie Zhang,∗ Alessandro Bozzon†

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, † Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
∗
{sunzhu, zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg, † {j.yang-3, a.bozzon}@tudelft.nl

Layer 3

Abstract
Feature hierarchy (FH) has proven to be effective to improve
recommendation accuracy. Prior work mainly focuses on the
inﬂuence of vertically afﬁliated features (i.e. child-parent)
on user-item interactions. The relationships of horizontally
organized features (i.e. siblings and cousins) in the hierarchy, however, has only been little investigated. We show in
real-world datasets that feature relationships in horizontal dimension can help explain and further model user-item interactions. To fully exploit FH, we propose a uniﬁed recommendation framework that seamlessly incorporates both
vertical and horizontal dimensions for effective recommendation. Our model further considers two types of semantically rich feature relationships in horizontal dimension, i.e.
complementary and alternative relationships. Extensive validation on four real-world datasets demonstrates the superiority of our approach against the state of the art. An additional
beneﬁt of our model is to provide better interpretations of the
generated recommendations.

Women’s Clothing

Layer 2

Athletic Clothing

Layer 1

Shirts ... Pants ... Shoes

......

Fashion Clothing
Blouse ... Skirts ... Heels

Product

Figure 1: Running example of feature hierarchy.
child-parent afﬁliation have inﬂuence on user-item interactions. They ignore, however, another important dimension
of FH, i.e. the horizontal dimension. Sibling and cousin
features, i.e. positioned in the same layer of the hierarchy,
might capture latent relationships that could be used to better characterize user-item interactions, and, consequently, to
enhance recommendation accuracy. In the following we use
a running example to illustrate how the horizontal dimension
of FH can help characterize user-item interactions.
Running Example Consider a Web product recommender
system, where the goal is to recommend products to users.
Figure 1 depicts a 3-layer category hierarchy of Women’s
Clothing. Categories in this hierarchy are organized in vertical dimension (e.g. Shirts and Athletic Clothing) or horizontal dimension (e.g. Shirts and Pants). Suppose a customer who prefers athletic style to fashion style. She may
buy more items of Athletic Clothing, such as athletic shoes
and pants to match each other, instead of items of Fashion
Clothing, e.g. heels or skirts. In this case, the two sibling
categories Athletic Clothing and Fashion Clothing at Layer
2 are characterized by an alternative relationship, as they are
purchased by the user in a mutually exclusive fashion. The
sibling categories at Layer 1, Athletic Shoes and Pants, are
characterized by a complementary relationship, as they are
jointly purchased by the user. Whereas the cousin categories
at this layer, e.g. Athletic Shoes and Heels are alternative as
determined by the relationship of their parent categories.
The example highlights that feature relationships in horizontal dimension can provide additional characterization of
user-item interactions. It is, however, nontrivial to exploit
such kind of relationships, as the vertical afﬁliation of features in different layers should also be preserved. As illustrated in the above example, users’ preferences on items (e.g.
Athletic Shoes and Heels) could also be affected by the rela-

Introduction
Feature-based recommendation has been widely studied to
resolve data sparsity and cold start problems in recommender systems. Generally, features of users and items can
be organized in different structures, e.g. ﬂat or hierarchical. Feature hierarchy (FH) (He et al. 2016) – as a natural
yet powerful structure to describe human knowledge – has
proven to be effective to boost recommendation accuracy.
Early work incorporates FH for better recommendation
by converting it to a ﬂat structure (Ziegler, Lausen, and
Schmidt-Thieme 2004; Koenigstein, Dror, and Koren 2011;
Kanagal et al. 2012; Mnih 2012). The reduction to a simpler knowledge structure, while simplifying the formalization of the recommendation problem, brings severe information loss. Recently a few studies consider the structured
nature of FH, assuming that items are characterized by the
afﬁliated features in the hierarchy. Such characterization can
be modeled as the inﬂuence of features on user-item interactions, which is either manually deﬁned (He et al. 2016), or
automatically learnt from data (Yang et al. 2016).
All the methods above consider the inﬂuence of features
in vertical dimension of the hierarchy, i.e. only features with
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

189

