Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Generalized Ambiguity Decompositions for Classiﬁcation with
Applications in Active Learning and Unsupervised Ensemble Pruning
Zhengshen Jiang

Hongzhi Liu,* Bin Fu, Zhonghai Wu*

Electronics Engineering and
Computer Science, Peking University
Beijing, P.R. China
jiangzhengshen@pku.edu.cn

National Engineering Center of
Software Engineering, Peking University
Beijing, P.R. China
{liuhz, fubin1990, wuzh}@pku.edu.cn
*Corresponding author
The classic Ambiguity Decomposition revealed the relationship between the loss of base learners and that of the ensemble for ensemble regression (Krogh and Vedelsby 1995).
Its form for a single sample (Brown et al. 2005) is


(fens − y)2 =
ωi (fi − y)2 −
ωi (fi − fens )2 (1)

Abstract
Error decomposition analysis is a key problem for ensemble
learning. Two commonly used error decomposition schemes,
the classic Ambiguity Decomposition and Bias-VarianceCovariance decomposition, are only suitable for regression
tasks with square loss. We generalized the classic Ambiguity
Decomposition from regression problems with square loss to
classiﬁcation problems with any loss functions that are twice
differentiable, including the logistic loss in Logistic Regression, the exponential loss in Boosting methods, and the 01 loss in many other classiﬁcation tasks. We further proved
several important properties of the Ambiguity term, armed
with which the Ambiguity terms of logistic loss, exponential
loss and 0-1 loss can be explicitly computed and optimized.
We further discussed the relationship between margin theory,
“good” and “bad” diversity theory and our theoretical results,
and provided some new insights for ensemble learning. We
demonstrated the applications of our theoretical results in active learning and unsupervised ensemble pruning, and the experimental results conﬁrmed the effectiveness of our methods.

i

i

where fi is the output of a base classiﬁer, y is the true value
a convex comof the considered sample’s target, and fens is
=
bination
of
the
base
classiﬁers,
i.e.,
f
ens
i ωi fi , where

i ωi = 1 and ωi ≥ 0.
Computing the expectation in the sample space yields the
classic Ambiguity Decomposition, which is always written
as
E = Ē − Ā
where E is the generalization error of the ensemble, Ē is
the average generalization error of the base learners, and
Ā, which has been considered to be relevant to diversity, is
called “ambiguity”.
The classic Ambiguity Decomposition assumes that the
loss function is square loss which is commonly used in regression but not suitable for classiﬁcation.
Brown and Kuncheva broke down the Ambiguity term for
0-1 loss into two terms: “good” and “bad” diversity. The
good diversity term is taken out of Ē whereas the bad diversity term is added to it (Brown and Kuncheva 2010). Their
work only considered classiﬁcation tasks with 0-1 loss, and
the base classiﬁers were assumed to be combined using majority voting.
Audhkhasi et al. presented a framework to generalize the
classic Ambiguity Decomposition to classiﬁcation problems
(Audhkhasi et al. 2013). Their results showed that the ensemble performance approximately decomposed into a difference of the average classiﬁer performance and the diversity of the ensemble. However, their result was a bound of
the generalization error. The bound is not tight and the applicability is limited.

Introduction
Previous work
As a sub-ﬁeld of machine learning, ensemble methods use
multiple learning algorithms to obtain better predictive performance than could be obtained from any of the constituent
learning algorithms alone (Rokach 2010). To achieve good
performance, the base learners should be both accurate and
diverse.
It is widely accepted that the generalization error of an ensemble depends on a term related to diversity (Zhou 2012).
Thus, error decomposition analysis has long been considered as a key problem in ensemble learning. Two commonly
used error decomposition schemes are the classic Ambiguity Decomposition and Bias-Variance-Covariance decomposition. Both the two decompositions are only suitable for regression tasks with square loss. In this work, we generalized
the classic Ambiguity Decomposition to classiﬁcation tasks
with a variety of loss functions, including the logistic loss,
exponential loss, 0-1 loss, etc.

Contributions
In this paper, we contributed to the ﬁeld of machine learning
both theoretically and practically.
First, we presented two Generalized Ambiguity Decompositions that can be used not only in regression tasks, but

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2073

