Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Matching Node Embeddings for Graph Similarity
Giannis Nikolentzos

Polykarpos Meladianos

Michalis Vazirgiannis

École Polytechnique and AUEB
nikolentzos@aueb.gr

École Polytechnique and AUEB
pmeladianos@aueb.gr

École Polytechnique and AUEB
mvazirg@lix.polytechnique.fr

structural aspect of graphs. There are kernels based on random walks (Kashima, Tsuda, and Inokuchi 2003; Gärtner,
Flach, and Wrobel 2003), shortest paths (Borgwardt and
Kriegel 2005), subtrees (Gärtner, Flach, and Wrobel 2003;
Mahé and Vert 2009), cycles (Horváth, Gärtner, and Wrobel 2004) and graphlets (Shervashidze et al. 2009). The performance of these kernels can be considerably improved
by using the Weisfeiler-Lehman test of isomorphism (Shervashidze et al. 2011) or by taking into account similarities
between the extracted instances of the considered substructures (Yanardag and Vishwanathan 2015b; 2015a).
Most existing graph kernels hence compare speciﬁc substructures of graphs (trees, cycles, paths, etc.). These substructures correspond either to small subgraphs present in
the graphs or to relationships between very small subsets
of vertices. Hence, these algorithms focus on local properties of graphs and ignore global structure. For graphs of
small size, such local approaches may be appropriate. However, for larger graphs, they may suffer from their local nature and fail to perform equivalently, as several interesting
properties of these graphs may not be captured in local substructures. Hence, the need for graph kernels that are built
upon global properties of graphs is clear. Some very recent
work in this direction has resulted in the development of two
graph kernels that are based on the Lovász number and the
corresponding orthonormal representation (Johansson et al.
2014). However, these kernels are deﬁned only on unlabeled
graphs. A second approach compares pairs of graphs by
computing the optimal matching between the embeddings
of their vertices generated from various graph-related matrices (adjacency matrix, Laplacian matrix, etc.) (Johansson
and Dubhashi 2015). However, the emerging kernel matrix
is not always positive semideﬁnite (Vert 2008) and the authors resort to the Balcan-Blum-Srebro theory of classiﬁcation with similarity functions.
The goal of this paper is to address the aforementioned
problems of graph kernels that focus on local substructures
of graphs. By employing algorithms that utilize features describing global properties of graphs, we can overcome these
inherent limitations of “local” kernels. It is also desirable
that these algorithms produce valid kernel matrices so that
they enjoy the attractive properties of kernel methods.
Main Contributions We present two novel algorithms
designed to compare pairs of graphs based on their global

Abstract
Graph kernels have emerged as a powerful tool for graph
comparison. Most existing graph kernels focus on local properties of graphs and ignore global structure. In this paper, we
compare graphs based on their global properties as these are
captured by the eigenvectors of their adjacency matrices. We
present two algorithms for both labeled and unlabeled graph
comparison. These algorithms represent each graph as a set
of vectors corresponding to the embeddings of its vertices.
The similarity between two graphs is then determined using
the Earth Mover’s Distance metric. These similarities do not
yield a positive semideﬁnite matrix. To address for this, we
employ an algorithm for SVM classiﬁcation using indeﬁnite
kernels. We also present a graph kernel based on the Pyramid Match kernel that ﬁnds an approximate correspondence
between the sets of vectors of the two graphs. We further
improve the proposed kernel using the Weisfeiler-Lehman
framework. We evaluate the proposed methods on several
benchmark datasets for graph classiﬁcation and compare their
performance to state-of-the-art graph kernels. In most cases,
the proposed algorithms outperform the competing methods,
while their time complexity remains very attractive.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graph-based representations have become
extremely popular for modelling real-world data. Some examples of data represented as graphs include social networks, protein or gene regulation networks and textual documents. Graph kernels have been successfully used for
comparing graphs in a variety of ﬁelds such as Computational Biology (Schölkopf, Tsuda, and Vert 2004), Chemistry (Mahé and Vert 2009), Information Retrieval (Hermansson et al. 2013) and Medicine (Feragen et al. 2013).
In the heart of graph kernels lies a positive semidefinite kernel function k. Once we deﬁne such a function
k : X × X → R on a set X, it is known that there exists a map φ : X → H into a Hilbert space H, such that
k(x, x ) = φ(x), φ(x ) for all x, x ∈ X where ·, · is
the inner product in H. Graph kernels have traditionally employed functions that compare substructures of graphs that
are computable in polynomial time. More speciﬁcally, there
is a plethora of graph kernels, each focusing on a different
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2429

