Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Phrase-Based Presentation Slides Generation for Academic Papers
Sida Wang, Xiaojun Wan, Shikang Du
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
{sidawang, wanxiaojun, dusk}@pku.edu.cn

1999; Yoshiaki et al., 2003; Shibata and Kurohashi, 2005;
Masum et al., 2005; Masum and Ishizuka, 2006; Sravanthi
et al., 2009; Hu and Wan, 2013). Almost all of them adopt
or adapt existing summarization techniques to extract sentences to form the presentation slides. Unfortunately, the
slides produced in these studies are not well-structured and
concise. For example, in the most recent work of (Hu and
Wan, 2013), many long sentences are selected into the
slides, and the selected key phrases are usually not good
bullet points, making the slides boring to read.
In this study, we propose a phrase-based approach to address this challenging problem. Different from existing
sentence-based approaches, our proposed approach considers phrases in the academic paper as the basic elements for
content selection and arrangement. In particular, our approach first extracts phrases from the given paper, and then
learns both the saliency score of each phrase and the hierarchical relationship between a pair of phrases. Finally a
greedy algorithm is used to select and align the salient
phrases in order to form the well-structured presentation
slides. In this study, we propose two greedy algorithms for
comparison. Empirical evaluation results on a real dataset
verify the efficacy of our proposed phrase-based approach,
which performs much better than the state-of-the-art
PPSGen method and other baseline methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we first
describe our proposed approach in details and then present
the evaluation results. Finally, we briefly introduce related
work and conclude this paper.

Abstract
Automatic generation of presentation slides for academic
papers is a very challenging task. Previous methods for addressing this task are mainly based on document summarization techniques and they extract document sentences to
form presentation slides, which are not well-structured and
concise. In this study, we propose a phrase-based approach
to generate well-structured and concise presentation slides
for academic papers. Our approach first extracts phrases
from the given paper, and then learns both the saliency of
each phrase and the hierarchical relationship between a pair
of phrases. Finally a greedy algorithm is used to select and
align the salient phrases in order to form the well-structured
presentation slides. Evaluation results on a real dataset verify the efficacy of our proposed approach.

Introduction
Presentation slides serve as a popular and effective means
for researchers to present their research work on conferences, workshops or seminars. Researchers usually spend
too much time on writing presentation slides for their published papers. Existing slides editors (e.g. Microsoft PowerPoint, OpenOffice, WPS Office and Latex) can help researchers to format the slides, but automatic generation of
slides is still far from reach. It would be very useful to develop a tool to automatically generate draft slides by
choosing and arranging text elements in an academic paper.
The draft slides produced by the tool can be used as a basis
by researchers when they prepare the final presentation
slides, and thus save the researchers a great amount of time
and effort.
The problem of automatic presentation slides generation
is very challenging, because the slides usually have hierarchical structure consisting of bullet points in different levels. A bullet point can be a phrase, part of a sentence or a
shortened sentence. In recent years, several pilot studies
have investigated this challenging problem (Masao et al.,

Our Approach
Though presentation slides can be written in different
styles by different people, a typical type of presentation
slides is bullet-based slides, and each bullet is usually a
phrase, part of a sentence or a shortened sentence. Each
slide has one or more first-level bullets (denoted as ‫ )ͳܮ‬and
some first-level bullets may have several second-level bullets (denoted as ‫)ʹܮ‬. The second-level bullets are usually

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

196

