Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Graph-Based Wrong IsA Relation Detection
in a Large-Scale Lexical Taxonomy
Jiaqing Liang

Yanghua Xiao∗

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
l.j.q.light@gmail.com

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Xiaoi Research, Shanghai, China
shawyh@fudan.edu.cn

Yi Zhang

Seung-won Hwang

Haixun Wang

School of Computer Science,
Fudan University
z yi11@fudan.edu.cn

Yonsei University
seungwonh@yonsei.ac.kr

Facebook, USA
haixun@gmail.com

The goal of this paper is to design algorithms to detect
and eliminate errors in automatically constructed knowledge
bases. In particular, we focus on lexical taxonomies, an important type of knowledge base consisting mainly of isA relations, such as apple isA fruit, where the “isA” refers to
the hyponymy relation. Taxonomies are important because
they map instances to concepts, thus enabling the machine
to obtain the ability of generalization and specialization
when understanding the text. Consequently, taxonomies, especially those machine-generated ones with a larger coverage, have been widely used in various text understanding
tasks. Thus, detecting and eliminating errors in taxonomies
are essential to improve machine intelligence.
In this work, we use a state-of-the-art, data-driven taxonomy, Probase (Wu et al. 2012), as an example for taxonomy cleansing. Although we focus on Probase, our solutions
are applicable to other data-driven taxonomies. Probase contains 16 million isA relations, which are automatically extracted from 1.7 billion web pages by using mainly the
Hearst syntactic patterns (Hearst 1992). In Probase, each
isA relation is associated with a frequency observed in the
web corpus. The accuracy of Probase is reported to be
92% (Wu et al. 2012), which is lower than WordNet. Table 1 shows some errors in Probase. Most of the errors are
caused by errors in the corpus, or mistakes made by information extraction algorithms. For example, a typo (as should
be an) in the following sentence "... make Paris such
as exciting city" leads to the extraction of exciting
city isA Paris by algorithms that use the such as pattern
for extraction.

Abstract
Knowledge base(KB) plays an important role in artiﬁcial intelligence. Much effort has been taken to both manually and
automatically construct web-scale knowledge bases. Comparing with manually constructed KBs, automatically constructed KB is broader but with more noises. In this paper, we
study the problem of improving the quality for automatically
constructed web-scale knowledge bases, in particular, lexical taxonomies of isA relationships. We ﬁnd that these taxonomies usually contain cycles, which are often introduced
by incorrect isA relations. Inspired by this observation, we
introduce two kinds of models to detect incorrect isA relations from cycles. The ﬁrst one eliminates cycles by extracting directed acyclic graphs, and the other one eliminates cycles by grouping nodes into different levels. We implement
our models on Probase, a state-of-the-art, automatically constructed, web-scale taxonomy. After processing tens of millions of relations, our models eliminate 74 thousand wrong
relations with 91% accuracy.

Introduction
Machine intelligence relies on a variety of knowledge bases,
which are constructed manually or automatically. Examples
of manually constructed knowledge bases include WordNet (Miller 1995) and Cyc (Lenat and Guha 1989), and
examples of automatically constructed ones include KnowItAll (Etzioni et al. 2004), NELL (Mitchell et al. 2015), and
Probase (Wu et al. 2012). Manually constructed knowledge
bases are highly precise, but are limited in scale, while automatically constructed ones have high coverage but relatively
low accuracy.

Entity
exciting city
automobile
music video
world cup
college

∗

Correspondence author. This paper was supported by National
Key Basic Research Program of China under No.2015CB358800,
by the National NSFC (No.61472085, U1509213), by Shanghai
Municipal Science and Technology Commission foundation key
project under No.15JC1400900, by Shanghai Municipal Science
and Technology project under No.16511102102. Hwang was supported by IITP grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP; No.
B0101-16-0307) and Microsoft Research.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

isA
isA
isA
isA
isA
isA

Concept
paris
lead acid battery
youtube video
football
basketball

Entity
battery
cause
sweet
grape
juice

isA
isA
isA
isA
isA
isA

Concept
fuel cell
tsunami
glucose
purple
tomato

Table 1: Examples of incorrect isA relations in Probase
To address the problem, we need to ﬁrst detect the sus-

1178

