Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Compiling Graph Substructures into Sentential Decision Diagrams
Masaaki Nishino,1 Norihito Yasuda,1 Shin-ichi Minato,2 Masaaki Nagata1
1

2

NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University
nishino.masaaki@lab.ntt.co.jp

manipulation, decision diagrams representing sets of graph
substructures appear in several applications including the
task of assessing the reliability of networks (Hardy, Lucet,
and Limnios 2007), graph coloring (Morrison, Sewell, and
Jacobson 2016), and loss minimization over distribution networks (Inoue et al. 2014).
A key to the effective use of decision diagrams in manipulating graph substructures is a fast algorithm for compiling the set of graph substructures into decision diagrams.
BDDs and ZDDs support the top-down construction method
called SimPath (Knuth 2011). SimPath constructs BDDs
and ZDDs representing sets of graph substructures directly
from the input graphs, and is known to be much more efﬁcient than the standard bottom-up construction method using the Apply operation since SimPath avoids constructing
many intermediate decision diagrams.
We extend SimPath to construct ZSDDs. One of the most
important properties of SimPath is that it can give a theoretical upper bound on the sizes of constructed BDDs and
ZDDs (Inoue and Minato 2016). This upper bound is derived
from the path-width of the input graph. Therefore, SimPath
may take a long time, or even fail to compile graphs with
large path-widths. In contrast, the proposed algorithm also
can give an theoretical upper bound on the sizes of constructed ZSDDs, which is derived from the branch-width of
the graph. Since the branch-width of a graph is equal to or
smaller than the path-width, our algorithm can give tighter
upper bounds than SimPath. Experiments show that our topdown construction algorithm is more efﬁcient than bottomup construction methods and SimPath, and can construct ZSDDs that are smaller than ZDDs obtained by SimPath.
Our method can be seen as a variant of a recently proposed top-down compilation algorithm for SDDs (Oztok and
Darwiche 2015). The algorithm takes a CNF as its input and
returns the corresponding SDD. The main difference from
ours is that the algorithm uses CNFs as its input. For some
graph substructures including simple paths and connected
components, the size of CNFs representing the set of all substructures have exponentially many clauses, and it is impractical to prepare such CNFs. The other approach shown in
(Choi, Tavabi, and Darwiche 2016), ﬁrst exploits SimPath to
construct a ZDD representing graph substructures and then
converts it into a SDD and reduces the size by applying the
dynamic minimization method (Choi and Darwiche 2013).

Abstract
The Zero-suppressed Sentential Decision Diagram (ZSDD)
is a recently discovered tractable representation of Boolean
functions. ZSDD subsumes the Zero-suppressed Binary Decision Diagram (ZDD) as a strict subset, and similar to ZDD,
it can perform several useful operations like model counting
and Apply operations. We propose a top-down compilation
algorithm for ZSDD that represents sets of speciﬁc graph substructures, e.g., matchings and simple paths of a graph. We
experimentally conﬁrm that the proposed algorithm is faster
than other construction methods including bottom-up methods and top-down methods for ZDDs, and the resulting ZSDDs are smaller than ZDDs representing the same graph substructures. We also show that the size constructed ZSDDs can
be bounded by the branch-width of the graph. This bound is
tighter than that of ZDDs.

Introduction
The Binary Decision Diagram (BDD) (Bryant 1986) is a
data structure that represents a Boolean function in a compressed form. Once a Boolean function is compiled into a
BDD, it can answer several types of queries in polytime
against BDD size. Due to its effectiveness, BDDs have many
variants, e.g., Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDD) (Darwiche 2011), Zero-suppressed BDDs (ZDD) (Minato 1993),
and Zero-suppressed SDDs (ZSDD) (Nishino et al. 2016).
Among them, SDD and ZSDD are prominent in that they
support bottom-up construction and are more succinct than
either BDD or ZDD (Darwiche 2011; Nishino et al. 2016).
Boolean functions appear in various situations. An important one is to represent speciﬁc graph substructures. Here we
use graph substructures as subsets of graph nodes and edges
satisfying speciﬁc conditions. A graph has several important
substructures such as matchings, cycles, and simple paths.
A set of such substructures can be represented as a Boolean
function whose input variables correspond to every node or
edge of the graph. It is known that decision diagrams can
succinctly represent a set of graph substructures. For example, Knuth (Knuth 2011) shows that the set of all connected
components of a graph, whose size is more than 1010 , can be
represented as a BDD that has only several hundred nodes.
Due to their succinctness and efﬁciency with regard to graph
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1213

