Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Integrating Verbal and Nonverbal Input into a
Dynamic Response Spoken Dialogue System
Ting-Yao Hu, Chirag Raman, Salvador Medina Maza, Liangke Gui,
Tadas Baltrusaitis, Robert Frederking, Louis-Philippe Morency, Alan W Black, Maxine Eskenazi
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
Abstract
In this work, we present a dynamic response spoken dialogue system (DRSDS). It is capable of understanding
the verbal/nonverbal language of users and making instant,
situation-aware response. Incorporating with two external
systems, MultiSense and email summarization, we built an
email reading agent on mobile device to show the functionality of DRSDS.

Introduction

Figure 1: Architecture of DRSDS. The arrow with dot line
represents the real time, incremental interaction between
modules. The gray blocks are required external modules

Current task-oriented spoken dialogue systems provide satisfactory performance in many scenarios. However, they still
lag behind humans because of several reasons. Two examples are that people rely on both verbal and nonverbal language to communicate, and we perform dialogues incrementally, not in a turn-by-turn manner. This suggests several
ways to improve current mainstream dialogue systems.
Some previous works explored these directions by developing nonverbal language detection and incremental processing components for spoken dialogue system. Perception
makeup language (Scherer et al. 2012) was designed to describe the nonverbal behavior of users. On the other hand,
Incremental language understanding (DeVault, Sagae, and
Traum 2011) and incremental speech synthesis (Baumann
and Schlangen 2012) were proposed to increase the responsivity of systems. However, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no practical spoken dialogue system incorporating
these two types of functions together.
We propose a dynamic response spoken dialogue system (DRSDS) framework. Comparing to conventional dialogue systems, DRSDS framework has two additional modules: nonverbal language understanding (NVLU) and dynamic natural language generation (dNLG). NVLU accepts
a stream of nonverbal language detection results (e.g. users
emotion, gesture...), and interprets it in real time, and dNLG
module estimates the speech synthesis progress. Incorporating with NVLU and dNLG, applications based on our
DRSDS framework can understand verbal and nonverbal
language and give out dynamic response according to the
inline expression of users.

In this demo, we implement an email reading agent using
our DRSDS framework. This agent receives the users vocal
request and reads the summarized content of an email. While
the agent reading, the granularity can be changed dynamically based on user’s reaction. To accomplish this application, we apply two external modules: Multisense and email
summarization. The former detects users’ facial expression,
and the latter provides the content of summarization.

DRSDS Architecture and Functionality
Fig 1. illustrates the ﬂow chart of DRSDS architecture. The
system preserves the basic components of conventional turnbased spoken dialogue system: automatic speech recognition (ASR), natural language understanding (NLU), dialogue manager (DM), natural language generation (NLG)
and text-to-speech (TTS). ASR takes the audio signal of user
utterance as input and outputs the text. NLU analyzes the
user’s intention and extracts key information pieces from the
raw text. DM keeps tract of the current dialogue state and
decides which action to take. NLG and TTS organizes the
content of system output utterance and plays it to the users.
Besides the basic functionality, DRSDS possesses two
key additional features. It is capable of understanding
users verbal and nonverbal language, and providing instant,
situation-aware response according to user’s inline expression and the current content system speaking. To achieve
these two features, we developed nonverbal language understanding (NVLU) and dynamic natural language generation
(dNLG), which will be introduced in the following. On the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5091

