Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Inference of Bird Songs Using Dynamic Bayesian Networks
Keisuke Daimon

Richard W. Hedley and Charles E. Taylor

Department of Complex Systems Science,
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
Graduate School of Information Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Nagoya University
USA
Furo-cho Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan
+81-52-789-4235, k.daimon@alife.cs.is.nagoya-u.ac.jp
http://www.alife.cs.is.nagoya-u.ac.jp/%7ek.daimon
here consist of four different pieces of information. Though
these behavioral contexts represent only a small subset of
the possible behavioral contexts that could be examined, this
analysis will provide a foundation for future attempts to understand the interplay between vocalizations and behavior
that may make use of more diverse behavioral categories.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt at using DBNs to
infer semantic content in animal vocalizations.

Abstract
This paper presents preliminary research aiming to understand the semantics of bird songs. We investigate relationship between context information and bird song output using
dynamic Bayesian networks, and show the potential of our
approach for semantics inference.

Introduction

Data and Methods

Knowledge representation and natural language processing
are core interests to the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI).
While most research has been directed toward machines and
humans, the principles and methods developed for AI might
be extended to other species as well. Birds frequently behave in a manner that is intelligent and convey information
in their vocalizations that is meaningful to others (Suzuki
2016). Here we report on efforts to use dynamic Bayesian
networks (DBNs) to describe semantics of songs among
Cassin’s Vireos (Vireo cassinii) in their natural habitat.
Cassin’s Vireo is a songbird found throughout the montane regions of western North America. Males of this species
deliver songs that are typically comprised of strings of 0.5second phrases separated by about 2 seconds of silent intervals. Each phrase can be unambiguously classiﬁed as a
phrase type using spectrographic characteristics (Tan et al.
2013), Each male delivers about 50 phrase types and shares
about 50% of its repertoire with other birds (Hedley 2016).
Phrase types are organized into clusters of several phrase
types that consistently occur together in sequences. We hypothesize that these clusters may convey meaningful information, such as about nesting behavior or territorial defense.
DBNs are directed graphs that are useful for identifying
causal relationships between observed events over timeslices
(Murphy and Mian 1999). Nodes in DBNs represent random variables of speciﬁc events and edges describe causal
relationships from nodes to nodes at next time step. Consecutive data points in bird song data are highly dependent
on previous ones, hence the suitability of DBNs as models
of bird songs. If semantic content is present in the songs,
there should be causal relationships between behavioral contexts and song output, which can be detected and tested
through DBN analysis. The behavioral contexts investigated

The data of two distinct birds were analyzed. For convenience, we named the two birds individual 1 and 2. Individual 1 and 2 have 7 and 11 tracks, 2172 and 3905
phrases, 51 and 53 phrase types (25 shared phrase types)
and were recorded in 2014 and 2015 respectively. The songs
of the birds were recorded in the ﬁeld (details are described
by Hedley (2016)), and behavioral observations were dictated into the microphone. In the lab, spectrograms of each
recording were manually annotated, with phrases classiﬁed
to phrase type and behavioral context information noted at
each point in the recording. We look into four behavioral
contexts: Distance (Far) (whether or not the focal bird is far
from the nest), Background (were other birds singing?), Female (was their mate on the nest?) and Time (Late) (was the
track recorded late in the day?). Phrase Type Clusters (was
the cluster sung?) and Interval (Long) (was the interval between phrases long?) are used as song output information.
We eliminated data points with missing values before the
analyses for the sake of simplicity. Our ﬁrst step is bringing the number of vocal units from about 50 phrase types to
seven clusters to reduce the dimensionality and sparsity of
the data based on community detection (modularity-based
non-hierarchical clustering). In the second step, to ﬁnd out
relationships between behavioral contexts and song output,
we build DBNs that show the best ﬁt to our data according
to Bayesian-Dirichlet equivalence (BDe) using a Python library, BNFinder2 (Dojer et al. 2013).

Results
At ﬁrst, we conducted community detection and found seven
clusters for each individual. Those clusters are called 1a-1g
(individual 1) and 2a-2g (individual 2) for convenience.
We found the best DBNs through testing all DBN structures with only one regulation: time node cannot be a child

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4911

