Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Parameter Free Large Margin
Nearest Neighbor for Distance Metric Learning
†

‡

Kun Song,† Feiping Nie,‡∗ Junwei Han,†∗ Xuelong Li§

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,710072, P. R. China
§
Center for OPTIMAL, State Key Laboratory of Transient Optics and Photonics, Xi’an Institute
of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China.
{songkun123000, feipingnie, junweihan2010}@gmail.com, xuelong li@ieee.org
for many classiﬁcation tasks because it captures the local
information of the data set (Weinberger and Saul 2009;
Ma, Crawford, and Tian 2010; Mensink et al. 2012;
You et al. 2016); secondly, LMNN with similarity to support vector machines (SVMs) is
much easily extended to non-linear versions by
adopting the kernel technique (Do et al. 2012;
Torresani and Lee 2006), which expands the application domain of LMNN; thirdly, the linear transform
matrix L learned by LMNN supervisedly contains many
statistical information of training set, thus it can be applied into many machine learning ﬁelds, such as feature
extraction, multi-task classiﬁcation and dimensionality
reduction (Kedem et al. 2012; Torresani and Lee 2006;
Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010).
LMNN is inspired by improving the performance of
kNN algorithm whose performance depends crucially on
the distance metric. LMNN learns a linear transform matrix
L to construct the Mahalanobis distance by utilizing the
local information of the training set. Under such distance
metric, the k nearest neighbors with same labels (target
neighbors) of an inqury xi are pulled nearer together and
the neighbors with different labels (imposters) are pushed
out of the neighborhood. In the model of LMNN, such
two competitive actions on the samples are implemented
by constructing two cost terms which are weighted by a
parameter needed to be tuned previously. However, it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd the optimal distance metric effectively by
minimizing the combination of such two competitive cost
terms. Actually, the model of the LMNN is very complex,
which not only considers the imposters of an inquiry sample
but also concerns the target neighbors. Such imposters and
target neighbors can be regarded as the constraints of the
model. The more the constraints are, the more difﬁcult the
way to ﬁnd the solution is. Actually, it is easy to ﬁnd that,
the missions of the actions of pulling and pushing are to
make the inquiry’s neighborhood ‘pure’. To complete such
mission, the action pushing the imposters apart form the
neighborhood is enough.
In this paper, we propose a novel metric learning algorithm named parameter free large margin nearest neighbor
(PFLMNN). Different from LMMN pulling target neighbors
together and pushing imposters apart at the same time, our
approach only considers the action to pushing the imposters

Abstract
We introduce a novel supervised metric learning algorithm named parameter free large margin nearest neighbor
(PFLMNN) which can be seen as an improvement of the classical large margin nearest neighbor (LMNN) algorithm. The
contributions of our work consist of two aspects. First, our
method discards the cost term which shrinks the distances
between inquiry input and its k target neighbors (the k nearest neighbors with same labels as inquiry input) in LMNN,
and only focuses on improving the action to push the imposters (the samples with different labels form the inquiry
input) apart out of the neighborhood of inquiry. As a result,
our method does not have the parameter needed to tune on
the validating set, which makes it more convenient to use.
Second, by leveraging the geometry information of the imposters, we construct a novel cost function to penalize the
small distances between each inquiry and its imposters. Different from LMNN considering every imposter located in the
neighborhood of each inquiry, our method only takes care
of the nearest imposters. Because when the nearest imposter
is pushed out of the neighborhood of its inquiry, other imposters would be all out. In this way, the constraints in our
model are much less than that of LMNN, which makes our
method much easier to ﬁnd the optimal distance metric. Consequently, our method not only learns a better distance metric than LMNN, but also runs faster than LMNN. Extensive
experiments on different data sets with various sizes and difﬁculties are conducted, and the results have shown that, compared with LMNN, PFLMNN achieves better classiﬁcation
results.

Instruction
Distance metric learningis an important topic in the
ﬁeld of machine learning (Xing et al. 2003; Yang and
Sukthankar 2006; Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010;
Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014; Xiang, Nie, and Zhang 2008;
You et al. 2016; Guillaumin and Verbeek 2009;
Weinberger, Blitzer, and Saul 2005). The largest margin
nearest neighbor (LMNN) algorithm (Weinberger, Blitzer,
and Saul 2005) is one of the most popular metric learning
methods. Several reasons account for lots of attentions paid
on LMNN: ﬁrstly, LMNN always yields competitive results
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2555

