Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Ordered Combinatorial
Semi-Bandits for Whole-Page Recommendation
Yingfei Wang,1 Hua Ouyang,2 Chu Wang,3 Jianhui Chen,4 Tsvetan Asamov,5 Yi Chang6
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, yingfei@cs.princeton.edu
2
Apple Inc., hua ouyang@apple.com
3
Nokia Bell Labs, chu.wang@nokia-bell-labs.com
4
Yahoo Research, jianhui@yahoo-inc.com
5
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, tasamov@princeton.edu
6
Huawei Research America, yichang@acm.org
movie recommendation, web advertising, vertical search and
query autocompletion (Li et al. 2011; Chapelle and Li 2011;
Chu et al. 2011; Jie et al. 2013). Despite these advances,
many real-world applications cannot ﬁt into the traditional
multi-armed bandit framework.
We use news article recommendation as a motivating example. Fig. 1 is a snapshot of a portal website. In this view,
there are totally 6 slots to display news articles. These slots
differ in positions, container sizes and visual appearance.
Several studies (Liu et al. 2015; Lagun and Agichtein 2014)
indicate that users do not sequentially scan the webpages.
How to make whole-page recommendations, that is, select 6
articles from a larger pool and place them accordingly in the
webpage, is a combinatorial problem that is beyond ranking.
The goal is to ﬁnd an optimal layout conﬁguration to maximize the expected total click-through-rate (CTR). A related
work on this topic is the optimal page presentation (Wang
et al. 2016). Yet even though search engine works in a real
time fashion, their models are trained on batch data rather
than in an online learning setting, thus neglecting the exploration/exploitation tradeoff.
There are some existing work that addresses the bandits
with multi-plays, for example, subset regret problems (Kale,
Reyzin, and Schapire 2010; Gopalan, Mannor, and Mansour
2014; Wang et al. 2015; Gai, Krishnamachari, and Liu 2011;
Swaminathan et al. 2016), batch-mode bandit optimization with delayed feedbacks (Desautels, Krause, and Burdick 2014) and ranked bandits (Radlinski, Kleinberg, and
Joachims 2008). This class of learning problems was also
recently formulated as a combinatorial bandit/semi-bandit
(Gai, Krishnamachari, and Jain 2012; Audibert, Bubeck, and
Lugosi 2013; Wen et al. 2015; Krishnamurthy, Agarwal, and
Dudik 2016). However, the complex combinatorial setting in
our example is beyond the capacity of existing methods.
To model this scenario, we consider the following ordered
combinatorial bandit problem. Given optional context information, instead of selecting one arm, the learner selects a
subset of S actions and displays them on S different positions from M possible positions. Our novelty lies in:

Abstract
Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) framework has been successfully applied in many web applications. However, many complex real-world applications that involve multiple content recommendations cannot ﬁt into the traditional MAB setting.
To address this issue, we consider an ordered combinatorial
semi-bandit problem where the learner recommends S actions from a base set of K actions, and displays the results
in S (out of M ) different positions. The aim is to maximize
the cumulative reward with respect to the best possible subset
and positions in hindsight. By the adaptation of a minimumcost maximum-ﬂow network, a practical algorithm based on
Thompson sampling is derived for the (contextual) combinatorial problem, thus resolving the problem of computational
intractability. With its potential to work with whole-page recommendation and any probabilistic models, to illustrate the
effectiveness of our method, we focus on Gaussian process
optimization and a contextual setting where click-throughrate is predicted using logistic regression. We demonstrate
the algorithms’ performance on synthetic Gaussian process
problems and on large-scale news article recommendation
datasets from Yahoo! Front Page Today Module.

Introduction
The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem is a classic and
natural framework for many machine learning applications.
In this setting, the learner takes an action and only observes
partial feedback from the environment. MAB naturally addresses the fundamental trade-off between exploration and
exploitation (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Langford and Zhang 2008). Traditional MAB is a sequential decision making setting deﬁned over a set of K actions. At
each time step t, the learner selects a single action It and
observes some payoff Xt,It . In stochastic MAB, the reward
of each arm is assumed to be drawn from some unknown
probability distribution. The goal is to maximize the cumulative payoff obtained in a sequence of n allocations over
time, or equivalently minimize the regret.
MAB has been extensively studied, and many algorithms
are proposed and have found applications in various domains. Some successful web applications are news and

1. Our method does not resort to an oracle to provide approximation solutions. Instead, we formulate the problem
via the minimum-cost maximum-ﬂow network, and efﬁ-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2746

