Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Latent Dependency Forest Models
Shanbo Chu and Yong Jiang and Kewei Tu
School of Information Science and Technology
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
{chushb, jiangyong, tukw}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

More recently, sum-product networks (SPNs) (Poon and
Domingos 2011) have been proposed as a type of very expressive tractable probabilistic models that subsume many
previous probabilistic models as special cases. A SPN can be
represented as a rooted directed acyclic graph with univariate distributions as leaves and sums and products as internal
nodes. Exact inference in SPNs can be done in linear time
with respect to the network size. However, the large number
of latent sum and product nodes in SPNs makes learning
(especially structure learning) of SPNs very challenging.

Abstract
Probabilistic modeling is one of the foundations of modern
machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. In this paper, we
propose a novel type of probabilistic models named latent
dependency forest models (LDFMs). A LDFM models the dependencies between random variables with a forest structure
that can change dynamically based on the variable values. It is
therefore capable of modeling context-speciﬁc independence.
We parameterize a LDFM using a ﬁrst-order non-projective
dependency grammar. Learning LDFMs from data can be formulated purely as a parameter learning problem, and hence the
difﬁcult problem of model structure learning is circumvented.
Our experimental results show that LDFMs are competitive
with existing probabilistic models.

It has been shown that SPNs can be seen as an extension of
probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs) and a special
case of stochastic And-Or grammars (Poon and Domingos
2011; Tu 2016b). Based on this observation, we would like to
draw a parallel between learning probabilistic models such as
SPNs and unsupervised learning of probabilistic grammars.
Learning the structure of a probabilistic model resembles
learning the set of production rules of a grammar, while
learning model parameters resembles learning grammar rule
probabilities. From the unsupervised grammar learning literature, one can see that learning approaches based on PCFGs
have not been very successful, while the state-of-the-art performance has mostly been achieved based on less expressive
models such as dependency grammars (DGs) (Klein and
Manning 2004; Headden III, Johnson, and McClosky 2009;
Tu and Honavar 2012; Spitkovsky 2013). In comparison with
PCFGs, DGs eliminate all the latent nodes (i.e., nonterminals) and therefore the difﬁcult discrete optimization problem of structure learning can be easily converted into the
more amenable continuous optimization problem of parameter learning. Inspired by this property of DGs, we propose
latent dependency forest models (LDFMs) as a new type of
probabilistic models. LDFMs encode the relations between
variables with a dependency forest (a set of trees). A distribution over all possible dependency forests given the current
assignment of variables is speciﬁed using a ﬁrst-order nonprojective DG (McDonald and Satta 2007). The probability
of a complete assignment can then be computed by adding
up the weights of all the dependency forests. Figure 1 gives
an example of using LDFMs to compute the joint probability of an assignment of two random variables. The number
of possible forests grows exponentially with the number of
variables, but the summation of the forest weights can still
be computed tractably by utilizing the Matrix Tree Theorem

Introduction
Probabilistic modeling is one of the foundations of modern
machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence, which aims to
compactly represent the joint probability distribution of random variables. The most widely used approach for probabilistic modeling is probabilistic graphical models. A probabilistic
graphical model represents a probability distribution with a
directed or undirected graph. It represents random variables
with the nodes in the graph and uses the edges in the graph to
encode the probabilistic relationships between random variables. However, traditional probabilistic graphical models
have a number of limitations. First, inference takes exponential time in the worst case. Second, learning probabilistic
graphical models (in particular, learning the model structures)
is very difﬁcult in general. Third, the dependencies between
variables are ﬁxed and therefore context-speciﬁc independence (CSI) (i.e., independency between variables that only
holds given a speciﬁc assignment of certain variables) cannot
be represented in the basic form of probabilistic graphical
models.
To alleviate or solve the ﬁrst two problems of probabilistic
graphical models, a number of tractable probabilistic models
are proposed. One example is mixtures of trees (MTs) (Meila
and Jordan 2001), which represent a probability distribution
with a ﬁnite mixture of tree distributions. Inference and learning of MTs are both tractable. In addition, certain CSI can be
represented in MTs.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3733

