Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Learning of Multi-Level
Descriptors for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Yang Yang,1 Longyin Wen,2 Siwei Lyu,2 Stan Z. Li1

1

Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190
2
University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, NY, 12222
yyangcv@gmail.com, lywen.cv.workbox@gmail.com, slyu@albany.edu, szli@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
In previous works (Yang et al. 2014b; Zhao, Ouyang,
and Wang 2014; Yang et al. 2014a; Shen et al. 2015;
Köstinger et al. 2012; Farenzena et al. 2010; Kviatkovsky,
Adam, and Rivlin 2013; Zhao, Ouyang, and Wang 2013;
Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015; Li and Wang 2013; Yang, Jin,
and Tao 2012), color and texture are often used to characterize human appearance in person re-identiﬁcation. Handcrafted textural descriptors (e.g., SIFT, LBP) achieve good
performances in image classiﬁcation (Wang et al. 2010;
Huang et al. 2011) and face recognition (Ahonen, Hadid,
and Pietikäinen 2006). Whereas the performance is pretty
poor when they are directly applied and used alone in person
re-identiﬁcation (Yang, Jin, and Tao 2012). This is because
person images from cameras are often low in resolution with
many image noises, thereby leading to the difﬁculty in accurately describing the image textures.
Among the color features, color histograms (e.g., RGB
histogram) are most commonly used. However, it is unstable when there are large variations in illumination (Yang
et al. 2014a). To improve the robustness of color features,
Yang et.al. (Yang et al. 2014b) propose a novel salient color
name based color descriptor to describe colors. Although it
shows good performance in addressing the issue of person
re-identiﬁcation, it may not sufﬁciently distinguish different
persons with similar clothing color. In view of this, a common strategy is to combine the color features with textural
features to compensate each other (Köstinger et al. 2012;
Farenzena et al. 2010; Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015;
Yang, Jin, and Tao 2012).
In this paper, we propose a coding method to learn descriptors from raw pixel data. This is motivated by (Yang et
al. 2014b), which utilizes a learned 16-dimensional color descriptor to replace raw 3-dimensional pixel. Different with
(Yang et al. 2014b), our method learns three types of descriptors that contains multi-levels: pixel-level, patch-level
and image-level, respectively. Each level has a corresponding relationship with a particular granularity of context.
Speciﬁcally, pixel-level represents color information, patchlevel corresponds to textural information or local shape patterns, and image-level provides entity (i.e., tracked person)
information. As such, the integration of features based on
these descriptors can exploit the complementary information resided in them, thus leading to more reliable, robust
and distinct features for person re-identiﬁcation.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel coding method named
weighted linear coding (WLC) to learn multi-level (e.g.,
pixel-level, patch-level and image-level) descriptors from raw
pixel data in an unsupervised manner. It guarantees the property of saliency with a similarity constraint. The resulting
multi-level descriptors have a good balance between the robustness and distinctiveness. Based on WLC, all data from
the same region can be jointly encoded. Consequently, when
we extract the holistic image features, it is able to preserve the
spatial consistency. Furthermore, we apply PCA to these features and compact person representations are then achieved.
During the stage of matching persons, we exploit the complementary information resided in multi-level descriptors via
a score-level fusion strategy. Experiments on the challenging person re-identiﬁcation datasets - VIPeR and CUHK 01,
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen a major progress in person reidentiﬁcation. Its objective is to automatically associate images of the same person captured by cameras at different
locations and time. This is a particular issue in a network
of cameras collaborating with each other, in which the appearances of the same person may exhibit drastic variations
in different camera views due to difference in illumination,
view angles and poses.
A popular pipeline in existing person re-identiﬁcation
methods includes person representation and similarity learning. In the former, one seeks features of detected human
image that are both robust to intra-personal variations in illumination, view angles and poses and distinctive in interpersonal description (Yang et al. 2014b; Zhao, Ouyang,
and Wang 2014; Yang et al. 2014a; Liao et al. 2015). In
the latter, one aims to ﬁnd a proper metric or metrics to
measure the similarity between any two images from disjoint cameras (Köstinger et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2016b;
Li et al. 2015). Considering that image representation is arguably the most fundamental task, we focus on how to extract features which have both intra-personal invariance and
inter-personal discrimination.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4306

