Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Estimating Uncertainty Online Against an Adversary
Volodymyr Kuleshov

Stefano Ermon

Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
tkuleshov@cs.stanford.edu

Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Background. Calibrated conﬁdence estimates are typically constructed via recalibration, using methods such as
Platt scaling (Platt 1999) or isotonic regression (NiculescuMizil and Caruana 2005). In the context of binary classiﬁcation, these methods reduce recalibration to a onedimensional regression problem that, given data (xi , yi )ni=1 ,
trains a model g(s) (e.g. logistic regression) to predict probabilities pi = g(si ) from uncalibrated scores si = h(xi )
produced by a classiﬁer h (e.g. SVM margins). Fitting
g is equivalent to performing density estimation targeting
P(Y = 1|h(X) = si ) and hence may fail on out-ofdistribution testing data.
The methods we introduce in this work are instead based
on calibration techniques developed in the literature on online learning in mathematical games (Foster and Vohra 1998;
Abernethy, Bartlett, and Hazan 2011). These classical methods are not suitable for standard prediction tasks in their
current form. For one, they do not admit covariates xi that
might be available to improve the prediction of yi ; hence,
they also do not consider the predictive power of the forecasts. For example, predicting 0.5 on a sequence 01010...
formed by alternating 0s and 1s is considered a valid calibrated forecaster. The algorithms we present here combine
the advantages of online calibration (adversarial assumptions), and of batch probability recalibration (covariates and
forecast sharpness).

Abstract
Assessing uncertainty is an important step towards ensuring the safety and reliability of machine learning systems. Existing uncertainty estimation techniques may
fail when their modeling assumptions are not met,
e.g. when the data distribution differs from the one seen
at training time. Here, we propose techniques that assess
a classiﬁcation algorithm’s uncertainty via calibrated
probabilities (i.e. probabilities that match empirical outcome frequencies in the long run) and which are guaranteed to be reliable (i.e. accurate and calibrated) on
out-of-distribution input, including input generated by
an adversary. This represents an extension of classical
online learning that handles uncertainty in addition to
guaranteeing accuracy under adversarial assumptions.
We establish formal guarantees for our methods, and we
validate them on two real-world problems: question answering and medical diagnosis from genomic data.

Introduction
Assessing uncertainty is an important step towards ensuring the safety and reliability of machine learning systems. In
many applications of machine learning — including medical
diagnosis (Jiang et al. 2012), natural language understanding (Nguyen and O’Connor 2015), and speech recognition
(Yu, Li, and Deng 2011) — assessing conﬁdence can be as
important as obtaining high accuracy. This work explores
conﬁdence estimation for classiﬁcation problems.
An important limitation of existing methods is the assumption that data is sampled i.i.d. from a distribution
P(x, y); when test-time data is distributed according to a
different P∗ , these methods may become overconﬁdent and
erroneous. Here, we introduce new, robust uncertainty estimation algorithms guaranteed to produce reliable conﬁdence
estimates on out-of-distribution input, including input generated by an adversary.
In the classiﬁcation setting, the most natural way of measuring an algorithm’s uncertainty is via calibrated probability estimates that match the true empirical frequencies of
an outcome. For example, if an algorithm predicted a 60%
chance of rain 100 times in a given year, its forecast would
be calibrated if it rained on about 60 of those 100 days.

Online learning with uncertainty. Whereas classical online optimization aims to accurately predict targets y given
x (via a convex loss (x, y)), our algorithms aim to accurately predict uncertainties p(y = ŷ). The p here are deﬁned
as empirical frequencies over data seen so far; it turns out
that these probability-like quantities can be estimated under
the standard adversarial assumptions of online learning. We
thus see our work as extending classical online optimization
to handle uncertainty in addition to guaranteeing accuracy.
Example. As a concrete motivating example, consider a
medical system that diagnoses a long stream of patients indexed by t = 1, 2, ..., outputting a disease risk pt ∈ [0, 1] for
each patient based on their medical record xt . Provably calibrated probabilities in this setting may be helpful for making
informed policy decisions (e.g. by providing guaranteed up-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2110

