Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Exploring Artificial Intelligence Through Image Recognition
Kelsey Fargas, Bingjie Zhou, Elizabeth Staruk, Sheila Tejada
University of Southern California
{ kfargas, binjiez, staruk, stejada } @usc.edu

Abstract

One-on-One Demonstration: Making Shapes

This demonstration showcases the different use cases of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in education by introducing students to
applications of the Scribbler robot with the Fluke board in order
to cultivate an interest in programming, robotics, and AI. The
targeted audience for this is students aged eight through twelve.
This demonstration uses three Scribbler robots to introduce
students to common tools in AI (OpenCV and Tesseract), and
teach them the basics of coding in an interactive, unintimidating
way; by physically describing the goals of simple shape-building
algorithms and implementing them using cards with both visual
and written representations of the instructions.

Students will be asked to draw a shape using the robot. The
set of shapes available to draw will be limited to simple
polygons. There will be two instruction-sets to code the
robots: a visual set, and a written set. Instructions will be
given by placing index cards into a provided block, which
will position the instruction in front of the robot’s camera.
Instructions will be given by using a restricted symbol-set
and written-set. We will provide pre-written solutions to
the problem in order to demonstrate the task. These prewritten solutions will take the form of a single instruction
written out as the image of the desired shape (e.g. a picture
of a triangle), or the name of the desired shape (e.g. the
word “triangle”).

Introduction
Students will be given tasks to think about and construct
algorithms using the Scribbler robot in one of two ways:
either working one-on-one with the robot, or working as a
team in a creative, problem-solving project. Two distinct
but related tasks are given in order to accommodate
students with various learning needs, such as their desire to
learn AI through problem solving. This gives them
exposure to computer vision, automatic reasoning, human
robot interaction, and knowledge in computer science. The
goal is to help students learn despite different comfort
levels when it comes to engaging with others (Chang et al.
2010).

Students will be asked to draw shapes with the robot using
the instruction-sets. This will take the form of symbols (up
arrow for forward, rounded arrow for rotate in designated
direction with a given quantity, etc.) or written instructions
(‘forward’, ‘rotate clockwise 60’, etc.). The intention is to
have the students a) design an algorithm that constructs a
goal shape and b) relate a physical instruction (as indicated
by the symbol-set) to a written instruction. The instructions
will be parsed using a combination of OpenCV and
Tesseract, and interpreted as instructions to the robot. The
roles of computer vision and character recognition will be
explained to the students.

The core of both demonstrations relies on the functionality
of the Scribbler robot. The robots visual input sensor (i.e.
camera) allow students to interact with it in a physical way,
as opposed to going directly to the console and coding
themselves. This will introduce them to high level
programming concepts and algorithms development in an
engaging way. The instruction images will be parsed by
OpenCV, an open source computer vision software, and
Tesseract, Google’s character recognition software. These
demonstrate the functionality of AI in the real world using
computer vision and character recognition.

Team Demonstration: Constructing a Maze
Children will be divided into different groups of either 2 or
3. Each student will be given a different task, exposing
them to all aspects of this activity. One student will be
tasked to draw the maze, and the other (2) child(ren) will
design the proper way to navigate the scribbler through
(Figure 1). Students will be provided the basic concepts
and background on how the will need to design the maze
and algorithm, such as sequential structure, conditional
structure, etc., to create steps for the Scribbler. For
example, they will be given cards in which the Scribbler

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4815

