Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Preferential Structures for Comparative Probabilistic Reasoning
Matthew Harrison-Trainor

Wesley H. Holliday

Group in Logic and the Methodology of Science
University of California, Berkeley

Department of Philosophy and
Group in Logic and the Methodology of Science
University of California, Berkeley

Thomas F. Icard, III
Department of Philosophy and
Symbolic Systems Program
Stanford University
grande and Renne 2015), building on the theory of qualitative probability (de Finetti 1937; Narens 2007);

Abstract
Qualitative and quantitative approaches to reasoning about
uncertainty can lead to different logical systems for formalizing such reasoning, even when the language for expressing uncertainty is the same. In the case of reasoning about
relative likelihood, with statements of the form ϕ  ψ expressing that ϕ is at least as likely as ψ, a standard qualitative approach using preordered preferential structures yields
a dramatically different logical system than a quantitative approach using probability measures. In fact, the standard preferential approach validates principles of reasoning that are
incorrect from a probabilistic point of view. However, in this
paper we show that a natural modiﬁcation of the preferential
approach yields exactly the same logical system as a probabilistic approach—not using single probability measures, but
rather sets of probability measures. Thus, the same preferential structures used in the study of non-monotonic logics and
belief revision may be used in the study of comparative probabilistic reasoning based on imprecise probabilities.

• Possibilistic interpretation (del Cerro and Herzig 1991;
Dubois, Fargier, and Prade 1998; Dubois, Fargier, and
Perny 2003; Touazi, Cayrol, and Dubois 2015);
• Preferential interpretation (Halpern 1996; 1997).
Each of these interpretations captures a distinct intuition
about relative likelihood reasoning, and they may be appropriate for different settings (Halpern 2003). A natural question is: to what extent are these interpretations compatible
with one another? Our focus is on the relationship between
the probabilistic and preferential interpretations. Existing
approaches based on the preferential interpretation (Halpern
1997) depart rather dramatically from those based on probabilistic interpretations—in fact, relating closely to the possibilistic interpretation. We demonstrate how a natural modiﬁcation of the approach—based on qualitative preferential
structures—yields a calculus for reasoning about relative
likelihood that is, from a logical point view, indistinguishable from standard forms of probabilistic reasoning.
Speciﬁcally, we prove soundness and completeness for
the comparative logic of imprecise probabilities (Alon and
Heifetz 2014) with respect to a class of preferential models that can be independently motivated. This shows how
the two approaches can be seen as fundamentally compatible. The methods we use to prove these results further lead
to a complexity result: the logic itself we prove to be NPcomplete. This justiﬁes the intuitive claim that this style of
comparative probabilistic reasoning is relatively elementary,
being no more complex than ordinary Boolean reasoning.

Introduction
Central to being an intelligent agent is the ability to reason adequately under, and even about, uncertainty. Such
reasoning requires representing this uncertainty in some
way. In this paper, we study qualitative forms of reasoning
about likelihood, a subject that can be traced back to the
foundations of mathematical probability theory (de Finetti
1937). Such reasoning may concern absolute or relative
likelihood, both of which have been studied in some detail within AI. The former involves statements of the form
Lϕ expressing that ϕ is likely (Halpern and Rabin 1987;
Halpern and McAllester 1989). The latter—our topic in this
paper—involves statements of the form ϕ  ψ expressing
that ϕ is at least as likely as ψ.1 This representation language
has been considered under several different interpretations:

Preferential Structures
Preferential structures have been applied widely across the
ﬁeld of representation and reasoning, including in the study
of non-monotonic logics (Shoham 1987; Kraus, Lehmann,
and Magidor 1990), belief revision (Katsuno and Mendelzon
1991; Friedman and Halpern 1994a), and conditional belief
in games (Board 2004; Baltag and Smets 2008). Restricted
classes of preferential structures are also used for conditional logics (Lewis 1973; Friedman and Halpern 1994b).
Here we are interested in the application of these structures
to the study of likelihood comparisons, whereby an ordering

• Probabilistic interpretation (Segerberg 1971; Gärdenfors
1975; van der Hoek 1996; Alon and Heifetz 2014; Delc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
A different reading of ϕ  ψ as belief in ϕ is at least as strong
as belief in ψ has been used to motivate another mathematical interpretation (Ghosh and de Jongh 2013).

1135

