Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Detection and Recognition of Text Embedded in
Online Images via Neural Context Models
Chulmoo Kang, Gunhee Kim and Suk I. Yoo
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Email: { (nkarma, gunhee, sukinyoo)@snu.ac.kr }
Project page: https://github.com/cmkang/CTSN
Jaderberg, Vedaldi, and Zissermann 2014; Neumann and
Matas 2012; Wang, Babenko, and Belongie 2011; Wang,
Wu, and Ng 2012). To address this problem, we propose a
contextual text spotting network (CTSN), whose major novelty is to take advantage of context information for both
text detection and recognition tasks. For detection of text
regions, we use local image context around the region of interest, based on that the text often sequentially appear (i.e. a
region near to text is also likely to be text). Such local image neighbors have been popularly used as a contextual cue
in object detection literature such as (Divvala et al. 2009;
Gkioxari, Girshick, and Malik 2015). For recognition, we
leverage metadata associated with the input online image,
including tags, comments, and title, which are used as contextual topic prior for the word candidates in the image. To
the best of our knowledge, there has been no convolutional
recurrent neural network model for text spotting that leverages such two sets of context information.
It is worth noting that spotting the text superimposed by
users in online images is different from that in natural images (e.g. house numbers or signs in street views). In the
former task, text is often denser and shows much variation
of font sizes and styles as shown in Fig.1, whereas the text
in the latter task may bear severe perspective or illumination challenges. Preferably, the two tasks need to be tackled
with different approaches, although both are referred to as
the same text spotting. Targeting at the former task, we design our algorithm to take advantage of additional metadata
context, and regional context from dense text regions, to enhance the performance.
For evaluation, we newly collect Instagram and Flickr
datasets, consisting of about 2.6K images with 26K words
with a large variety of locations, scales, and fonts. We compare our approach with ﬁve state-of-the-art text spotting
methods, and show that our approach is particularly successful for the online images to perform the three basic text
spotting tasks: text detection, cropped-word recognition, and
end-to-end recognition.
Finally, we highlight main contributions of this work as
follows. (1) We design the contextual text spotting network
(CTSN) that boosts the text detection and recognition performance by taking advantage of context information. Our
method is motivated by the fact that general users’ photos often embed sequential text, and associate with multiple infor-

Abstract
We address the problem of detecting and recognizing the text
embedded in online images that are circulated over the Web.
Our idea is to leverage context information for both text detection and recognition. For detection, we use local image
context around the text region, based on that the text often
sequentially appear in online images. For recognition, we exploit the metadata associated with the input online image, including tags, comments, and title, which are used as a topic
prior for the word candidates in the image. To infuse such
two sets of context information, we propose a contextual text
spotting network (CTSN). We perform comparative evaluation with ﬁve state-of-the-art text spotting methods on newly
collected Instagram and Flickr datasets. We show that our approach that beneﬁts from context information is more successful for text spotting in online images.

Introduction
The use of photos in social networks is growing recently,
because the photo posts often generate more engagement
than text-only posts. Interestingly, a large portion of images
that are circulated over the Web embed the text, as shown in
Fig.1. Such text embedding on online photos becomes popular for several reasons. First, it can accompany important information about photos such as authors, location, and time.
Second, text can be used as a caption if the image is a video
frame captured from news clips, movies, or TV episodes.
Finally, text often magniﬁes the message of the photo by
making it funny, sarcastic, inspiring, or hilarious, which can
lead higher engagement from other users. However, the text
embedded in Web images has been largely ignored as a digital dark matter in the current information retrieval system,
although the text often conveys the key messages of such
visual memes. For example, in the reddit, almost identical
smiley Obama picture can be used in completely opposite
ways by embedding different text.
The objective of this work is to detect and recognize
the text embedded in online images. That is, we aim at
localizing the regions of text in the image, and recognize
the words in them, as shown in Fig.1. This task is generally referred to as text spotting (Bissacco et al. 2013;
Epshtein, Ofek, and Wexler 2010; Chen and Yuille 2004;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4103

