Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Video Captioning with Listwise Supervision

†

Yuan Liu,† Xue Li,‡ Zhongchao Shi †
Ricoh Software Research Center (Beijing) Co., Ltd., Beijing, China

‡

Ricoh Company, Ltd., Yokohama, Japan

yuanliu.ustc@gmail.com, Setsu.Ri@nts.ricoh.co.jp, Zhongchao.Shi@srcb.ricoh.com

,QSXW9LGHR

Abstract
Automatically describing video content with natural language
is a fundamental challenging that has received increasing
attention. However, existing techniques restrict the model
learning on the pairs of each video and its own sentences,
and thus fail to capture more holistically semantic relationships among all sentences. In this paper, we propose to model
relative relationships of different video-sentence pairs and
present a novel framework, named Long Short-Term Memory
with Listwise Supervision (LSTM-LS), for video captioning.
Given each video in training data, we obtain a ranking list of
sentences w.r.t. a given sentence associated with the video using nearest-neighbor search. The ranking information is represented by a set of rank triplets that can be used to assess
the quality of ranking list. The video captioning problem is
then solved by learning LSTM model for sentence generation,
through maximizing the ranking quality over all the sentences
in the list. The experiments on MSVD dataset show that our
proposed LSTM-LS produces better performance than the
state of the art in generating natural sentences: 51.1% and
32.6% in terms of BLEU@4 and METEOR, respectively. Superior performances are also reported on the movie description M-VAD dataset.





2XWSXW6HQWHQFH
/670DPDQLVULGLQJDFDU
/670/6 D PDQLVULGLQJDPRWRUF\FOH
*URXQG7UXWKVRPHRQHLVULGLQJDPRWRUF\FOH DPDQLV
ULGLQJKLVPRWRUF\FOHDPDQLVULGLQJRQDPRWRUELNH

Figure 1: Examples of video description generation.
(Venugopalan et al. 2015a; Yao et al. 2015; Pan et al. 2016a)
and its closely related task of image captioning (Vinyals et
al. 2015; Yao et al. 2016). The basic idea is to employ Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to encode video/image
content and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to decode
a sentence. We follow this philosophy for generating video
description in this work.
While encouraging performances are reported, most existing works perform model learning on labeled video-sentence
pairs separately, leaving the semantic relationships between
sentences associated with different videos not fully exploited. A relative relationship indicates the correctness and
logic of a sentence describing a video with respect to other
sentences. Indeed, we observe that relative relationship is a
semantically rich way by which humans describe and compare visual properties in the world. For example, in Figure 1,
it is difﬁcult to predict the correct objective “motorcycle” in
the sentence generated by LSTM model (Venugopalan et al.
2015b) trained locally on video-sentence pairs. By leveraging relative relationship, i.e., “a man is riding a motorcycle”
is more accurate than “a man is riding a car” to describe the
given video, we could allow access to more human supervision and thus generate more informative sentence.
How can we learn relative properties for video captioning? In this paper, we present a novel Long Short-Term
Memory with Listwise Supervision (LSTM-LS) architecture, as shown in Figure 2. Speciﬁcally, given a video, a 2-D
and/or 3-D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) is utilized to extract visual features of selected video frames/clips,
while video representation is produced by mean pooling
over these visual features. For each sentence associated with

Introduction
Accelerated by the tremendous increase in Internet bandwidth and storage space, video data has been generated, published and spread explosively, becoming an indispensable
part of today’s big data. This has encouraged the development of advanced techniques for a broad range of video understanding applications. A fundamental issue that underlies
the success of these technological advances is the recognition. Previous research has predominantly focused on recognizing videos with a predeﬁned set of individual words
(tags). Recently, researchers have strived to automatically
describe video content with a complete and natural sentence,
which is illustrated in Figure 1. However, the need to understand not only video content (e.g., key objects, scenes and
motions) but also express their spatio-temporal relationships
in a natural sentence makes the task very challenging.
Despite the difﬁculty of this problem, there have been several attempts being proposed for attacking video captioning
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4197

