Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Audio Feature Learning with Triplet-Based Embedding Network
Xiaoyu Qi, Deshun Yang, and Xiaoou Chen
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
128th, ZhongGuanCun North Street, Haidian District, Beijing, 100080, P.R. China
{xyqi, yangdeshun, chenxiaoou}@pku.edu.cn

marized into two-folds. 1) To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
time that a triplet deep learning method has been applied to
audio metric learning. 2) We propose an end-to-end framework and the triplet-based network shall be applicable for
large-scale commercial use due to its high efﬁciency and
great potential as the amount of audio data grows.

Abstract
We propose a triplet-based network for audio feature learning
for version identiﬁcation. Existing methods use hand-crafted
features for a music as a whole while we learn features by
a triplet-based neural network on segment-level, focusing on
the most similar parts between music versions. We conduct
extensive experiments and demonstrate our merits.

Method Overview
Given a training set D = {(ai , vi )}N
i=1 , where ai =
{ej,k }l×d is an audio track, and vi denotes the version it
belongs to. ej,k ∈ (0, 1) indicates audio energy of different
frequency bands. l is the audio duration and d is the number
of frequency bands. Our goal is to learn a similarity metric
S(·, ·) with D in order to make a prediction of the similarity
degree given a new music pair (aj , ak ).
It is impractical to train a classiﬁer for each kind of version due to the large amount of music tracks and small number of versions. To solve this problem, we learn by distance
comparison within triplets. Furthermore, we experiment on
segment-level for more precise learning.
Our framework includes two parts. First, we construct triplets set D̃ from D on segment-level. D̃ =
− N
+
{(xi , x+
i , xi )}i=1 , where xi is a music segment, xi denotes
a same version of xi , while x−
i represents a non-version
one. Then, we embed audio with a triplet-based network and
form the similarity metric on the embedded feature.

Introduction
A version of a music is a new performance of a previous
work. Given a query audio piece, version identiﬁcation aims
to retrieve all the versions in a database. Music version identiﬁcation has wide application, especially in music copyright
monitoring, while it remains challenging due to the variances in tempo, key, etc. Previous work mainly focus on extracting features from pitch class proﬁles or chroma, which
well captures the tonal content of a music, and has been
proved to be more effective than original audio spectrums
descriptors such as Mel-frequency cepstrum coefﬁcients.
Most version identiﬁcation algorithms use some form
of dynamic time-warping (DTW) (Serra 2011). Balen et
al.(Bertin-Mahieux and Ellis 2011) extracted hash code
called ’jump code’ from beat-aligned chroma. Balen et al.
(van Balen et al. 2014) proposed cognition-inspired descriptors as audio features. From then on, more methods such as
information theoretic measures have been proposed with little performance improvement. Having seen the glass-ceiling
for hand-crafted features, we thus turn to machine learning
algorithms for higher learning capability to bridge the semantic gap in the long term.
Version identiﬁcation is basically a problem of similarity
metric learning. To this end, our goal is to embed the data to
a feature space where versions of the same music are close
to each other and music from different versions stay relatively far away. We propose a triplet-based neural network,
which learns audio similarity from triplet input containing
a query audio piece, a same version and a different version.
In addition, in order to match music accurately, we conduct
the learning process on segment-level instead of song-level.
The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms hand-crafted ones. Our contribution can be sum-

Audio segmentation and triplets generation
In this section, we conduct audio segmentation and construct triplets set. We experiment on segment-level for two
reasons, focusing on the most signiﬁcant parts and solving
the problem that audio versions of different genres usually
vary in length while triplets should have equal length. We
encode audio tracks and build an index for efﬁcient segment
retrieval to construct triplets. The concrete algorithm is as
follows.
A song is originally represented as a sequence of ddimensional vectors ek . In the ﬁrst step, each vector is encoded into a 64-bit vector with two parts. One part concerns
the audio vector itself, consisting of four 12-bit sub-codes.
In each sub-code, the bits corresponding to the top m largest
dimensions of the vector are set to 1 and others 0, with m
being 6, 5, 3 and 1. The other part of a code represents the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4979

