Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast Inverse Reinforcement Learning
with Interval Consistent Graph for Driving Behavior Prediction
Masamichi Shimosaka†, Junichi Sato‡, Kazuhito Takenaka♦, Kentarou Hitomi♦
Tokyo Institute of Technology†, The University of Tokyo‡, and DENSO CORPORATION♦

Kaneko, and Nishi 2014). Though these works succeeded in
showing the value of MaxEnt IRL based ﬁne-grained modeling, there are still limitations in the general driving behavior problem. (Levine, Popović, and Koltun 2011) and (Shimosaka, Kaneko, and Nishi 2014), for example, modeled
two dimensional (position–velocity) state space; however,
the model cannot be applied directly to higher dimensionality, e.g., adding steering to state space. This stems from
the exponential growth of the computational cost of MaxEnt IRL with respect to the dimensionality of state space,
so ﬁne-grained prediction is hard to solve because its state
space is likely to become high-dimensional.

Abstract
Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning (MaxEnt
IRL) is an effective approach for learning the underlying rewards of demonstrated human behavior, while it is intractable
in high-dimensional state space due to the exponential growth
of calculation cost. In recent years, a few works on approximating MaxEnt IRL in large state spaces by graphs provide
successful results, however, types of state space models are
quite limited. In this work, we extend them to more generic
large state space models with graphs where time interval consistency of Markov decision processes are guaranteed. We
validate our proposed method in the context of driving behavior prediction. Experimental results using actual driving
data conﬁrm the superiority of our algorithm in both prediction performance and computational cost over other existing
IRL frameworks.

Our goal is to achieve fast ﬁne-grained driving behavior
prediction. Continuous IRL (Levine and Koltun 2012), as an
example of the high-dimensional MaxEnt IRL problem, is
impractical in some cases due to its local optimality. In contrast, a discrete approach guarantees global optimality once
proper discrete state space is given, hence it is more suitable for driving behavior modeling. In a discrete approach,
the calculation cost of MaxEnt IRL is O(|S||A|), where |S|
is the number of states and |A| is the number of actions
(Ziebart and others 2008). That is, the key for fast prediction is suppressing the increase of |S| depending on dimensions and preparing a necessary and sufﬁcient action set, A,
for representing driving behavior. As examples of existing
discretization schemes, there are mesh grid representation
(Shimosaka, Kaneko, and Nishi 2014) and random graph
based representation connected with neighbors (Byravan et
al. 2015). In these approaches, however, A for general dynamic systems is not trivial. This is because neighbors on
state space deﬁned by Euclidean distance do not necessarily correspond to the transition area of general dynamics
deﬁned by its state equation xt = f (xt−1 , ut ) under the
constraint of control input ut . In other words, this approach
could not always hold the assumption that each edge in MDP
keeps the same time interval. This problem comes to the
surface when state space contains temporal representations,
e.g., position and velocity, and state space quantiﬁed with
conventional discretization approaches does not satisfy time
interval consistency in state transition, which is an essential
requirement in Markov decision processes (MDPs). Instead
of using Euclidean proximity in state space, we employ new
metric around “neighbors” with the basis of the state equation of dynamics xt = f (xt−1 , ut ). However, the calcula-

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), inverse optimal control, and imitation learning(Ng and Russell 2000; Abbeel
and Ng 2004) are modeling frameworks for acquiring rewards (or cost) of a certain environment by using the optimal path under a possibly different environment as training data. In particular, in human behavior modeling, it is
shown that human-centered rewards can be obtained with
maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning (MaxEnt
IRL)(Ziebart and others 2008), which allows suboptimal
training data (Huang et al. 2015; Vernaza and Bagnell 2012;
Dragan and Srinivasa 2012; Walker, Gupta, and Hebert
2014). For instance, Ziebart et al. (Ziebart et al. 2008) modeled the driving behavior of expert taxi drivers and enabled
driving behavior prediction based on the experts’ very own
experience or knowledge. MaxEnt IRL based driving behavior prediction, which balances safety, comfort, and economic performance, is very promising.
Macroscale routing prediction, such as tens of kilometers
driving, was dealt with in (Ziebart et al. 2008). Microscale
(ﬁne-grained) driving behavior prediction, e.g., acceleration,
deceleration, and steering for a few hundred meters, has become increasingly important for further safety in driver assistance or automated driving. Giving emphasis to this point,
research has been done on developing ﬁne-grained driving
behavior prediction based on MaxEnt IRL (Levine, Popović,
and Koltun 2011; Levine and Koltun 2012; Shimosaka,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1532

