Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Dynamic Action Repetition
for Deep Reinforcement Learning
Aravind S. Lakshminarayanan,∗ Sahil Sharma,∗ Balaraman Ravindran
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras

can play the game well automatically lead to AI opponents
against which humans might enjoy playing computer games.
Hence, any advancement in the former domain leads to an
advancement in the latter. We present one such advancement
in Reinforcement Learning (RL)-based game playing.
Video game domains such as Mario (Togelius,
Karakovskiy, and Baumgarten 2010), Atari 2600 (Bellemare
et al. 2013) and Half Field Offensive (Hausknecht et al.
2016) have served as a test bed to measure performance of
learning algorithms in AI-based game playing. Such games
present unique challenges to an AI agent since performing
well in them requires being able to understand the current
state of the game (involves pattern recognition) as well as
being able to choose actions after considering long term
implications of choosing those actions (involves planning).
Recent applications of Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) to these domains has resulted in state-of-the-art
performance, when the policies have to be learnt directly
from pixels in a model-free RL setting (Mnih et al. 2015;
2016; Hausknecht and Stone 2016).
Game playing AI should be real-time for it to appear
plausible to humans and for it to have real world applications. This is one of the motivations behind the evolution of Deep Learning (DL)-based AI agents as a replacement for simulation based AI. However, DRL agents involve signiﬁcant computation in the form of convolutional
neural networks and recurrent neural networks. One way to
reduce such computation is to introduce a hyper-parameter
in DRL algorithms called the action repetition rate (ARR)
which denotes the number of times an action selected by
the agent is to be repeated. If the ARR is low, the decision making frequency of the agent is high. This leads
to policies which evolve rapidly in space and time. On
the other hand, a high ARR causes infrequent decisions,
which reduces the time to train at the cost of losing ﬁnegrained control. A higher ARR also leads to the agent learning human-like policies for game play. This is because the
policies learnt with a higher ARR have fewer action sequences which exhibit super-human reﬂexes as compared to
an agent which plays with a low ARR ((Mnih et al. 2015;
2016) use an ARR of 4). A reduction in decision making frequency gives the agent the advantage of not having to learn
the control policy in the intermediate states given that a persistent action from the current state can lead to an advanta-

Abstract
One of the long standing goals of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
is to build cognitive agents which can perform complex tasks
from raw sensory inputs without explicit supervision (Lake
et al. 2016). Recent progress in combining Reinforcement
Learning objective functions and Deep Learning architectures
has achieved promising results for such tasks. An important
aspect of such sequential decision making problems, which
has largely been neglected, is for the agent to decide on the
duration of time for which to commit to actions. Such action
repetition is important for computational efﬁciency, which
is necessary for the agent to respond in real-time to events
(in applications such as self-driving cars). Action Repetition
arises naturally in real life as well as simulated environments.
The time scale of executing an action enables an agent (both
humans and AI) to decide the granularity of control during
task execution. Current state of the art Deep Reinforcement
Learning models, whether they are off-policy (Mnih et al.
2015; Wang et al. 2015) or on-policy (Mnih et al. 2016), consist of a framework with a static action repetition paradigm,
wherein the action decided by the agent is repeated for a ﬁxed
number of time steps regardless of the contextual state while
executing the task. In this paper, we propose a new framework - Dynamic Action Repetition which changes Action
Repetition Rate (the time scale of repeating an action) from a
hyper-parameter of an algorithm to a dynamically learnable
quantity. At every decision-making step, our models allow
the agent to commit to an action and the time scale of executing the action. We show empirically that such a dynamic
time scale mechanism improves the performance on relatively
harder games in the Atari 2600 domain, independent of the
underlying Deep Reinforcement Learning algorithm used.

Introduction
There has been a growing interest both in creating AI agents
which can play computer games well (Mnih et al. 2015;
Hausknecht and Stone 2016; Mnih et al. 2016), as well as
creating Human-like AI agents against which human opponents can enjoy playing (Hingston 2010; Ortega et al. 2013;
Van Hoorn et al. 2009). Indeed, both the problems are related. A solution to the former is necessary, but not sufﬁcient for a solution to the later. This is because agents which
∗

Authors contributed equally, listed in alphabetical order
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2133

