Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Optimal Pricing for Submodular Valuations with Bounded Curvature
Takanori Maehara

Yasushi Kawase

Shizuoka University
maehara.takanori@shizuoka.ac.jp

Tokyo Institute of Technology
kawase.y.ab@m.titech.ac.jp

Hanna Sumita

Katsuya Tono

Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi

National Institute of Informatics
sumita@nii.ac.jp

University of Tokyo
katsuya tono@mist.u-tokyo.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics
k keniti@nii.ac.jp

In this paper, we assume that the valuations of buyers are represented by submodular functions, which capture the notion of the diminishing returns property. Submodular functions appear in many situations (Bach 2010;
Soma and Yoshida 2015), and have been studied extensively.
For simplicity, we assume that every buyer truthfully tells
the seller his valuation and his budget. The purpose of this
paper is to analyze theoretical properties of the optimal pricing problems with submodular valuations, and to propose
(approximation) algorithms for the problems. We analyze
the performance of the algorithms in terms of the curvatures of the valuations, which capture the degree of nonlinearity. The curvature has been used to derive better approximation ratios for several submodular optimization problems (Iyer and Bilmes 2013; Iyer, Jegelka, and Bilmes 2013;
Sviridenko, Vondrák, and Ward 2015; Vondrák 2010).

Abstract
The optimal pricing problem is a fundamental problem that
arises in combinatorial auctions. Suppose that there is one
seller who has indivisible items and multiple buyers who want
to purchase a combination of the items. The seller wants to sell
his items for the highest possible prices, and each buyer wants
to maximize his utility (i.e., valuation minus payment) as long
as his payment does not exceed his budget. The optimal pricing
problem seeks a price of each item and an assignment of items
to buyers such that every buyer achieves the maximum utility
under the prices. The goal of the problem is to maximize the
total payment from buyers. In this paper, we consider the case
that the valuations are submodular. We show that the problem
is computationally hard even if there exists only one buyer.
Then we propose approximation algorithms for the unlimited
budget case. We also extend the algorithm for the limited
budget case when there exists one buyer and multiple buyers
collaborate with each other.

1
1.1

1.2

Our contributions

We summarize our results for the optimal pricing problem.
We ﬁrst show that the optimal pricing problem with submodular valuations is NP-hard even for instances derived
from our application (Theorem 5). Moreover, there exists an
instance that requires exponentially many oracle evaluations
in the oracle model (Theorem 6).
Our main result is to propose approximate pricing algorithms for the following three cases: single buyer case (Algorithm 1), multiple buyers case (Algorithm 2), and multiple
collaborating buyers case (Algorithm 3). Then we show the
approximation ratios for these algorithms in terms of the
curvatures of the valuations (Theorems 7, 10, 12). Our algorithms output a nearly optimal solution if the curvatures
are small. We will point out that a practical application of
our problem has submodular valuations whose curvatures are
typically small by using a general upper bound on curvatures
(Theorem 2). This justiﬁes our analysis of the optimal pricing problem using curvatures. The application is a similar
problem to the budget allocation problem, which is widely
studied both theoretically and practically in computational
advertising. Due to the space constraint, we omit the proofs,
which can be found in the full version (Maehara et al. 2016).
We also conduct computational experiments on some synthetic and realistic datasets to evaluate the proposed pricing
algorithms (Section 6). Our algorithm performs better than
baseline algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, no prior

Introduction

Background and motivation

In a combinatorial auction (Blumrosen and Nisan 2007;
Cramton, Shoham, and Steinberg 2006), a seller has a set
of indivisible items, and buyers purchase a combination of
the items. The seller wants to sell his items to the buyers
for the highest possible prices, and each buyer wants to purchase a set of items that is valuable for him and also has
a reasonable price. More precisely, each buyer purchases a
set of items that maximizes his utility within the limits of
his budget; here, the utility for a set of items is the valuation for him (minus the payment for purchase). Thus, the
seller seeks a price of each item (not bundle) and an assignment of items to buyers such that they are stable, i.e., no
buyer can gain more utility by changing the set of items
that he purchases. The goal is to maximize the total proﬁt
obtained from the buyers. The stability captures a fairness
condition for the individual buyers (Goldberg and Hartline
2003; Guruswami et al. 2005; Cheung and Swamy 2008;
Anshelevich, Kar, and Sekar 2015). In general, such a problem is called the optimal pricing problem and studied in many
situations.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

622

