Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Nonnegative Orthogonal Graph Matching
Bo Jiang,1 Jin Tang,1 Chris Ding,2,1 Bin Luo1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, China
2
CSE Department, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn, ahhftang@gmail.com, chqding@uta.edu, luobin@ahu.edu.cn

and Hebert 2005; Cour, Srinivasan, and Shi 2006; Enqvist, Josephon, and Kahl 2009; Choi and Kweon 2009;
Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010). These methods generally ﬁrst develop an approximate continuous problem for QAP by relaxing its discrete mapping constraint and then ﬁnd the optimal solution for this continuous problem. At last, they use
some discretization techniques to obtain the ﬁnal permutation solution (Cho, Lee, and Lee 2010; Leordeanu and
Hebert 2005). One drawback of these continuous algorithms
is that the discrete constraint of QAP matching problem is
entirely ignored and thus need to be further discretized to
obtain a discrete solution for the problem. Obviously, this
post-discretization step is independent of QAP matching objective and thus leads to weak local optimal solution (Jiang
et al. 2017; Zhou and la Torre 2012). In additional to continuous algorithm, Leordeanu and Hebert (Leordeanu, Hebert,
and Sukthankar 2009) also propose an iterative matching
method (IPFP) which optimizes the QAP in the discrete domain and thus ﬁnds a discrete solution strictly in the optimization process. In this paper, we focus on continuous optimization methods.
This paper proposes a new algorithm, called Nonnegative
Orthogonal Graph Matching (NOGM), for QAP problem.
NOGM is based on our new observation that the discrete
mapping constraint of QAP can be equivalently encoded by
a nonnegative orthogonal constraint. This motivates us to develop a multiplicative update algorithm to ﬁnd an effective
solution for QAP. Comparing with many traditional continuous methods which usually obtain continuous solutions and
need to be further discretized, NOGM can generate a sparse
solution for the problem and thus better incorporates the desirable discrete constraint in its optimization. To the best of
our knowledge, this nonnegative orthogonal constraint has
not been studied or emphasized in QAP problem. Promising
experimental results demonstrate the beneﬁts and effectiveness of the proposed NOGM method.

Abstract
Graph matching problem that incorporates pair-wise constraints can be formulated as Quadratic Assignment Problem
(QAP). The optimal solution of QAP is discrete and combinational, which makes QAP problem NP-hard. Thus, many
algorithms have been proposed to ﬁnd approximate solutions.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm, called Nonnegative Orthogonal Graph Matching (NOGM), for QAP matching problem. NOGM is motivated by our new observation
that the discrete mapping constraint of QAP can be equivalently encoded by a nonnegative orthogonal constraint which
is much easier to implement computationally. Based on this
observation, we develop an effective multiplicative update algorithm to solve NOGM and thus can ﬁnd an effective approximate solution for QAP problem. Comparing with many
traditional continuous methods which usually obtain continuous solutions and should be further discretized, NOGM can
obtain a sparse solution and thus incorporates the desirable
discrete constraint naturally in its optimization. Promising experimental results demonstrate beneﬁts of NOGM algorithm.

Introduction
Many problems of interest in computer vision and machine
learning area can be formulated as a problem of ﬁnding consistent correspondences between two sets of features. This
problem can usually be formulated and solved by graph
matching model. From optimization aspect, previous approaches have formulated graph matching as a Quadratic
Assignment Problem (QAP).
It is known that the optimal solution of QAP matching
problem should satisfy both discrete and mapping (one-toone or one-to-many) constraints simultaneously. This combinatorial constraints make QAP problem NP-hard. Thus
many algorithms have been proposed to ﬁnd approximate
solutions for graph matching problem (Enqvist, Josephon,
and Kahl 2009; Leordeanu, Hebert, and Sukthankar 2009;
Zhou and la Torre 2012; van Wyk and van Wyk 2004;
Zaslavskiy, Bach, and Vert 2009; Liu, Qiao, and Xu 2012;
Zhang et al. 2016; Adamczewski, Suh, and Lee 2015).
Among them, one kind of popular methods is to use continuous optimization techniques (Gold and A 1996; Leordeanu

Problem Formulation and Related Works
Assume that two graphs to be matched are GD = (V D , E D )
and GM = (V M , E M ) where V represents a set of
nodes and E denotes edges. The graph matching problem, in its most recent and general from, can be formulated as Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP) problem,
i.e., ﬁnding the indicator matrix X ∈ {0, 1}n×n where

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4089

