Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A General Efﬁcient Hyperparameter-Free
Algorithm for Convolutional Sparse Learning
Zheng Xu, Junzhou Huang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The University of Texas at Arlington
701 S. Nedderman Drive, Arlington, Texas 76019

al. 2005), directional total variation (Bayram and Kamasak
2012), wavelet sparsity (Ma et al. 2008; Chen and Huang
2012) and even higher-order total variation (Toma et al. 2014;
Chan et al. 2015), etc. These most recent models have
been demonstrated effective in various applications, e.g.,
feature selection, computer vision, etc. Our convolutional
sparse framework bridges a gap between the standard sparsity (Candes, Romberg, and Tao 2006), without structural
priori that could suffer from the requirements of more measurements, and the dictionary sparsity (Candes et al. 2011;
Liu, Yuan, and Ye 2013) that lacks the decent properties
from the convolution operators. The standard sparsity can
be viewed as a specialized case in our framework while
only one convolution ﬁlter is used and the kernel is ﬁxed to
k = [1]. The dictionary sparse recovery (Candes et al. 2011;
Liu, Yuan, and Ye 2013), in a
general case, employs λDβ1
m
as the regularizer instead of i=1 λi ki  β1 in our framework, where D is a linear bounded operator and also usually
referred as a redundant dictionary. While the dictionary sparsity seems more generic than our framework, however, in
practice, the model usually suffers from the complicated analysis of D. For instance, the design of algorithm in (He and
Yuan 2012) requires the estimation of the spectrum norm of
linear operator D, but it generally requires O(N 3 ) time complexity for an accurate numerical computation, which is absolutely prohibited in large-scale applications. Furthermore,
it is worth mentioning another seemingly similar framework
convolutional sparse coding (CSC) (Heide, Heidrich, and
Wetzstein 2015). The CSC model basically focus on learning
a group of convolution operators acting as the measurement
matrix X, i.e., in f (β) = Xβ − y22 , it replaces X with
a set of convolution operators and uses a standard sparse
constraint. Overall, the CSC model is a special case of standard sparse learning and, in succession, a special case of our
convolutional sparse framework.

Abstract
Structured sparse learning has become a popular and mature
research ﬁeld. Among all structured sparse models, we found
an interesting fact that most structured sparse properties could
be captured by convolution operators, most famous ones being
total variation and wavelet sparsity. This ﬁnding has naturally brought us to a generalization termed as Convolutional
Sparsity. While this generalization bridges the convolution
and sparse learning theory, we are able to propose a general,
efﬁcient, hyperparameter-free optimization algorithm framework for convolutional sparse models, thanks to the analysis
theory of convolution operators. The convergence of the general, hyperparameter-free algorithm has been comprehensively
analyzed, with a non-ergodic rate of O(1/ε2 ) and ergodic
rate of O(1/ε), where ε is the desired accuracy. Extensive
experiments conﬁrm the superior performance of our general
algorithm in various convolutional sparse models, even better
than some application-specialistic algorithms.

Introduction
We investigate the following convolutional sparse learning
(Huang, Zhang, and Metaxas 2011; Huang, Zhang, and others
2010) framework where the original signal is sparse in terms
of the representation ﬁltered by some convolution operators.
It can be formulated as:
min f (β) + g(β) +
β

m


λi ki  β1 ,

(1)

i=1

where f (β) is a proper, lower semi-continuous, sufﬁciently
smooth convex function. Famous examples off include
the least squares (Xβ − y2 /2) and logistic ( j log(1 +
exp(β T xj + bj ))) regressions. g(β) is a proper, lower semicontinuous, convex function, which usually appears as a regularizer, e.g., nuclear norm ( · ∗ ), Tikhonov regularizer
 · 22 , etc. λi > 0 is the tuning parameter, balancing among
different convolution operations, and ki ∈ L1 is the absolute
integrable convolution kernel function. ·  · is the convolution
operator deﬁned rigidly on locally compact abelian group.
This generic convolutional sparse framework generalizes
a sufﬁcient large class of sparse learning models, which
includes but not limited to, fused LASSO (Tibshirani et

At present, the choice of optimization algorithm is still
customarily left as an application-speciﬁc detail for the enduser to determine. While the convolutional sparse framework
generalizes a wide class of sparse learning models, we can
now imagine a general, easy-to-use algorithm that solves
all convolutional sparse models. However, it is hard to efﬁciently solve the convolutional sparse formulation, since the
formulation couples an non-smooth non-separable convolutional sparse regularizer and a non-smooth term g(β) with

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2803

