Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Kernel Kalman Rule — Efﬁcient Nonparametric
Inference with Recursive Least Squares
Gregor H. W. Gebhardt

Andras Kupcsik

Gerhard Neumann

Technische Universität Darmstadt
Hochschulstr. 10
64289 Darmstadt, Germany
gebhardt@ias.tu-darmstadt.de

School of Computing
National University of Singapore
13 Computing Drive, Singapore 117417
kupcsik@comp.nus.edu.sg

School of Computer Science
University of Lincoln
Lincoln, LN6 7TS, UK
gneumann@lincoln.ac.uk

rule, inference can be performed entirely in the RKHS. Additionally, Song, Fukumizu, and Gretton (2013) use the kernel sum rule and the kernel Bayes’ rule to construct the kernel Bayes’ ﬁlter (KBF). The KBF learns the transition and
observation models from observed samples and can be applied to nonlinear systems with high-dimensional observations. However, the computational complexity of the KBR
update scales poorly with the number of samples such that
hyper-parameter optimization becomes prohibitively expensive. Moreover, the KBR requires mathematical tricks that
may cause numerical instabilities and also render the objective which is optimized by the KBR unclear.
In this paper, we present the kernel Kalman rule (KKR) as
alternative to the kernel Bayes’ rule. Our derivations closely
follow the derivations of the innovation update used in the
Kalman ﬁlter and are based on a recursive least squares minimization objective in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
We show that our update of the mean embedding is unbiased and has minimum variance. While the update equations
are formulated in a potentially inﬁnite dimensional RKHS,
we derive, through the application of the kernel trick and
by virtue of the representer theorem (Schölkopf, Herbrich,
and Smola 2001), an algorithm using only products and inversions of ﬁnite kernel matrices. We employ the kernel
Kalman rule together with the kernel sum rule for ﬁltering,
which results in the kernel Kalman ﬁlter (KKF). In contrast
to ﬁltering techniques that rely on the KBR, the KKF allows
to precompute expensive matrix inversions which signiﬁcantly reduces the computational complexity. This allows us
also to apply hyper-parameter optimization for the KKF.
To scale gracefully with larger data sets, we rederive the
KKR and the KKF with the subspace conditional operator
(Gebhardt, Kupcsik, and Neumann 2015). Here, only a subset of the samples is used to span a feature space, while all
training samples are used to estimate the models.
We compare our approach to different versions of the
KBR and demonstrate its improved estimation accuracy
and computational efﬁciency. Furthermore, we evaluate the
KKR on a simulated 4-link pendulum task and a human motion capture data set (Wojtusch and von Stryk 2015).

Abstract
Nonparametric inference techniques provide promising tools
for probabilistic reasoning in high-dimensional nonlinear systems. Most of these techniques embed distributions into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) and rely on the kernel Bayes’ rule (KBR) to manipulate the embeddings. However, the computational demands of the KBR scale poorly
with the number of samples and the KBR often suffers from
numerical instabilities. In this paper, we present the kernel
Kalman rule (KKR) as an alternative to the KBR. The derivation of the KKR is based on recursive least squares, inspired
by the derivation of the Kalman innovation update. We apply
the KKR to ﬁltering tasks where we use RKHS embeddings
to represent the belief state, resulting in the kernel Kalman ﬁlter (KKF). We show on a nonlinear state estimation task with
high dimensional observations that our approach provides a
signiﬁcantly improved estimation accuracy while the computational demands are signiﬁcantly decreased.

1

Introduction

State estimation and prediction for continuous partially observable stochastic processes is a signiﬁcant challenge in
many high-dimensional applications, such as robotics. However, analytical solutions are only applicable for a limited
set of models with special structure. When assuming linear
models with Gaussian noise, for instance, the Kalman ﬁlter (Kalman 1960) is known to provide an optimal solution.
For more complex models, approximate solutions have to be
used instead (McElhoe 1966; Smith, Schmidt, and McGee
1962; Julier and Uhlmann 1997; Wan and Van Der Merwe
2000). These approximations are again difﬁcult to scale to
high-dimensional problems, they often assume a unimodal
Gaussian observation prior and also require that the model
of the system is known.
The recently introduced methods for nonparametric inference (Song, Fukumizu, and Gretton 2013; Fukumizu, Song,
and Gretton 2013) alleviate the problems of traditional state
estimation methods for nonlinear systems. The idea of these
methods is to represent probability distributions as points
in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. Based on the kernelized versions of the sum rule, the chain rule, and the Bayes’

1.1

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, the kernel Bayes’ rule exists in three different versions. It was ﬁrst introduced in its

3754

