Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

An Image Wherever You Look!
Making Vision Just Another Sensor for AI/Robotics Projects
Andy Zhang, John Lee, Ciante Jones, Zachary Dodds
Harvey Mudd College 301 Platt Blvd. Claremont, CA 91711 USA
axzhang, johlee, cjjones, dodds@g.hmc.edu

Abstract

al 2016). To help undergraduates tap into these trends, we
created and tested a software framework -- for building and
localizing within circular panoramas using vision. The
software is designed for both accessibility and "tinkerability" (Resnick and Rosenbaum 2013), including (a) nearzero cost of materials, (b) the adaptability of the visionbased algorithms, including their spatial and angular resolution, and (c) the ease with which new users can deploy
and modify the system.

Visual sensing can be difficult to incorporate into undergraduate robotics and AI assignments. Images, after all, do
not provide a direct estimate of the geometric conditions
within the field of view. Yet vision is increasingly compelling as a part of undergraduate AI and robotics, given the
centrality of pixels in our students' interactions with technology and each other. This paper shares a small-footprint
framework designed to make visual sensing as easy to incorporate into AI projects and assignments, e.g., as a source
of evidence for localization algorithms, as range sensors.
The framework leverages (hand-built) circular panoramas
and the image-matching capabilities provided by OpenCV's
python library. An example localization project highlights
its pedagogical accessibility and ease of deployment atop
low-cost hardware and alongside other sensors.

Thus, this project contributes a small-footprint software
scaffold that makes it easy for instructors creating projects,
or students seeking to extend their sensor suite's reach, to
use vision to support localization in AI/Robotics projects:
• the system uses only Python and OpenCV (Bradski
2013) to support a cooperatively-built graph of panoramas, with student-chosen angular and translational resolution, as the map from image data to location
• several image-matching algorithms and resolutions
were considered; we have chosen a default combination
that produces a reasonable tradeoff in accuracy and
time-performance
• a student deployment of the framework shows its flexibility in contributing to other low-cost, easily-deployed
sensors and hardware, in service to an indoor navigation
task, the kitchen run.

The Challenge
A fundamental challenge in developing undergraduate
AI/Robotics assignments is deciding what to include. So
many engineering, computing, and algorithmic priorities
are shared by AI/Robotics that the limited timeframe and
high expectations for insight-per-experience payoff often
precludes the integration of image processing with traditional AI/Robotics tasks such as localization and mapping.
Yet vision-based localization and navigation systems have
a history that reaches to the earliest days of AI/Robotics
(Nilsson 1969; Moravec 1983). Contemporary visionbased robots, leverage both the mature understanding of
visual geometry, e.g., (Diel, et al 2005), and the power of
data-driven visual lookup, e.g., (Johns et al. 2016). Moreover, vision and robotics together now support many other
investigations, e.g., husbanding endangered marine species
(Wilby, et al. 2016), tracking lions in their natural habitat
(Ackerman 2013), even surveilling other robots (Moeys et

Developed in the summer of 2016, this framework has not
yet been tested in a classroom setting. Even as the system
itself matures and evolves, however, its goal – making
computer vision an accessible facet of undergraduate
AI/Robotics – will continue to motivate and challenge the
AI education community.

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4806

