Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Integration of Planning with Recognition for
Responsive Interaction Using Classical Planners
Richard G. Freedman and Shlomo Zilberstein
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
{freedman,shlomo}@cs.umass.edu
The ﬁelds of plan and goal recognition have produced
methods for identifying an observed agent’s task or goal,
given her action sequence. This is often regarded as the
inverse of planning in which, given a set of goal conditions representing a task, the agent aims to derive a sequence of actions that will achieve the conditions when performed from a given initial state. Although planning was
one of the earliest research areas within artiﬁcial intelligence, recognition was not investigated as rigorously until recently, and the two problems were not initially interconnected. Classical planning was focused on formulating tasks (Fikes and Nilsson 1971; McDermott et al. 1998;
Younes and Littman 2004) and developing reasoning and
search methods for solving these formulated problems (Hart,
Nilsson, and Raphael 1968; Hoffmann and Nebel 2001;
Helmert 2006), but early work in plan and goal recognition was motivated by extracting logical information from
text documents to derive explanations of the described tasks
(Kautz 1991; Charniak and Goldman 1991). The logical
databases of facts did not often resemble the formulations
used in classical planning until Geib and Steedman (2007)
provided a formal relation between natural language parsing
and plan recognition using hierarchical task networks (Erol,
Hendler, and Nau 1994).
Despite this past separation between planning and plan
recognition, the integration of these areas is crucial for interacting well with others. Recognizing the plans and goals
of those with whom an agent is interacting provides a context for the task and an expectation of how the other agents
are approaching it; planning within a similar context and
considering the other agents’ potential actions as constraints
allows the observing agent to develop a sequence of actions that work well with everyone else. This is not a onedirectional relationship because the planned actions may not
be exactly correct, or the other agents may vary their behaviors and invalidate the observed agent’s responding plan.
Thus plan recognition must still be performed to conﬁrm the
validity of the current action choices and update the information for potential replanning.
Some approaches to such interactive systems have been
developed, for example by creating action tables with precalculated responses to recognized events (Koppula and
Saxena 2013; Kelley et al. 2012), specifying branching paths
of a plan where an interactive agent recognizes the path

Abstract
Interaction between multiple agents requires some form of
coordination and a level of mutual awareness. When computers and robots interact with people, they need to recognize
human plans and react appropriately. Plan and goal recognition techniques have focused on identifying an agent’s task
given a sufﬁciently long action sequence. However, by the
time the plan and/or goal are recognized, it may be too late
for computing an interactive response. We propose an integration of planning with probabilistic recognition where each
method uses intermediate results from the other as a guiding heuristic for recognition of the plan/goal in-progress as
well as the interactive response. We show that, like the used
recognition method, these interaction problems can be compiled into classical planning problems and solved using offthe-shelf methods. In addition to the methodology, this paper
introduces problem categories for different forms of interaction, an evaluation metric for the beneﬁts from the interaction,
and extensions to the recognition algorithm that make its intermediate results more practical while the plan is in progress.

1

Introduction

In order for agents, whether they are robots, computers, or
humans, to interact with people in the world around them,
it is important that they are not just aware of the people’s
presence, but also able to understand what those people are
doing. In particular, interaction involving multiple agents
requires some form of coordination during plan execution.
In some cases, coordination could be achieved by communication or executing a precise predetermined plan, but
other times interaction occurs spontaneously based solely
on observations (such as aiding someone who seems to be
struggling with a task). Maeda et al. (2014) collected data
from human teams performing tasks that enabled robots to
learn probabilistic motion primitives to mimic the interaction. Their form of interaction is reactive, serving as a lowlevel reﬂex to the partner’s motions. We instead focus on
responsive interaction, considering the partner’s activities at
a higher level and deciding how to act alongside her. Such
coordination must account for the uncertainty about the duration and manner in which agents execute their actions.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4581

