Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Capturing Dependencies among Labels and Features
for Multiple Emotion Tagging of Multimedia Data
Shan Wu,1 Shangfei Wang,∗1 and Qiang Ji2

1

Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
Email: SA14WS@mail.ustc.edu.cn, sfwang@ustc.edu.cn
2
Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
Email: qji@ecse.rpi.edu
of a video clip from the FilmStim database, both conveying
disgust and fear. Figure 1(b) shows two images that convey happiness, peace, and tenderness. Some emotions often
appear together, while others do not. For instance, Figure
1(a) are still shots from a video about war, which may make
people fearful and disgusted, but rarely happy. On the contrary, Figure 1(b) describes two beautiful scenes which convey happiness, peace, and tenderness, but not fear and disgust. Therefore, emotion tagging should be formulated as a
multi-label classiﬁcation problem, and successfully exploring the dependency inherent in multiple emotions is the key
to improve emotion tagging.

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of emotion tagging of
multimedia data by modeling the dependencies among multiple emotions in both the feature and label spaces. These dependencies, which carry crucial top-down and bottom-up evidence for improving multimedia affective content analysis,
have not been thoroughly exploited yet. To this end, we propose two hierarchical models that independently and dependently learn the shared features and global semantic relationships among emotion labels to jointly tag multiple emotion
labels of multimedia data. Efﬁcient learning and inference algorithms of the proposed models are also developed. Experiments on three benchmark emotion databases demonstrate
the superior performance of our methods to existing methods.

Introduction
We are surrounded by digital multimedia collections due to
the popularity of the Internet and the proliferation of userfriendly equipment, such as smart phones. Such multimedia collections, including music, images, and videos, have
gradually become the most common means of communication, entertainment, and knowledge and information sharing.
Naturally, emotion tagging for multimedia data has attracted
increasing attention in recent years, since emotion is a key
factor in human communication and entertainment.
Automatic emotion annotation for multimedia data is a
challenging task due to the complexity and subjectivity of
human emotions, and the rich variety of multimedia content.
Current research into multimedia emotion tagging mainly
focuses on developing discriminative features and classiﬁers. Various visual and audio features have been adopted.
Both static and dynamic classiﬁers are used for emotion annotation. An extensive review of emotion tagging of music,
videos and images can be found in (Yang and Chen 2012;
Joshi et al. 2011; Kim et al. 2010; Wang and Ji 2015;
Wang and Wang 2005; Dorai and Venkatesh 2001; Wang
and He 2008).
Most present research on multimedia emotion tagging assumes there is only one emotional tag for a medium. However, several emotional tags can be assigned to the same
multimedia data. For examples, Figure 1(a) lists two shots

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Samples which induce mixed emotions. (a) Two
image frames from the FilmStim database induce fear and
disgust, but not happiness; (b) Two images from website induce happiness, peace, and tenderness, but not fear and disgust.
However, it is only recently that a few researchers realized that the disjointedness of emotional labels is not valid
in emotion detection from music, images and videos. Li and
Ogihara (Li and Ogihara 2003) may be the ﬁrst to formulate emotion detection from music as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem. They decompose the problem into a set
of binary classiﬁcation problems, and adopt a support vector
machine as the classiﬁer for each binary classiﬁcation. Their
method can be regarded as binary relevance (BR) multilabel algorithm, which ignores the dependencies among labels. Later, Trohidis et al. (Trohidis et al. 2011) compare
seven multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms, i.e., binary relevance, label powerset (LP), random k-label sets (RAKEL),
multi-label k-nearest neighbor (MLkNN), ranking by pairwise comparison (RPC), calibrated label ranking (CLR), and
multi-label back-propagation (BPMLL), for emotion detection from music. LP, RAKEL, RPC, and CLR explore label dependencies from target labels through detecting label combinations, such as a pairwise or subset label combinations in the training data. Thus, it is only feasible for
a few combinations, and it is hard to detect thousands of

∗

this is the corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1026

