Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multitask Dyadic Prediction and Its Application
in Prediction of Adverse Drug-Drug Interaction
Bo Jin,† Haoyu Yang,† Cao Xiao,* Ping Zhang,* Xiaopeng Wei,† Fei Wang¶
†

Computer Science, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China 116024
*Health Analytics Research Group, IBM T.J.Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
¶
Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065

an urgent need for methods that can identify DDIs earlier
and more comprehensively.
With the arrival of the big data era, more and more healthcare related data are becoming readily available, so does
the pharmaceutical industry. There are quite a few research
works trying to leverage pharmaceutical research and development data in the task of DDI prediction. One of the
prominent resource they are using is the chemical structure
of the drugs, as many DDIs are essentially caused by the
chemical-physical incompatibility of two drugs. For example, machine learning methods were developed for predicting DDIs by analyzing chemical structure similarity (Cheng
and Zhao 2014b), implementing the chemical-protein interactome (Luo et al. 2014), modeling interaction proﬁle ﬁngerprints (Vilar et al. 2013), and exploiting pharmacointeraction network structure (Cami et al. 2013). There are
also some efforts on predicting DDIs by integrating multiple
molecular and pharmacological data (Yang, Xu, and Zeng
2014). The advantage of these methods lies in the fact that
they rely mainly on chemical and bioactivity data from laboratory studies which could be obtained during preclinical
phase rather than clinical records. As a result, they could
potentially be used to predict DDIs years in advance, enabling drug safety professionals to better prioritize their limited investigative resources and take appropriate regulatory
actions.
Despite their initial success, there are still limitations for
existing computational approaches. For example,
• They only focus on binary predictions, which correspond
to whether or not a DDI would happen. Actually there is a
detailed type (e.g., hepatic failure, cough, dizziness, etc.)
associated with each DDI. Obtaining the actual DDI types
may help us understand better the mechanistic underlying
the DDI and take proper preventative actions.
• They typically use drug features alone in the predictive model (e.g., logistic regression). However, in reality
the interactions among different chemical compounds are
also important factors that lead to DDIs.
• They usually work in an “imputation” manner, i.e., predicting potential interactions among existing drugs. It is
also much demanding of predicting potential DDIs for
new drugs.
To lift the aforementioned limitations, in this work, we

Abstract
Adverse drug-drug interactions (DDIs) remain a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality around the world. Identifying potential DDIs during the drug design process is critical
in guiding targeted clinical drug safety testing. Although detection of adverse DDIs is conducted during Phase IV clinical
trials, there are still a large number of new DDIs founded by
accidents after the drugs were put on market. With the arrival
of big data era, more and more pharmaceutical research and
development data are becoming available, which provides an
invaluable resource for digging insights that can potentially
be leveraged in early prediction of DDIs. Many computational approaches have been proposed in recent years for DDI
prediction. However, most of them focused on binary prediction (with or without DDI), despite the fact that each DDI
is associated with a different type. Predicting the actual DDI
type will help us better understand the DDI mechanism and
identify proper ways to prevent it. In this paper, we formulate
the DDI type prediction problem as a multitask dyadic regression problem, where the prediction of each speciﬁc DDI type
is treated as a task. Compared with conventional matrix completion approaches which can only impute the missing entries
in the DDI matrix, our approach can directly regress those
dyadic relationships (DDIs) and thus can be extend to new
drugs more easily. We developed an effective proximal gradient method to solve the problem. Evaluation on real world
datasets is presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a modiﬁcation of the effect
of a drug when administered with another drug, which is a
common scenario for patients with complicated conditions
such as cancer or other chronic diseases. Some DDIs could
be an increase or a decrease in the effect, while some could
be an adverse effect that even results in severe morbidity and
mortality. Although detection of adverse DDIs is conducted
during Phase IV clinical trials, there are still a large number of new DDIs founded by accidents after the drugs were
put on market. These undetected adverse DDIs have become
serious health threats and caused nearly 74, 000 emergency
room visits and 195, 000 hospitalizations each year in the
United States alone (Percha and Altman 2013). This brings
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1367

