Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deterministic Attention for
Sequence-to-Sequence Constituent Parsing
Chunpeng Ma,1∗ Lemao Liu,2† Akihiro Tamura,2 Tiejun Zhao,1 Eiichiro Sumita2
1

2

Machine Intelligence and Translation Laboratory, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
ASTREC, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Kyoto, Japan
{cpma, tjzhao}@hit.edu.cn, {lmliu, akihiro.tamura, eiichiro.sumita}@nict.go.jp

NP

The sequence-to-sequence model is proven to be extremely
successful in constituent parsing. It relies on one key technique, the probabilistic attention mechanism, to automatically
select the context for prediction. Despite its successes, the
probabilistic attention model does not always select the most
important context. For example, the headword and boundary
words of a subtree have been shown to be critical when predicting the constituent label of the subtree, but this contextual information becomes increasingly difﬁcult to learn as the
length of the sequence increases. In this study, we proposed
a deterministic attention mechanism that deterministically selects the important context and is not affected by the sequence
length. We implemented two different instances of this framework. When combined with a novel bottom-up linearization
method, our parser demonstrated better performance than that
achieved by the sequence-to-sequence parser with probabilistic attention mechanism.

1

TD

S

Abstract
John

VP

has

.

NP

a

dog

BU

(S (NP XX )N P (VP XX (NP
XX XX )N P )V P XX )S
sh label-NP sh nolabel sh nolabel sh nolabel comb labelNP comb label-VP comb nolabel sh nolabel comb label-S

Table 1: A constituent tree and its linearization. TD = topdown, BU = bottom-up.

other hand, it is easy to implement, and even off-the-shelf
toolkits can be used with minor modiﬁcations, to create a
competitive constituent parsing system.
The key technique in the sequence-to-sequence constituent parsing is the probabilistic attention mechanism
(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015), which can automatically select a context relevant to each time step to yield an accurate prediction. While
this has been successful, we argue that this general probabilistic attention mechanism ignores the inherent characteristics of constituent parsing: the boundary and head information that has proven to be critical when identifying phrase
structure and predicting its label. There is no guarantee that
the probabilistic attention mechanism can select these critical words and use them as the context, which is discussed
by Liu et al. (2016b) and Mi, Wang, and Ittycheriah (2016)
in the task of machine translation. Consequently, this limits
the accuracy of sequence-to-sequence constituent parsing.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of this. When predicting
the token “)N P ” of the noun phrase structure “the ﬁscal year
just ended”, the attention mechanism mainly focuses on the
verb “ended” and pays almost no attention to the boundary word (symbol) “,” and the headword “year”. However,
these words are very informative in determining the phrase
structure: “,” indicates that a phrase precedes it, and “year”
shows that this phrase should be labeled “NP”. The failure
to take account of these clues leads to a parsing error. This
“pay-attention-to-one-word” phenomenon is quite common.
A statistical analysis of the parsing results of Vinyals et al.
(2015) on the development set of the Wall Street Journal
(WSJ) part of the Penn Treebank (Marcus, Marcinkiewicz,
and Santorini 1993) showed that for 91.46% of the sentences, more than 90% of the parser’s attention was given

Introduction

The sequence-to-sequence model, based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014), provides a uniﬁed solution for a number of
sequence-to-sequence transformation tasks, including machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), image
captioning (Xu et al. 2015), and grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (Liu et al. 2016a). In particular, Vinyals et al. (2015)
applied the sequence-to-sequence model to constituent parsing after linearizing the parse tree as a sequence in a topdown manner (see the ﬁrst row of Table 1) and viewing it as
a speciﬁc instance of the sequence-to-sequence transformation task.
The sequence-to-sequence model has notable advantages
over task-speciﬁc RNN parsing models (Watanabe and
Sumita 2015; Dyer et al. 2016), whose architectures are
speciﬁcally designed for the parsing task. On one hand, the
sequence-to-sequence architecture is so general that any improvements made in other sequence-to-sequence tasks can
be simultaneously transferred to constituent parsing. On the
∗
This work was done during the internship of the author at
NICT.
†
Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3237

