Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

What’s Hot in Constraint Programming
Laurent Michel

Michel Rueher

CSE Department, University of Connecticut
371 Fairﬁeld Road, Storrs, CT 06269-4155, USA
ldm@engr.uconn.edu

University of Nice–Sophia Antipolis / CNRS
BP 121, 06903 Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France
michel.rueher@gmail.com

dynamic programming formulation which, while being intractable, serves as inspiration for a CP technique relying on
interval discretizations that adaptively tighten the variable
bounds as the DP algorithm proceeds. The ﬁnal result is an
algorithm that delivers -feasible super-optimal approximate
solution to the optimal power ﬂow in time linear in the network size and polynomial in 1 .

Abstract
The CP conference is the annual international conference
on constraint programming. It is concerned with all aspects
of computing with constraints, including theory, algorithms,
environments, languages, models, systems, and applications
such as decision-making, resource allocation, scheduling,
conﬁguration, and planning. The CP community is very keen
to ensure it remains open to interdisciplinary research at
the intersection between constraint programming and related
ﬁelds. Hence, in addition to the usual technical and application tracks, the CP 2016 conference featured thematic tracks:
“Computational Sustainability”, “CP and Biology”, “Preferences, Social Choice and Optimization”, and “Testing and
Veriﬁcation”. In this overview, we highlight several remarkable papers that have been selected by the senior program
committee and papers with the most innovative methods and
techniques, and a very high potential for applications (in our
opinion).

Almost-stable matchings in the Hospitals / Residents
problem with Couples. In (Manlove, McBride, and Trimble 2016), the authors investigate a practical variant of the
Hospital/Resident almost-stable matching problem in which
couples of residents are allowed to submit joint preferences
over pairs of (typically close) hospitals. As expected, the
objective is to ﬁnd an allocation that is as stable as possible. Namely, the number of blocking pairs among participants, or couples of Hospitals / Residents is minimal. The
paper establishes that the optimization problem is NP-hard
and hard to approximate. It introduces an Integer Programming and a Constraint Programming model and empirically
investigates their behavior on randomly generated instances.
Interestingly, the CP model augmented with presolving techniques delivers optimal solutions almost an order of magnitude faster than the IP model.

Awards
The conference bestowed best paper awards on Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Pascal Van Hentenryck, Michael
Chertkov, Sidhant Misra and Marc Vuffray for “Graphical
models for optimal power ﬂow” and on David Manlove, Iain
McBride and James Trimble for “Almost-stable matchings
in the Hospitals / Residents problem with Couples”.

Student Paper Awards. The conference also awarded a
Best Student Paper Prize to Clément Carbonnel for “The
Dichotomy for Conservative Constraint Satisfaction is Polynomially Decidable” (Carbonnel 2016), and a Distinguished
Student Paper Prize to Kyle E. C. Booth, Goldie Nejat and J.
Christopher Beck for “A Constraint Programming Approach
to Multi-Robot Task Allocation and Scheduling in Retirement Homes” (Booth, Nejat, and Beck 2016).

Graphical models for optimal power ﬂow. In (Dvijotham et al. 2016), the authors consider the problem of reliably operating a power grid in a context where the number of stochastic demand-side resources becomes signiﬁcant. In particular, it considers the smart management of
those demand-side resources through the resolution of a distributed optimization formulation of the optimal power ﬂow
problem over tree networks. Unlike previous algorithms that
rely on convex relaxations, this novel approach works for arbitrary distribution networks and can handle mixed-integer
optimization problems. The paper not only offers the initial steps towards solving the problem, but it also delivers
an empirical evaluation demonstrating that the problem can
be solved efﬁciently. The technical approach articulates a

The Dichotomy for Conservative Constraint Satisfaction
is Polynomially Decidable. Given a ﬁxed constraint
language Γ, the conservative CSP over Γ (denoted by
c-CSP(Γ)) is a variant of CSP(Γ) where the domain of each
variable can be restricted arbitrarily. This paper (Carbonnel
2016), introduces a polynomial-time algorithm that, given
a constraint language Γ as input, decides if c-CSP(Γ) is
tractable. In addition, if Γ is proven tractable the algorithm
also outputs its coloured graph, which contains valuable
information on the structure of Γ.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5073

