Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Recovering Concept Prerequisite Relations
from University Course Dependencies
Chen Liang,† Jianbo Ye,† Zhaohui Wu,‡ Bart Pursel,† C. Lee Giles†
†

Pennsylvania State University
‡
Microsoft Corporation
{cul226, jxy198, bkp10, giles}@ist.psu.edu zhaowu@microsoft.com

in educational data mining has been devoted to analyzing
student assessment data which records the performance of
students on different items (e.g. units, sections, etc.) (Vuong,
Nixon, and Towle 2011). Existing approaches aim to discover prerequisite relations among certain performance variables such as handcrafted knowledge components and skills.
Since those discovered relations are highly structured and
are often subject to a speciﬁc assessment pool, they can not
be generalized for other educational purposes or applicable for processing a large concept set. To address these issues, Wikipedia data is exploited to ﬁnd prerequisite relations among universally shared concepts (Talukdar and Cohen 2012; Liang et al. 2015), using both the Wikipedia article contents and their linkage structures. For the purpose of
curriculum planning, Yang et al. (2015) proposed a supervised framework to infer course prerequisites by constructing a latent concept graph to support the prediction.
Here, we focus on the problem of recovering concept
prerequisite relations from course dependencies (denoted as
CPR-Recover for short). We utilize a similar data setting as
that of (Yang et al. 2015) but instead focus on recovering
an accurate and universally shared concept graph from the
observed course dependencies rather than extrapolating the
course prerequisites to unseen course pairs. We have information and dependencies of courses collected from different
universities. As shown in Figure 1, courses #1-4 are from
the curriculum of University A. Based on their descriptions,
course dependencies (e.g. Course #2 depends on Course #1)
are used to recover concept prerequisite relations in a shared
concept graph. To address the CPR-Recover problem, we
propose an unsupervised optimization-based method based
on the following two assumptions:

Abstract
Prerequisite relations among concepts play an important role
in many educational applications such as intelligent tutoring
system and curriculum planning. With the increasing amount
of educational data available, automatic discovery of concept
prerequisite relations has become both an emerging research
opportunity and an open challenge. Here, we investigate how
to recover concept prerequisite relations from course dependencies and propose an optimization based framework to address the problem. We create the ﬁrst real dataset for empirically studying this problem, which consists of the listings of
computer science courses from 11 U.S. universities and their
concept pairs with prerequisite labels. Experiment results on
a synthetic dataset and the real course dataset both show that
our method outperforms existing baselines.

Introduction
A prerequisite is a concept or skill that is necessary to learn
before one can proceed to understand more advanced knowledge. Prerequisite relations exist as natural dependencies
among concepts in cognitive processes when we learn, organize, apply, and generate knowledge (Laurence and Margolis
1999). Recently, the growth of available educational data has
made a variety of emerging educational applications possible. Examples include intelligent tutoring systems (Aleven
and Koedinger 2002), curriculum planning (Agrawal, Golshan, and Papalexakis 2015), automatic sequencing of learning materials (Changuel, Labroche, and Bouchon-Meunier
2015), etc. In these applications, obtaining prerequisite relations plays a crucial role.
While it can beneﬁt both learners and instructional designers, discovering prerequisite relations among concepts is
usually done manually by domain experts (Bergan and Jeska
1980). However, it is inefﬁcient and expensive — and does
not scale with large concept sets. A possible solution for
scaling is to develop or integrate approaches that automatically infer such prerequisites from the increasing amount of
digital educational data. Available sources include knowledge bases, student assessment data, text books, course materials, etc.
Developing data-driven methods for automatically discovering prerequisite relations is challenging. Earlier work

1. Causality: The dependency among courses is caused
by sufﬁcient evidence provided by prerequisite relations
among concepts representing the courses.
2. Sparsity: The prerequisites in a concept graph will be
sparse, which means the number of prerequisite relations
is much smaller than the total number of concept pairs.
Our method is designed to recover the part of concept prerequisite relations that causes course dependencies. Take
the example in Figure 1, the prerequisite relations (Matrix
⇒ Gaussian elimination, Matrix ⇒ QR decomposition) are
evidences for supporting the dependency between Course

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4786

