Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Label Efﬁcient Learning by
Exploiting Multi-Class Output Codes
Maria Florina Balcan

Travis Dick

Yishay Mansour

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
tdick@cs.cmu.edu

Microsoft Research and
Tel Aviv University
mansour@tau.ac.il

Overview: We approach label-efﬁcient learning by making the implicit assumptions of popular multi-class learning algorithms explicit and showing that they can also be
exploited when learning from limited labeled data. We focus on a family of techniques called output codes that work
by decomposing a given multi-class problem into a collection of binary classiﬁcation tasks (Mohri, Rostamizadeh, and
Talwalkar 2012; Dietterich and Bakiri 1995; Langford and
Beygelzimer 2005; Beygelzimer, Langford, and Ravikumar
2009). The novelty of our results is to show that the existence
of various low-error output codes constrains the distribution
of unlabeled data in ways that can be exploited to reduce the
label complexity of learning. We consider both the consistent setting, where the output code achieves zero error, and
the agnostic setting, where the goal is to compete with the
best output code. The most well known output code technique is one-vs-all learning, where we learn one binary classiﬁer for distinguishing each class from the union of the rest.
When output codes are successful at learning from labeled
data, it often implies geometric structure in the underlying
problem. For example, if it is possible to learn an accurate
one-vs-all classiﬁer with linear separators, it implies that no
three classes can be collinear, since then it would be impossible for a single linear separator to distinguish the middle
class from the union of the others. In this work, we exploit
this implicitly assumed structure to design label-efﬁcient algorithms for the commonly assumed cases of one-vs-all and
error correcting output codes, as well as a novel boundary
features condition that captures the intuition that every bit of
the codewords should be signiﬁcant.

Abstract
We present a new perspective on the popular multi-class algorithmic techniques of one-vs-all and error correcting output codes. Rather than studying the behavior of these techniques for supervised learning, we establish a connection between the success of these methods and the existence of labelefﬁcient learning procedures. We show that in both the realizable and agnostic cases, if output codes are successful
at learning from labeled data, they implicitly assume structure on how the classes are related. By making that structure explicit, we design learning algorithms to recover the
classes with low label complexity. We provide results for the
commonly studied cases of one-vs-all learning and when the
codewords of the classes are well separated. We additionally
consider the more challenging case where the codewords are
not well separated, but satisfy a boundary features condition
that captures the natural intuition that every bit of the codewords should be signiﬁcant.

1

Introduction

Motivation: Large scale multi-class learning problems with
an abundance of unlabeled data are ubiquitous in modern
machine learning. For example, an in-home assistive robot
needs to learn to recognize common household objects, familiar faces, facial expressions, gestures, and so on in order to be useful. Such a robot can acquire large amounts
of unlabeled training data simply by observing its surroundings, but it would be prohibitively time consuming (and frustrating) to ask its owner to annotate any signiﬁcant portion
of this raw data. More generally, in many modern learning problems we often have easy and cheap access to large
quantities of unlabeled training data (e.g., on the internet)
but obtaining high-quality labeled examples is relatively expensive. More examples include text understanding, recommendation systems, or wearable computing (Thrun 1996;
Thrun and Mitchell 1995b; 1995a; Mitchell et al. 2015). The
scarcity of labeled data is especially pronounced in problems
with many classes, since supervised learning algorithms require labeled examples from every class. In such settings,
algorithms should make the best use of unlabeled data in order to minimize the need for expensive labeled examples.

Our results: Before discussing our results, we brieﬂy review the output code methodology. For a problem with
L classes, a domain expert designs a code matrix C ∈
{±1}L×m where each column partitions the classes into two
meaningful groups. The number of columns m is chosen by
the domain expert. For example, when recognizing household objects we could use the following true/false questions to deﬁne the partitions: “is it made of wood?”, “is
it sharp?”, “does it have legs?”, “should I sit on it?”, and
so on. Each row of the code matrix describes one of the
classes in terms of these partitions (or semantic features).
For example, the class “table” could be described by the
vector (+1, −1, +1, −1), which is called the class’ codeword. Once the code matrix has been designed, we train an

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1735

