Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Unusual Suspects: Deep Learning Based Mining of Interesting Entity Trivia
from Knowledge Graphs
Nausheen Fatma

Manoj K. Chinnakotla

Manish Shrivastava

LTRC, IIIT-H
Hyderabad, India
nausheen.fatma@research.iiit.ac.in

Microsoft
Hyderabad, India
manojc@microsoft.com

LTRC, IIIT-H
Hyderabad, India
m.shrivastava@iiit.ac.in

Wikipedia, KGs also include data from other rich sources
such as - crowd-sourcing, CIA World Factbook etc.
A Trivia is any fact about an entity which is interesting due to its unusualness, unexpectedness, uniqueness or
weirdness when compared to other entities of similar type
(Prakash et al. 2015). For example, Yuvraj Singh, a popular
cricket player from the Indian cricket team, authored a book
called ‘Test of my Life’ which is an unexpected event for a
cricketer since very few of them have authored books.
Trivia, when presented in the form of either a question
or a factoid, helps in attracting human attention since it appeals to their innate sense of curiosity, inquisitiveness and
appreciating novelty (Attﬁeld et al. 2011; O’Brien and Toms
2010). Due to this, studies have shown that trivia could be
used to improve user engagement in various product experiences featuring the entity (Wizard 2013; Prakash et al. 2015)
. For example, during ICC Cricket World Cup 2015, the Bing
search engine offered a unique experience1 for cricket related queries which included trivia about teams and players.
As a result, they observed signiﬁcant improvement in user
engagement with each user watching at least 10 trivia per
cricket query. In a pure sense, the notion of human interestingness is a psychological, cognitive and subjective process (Varela, Thompson, and Rosch 1993). However, there
are usually some facts for which there would be signiﬁcant
agreement, between a majority of people, regarding their interestingness. In this work, we restrict ourselves to such a
majoritarian notion of interestingness and leave the personalized subjective angle for future work.
In spite of the utility of trivia, the curation process remains
mostly manual which is hard to scale across millions of entities on the web. Recently, some attempts (Prakash et al.
2015; Michael Gamon 2014) have been made to automatically mine interesting facts or spans of text from unstructured Wikipedia or normal text. However, such techniques
rely heavily on the textual representation of facts or context
features to learn about interestingness such as the presence
of superlative (greatest, longest, best), contradictory words
(although, however), exclusive words (is the only), verbs
within the sentence indicating the core activity (performing a
stunt) etc. On the other hand, in KGs, since the knowledge is

Abstract
Trivia is any fact about an entity which is interesting due to
its unusualness, uniqueness or unexpectedness. Trivia could
be successfully employed to promote user engagement in various product experiences featuring the given entity. A Knowledge Graph (KG) is a semantic network which encodes various facts about entities and their relationships. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach called DBpedia Trivia Miner
(DTM) to automatically mine trivia for entities of a given
domain in KGs. The essence of DTM lies in learning an
Interestingness Model (IM), for a given domain, from human annotated training data provided in the form of interesting facts from the KG. The IM thus learnt is applied to
extract trivia for other entities of the same domain in the
KG. We propose two different approaches for learning the
IM - a) A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based approach and b) Fusion Based CNN (F-CNN) approach which
combines both hand-crafted and CNN features. Experiments
across two different domains - Bollywood Actors and Music
Artists reveal that CNN automatically learns features which
are relevant to the task and shows competitive performance
relative to hand-crafted feature based baselines whereas FCNN signiﬁcantly improves the performance over the baseline approaches which use hand-crafted features alone. Overall, DTM achieves an F1 score of 0.81 and 0.65 in Bollywood
Actors and Music Artists domains respectively.

1

Introduction

In recent years, signiﬁcant progress has been made in curating large web-scale semantic networks, popularly known as
Knowledge Graphs (KGs), which encode various facts about
entities and their relationships (Berners-Lee et al. 2001;
Bizer, Heath, and Berners-Lee 2009; Auer et al. 2007).
Some of the popular freely available knowledge graphs are
DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), YAGO2 (Suchanek, Kasneci,
and Weikum 2007) and Wikidata (Vrandečić and Krötzsch
2014). For example, the English version of DBpedia alone
contains more than 4.22 million entities and close to 3 billion relations (RDF triples). Besides, large commercial companies like Google, Microsoft, Yahoo! and Baidu have been
curating their own KGs. Although, a signiﬁcant portion of
these facts were extracted from unstructured sources like
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
http://www.windowscentral.com/bings-cricket-world-cupcoverage-includes-predictions-polls-and-more

1107

