Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fredholm Multiple Kernel Learning
for Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Wei Wang,1 Hao Wang,1,2 Chen Zhang,1 Yang Gao1
1. Science and Technology on Integrated Information System Laboratory
2. State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
wangwei2014@iscas.ac.cn

port vector machine, logistic regression and statistic classiﬁers, to the target domain. However, they do not explicitly explore the distribution inconsistency between the
two domains, which essentially limits their capability of
knowledge transfer. To this end, many semi-supervised domain adaptation methods are proposed within the classiﬁer
adaptation framework (Chen, Weinberger, and Blitzer 2011;
Duan, Tsang, and Xu 2012; Sun et al. 2011; Wang, Huang,
and Schneider 2014). Compared with supervised ones, they
take into account unlabeled target samples to cope with the
inconsistency of data distributions, showing improved classiﬁcation and generalization capability. Nevertheless, most
work in this area only incorporates unlabeled target samples
in distribution alignment, but not in adaptive classiﬁer learning. Large quantities of unlabeled target samples potentially
contain rich information and incorporating them is desirable for noise resiliency. Moreover, some work in this semisupervised setting is customized for certain classiﬁers, and
the extension to other predictive models remains unclear.
In conventional supervised learning, kernel methods provide a powerful and uniﬁed prediction framework for building non-linear predictive models (Rifkin, Yeo, and Poggio
2003; Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini 2004; Yen et al. 2014).
To further incorporate unlabeled samples with labeled ones
in model learning, the kernel prediction framework is developed into semi-supervised setting by formulating a regularized Fredholm integral equation (Que, Belkin, and Wan
2014). Although this development is proven theoretically
and empirically to be effective in noise suppression, the performance heavily depends on the choice of a single predeﬁned kernel function. The reason is that its solution is based
on Representer Theorem (Scholkopf and Smola 2001) in the
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) induced by the
kernel. More importantly, the kernel methods are not developed for domain adaptation, and the distribution difference
will invalidate the predictive models across two domains.
In this paper, we focus on semi-supervised domain adaptation and extend the applied range of unlabeled target samples from the distribution alignment into the whole learning process. This extension further explores the structure information in target domain, enhancing robustness in complex knowledge propagation. The key challenge is to accomplish this extension through a single optimization combining
the following three aspects: 1) learning a predictive model

Abstract
As a fundamental constituent of machine learning, domain
adaptation generalizes a learning model from a source domain to a different (but related) target domain. In this paper,
we focus on semi-supervised domain adaptation and explicitly extend the applied range of unlabeled target samples into
the combination of distribution alignment and adaptive classiﬁer learning. Speciﬁcally, our extension formulates the following aspects in a single optimization: 1) learning a crossdomain predictive model by developing the Fredholm integral
based kernel prediction framework; 2) reducing the distribution difference between two domains; 3) exploring multiple
kernels to induce an optimal learning space. Correspondingly,
such an extension is distinguished with allowing for noise resiliency, facilitating knowledge transfer and analyzing diverse
data characteristics. It is emphasized that we prove the differentiability of our formulation and present an effective optimization procedure based on the reduced gradient, guaranteeing rapid convergence. Comprehensive empirical studies
verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Conventional supervised learning aims at generalizing a
model inferred from labeled training samples to test samples. For well generalization capability, it is required to collect and label plenty of training samples following the same
distribution of test samples, however, which is extremely expensive in practical applications. To relieve the contradiction
between generalization performance and label cost, domain
adaptation (Pan and Yang 2010) has been proposed to transfer knowledge from a relevant but different source domain
with sufﬁcient labeled data to the target domain. It gains increased importance in many applied areas of machine learning (Daumé III 2007; Pan et al. 2011), including natural language processing, computer vision and WiFi localization.
Supervised domain adaptation takes advantage of both
abundant labeled samples from source domain and a relatively small number of labeled samples from target domain. A line of recent work in this supervised setting (Aytar and Zisserman 2011; Daumé III and Marcu 2006; Liao,
Xue, and Carin 2005; Hoffman et al. 2014) learns crossdomain classiﬁers by adapting traditional models, e.g., supc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2732

