Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Webly-Supervised Learning
of Multimodal Video Detectors
Junwei Liang, Lu Jiang, Alexander Hauptmann
Carnegie Mellon University
{junweil, lujiang, alex}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Given any complicated or specialized video content search
query, e.g. ”Batkid (a kid in batman costume)” or ”destroyed
buildings”, existing methods require manually labeled data
to build detectors for searching. We present a demonstration
of an artiﬁcial intelligence application, Webly-labeled Learning (WELL) that enables learning of ad-hoc concept detectors over unlimited Internet videos without any manual annotations. A considerable number of videos on the web are
associated with rich but noisy contextual information, such
as the title, which provides a type of weak annotations or labels of the video content. To leverage this information, our
system employs state-of-the-art webly-supervised learning
(WELL) (Liang et al. ). WELL considers multi-modal information including deep learning visual, audio and speech features, to automatically learn accurate video detectors based
on the user query. The learned detectors from a large number
of web videos allow users to search relevant videos over their
personal video archives, not requiring any textual metadata,
but as convenient as searching on Youtube.

Figure 1: The workﬂow of WELL
which makes it even harder to search these concepts in person collections. Meanwhile, videos are available on the web
and contain rich contextual information with a weak annotation about their content, such as their titles, descriptions
and surrounding text. These webly-labeled data are orders of
magnitude larger than that of any manually-labeled collections. Moreover, automatically extracted features from multiple modalities such as existing still image classiﬁcation
models, automatic speech recognition and optical character
recognition tools can be useful additional information for the
content of the video.
In this demo, we present our learning framework called
WEbly-Labeled Learning (WELL) (Liang et al. ), extended by utilizing multi-modal representations. The learning framework is motivated by human learning, where people generally start learning easier aspects of a concept, and
then gradually take more complex examples into the learning process(Bengio et al. 2009; Kumar, Packer, and Koller
2010; Jiang et al. 2015a). Such learning paradigm is proven
to be efﬁcient to deal with noise and outliers.

Introduction
Nowadays, millions of videos are being uploaded to the
Internet every day. These explosively growing user generated content videos online are becoming an crucial source
of video data. Automatically categorizing these web videos
into concepts, such as people actions, objects, etc., has become an important research topic. More interestingly, it
would be even more valuable to learn detectors from the
web videos and apply to personal video collections. Unlike
web videos that are usually accompanied with textual labels
like titles and descriptions, personal videos or surveillance
videos are often stored with no label at all. Therefore traditional text-based indexing methods would not work in such
video collections. Recently many work have been proposed
to tackle with building concept detectors both in image domain and video domain (Deng et al. 2009; Liang et al. 2015;
Karpathy et al. 2014; Jiang et al. 2015b). However, the need
for manual labels by human annotators has become one
of the major important limitations for large-scale concept
learning. In addition, it is difﬁcult for common datasets to
include concepts like ”Batkid” (a kid in batman costume),

System Framework

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In our demo system, users can provide arbitrary text to query
for videos in a target video collection. Figure 1 shows the

5099

