Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Declarative Approach to
Data-Driven Fact Checking
Julien Leblay
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Center, AIST, Japan
ﬁrstname.lastname@aist.go.jp

automatically extracted from the Web could contain the following facts, each of which inferred with enough conﬁdence
to be deemed trustworthy:

Abstract
Fact checking is an essential part of any investigative work.
For linguistic, psychological and social reasons, it is an inherently human task. Yet, modern media make it increasingly
difﬁcult for experts to keep up with the pace at which information is produced. Hence, we believe there is value in tools
to assist them in this process. Much of the effort on Web data
research has been focused on coping with incompleteness and
uncertainty. Comparatively, dealing with context has received
less attention, although it is crucial in judging the validity of
a claim. For instance, what holds true in a US state, might not
in its neighbors, e.g., due to obsolete or superseded laws.
In this work, we address the problem of checking the validity of claims in multiple contexts. We deﬁne a language to
represent and query facts across different dimensions. The
approach is non-intrusive and allows relatively easy modeling, while capturing incompleteness and uncertainty. We describe the syntax and semantics of the language. We present
algorithms to demonstrate its feasibility, and we illustrate its
usefulness through examples.

party(JohnDoe, Labour)
party(JohnDoe, Tories)

Several problems immediately appear in this example.
Firstly, the knowledge base does not contain any explicit
information about the person’s position towards EU integration. To resolve the incompleteness, one might add more
facts from other sources, in which case exploiting the provenance of those additional facts would be desirable. Another
approach is to use axioms to check if the question is entailed
by those facts. The following rule states that anyone belonging to the Conservative Party is eurosceptic:
σ1 : ∀x (party(x, Tories) → Eurosceptic(x))
However, this is context dependent as not everyone might
agree, or the rule might not have always held in the past.
Secondly, there is also uncertainty in that conﬂicts exist
within the information source; either fact above might have
been more accurate than the other over different periods of
time, but there is no way to distinguish which one holds today. If one has write access to the data, it is be possible to add
time-related facts to the knowledge base. But this requires a
clear understanding of the underlying ontology, and does not
protect against further redundant or conﬂicting statements.

Introduction
Fact checking is the task of assessing the validity of a claim
based on trusted sources. It is a basic component of journalism and to a larger extent any investigative task. The scale
of information available on the Web, its incompleteness, its
inconsistencies and the speed with which it spreads, have
recently brought fact checking to the forefront in the media. Beyond “technical” limitations, there are external factors like culture or belief systems, that will likely prevent
automation for a long time. Yet, as already advocated in
the past (McCarthy 1993; Bienvenu, Deutch, and Suchanek
2012), contextual information can play a crucial role in interpreting the data. For instance, one might ask “Is John Doe
eurosceptic?” The answer does not just depend on the person’s reputation, but also on what “eurosceptic” means to
different people, or the sources of information leading to a
conclusion.
A number of probabilistic reasoning tools have been proposed over the years, but compiling uncertainty into a scalar
value is often unsatisfactory. For instance, a knowledge base

Objective and contributions. This simple example highlights several issues that are all contextual to some extent:
here time and provenance affect the interpretation of the
question and thus the answer. In this work, we tackle the
problem of answering queries in some predeﬁned contexts,
and exploring the answers as they vary. We aim to answer
questions like: “According to sources A and B, is Mr. Doe
eurosceptic?”, “According to which sources could he be considered eurosceptic in 2010?”, or “In which context is he
eurosceptic with a conﬁdence above 50%?”
To address this problem, we revisit some prior works on
data management in the presence of incompleteness and
uncertainty, namely probabilistic Datalog± (Gottlob et al.
2013), and contextual knowledge. Our contributions are as
follows: (i) we deﬁne the syntax and semantics of a language
to model incomplete, uncertain knowledge in multiple contexts, (ii) we describe a query language to assess the validity

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

147

