Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Android Malware Detection with Weak Ground Truth Data
Jordan DeLoach, Doina Caragea

Xinming Ou

Department of Computer Science
Kansas State University
{jdeloach,dcaragea}@ksu.edu

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of South Florida
xou@usf.edu

tive (benign) label present an opportunity to leverage a classiﬁer that is not dependent on labeled negative data. Specifically, we leverage Label Regularized Logistic Regression
(LR-LR) (Ritter et al. 2015), which is a modiﬁed version
of Logistic Regression that learns only from labeled positive and unlabeled data. The LR-LR approach matches our
problem domain well, as we are highly certain of our positive labeled data, while the rest of the data is better used as
unlabeled.

Abstract
For Android malware detection, precise ground truth is a rare
commodity. As security knowledge evolves, what may be
considered ground truth at one moment in time may change,
and apps once considered benign may turn out to be malicious. The inevitable noise in data labels poses a challenge
to inferring effective machine learning classiﬁers. Our work
is focused on approaches for learning classiﬁers for Android malware detection in a manner that is methodologically
sound with regard to the uncertain and ever-changing ground
truth in the problem space. We leverage the fact that although
data labels are unavoidably noisy, a malware label is much
more precise than a benign label. While you can be conﬁdent
that an app is malicious, you can never be certain that a benign app is really benign, or just undetected malware. Based
on this insight, we leverage a modiﬁed Logistic Regression
classiﬁer that allows us to learn from only positive and unlabeled data, without making any assumptions about benign
labels. We ﬁnd Label Regularized Logistic Regression to perform well for noisy app datasets, as well as datasets where
there is a limited amount of positive labeled data, both of
which are representative of real-world situations.

Experimental Setup & Methods
Dataset & Label Preparation
We use a dataset from our previous work (Roy et al. 2015),
where nearly 1 million apps are from the Google Play Store.
An additional 35K malware apps come from VirusShare,
and 24K from Arbor Networks. Using the app binaries,
we extracted semantic features from the code using string
searches. Extracted features included permissions, APIs,
and intents. For further information on feature extraction, the
reader can reference our previous work (Roy et al. 2015).
To identify ground truth labels for our dataset, we utilized
VirusTotal, which checks an app against multiple anti-virus
solutions. Using the results from VirusTotal and a multiple
expert voting system, we classiﬁed each app with at least 10
A/V’s marking it as malware as high conﬁdence malware.
We consider an app as high conﬁdence benign when 0 out
of 54 A/V’s mark it as malware. We exclude the apps in the
range 1 to 9 from the dataset, in an attempt to have a clean
dataset to experiment with.

Introduction
Android malware detection techniques have increasingly
evolved towards machine learning. To effectively use machine learning to detect malware three elements are necessary. First, you must have a large amount of apps to learn
from. Second, you need accurate labels (malware or benign)
for those apps. Finally, you need an effective machine learning classiﬁer that can accurately label new apps. Our work
is motivated by the insight that, while we can be highly certain of the labels of the positive examples (malware), we can
never be certain of the labels of the negative or benign examples (Kantchelian et al. 2015). Using the dataset and label
preparation methods described in the following section, we
veriﬁed this fact in our own dataset, where 1681 apps were
reclassiﬁed by VirusTotal from benign to malware between
2015 and 2016, while only a single app was reclassiﬁed as
benign after previously being considered malware.
The strong belief in the precision of the positive (malware) label and a comparatively weaker belief in the nega-

Label Regularized Logistic Regression
We utilized Label Regularized Logistic Regression to learn
from positive and unlabeled data only. The LR-LR algorithm
does this by using an expert-provided factor, p̃, to represent the proportion of positive apps in the unlabeled dataset.
In addition to the terms in the optimization problem corresponding to the standard Logistic Regression algorithm,
the LR-LR optimization problem also includes a label regularization term that requires the posterior class probabili, to be in line with the exties of the unlabeled data, p̂unlab
θ
pert estimation of the true distribution, p̃. Speciﬁcally, the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the two distri) needs to be minimized. We implebutions, KL(p̃||p̂unlab
θ

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Copyright 
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4915

