Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

User Modeling Using LSTM Networks
Konrad Żołna

Bartłomiej Romański

konrad.zolna@im.uj.edu.pl
Jagiellonian University, Institute of Mathematics,
ul. prof. Stanisława Łojasiewicza 6
30-348 Cracow, Poland

bartlomiej.romanski@rtbhouse.com
RTB House,
ul. Złota 61/101
00-819 Warsaw, Poland

1

Introduction

There is a family of algorithms used in e-commerce dealing with data stored as sequence of actions performed by
the users. This family includes, but is not limited to, clickthrough rate (CTR) models, conversion rate (CR) models
and recommender systems. Preparing data in a form easily
understandable by computers may be crucial for effectiveness of these algorithms.
In this work we focus on building a model which is capable of describing a user of a particular website without
human expert supervision. The representation obtained may
be used to enrich typical models used in e-commerce. We
present possible beneﬁts to CR model.
In the setup considered a user generates data by performing actions (events) on the website. Hence, the data which
describe the user is a list of consecutive events with meaningful ordering and time gaps between the events. Therefore, we used the architecture suited for a task of this kind – a
recurrent neural network, speciﬁcally long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997).
Ordinary methods for learning CR models snapshot userbased data at the moment of an impression. This way of
learning limits the data available, because only clicked impressions are considered during the training procedure. The
LSTM model proposed in this paper learns from all events,
hence all collected data are used. Even the users who have
not seen any ad are included. This approach typically results
in over two orders of magnitute larger training datasets.
To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst usage of an LSTM model
in enhancing CR model.

2

Figure 1: Structure of our LSTM model
For a ﬁxed advertiser and for every user our RNN model is
fed sequentially with every event originating from the user’s
activity. Hence, a single input for the user is the sequence of
all the events and targets are answers to a ﬁxed list of a few
questions asked at the time of every event.
Our LSTM model was trained using the rnn Torch library
(Léonard et al. 2015). It is sequential in structure and has a
form as shown in ﬁgure 1. The consecutive layers are described below.
1. Input. Input to a single step is represented as a vector of
seven real numbers:
(a) one-hot encoded type of the event,
(b) normalized time to the previous event.
2. First LSTM layer. A layer with 300 memory cells.
3. Second LSTM layer. A layer with 100 memory cells.
4. Vanilla neural networks. At each step output of the second LSTM layer is replicated and used by six independent
vanilla neural networks. Each network has one hidden
layer with 30 neurons and ReLU activation function.
5. Final output. Networks end with either sigmoid or softmax, depending on the nature of the question answered:
(a) Will the user come back in less than 30 days after this
session ends?
(b) What is the type of the next event?

The Main Idea, LSTM Model and user2vec

Typically the history of the user is projected into a ﬁxed
number of manually-crafted features at the time of clicking
the impression. It causes loss of data and requires a human
expert whose work is laborious and expensive.
Our LSTM model, which we call user2vec, automatically
projects the user’s state into a ﬁxed-size vector that does not
require additional work of a human expert. Once a representation of this kind is obtained, one may add these new
features to an existing CR model in order to enrich it.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5025

