Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Reactive Versus Anticipative Decision Making in a Novel Gift-Giving Game
1

2

Elias Fernández Domingos,1,2,3 Juan Carlos Burguillo,3 and Tom Lenaerts1,2

AI lab, Computer Science Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
MLG, Département d’Informatique, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Boulevard du Triomphe CP212, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
3
Department of Telematic Engineering. University of Vigo. 36310-Vigo, Spain
Corresponding: eliferna@vub.ac.be and tlenaert@ulb.ac.be

Experiments have logically revealed that humans are not
hyper-rational or fully selﬁsh: 60% of the participants decide to share a positive amount of money with a mean transfer of approximately 28% of the endowment (Camerer 2003;
Engel 2011). The Ultimatum Game (UG) differs from the
DG in that the receiver obtains the power to refuse an offer,
with the consequence that they both get zero payoff. This
new bargaining power results into a signiﬁcant increase in
the amount offered, reaching almost half the endowment on
average (Oosterbeek, Sloof, and Van De Kuilen 2004). Recently, a variation on these two games was proposed, i.e.,
the Anticipation Game (AG) (Zisis et al. 2015), to study the
impact of group formation on generosity. The AG differs
from the UG in the sense that the decision by the receiver
is made prior to the offer of the dictator: The receiver is
ﬁrst informed about the reputation of the dictator, i.e., the
amounts he or she gave in previous interactions. Using this
information she then has to decide whether to play the DG
with that particular player. If she refuses they both get zero
payoff, if she agrees the payoff is deﬁned by the outcome of
the DG. Once the game is played the reputation of the dictator is updated by including the last donation that she made.
The game has an equivalent sub-game perfect equilibrium as
the UG and experiments show that also in that case, dictators give an amount close to an equal split of the endowment
(Zisis et al. 2015).

Abstract
Evolutionary game theory focuses on the ﬁtness differences
between simple discrete or probabilistic strategies to explain
the evolution of particular decision-making behavior within
strategic situations. Although this approach has provided substantial insights into the presence of fairness or generosity
in gift-giving games, it does not fully resolve the question
of which cognitive mechanisms are required to produce the
choices observed in experiments. One such mechanism that
humans have acquired, is the capacity to anticipate. Prior
work showed that forward-looking behavior, using a recurrent
neural network to model the cognitive mechanism, are essential to produce the actions of human participants in behavioral
experiments. In this paper, we evaluate whether this conclusion extends also to gift-giving games, more concretely, to a
game that combines the dictator game with a partner selection
process. The recurrent neural network model used here for
dictators, allows them to reason about a best response to past
actions of the receivers (reactive model) or to decide which
action will lead to a more successful outcome in the future
(anticipatory model). We show for both models the decision
dynamics while training, as well as the average behavior. We
ﬁnd that the anticipatory model is the only one capable of
accounting for changes in the context of the game, a behavior also observed in experiments, expanding previous conclusions to this more sophisticated game.

Introduction

To explain the origin of the behavior observed in the AG
experiments, a stochastic evolutionary dynamics model was
used similar to the one in (Rand et al. 2013). This model easily reproduces the average donations observed in different
AG experiments using simple discrete strategies, yet does
not capture closely the individual behaviors used by the participants (Fowler and Christakis 2013). To overcome this
problem, the model had to incorporate in the dynamics that
the participants have the capacity to anticipate (Zisis et al.
2015), i.e., they take into account that the amount they give
will have an effect on being accepted in future interactions.
This feature was implemented by simply assuming that the
success of an individual is deﬁned by the donation made
now, the likelihood of being accepted in the next round and
the payoff obtained for the same donation in the next round.
Although this adaptation leads to a closer ﬁt with the experimental results, it does not explain which cognitive mechanisms are necessary or which features they should have. Ad-

Many situations related to trust and fairness are modeled
through gift-giving games, of which the Ultimatum and
Dictator games are two examples (Forsythe et al. 1994;
Cooper and Kagel 2009; Bardsley 2008; Nowak, Page, and
Sigmund 2000; Fehr and Schmidt 1999; Kirchsteiger 1994).
The Dictator Game (DG) takes place between pairs of individuals, where one is assigned the role of dictator and the
other receiver. At the start of the game the dictator is assigned an endowment and she is requested to give an amount
between 0 and the entire endowment to the receiver. The receiver has no choice in the matter: she just receives whatever the dictator gives. Game Theory predicts, under the
assumption of rational and selﬁsh behavior, that the dictator should keep everything for herself, which is referred
to as the sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium of the game.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4399

