Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Problem Difﬁculty and
the Phase Transition in Heuristic Search
Eldan Cohen, J. Christopher Beck
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
{ecohen, jcb}@mie.utoronto.ca
Levesque 1992; Crawford and Auton 1996), CSP (Smith and
Dyer 1996; Prosser 1996), quantiﬁed boolean formula (Gent
and Walsh 1999), and classical planning (Bylander 1996;
Rintanen 2004). Interestingly, despite Cheeseman et al.’s
conjecture that the phase transition was relevant to a number
of AI problems, it does not appear to have been studied for
heuristic search problems.
In this work, we introduce the tool of phase transition to
heuristic search using an abstract model of a heuristic search
problem that is based on a random graph representation of
the state space. We demonstrate an abrupt transition in solubility as a parameter controlling the density of the transitions
in the state space is varied and observe the accompanying
easy-hard-easy pattern of problem difﬁculty across the transition region. Building on these results, we make the following further contributions:
• Exploiting our random graph model, we provide analytical bounds on the “mushy region” between the fully soluble and fully insoluble problems.
• We demonstrate how to transfer the abstract graph model
to existing heuristic search benchmark problems, allowing the generation of versions of each problem across the
phase transition and demonstrating both the phase transition and the easy-hard-easy pattern on the ﬁve standard
heuristic search benchmarks.
• We study the behavior of systematically stronger heuristics across the phase transition region and show that the
reduction in search effort for strong heuristics is orders
of magnitude smaller for the hard soluble instances at the
phase transition than in the underconstrained regions.

Abstract
In the recent years, there has been signiﬁcant work on the
difﬁculty of heuristic search problems, identifying different
problem instance characteristics that can have a signiﬁcant
impact on search effort. Phase transitions in the solubility
of random problem instances have proved useful in the study
of problem difﬁculty for other classes of computational problems, notably SAT and CSP, and it has been shown that the
hardest problems typically occur during this rapid transition.
In this work, we perform the ﬁrst empirical investigation of
the phase transition phenomena for heuristic search. We establish the existence of a rapid transition in the solubility of
an abstract model of heuristic search problems and show that,
for greedy best ﬁrst search, the hardest instances are associated with the phase transition region. We then perform a
novel investigation of the behavior of heuristics of different
strength across the solubility spectrum. Finally, we demonstrate that the behavior of our abstract model carries over
to commonly used benchmark problems including the Pancake Problem, Grid Navigation, TopSpin, and the Towers of
Hanoi. An interesting deviation is observed and explained in
the Sliding Puzzle.

1

Introduction

A recent line of research in heuristic search aims to develop
of an understanding of empirical problem difﬁculty. Several
factors affecting search effort have been identiﬁed including
the ratio of operator costs (Wilt and Ruml 2011), the correlation between path cost and length (Wilt and Ruml 2012;
2015) and the existence of uninformed heuristic regions
(Xie, Müller, and Holte 2015).
The phase transition in problem solubility has been a
central tool in the study of problem difﬁculty for computational problems. In seminal work, Cheeseman, Kanefsky and Taylor (1991) empirically showed that several NPcomplete problems exhibit an abrupt phase transition from
underconstrained to overconstrained problems as a problemgeneration control parameter is varied, changing the probability of a solution from nearly zero to nearly one. They
discovered that the hardest problem instances occur during
this abrupt change.
Subsequently, the phase transition was extensively studied in problems including SAT (Mitchell, Selman, and

2

Background

For many NP-complete problems, we can deﬁne a control
parameter for which a critical interval of values separates
two regions: one that is underconstrained with high density of solutions and one that is overconstrained with low
likelihood that a solution exists (Cheeseman, Kanefsky, and
Taylor 1991). Empirically, the hardest problems occur over
this critical interval. Mitchell, Selman and Levesque (1992)
identiﬁed a phase transition for critical values of the clauseto-variable ratio of 3-SAT problems, with search effort peaking at a ratio of approximately 4.27. Smith and Dyer (1996)
investigated phase transitions in CSPs and showed a phase

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

780

