Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Alternating Back-Propagation
for Generator Network
Tian Han,† Yang Lu,† Song-Chun Zhu, Ying Nian Wu
Department of Statistics
University of California
Los Angeles, USA

analysis to a non-linear mapping that is deﬁned by a convolutional neural network (ConvNet or CNN) (LeCun et al. 1998;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Dosovitskiy, Springenberg, and Brox 2015). It has been shown recently that the
generator network is capable of generating realistic images
(Denton et al. 2015; Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2016).
The generator network is a fundamental representation of
knowledge, and it has the following properties: (1) Analysis:
The model disentangles the variations in the observed signals
into independent variations of latent factors. (2) Synthesis:
The model can synthesize new signals by sampling the factors from the known prior distribution and transforming the
factors into the signal. (3) Embedding: The model embeds
the high-dimensional non-Euclidean manifold formed by the
observed signals into the low-dimensional Euclidean space
of the latent factors, so that linear interpolation in the lowdimensional factor space results in non-linear interpolation
in the data space.

Abstract
This paper proposes an alternating back-propagation algorithm
for learning the generator network model. The model is a nonlinear generalization of factor analysis. In this model, the mapping from the continuous latent factors to the observed signal
is parametrized by a convolutional neural network. The alternating back-propagation algorithm iterates the following two
steps: (1) Inferential back-propagation, which infers the latent
factors by Langevin dynamics or gradient descent. (2) Learning back-propagation, which updates the parameters given
the inferred latent factors by gradient descent. The gradient
computations in both steps are powered by back-propagation,
and they share most of their code in common. We show that
the alternating back-propagation algorithm can learn realistic generator models of natural images, video sequences, and
sounds. Moreover, it can also be used to learn from incomplete
or indirect training data.

1

Introduction

1.2

This paper studies the fundamental problem of learning and
inference in the generator network (Goodfellow et al. 2014),
which is a generative model that has become popular recently.
Speciﬁcally, we propose an alternating back-propagation algorithm for learning and inference in this model.

1.1

Alternating back-propagation

The factor analysis model can be learned by the Rubin-Thayer
EM algorithm (Rubin and Thayer 1982; Dempster, Laird, and
Rubin 1977), where both the E-step and the M-step are based
on multivariate linear regression. Inspired by this algorithm,
we propose an alternating back-propagation algorithm for
learning the generator network that iterates the following
two-steps:
(1) Inferential back-propagation: For each training example, infer the continuous latent factors by Langevin dynamics
or gradient descent.
(2) Learning back-propagation: Update the parameters
given the inferred latent factors by gradient descent.
The Langevin dynamics (Neal 2011) is a stochastic sampling counterpart of gradient descent. The gradient computations in both steps are powered by back-propagation. Because
of the ConvNet structure, the gradient computation in step
(1) is actually a by-product of the gradient computation in
step (2) in terms of coding.
Given the factors, the learning of the ConvNet is a supervised learning problem (Dosovitskiy, Springenberg, and
Brox 2015) that can be accomplished by the learning backpropagation. With factors unknown, the learning becomes an
unsupervised problem, which can be solved by adding the
inferential back-propagation as an inner loop of the learning

Non-linear factor analysis

The generator network is a non-linear generalization of factor
analysis. Factor analysis is a prototype model in unsupervised learning of distributed representations. There are two
directions one can pursue in order to generalize the factor
analysis model. One direction is to generalize the prior model
or the prior assumption about the latent factors. This led to
methods such as independent component analysis (Hyvärinen, Karhunen, and Oja 2004), sparse coding (Olshausen
and Field 1997), non-negative matrix factorization (Lee and
Seung 2001), matrix factorization and completion for recommender systems (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), etc.
The other direction to generalize the factor analysis model
is to generalize the mapping from the continuous latent factors to the observed signal. The generator network is an example in this direction. It generalizes the linear mapping in factor
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
Equal contributions.

1976

