Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Manifold Matrix Factorization
for Joint Clustering and Feature Extraction
Lefei Zhang

Qian Zhang

Bo Du ∗

School of Computer
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn

Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
qianzhang.zq@alibaba-inc.com

School of Computer
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
remoteking@whu.edu.cn

Dacheng Tao

Jane You

Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
csyjia@comp.polyu.edu.hk
sis (PCA) is nothing but a truncated singular value decomposition (TSVD) applied on re-centered data (Zhang
and Zhao 2013). The low-rank representation (LRR) model
(Liu, Lin, and Yu 2010; Liu et al. 2013), which shares the
same assumption that the observed data matrix should be
approximately of low-rank and seeks the lowest-rank representation of all data jointly, has attracted great deal of
attention in recent years and in particular employed for
data clustering and segmentation (Liu, Lin, and Yu 2010;
Yin et al. 2015). As another famous matrix factorization
technique, the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) (Lee
and Seung 2001) aims to ﬁnd two nonnegative matrices
whose product provides a good approximation to the original one, has also received considerable attention due to its
psychological and physiological interpretation of naturally
occurring data whose representation may be parts based in
the human brain (Cai et al. 2011).

Abstract
Low-rank matrix approximation has been widely used for
data subspace clustering and feature representation in many
computer vision and pattern recognition applications. However, in order to enhance the discriminability, most of the matrix approximation based feature extraction algorithms usually generate the cluster labels by certain clustering algorithm
(e.g., the kmeans) and then perform the matrix approximation guided by such label information. In addition, the noises
and outliers in the dataset with large reconstruction errors will
easily dominate the objective function by the conventional 2 norm based squared residue minimization. In this paper, we
propose a novel clustering and feature extraction algorithm
based on an uniﬁed low-rank matrix factorization framework,
which suggests that the observed data matrix can be approximated by the production of projection matrix and low dimensional representation, among which the low-dimensional
representation can be approximated by the cluster indicator
and latent feature matrix simultaneously. Furthermore, we
have proposed using the 2,1 -norm and integrating the manifold regularization to further promote the proposed model.
A novel Augmented Lagrangian Method (ALM) based procedure is designed to effectively and efﬁciently seek the optimal solution of the problem. The experimental results in both
clustering and feature extraction perspectives demonstrate the
superior performance of the proposed method.

In the literature, the matrix factorization methods can be
directly considered as the feature extraction algorithms by
letting the factor matrices as the projection matrix and lowdimensional representation, respectively (Guan et al. 2011;
2012; Zhang et al. 2015b). Additional regularizers are accordingly suggested to match the certain data structure or
priori knowledge, e.g., the manifold regularization (Zhang
and Zhao 2013; Cai et al. 2011), the loss of a classiﬁer
(Gupta and Xiao 2011), the model constraint (Chen et al.
2015), and sparsity (Zheng et al. 2012). As an alternate point
of view, it have been demonstrated that the NMF is equivalent to the kmeans clustering by interpreting the factor matrices as the cluster indicator and latent feature matrix, respectively (Ding et al. 2005; Ding, Li, and Jordan 2010).
Pioneered by this idea, an orthogonal nonnegative matrix
tri-factorization algorithm is developed for clustering, which
addresses the orthogonality constraint and leads to rigorous
clustering interpretation (Ding et al. 2006), and it has been
further generalized to a high-order co-clustering framework
for simultaneous clustering of multi-type relational data with
a fast version to deal with large scale data (Wang et al. 2011).
Moreover, an embedded unsupervised feature selection algorithm is proposed by using a novel constraint on the latent
feature matrix (Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015).

Introduction
Low-rank matrix factorization, as a promising technique to
ﬁnd two or more lower dimensional matrices whose product
provides a good approximation to the original one and by
which to capture the underlying low-dimensional structures
of data, plays an important role in many computer vision
and pattern recognition applications, e.g., dimension reduction, clustering and classiﬁcation (Zhang and Zhao 2013;
la Torre 2012; Zhang et al. 2015a). As one of the standard approaches for low-rank matrix approximation with
a given data matrix and a preindicated rank r of the approximation, the well-known principal component analy∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1662

