Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Policy Reuse in Deep Reinforcement Learning∗
Ruben Glatt, Anna Helena Reali Costa
Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
Av. Prof. Luciano Gualberto, n.158, Engenharia Elétrica, São Paulo, CEP: 05508-970.
{ruben.glatt,anna.reali}@usp.br
http://www.cowhi.org, Phone: +55 11 97019-3738

Abstract

Objective

Driven by recent developments in Artiﬁcial Intelligence research, a promising new technology for building intelligent
agents has evolved. The approach is termed Deep Reinforcement Learning and combines the classic ﬁeld of Reinforcement Learning (RL) with the representational power of modern Deep Learning approaches. It is very well suited for single task learning but needs a long time to learn any new task.
To speed up this process, we propose to extend the concept
to multi-task learning by adapting Policy Reuse, a Transfer
Learning approach from classic RL, to use with Deep QNetworks.

We have seen impressive results in many areas utilizing DRL
over the last years but those remarkable successes are mostly
located in the domain of single task learning, while knowledge transfer and multi-task learning are underrepresented
subjects to date.
Consequently, in our research efforts we are interested in
investigating the adaptation of DRL to the multi-task case,
where Transfer Learning approaches can be used to beneﬁt
from gathered knowledge from previous experiences (Taylor and Stone 2009). The goal of our research is to overcome the restriction to single task learning for DQNs by exploiting past experiences, describing appropriate methods to
determine similarities between tasks, and selecting the right
knowledge to transfer.
In this context, we are initially proposing to adapt effective solutions for knowledge transfer from classic to deep
RL. Here, we speciﬁcally propose to modify Policy Reuse
for use with DQNs (Fernández and Veloso 2006).

Introduction and Context
The area of Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been gaining
a lot of renewed interest lately. It is concerned with solving
sequential decision-making problems that can be formulated
as Markov Decision Processes, where an agent explores a
given environment by performing actions and observes the
feedback he receives to deduce a behavior policy to solve a
given task (Sutton and Barto 1998).
When dealing with large state spaces it is often beneﬁcial
to work with abstractions, which can be realized with Neural Networks (NN). Advances in algorithms for Deep NNs
(DNN) have brought up a new wave of successful applications of these networks in RL and established the ﬁeld of
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) (Mnih et al. 2015).
In DRL, a trained DNN can be seen as a kind of end-toend RL approach, where the agent learns a state abstraction
and a policy approximation within a single network directly
from input data. The policy follows the optimal action-value
function Q∗ (s, a) to select the best action in every state
towards solving the task. Q∗ (s, a) is approximated by the
DNN, which is therefore termed Deep Q-Network (DQN).
However, RL algorithms in general need a long time to
converge to good results and the resulting policy can commonly only be used for a single task.

Related work
In Policy Reuse, a library of policies is built over time. During the training of a new task, policies from the library can
be used to speed up training and improve results. The agent
determines the suitability of already existing policies at the
beginning of every training episode and chooses the currently best policy to accelerate the training process of the
new policy. After the training is complete, the agent decides
if the new policy should enter the library or not by comparing the result minus a threshold value with the best result
from existing policies. Over time the library is expected to
present a set of core policies for the domain.
More recently, a general Single Policy Network, coined
Actor-Mimic-Network (AMN), was introduced to solve a variety of distinct tasks using the guidance of several expert
networks (Parisotto, Ba, and Salakhutdinov 2015). In this
approach, a bigger network is trained with the help of previously trained expert DQNs to initialize the parameters of a
new DQN for unknown tasks using a network compression
technique. The training of the multi-task policy in the AMN
not only takes the expert policy into account but also integrates the feature representation of each expert. Although
the results show that this approach improves and speeds up

∗

We are grateful for the support from CAPES and CNPq (grant
311608/2014-0). The HPC resources for the computation are provided by the Superintendency of Information at the University of
São Paulo. We also thank for the support from Google (Research
Award) and the Nvidia corporation (GPU donation).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4929

