Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Predictive Patent Valuation:
Forecasting Patent Citations and Their Types
Xin Liu,1∗ Junchi Yan,12∗ Shuai Xiao,3 Xiangfeng Wang,1 Hongyuan Zha,1 Stephen M. Chu2
1

East China Normal University 2 IBM Research – China 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
xinchrome@gmail.com, {jcyan,xfwang,zha}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, benjaminforever@sjtu.edu.cn, schu@us.ibm.com

However, patents often show less explanatory power than
other R&D measures. (Griliches, Pakes, and Hall 1986) ﬁnd
that patents are an extremely noisy measure of the underlying economic value of the innovations with which they
are associated. By their nature, patented technologies differ greatly in quality, and the distribution of patent values is
skewed (Pakes 1984; Griliches 1990). Hence estimating the
patent value via a principled approach is a central issue to
technology markets, patent systems and other stakeholders.
In current practices, patents without established market
values (e.g., no negotiated royalty rates) are often valued by
comparing the number of citations the patent has received to
the numbers received by other patents whose market values
are established. Speciﬁcally, the citations that a patent receives from subsequent patents are called forward citations.
Forward citation analysis has become increasingly dominant
for patent valuation in litigation, transfer pricing, and other
purposes; see reference cases e.g., Oracle v. Google, Finjan
v. Blue Coat Systems, Realtek Semiconductor v. LSI and
Agere2 . The standard method is to compare the patent being
valued against patents, or portfolios of patents, with established values, such as licensing fees or sales prices.
However, patent valuation that relies on the count of observed and received citations has fundamental limitations.
In an extreme case, a patent that has received no citation by
the time of appraisal can not be valued or is trivially valued
as zero, though the patent might receive numerous citations
in future. For most of recently-issued patents, if the patent
has received only a few citations, then comparisons are subject to the noisiness of small numbers. Even for relatively
old patents that have had time to accumulate many citations,
two patents currently with the same citation counts in general will not have the same number of lifetime citations.
This paper initiates an alternative way by adopting the
prediction of the accumulated citation count that a patent
will receive in a relatively long prospect time window, e.g.
5 or 10 years. This is a natural generalization (but a very
early exploration in this direction (Falk and Train 2016)) towards the current prevalent citation based patent valuation
approaches, whereby the future citations are also accounted.

Abstract
Patents are widely regarded as a proxy for inventive output which is valuable and can be commercialized by various means. Individual patent information such as technology ﬁeld, classiﬁcation, claims, application jurisdictions are
increasingly available as released by different venues. This
work has relied on a long-standing hypothesis that the citation
received by a patent is a proxy for knowledge ﬂows or impacts of the patent thus is directly related to patent value. This
paper does not fall into the line of intensive existing work
that test or apply this hypothesis, rather we aim to address the
limitation of using so-far received citations for patent valuation. By devising a point process based patent citation type
aware (self-citation and non-self-citation) prediction model
which incorporates the various information of a patent, we
open up the possibility for performing predictive patent valuation which can be especially useful for newly granted patents
with emerging technology. Study on real-world data corroborates the efﬁcacy of our approach. Our initiative may also
have policy implications for technology markets, patent systems and all other stakeholders. The code and curated data
will be available to the research community.

Introduction
Questions involving patent valuation have intrigued scholars
for decades. Assessing the value of a patent is crucial both
at the licensing stage and during the resolution of a patent
infringement lawsuit. The demand for Intellectual Property
(IP) valuation is increasing, with IP now being of great importance or collateral in ﬁnancial investment and loan decisions. Many companies, especially high-tech ﬁrms, apply
and receive thousands of granted patents each year1 . IP valuation is also growing more important so as to make fair and
reliable valuation information available to investors.
∗
Correspondence author is Junchi Yan. The ﬁrst two authors
contribute equally to this paper. This research was supported
by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61602176,
61672231), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (15JC1401700, 14XD1402100), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project (2016M590337).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
According to http://www.iﬁclaims.com/, in 2015, IBM received 7,355 granted U.S. patents, followed by Samsung (5,072),
Canon (4,134), Qualcomm (2,900), Google (2,835), Toshiba
(2,627), Sony (2,455), LG Electronics (2,242), Intel (2,048).

2
Oracle v. Google Inc., 3:10-cv-03561-WHA (8/24/2012, N.D.
Cal.); Finjan, Inc. v. Blue Coat Systems, Inc., 13-cv-03999-BLF
(7/14/2015, N.D.Cal.); Realtek Semiconductor Corp. v. LSI Corp.
and Agere Systems LLC, C-12-03451-RMW (1/6/2014, N.D.Cal.).

1438

