Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Optimization for Tree-Structured Stochastic Network Design
Xiaojian Wu,1 Akshat Kumar,2 Daniel Sheldon,3,4 Shlomo Zilberstein3
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, USA
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College, USA
xw458@cornell.edu akshatkumar@smu.edu.sg {sheldon,shlomo}@cs.umass.edu
2

design problems that include uncertain network probabilities (He and Kempe 2014; Chen et al. 2016). Recently, Kumar et al. (2016) also studied a robust conservation planning
problem where the movement probabilities of species and
sizes of habitats are not accurately speciﬁed. The robust network design problem we address differs from previous work,
which does not allow management actions to modify interval parameters (e.g., edge probabilities). They only modify
network structure, for example, by adding sources or nodes.
In contrast, we allow management actions that can modify
both interval bounds and network structure. As a result of
the richer action space, it is unclear whether the sample average approximation (SAA) approach used in previous settings (Kumar et al. 2016) is applicable to our problem. To
address these challenges, we develop a dynamic programming and mixed-integer programming based approach that
can optimize connectivity without using SAA.
We study robust SNDPs for tree-structured river networks. The motivating application is the barrier removal
problem (Neeson et al. 2015), where the goal is to decide
which instream barriers to remove or repair to help ﬁsh move
upstream and get access to their historical habitats. In this
domain, the passage probability of a barrier can only be inaccurately estimated, and the new passage probability of a
repaired barrier is even harder to estimate. Hence, we model
the uncertainty in passage probability using well known interval bounds (Boutilier et al. 2003). We then develop a scalable algorithm to ﬁnd the robust policy for barrier removal.
The robustness of a policy can be quantiﬁed by two correlated metrics: robust ratio (He and Kempe 2014; Chen et al.
2016) and regret (Boutilier et al. 2003; Kumar et al. 2016).
Intuitively, assume that given a policy, nature chooses an adversarial policy that selects parameters within their interval
bounds so as to either minimize the ratio between the values of the given policy and the adversarial policy (called robust ratio) or maximize the value difference between them
(called regret). We develop a scalable algorithm to ﬁnd a
robust policy that maximizes the robust ratio by solving a
bilevel optimization problem. We also show that, with minor
modiﬁcations, our approach can be used to minimize regret.
The algorithm is based on a constraint generation procedure (Boutilier et al. 2003) that interleaves between two optimization steps. The decision optimization step ﬁnds a decision policy that maximizes the robust ratio when nature can

Abstract
Stochastic network design is a general framework for optimizing network connectivity. It has several applications in
computational sustainability including spatial conservation
planning, pre-disaster network preparation, and river network optimization. A common assumption in previous work
has been made that network parameters (e.g., probability of
species colonization) are precisely known, which is unrealistic in real-world settings. We therefore address the robust
river network design problem where the goal is to optimize
river connectivity for ﬁsh movement by removing barriers.
We assume that ﬁsh passability probabilities are known only
imprecisely, but are within some interval bounds. We then
develop a planning approach that computes the policies with
either high robust ratio or low regret. Empirically, our approach scales well to large river networks. We also provide
insights into the solutions generated by our robust approach,
which has signiﬁcantly higher robust ratio than the baseline
solution with mean parameter estimates.

1

Introduction

Many problems, such as inﬂuence maximization (Kempe,
Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), spatial and ﬁsh conservation
planning (Sheldon et al. 2010; O’Hanley and Tomberlin
2005), and predisaster preparation (Schichl and Sellmann
2015) can be formulated as a variant of the stochastic network design problem. A stochastic network design problem
(SNDP) is deﬁned by a directed graph where each edge is
either present or absent with some probability. Management
actions can be taken to change the probabilities of edge presence. The goal is to determine which actions to take, subject
to a budget, to optimize some outcome of the stochastic network over a time period. Several approaches to solve SNDPs
have been shown to scale up to large networks (Chen,
Wang, and Wang 2010; Kumar, Wu, and Zilberstein 2012;
Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2014b; 2016).
An important assumption made in SNDPs is that the network parameters (e.g., probabilities of edge presence) are
estimated accurately, which is not feasible in real world ecological domains due to noisy observations, model drift, climate change, and the diversity of species. To handle parameter uncertainty, researchers have formulated robust network
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4545

