Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Let Your Photos Talk: Generating Narrative Paragraph for
Photo Stream via Bidirectional Attention Recurrent Neural Networks
Yu Liu,† Jianlong Fu,‡ Tao Mei,‡ Chang Wen Chen†
†

State University of New York at Buffalo, NY, USA
‡
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, P. R. China
†
{yliu44,chencw}@buffalo.edu, ‡ {jianf,tmei}@microsoft.com ∗

Abstract
Automatic generation of natural language description for individual images (a.k.a. image captioning) has attracted extensive research attention. In this paper, we take one step further to investigate the generation of a paragraph to describe a
photo stream for the purpose of storytelling. This task is even
more challenging than individual image description due to the
difﬁculty in modeling the large visual variance in an ordered
photo collection and in preserving the long-term language coherence among multiple sentences. To deal with these challenges, we formulate the task as a sequence-to-sequence
learning problem and propose a novel joint learning model by
leveraging the semantic coherence in a photo stream. Specifically, to reduce visual variance, we learn a semantic space
by jointly embedding each photo with its corresponding contextual sentence, so that the semantically related photos and
their correlations are discovered. Then, to preserve language
coherence in the paragraph, we learn a novel Bidirectional
Attention-based Recurrent Neural Network (BARNN) model,
which can attend on the discovered semantic relation to produce a sentence sequence and maintain its consistence with
the photo stream. We integrate the two-step learning components into one single optimization formulation and train
the network in an end-to-end manner. Experiments on three
widely-used datasets (NYC/Disney/SIND) show that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods with
large margins for both retrieval and paragraph generation
tasks. We also show the subjective preference of the machinegenerated stories by the proposed approach over the baselines
through a user study with 40 human subjects.

Image Captions:
xA group people is play ball.
xA man is playing a ball.
xA group of people is having dinner
around a table.

Storytelling:
A group of people gather as a team.
The ball game begins.
After the ball game, the team winds
down with some food.

Figure 1: The difference between storytelling and image
captions in isolation is the coherence among sentences, i.e.
the green term “ball game” and the blue term “the team” are
introduced from previous photos with corresponding color.
[Best viewed in color]
Existing researches have focused more on generating natural descriptions for a single photo. In this research we take
one step further to investigate the problem of paragraphing a photo stream. We consider this task as a sequenceto-sequence learning problem, where the input is a photo
stream (with order) while the output is a sentence sequence,
each corresponding to one photo.
It is a totally different issue from conventional sequenceto-sequence problems. The closely related research to visual storytelling is image and video captioning, where the
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are usually employed
for generating a single sentence from a given image or
video clip (Venugopalan et al. 2015a; Donahue et al. 2015;
Venugopalan et al. 2015b; Pan et al. 2016). However, the
task of visual storytelling is more challenging due to the difﬁculty of modeling the large visual variance in an ordered
photo collection and preserving the long-term language coherence among multiple sentences. First, at the input side,
photo stream usually has signiﬁcantly large visual variance
(Fu et al. 2015), such as in Figure 1. Most existing models
for sequence learning with deep structure (e.g., RNN) are
not designed to deal with such long-term dependency with
large visual variance. Second, at the output side, visual storytelling requires much more complicated textual form in
coherent and consistent paragraph. As the storytelling in the
Figure 1, the overlapping of semantics between sentences
often results in complex relational structure of a story.
To deal with the above two challenges, we formulate this

Introduction
Generating a human-level narrative from an ordered photo
stream, in this research we refer to as “visual storytelling”,
presents a fundamental challenge to both computer vision
and natural language processing areas. This is challenging
because it requires not only the full understanding of each
photo in a stream as well as the relation among different photos, but also a sophisticated mechanism to generate a natural
paragraph from the perspective of language coherence.
∗

This work was performed when Yu Liu was visiting Microsoft
Research Asia as a research intern. This research was also supported by US New York State Empire Innovation Program.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1445

