Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust MIL-Based Feature Template
Learning for Object Tracking
Xiangyuan Lan,† Pong C. Yuen,† Rama Chellappa‡

†

‡

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China
Center for Automation Research and ECE Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
{lanxiangyuan, pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, rama@umiacs.umd.edu

caused by two scenarios. First, large extrinsic variations
such as occlusion, large illumination change may introduce
outliers into target appearance, which may contaminate the
tracking samples and thereby deteriorate the representation
power of tracking model. Second, slight tracking inaccuracy,
which is often caused by intrinsic variations (e.g. deformation and in/out of plane rotation), may lead to misaligned
tracking samples, which usually introduces label ambiguity
and ‘confuses’ the tracker itself. Updating with such samples
may contribute to reduced discriminability and drift, gradually leading to tracking failure. Therefore, while maintaining adaptivity to appearance changes, the model updating
strategy should be able to handle corrupted tracking samples caused by these two scenarios so as to reduce tracking
drift.

Abstract
Because of appearance variations, training samples of the
tracked targets collected by the online tracker are required
for updating the tracking model. However, this often leads to
tracking drift problem because of potentially corrupted samples: 1) contaminated/outlier samples resulting from large
variations (e.g. occlusion, illumination), and 2) misaligned
samples caused by tracking inaccuracy. Therefore, in order
to reduce the tracking drift while maintaining the adaptability
of a visual tracker, how to alleviate these two issues via an effective model learning (updating) strategy is a key problem to
be solved. To address these issues, this paper proposes a novel
and optimal model learning (updating) scheme which aims to
simultaneously eliminate the negative effects from these two
issues mentioned above in a uniﬁed robust feature template
learning framework. Particularly, the proposed feature template learning framework is capable of: 1) adaptively learning uncontaminated feature templates by separating out contaminated samples, and 2) resolving label ambiguities caused
by misaligned samples via a probabilistic multiple instance
learning (MIL) model. Experiments on challenging video sequences show that the proposed tracker performs favourably
against several state-of-the-art trackers.

1

However, most existing tracking algorithms which aim to
reduce tracking drift are not effective in handling either or
both scenarios. One kind of approaches explicitly models
the outliers in the corrupted target’s samples caused by occlusion or noise, such as sparsity-based trackers (Mei and
Ling 2011) (Mei et al. 2013). Although they can detect and
prevent contaminated samples (e.g. occluded samples) from
updating which enhances their robustness to outlier samples to some extent, most of them do not explicitly handle the misaligned samples. Another kind of approaches
are weakly/semi-supervised learning-based methods, such
as online multiple instance learning (MIL) (Babenko, Yang,
and Belongie 2011) and online semi-supervised boosting (Grabner, Leistner, and Bischof 2008), which aim to resolve the label ambiguities caused by misaligned samples
within the framework of weakly/semi-supervised learning.
However, the strength of their learning methods are only
exploited to construct an optimal ensemble of base classiﬁers, and each base classiﬁer keeps updated every frame,
which is more likely to update with contaminated samples and thereby deteriorates the discriminability. Although
some heuristic methods such as sample selection or sample
weighting are also developed to handle these two scenarios
without considering different specialties of these two issues,
they may rely heavily on some prior knowledge (e.g. predeﬁned thresholds for corrupted sample decision (Zhong,
Lu, and Yang 2014), pre-deﬁned updating rate of sample
weights (Li et al. 2012)), which may not be practical and
limits the trackers’ ﬂexibility to variations under different

Introduction

As an important step in intelligent motion perception, object
tracking has received great research interests with the development of numerous tracking algorithms and applications.
Since dramatic appearance changes, caused by illumination,
pose, occlusion, etc, may occur on the tracked target during tracking, to adapt the online tracker to such appearance
changes, a key problem is how to develop an adaptive model
learning (updating) strategy.
With limited amount of labeled tracking samples available
in the ﬁrst frame, additional examples of the tracked targets
which are collected by the tracker itself should be utilized
for model updating (e.g. (Ross et al. 2008), (Mei and Ling
2011), (Babenko, Yang, and Belongie 2011)). While model
adaptivity can be enhanced with more training samples, instability may also be increased when updating is done, leading to poor tracking performance. The problem of corrupted
samples is usually encountered in tracking, which is mainly
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4118

