Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Generic Bet-and-Run Strategy for Speeding
Up Stochastic Local Search∗
Tobias Friedrich,1 Timo Kötzing,1 Markus Wagner2
1

2

Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany
Optimisation and Logistics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia

Sinclair, and Zuckerman 1993) showed that, for Las Vegas algorithms with known run time distribution, there is
an optimal stopping time in order to minimize the expected
running time. They also showed that, if the distribution is
unknown, there is an universal sequence of running times
given by (1,1,2,1,1,2,4,1,1,2,1,1,2,4,8,...), which is the optimal restarting strategy up to constant factors. These results
have the appeal that they can be used for every problem setting; however, they only apply to Las Vegas algorithms.
For the case of optimization, the situation is much less
clear, with plenty of different approaches presented by the
stochastic optimization community. A gentle introduction
to practical approaches for such restart strategies is given
by (Marti 2003) and (Loureno, Martin, and Stützle 2010),
and a recent theoretical result is presented by (Schoenauer,
Teytaud, and Teytaud 2012). Particularly for the satisﬁability
problem (SAT), there are several studies that make an empirical comparison of a number of restart policies (Biere 2008;
Huang 2007). These show the substantial impact of the
restart policy on the efﬁciency of SAT solvers. In the context
of satisﬁability problems this might be unsurprising as stateof-the-art SAT and CSP solvers often speed up their search
by learning “no-goods” during backtracking (Ciré, Kadioglu, and Sellmann 2014).
Classical optimization algorithms are often deterministic
and thus cannot be improved by restarts (neither their run
time nor their outcome will alter). This also appears to hold
for certain popular modern solvers. For example, one might
argue that the underlying algorithm of IBM ILOG CPLEX
is not random, however, when memory constraints or parallel computations come into play, the characteristics change.
This was the initial idea of (Lalla-Ruiz and Voß 2016), when
they investigated different mathematical programming formulations to provide different starting points for the solver.
Many other modern optimization algorithms, while also
working mostly deterministically, have some randomized
component, for example by choosing a random starting
point. Thus, the initial solution often strongly inﬂuences the
quality of the outcome. It follows that it is natural to do several runs of the algorithm. Two very typical uses for an algorithm with time budget t are to (a) use all of time t for
a single run of the algorithm (single-run strategy), or (b) to
make a number of k runs of the algorithm, each with running
time t/k (multi-run strategy).

Abstract
A common strategy for improving optimization algorithms is
to restart the algorithm when it is believed to be trapped in
an inferior part of the search space. However, while speciﬁc
restart strategies have been developed for speciﬁc problems
(and speciﬁc algorithms), restarts are typically not regarded
as a general tool to speed up an optimization algorithm. In
fact, many optimization algorithms do not employ restarts at
all.
Recently, bet-and-run was introduced in the context of
mixed-integer programming, where ﬁrst a number of short
runs with randomized initial conditions is made, and then
the most promising run of these is continued. In this article,
we consider two classical NP-complete combinatorial optimization problems, traveling salesperson and minimum vertex cover, and study the effectiveness of different bet-and-run
strategies. In particular, our restart strategies do not take any
problem knowledge into account, nor are tailored to the optimization algorithm. Therefore, they can be used off-the-shelf.
We observe that state-of-the-art solvers for these problems
can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from restarts on standard benchmark
instances.

1

Introduction

When a desktop PC is not working properly, the default answer of an experienced system administrator is restarting
it. The same holds for stochastic algorithms and randomized search heuristics: If we are not satisﬁed with the result,
we might just try restarting the algorithm again and again.
While this is well-known (Marti 2003; Loureno, Martin, and
Stützle 2010), very few algorithms directly incorporate such
restart strategies. We assume that this is due to the added
complexity of designing an appropriate restart strategy that
is advantageous for the considered algorithm.
Hence, it would be beneﬁcial to have a generic framework
for restart strategies which is not overly dependent on the
exact algorithm used or the problem under consideration. In
this paper we want to show that there are restart strategies
which are of beneﬁt in a variety of settings.
There are some theories on how to choose optimal restart
strategies, independently of the setting. For example, (Luby,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

801

