Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Nonlinear Dynamic Boltzmann
Machines for Time-Series Prediction
Sakyasingha Dasgupta and Takayuki Osogami
IBM Research - Tokyo
{sdasgup, osogami}@jp.ibm.com

primarily for engineering purposes. Unlike BM, the recently
proposed dynamic Boltzmann machine (DyBM) (Osogami
and Otsuka 2015a; 2015b) can be used to learn a generative
model of temporal pattern sequences, using an exact learning rule that maximises the log likelihood of given timeseries. This learning rule exhibits key properties of spiketiming dependent plasticity (STDP), a variant of the Hebbian rule. In STDP, the amount of change in the synaptic
strength between two neurons that ﬁred together depends on
precise timing when the two neurons ﬁred. However, similar
to a BM, in the DyBM, each neuron takes a binary value, 0
or 1, following a probability distribution that depends on the
parameters of the DyBM. This has limited applicability to
real-world time-series modeling problems, which are often
real valued.
First Contribution: Here, we extend the DyBM to deal with
real values and refer to the extended model as a Gaussian
DyBM. Although extension is possible in the way that BM is
extended to the Gaussian BM, we also relax some of the constraints that the DyBM has required in (Osogami and Otsuka
2015a; 2015b). The primary purpose of these constraints
in (Osogami and Otsuka 2015a; 2015b) was to interpret its
learning rule as biologically plausible STDP. We relax these
constraints in a way that the Gaussian DyBM can be related
to a vector autoregressive (VAR) model (Lütkepohl 2005;
Bahadori, Liu, and Xing 2013), while keeping the key properties of the DyBM having an exact learning rule intact. This
makes our new model speciﬁcally suited for time-series prediction problems. Speciﬁcally, we show that a special case of
the Gaussian DyBM is a VAR model having additional components that capture long term dependency of time series.
These additional components correspond to DyBM’s eligibility traces, which represent how recently and frequently
spikes arrived from one unit1 to another. This forms the ﬁrst
primary contribution of this paper.
Second Contribution: Similar to DyBM, its direct extension to the Gaussian case, can have two restrictions. Firstly,
the maximum number of units has to be equal to the dimension of the time-series being learned, and secondly, the absence of nonlinear hidden units. In our second contribution,
we extend DyBM by adding a RNN layer that computes a

Abstract
The dynamic Boltzmann machine (DyBM) has been proposed as a stochastic generative model of multi-dimensional
time series, with an exact, learning rule that maximizes the
log-likelihood of a given time series. The DyBM, however,
is deﬁned only for binary valued data, without any nonlinear hidden units. Here, in our ﬁrst contribution, we extend
the DyBM to deal with real valued data. We present a formulation called Gaussian DyBM, that can be seen as an extension of a vector autoregressive (VAR) model. This uses, in
addition to standard (explanatory) variables, components that
captures long term dependencies in the time series. In our
second contribution, we extend the Gaussian DyBM model
with a recurrent neural network (RNN) that controls the bias
input to the DyBM units. We derive a stochastic gradient update rule such that, the output weights from the RNN can also
be trained online along with other DyBM parameters. Furthermore, this acts as nonlinear hidden layer extending the
capacity of DyBM and allows it to model nonlinear components in a given time-series. Numerical experiments with synthetic datasets show that the RNN-Gaussian DyBM improves
predictive accuracy upon standard VAR by up to ≈ 35%. On
real multi-dimensional time-series prediction, consisting of
high nonlinearity and non-stationarity, we demonstrate that
this nonlinear DyBM model achieves signiﬁcant improvement upon state of the art baseline methods like VAR and
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks at a reduced computational cost.

Introduction
The Boltzmann machine (BM) (Hinton and Sejnowski 1983;
Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski 1985) is an artiﬁcial neural network that is motivated by the Hebbian learning rule
(Hebb 1949) of biological neural networks, in order to learn
a collection of static patterns. That is, the learning rule of
the BM that maximizes the log likelihood of given patterns
exhibits a key property of the Hebb’s rule, i.e. co-activated
neural units should be connected. Although the original BM
is deﬁned for binary values (1 for neuron ﬁring and 0 representing silence), it has been extended to deal with real
values in the form of Gaussian BM (Marks and Movellan
2001; Welling, Rosen-Zvi, and Hinton 2004) or GaussianBernoulli restricted BM (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006)
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 In the rest of the paper the term neuron and unit are used interchangeably.

1833

