Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semi-Supervised Classiﬁcations via Elastic and Robust Embedding
1

Yun Liu,1 Yiming Guo,2 Hua Wang,3 Feiping Nie,4,1∗ Heng Huang1∗

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Texas, USA
2
Computer Science Department, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois, USA
3
Division of Computer Science, Colorado School of Mines, Colorado, USA
4
School of Computer Science, OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
yunliu09@gmail.com, yguo46@hawk.iit.edu, huawang@mines.edu, feipingnie@gmail.com, heng@uta.edu

The success of semi-supervised learning is based on how
much information unlabeled data carry about the distribution of labels in the pattern space (Nie et al. 2011b). In
general, researchers hypothesize a low-dimensional manifold structure along which labels can be assumed to vary
smoothly (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006; Sindhwani
et al. 2005). Because the linear models are strongly preferred due to their ease of and empirical performance,
the linear manifold regularization was introduced to semisupervised learning (Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006;
Sindhwani et al. 2005). However, the linear embedding often
restricts the identiﬁcation of manifold structure and reduces
the classiﬁcation performance of semi-supervised learning.
To solve this problem, we propose a new elastic constraint
on the predicted label matrix such that a better manifold
structure can be identiﬁed. Meanwhile, we consider that the
outliers often exist in the unlabeled data and confuse the
learning model. In order to reduce the outliers effect, we replace the traditional squared loss function by a non-squared
one which is robust to the outliers. Although our new objective is a convex function, it includes many non-smooth
terms which make the optimization problem very challenging. We provide a new efﬁcient optimization algorithm to
solve a more general problem and also solve the proposed
objective. Extensive experiments have been performed on
both single-label image categorizations and multi-label image annotations to evaluate the new method. In all empirical
results, our approach outperforms other related methods.

Abstract
Transductive semi-supervised learning can only predict labels
for unlabeled data appearing in training data, and can not predict labels for testing data never appearing in training set. To
handle this out-of-sample problem, many inductive methods
make a constraint such that the predicted label matrix should
be exactly equal to a linear model. In practice, this constraint
might be too rigid to capture the manifold structure of data.
In this paper, we relax this rigid constraint and propose to
use an elastic constraint on the predicted label matrix such
that the manifold structure can be better explored. Moreover,
since unlabeled data are often very abundant in practice and
usually there are some outliers, we use a non-squared loss instead of the traditional squared loss to learn a robust model.
The derived problem, although is convex, has so many nonsmooth terms, which make it very challenging to solve. In the
paper, we propose an efﬁcient optimization algorithm to solve
a more general problem, based on which we ﬁnd the optimal
solution to the derived problem.

Introduction
In most machine learning and data mining applications, such
as image annotations and categorizations, we often have a
small set of labeled data together with a large collection of
unlabeled data. Due to the small size of labeled data, the
traditional supervised classiﬁcation methods cannot be applied. The semi-supervised method involving both labeled
and unlabeled data to train classiﬁcation model is more realistic to solve the problems. The semi-supervised learning
can be viewed as label propagation from labeled data to unlabeled data. In its simplest form, the label propagation is
like a random walk on a similarity graph (Szummer and
Jaakkola 2002; Nie et al. 2010b). Using the diffusion kernel,
the semi-supervised learning is like a diffusive process of the
labeled information (Kondor and Lafferty 2002). The harmonic function approach (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty
2003) emphasizes the harmonic nature of the diffusive function. The consistency labeling approach (Zhou et al. 2004)
focuses on the iterative spread of labels.

Related Work Revisited
Suppose we have n training data points {x1 , x2 , ..., xn }, denote the data matrix by X = [x1 , x2 , ..., xn ] ∈ Rd×n , where
d is the dimensionality. For a graph based method, a graph
on the data is constructed based on the training data points.
The similarity matrix A ∈ Rn×n of the graph is calculated to encode the similarities between data pairs. In semisupervised learning, only a few data points of the training
data are labeled, and the remaining data points are unlabeled.
Without loss of generality, suppose the ﬁrst l data points
x1 , ..., xl are labeled as y1 , ..., yl , respectively. For every i,
yi ∈ {1, 2, ..., c}, where c is the number of classes. The task
of semi-supervised learning is to predict the labels for the
unlabeled data points. Denote the label matrix of the ﬁrst l
data points by Yl ∈ Rl×c , where the (i, j)-th element of Yl is

∗
Corresponding authors. This work was partially supported by
the following grants: NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSFDBI 1356628, NSF-IIS 1619308, NSF-IIS 1633753, NIH R01
AG049371.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2294

