Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Active Search in Intensionally
Speciﬁed Structured Spaces
Dino Oglic†‡
dino.oglic@uni-bonn.de
Institut für Informatik III
Universität Bonn, Germany
†

Roman Garnett 

garnett@wustl.edu
tg@thomasgaertner.org
‡
Dep. of Computer Science & Eng.
School of Computer Science
Washington University in St. Louis, USA The University of Nottingham, UK


2012). In particular, (i) the chemspace, i.e., the space of potentially synthesizable compounds, is huge—estimates are
often larger than 1060 ; (ii) there are many activity cliffs, i.e.,
small changes in structure can have large effects on pharmaceutical activity, and (iii) existing compound libraries focus
on a very restricted area of the chemspace. De novo design
approaches (Schneider and Fechner 2005) aim to overcome
these problems by constructing desired molecular structures
from scratch. In the past 20 years, several Monte Carlo search
heuristics have been developed for de novo design of druglike molecules (Schneider and Fechner 2005). A common
property of these search heuristics is the generation of molecular structures using Markov chains. Several search heuristics
incorporate an additional scoring step in which the generated
structures are accepted/rejected with a probability based on
a hand-crafted energy-based scoring function. The whole
process can be seen as Metropolis sampling from an expertdesigned distribution. Throughout the constructive process
this designed distribution is either kept static or manually
updated as the process evolves.
Motivated by these hand-crafted search heuristics, we propose a data-driven approach that learns the target class of
desired structures as it observes the results of new experiments. To deal with the intensionally speciﬁed search space,
we assume that a proposal generator can be constructed
which is speciﬁc to the application domain and has support
on all parts of the space that contain the targets. Similar to
the described Monte Carlo search heuristics, we model this
proposal generator with a Markov chain given by its transition kernel. The transition kernel can be either conditional or
independent and in the latter case the proposal generator is
an uninformed sampler. As the target structures are typically
rare and expensive to evaluate, the cost per discovered structure would be prohibitively high for plain Monte Carlo search
performed by evaluating each proposed structure. To overcome this, our approach relies on a max-entropy conditional
model that acts as a probabilistic surrogate for the oracle evaluations. This conditional model is updated in each iteration
upon the evaluation of a selected structure. As this changes
the distribution of the Metropolis sampler in the following
discovery step, we can not assume that the sampled structures
are drawn independently from identical distributions.
We analyze the theoretical properties of this process in Section 3 where we show its consistency and bound the mixing

Abstract
We consider an active search problem in intensionally speciﬁed structured spaces. The ultimate goal in this setting is to
discover structures from structurally different partitions of a
ﬁxed but unknown target class. An example of such a process
is that of computer-aided de novo drug design. In the past 20
years several Monte Carlo search heuristics have been developed for this process. Motivated by these hand-crafted search
heuristics, we devise a Metropolis–Hastings sampling scheme
where the acceptance probability is given by a probabilistic
surrogate of the target property, modeled with a max entropy
conditional model. The surrogate model is updated in each iteration upon the evaluation of a selected structure. The proposed
approach is consistent and the empirical evidence indicates
that it achieves a large structural variety of discovered targets.

1

Thomas Gärtner ‡

Introduction

We consider an active classiﬁcation problem in structured
spaces, where the goal is not to learn a hypothesis but to
discover a diverse set of structures exhibiting a target property.
A variant of this problem where the only goal is to discover
targets is known as active search (Garnett et al. 2012).
In the applications we consider, the search space is speciﬁed only intensionally and its cardinality is at least exponential in the size of its combinatorial objects (e.g., number of
edges in a graph). Thus, the extension of the search space
can neither be completely stored on a disk nor enumerated in
feasible time. The structures we aim to discover are characterized by a target property that is a priori not known for any
structure and is expensive to evaluate on each structure. The
evaluation process can be noisy and it is simulated with an
oracle. The structures exhibiting the target property are typically rare and we can not assume that they are concentrated
in a small region of the search space. We are thus interested
in ﬁnding a diverse set of candidates that spans the whole
space and is likely to exhibit the target property.
Taking drug discovery as our main motivating example,
several problems have been identiﬁed as the cause for the
huge cost associated with attrition (Scannell et al. 2012;
Schneider and Schneider 2016), i.e., drug candidates failing
later stages of the development process, and increased use of
algorithmic support has been proposed as a remedy (Woltosz
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2443

