Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Patch Reordering: A Novel Way to Achieve Rotation and
Translation Invariance in Convolutional Neural Networks
†

Xu Shen,† Xinmei Tian,† Shaoyan Sun,† Dacheng Tao‡
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-spatial Information Processing and Application System,
University of Science and Technology of China Hefei, Anhui, China 230027
‡
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology,
University of Technology Sydney, 81 Broadway Street, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
output to small local shifts and distortions by reducing the
resolutions of input feature maps. However, another important property of weight sharing or pooling is that the location
of detected features in the output feature maps is identical
to that of the corresponding local patch in the input feature
maps. As a result, the location change of the input visual
patterns in lower layers will propagate to higher convolutional layers. Due to the typically small local spatial support
for pooling (e.g., 2 × 2) and convolution (e.g., 9 × 9 kernel
size), large global location changes of patterns in input (e.g.,
global rotation or translation of objects) will even propagate
to the feature maps of the ﬁnal convolutional layer (as shown
in Fig. 1). Consequently, the following fully connected layers have to learn the location invariance to produce consistent predictions or representations, which restricts the use of
the parameter budget for achieving more powerful outputs.
In this paper, we introduce a Patch Reordering (PR) module that can be embedded into a standard CNN architecture
to improve the rotation and translation invariance capabilities. Output feature maps of the convolutional layer are ﬁrst
divided into multiple tiers of non-overlapped local patches
at different spatial pyramid levels. We reorder these local
patches at each level based on their energy (e.g., L1 or L2
norm of activations of the patch). To retain the spatial consistency of local patterns, we only reorder the patches of a
given level locally (i.e., within each single patch of its upper level). In convolutional layers, a location change of the
patterns in input feature maps will result in a corresponding
location change of the output feature maps, while the local
patterns (activations) in the output are equivalent. As a result, ranking these local patterns in a speciﬁc order leads to
a consistent representation despite the locations of local patterns in input, that is, rotation or translation invariance. The
proposed architecture can be inserted into any convolutional
layers and allows for end-to-end training of the models for
which they are applied. In addition, we do not need any extra
training supervision or modiﬁcation to the training process
or any preprocessing of input images.

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance on many visual recognition
tasks. However, the combination of convolution and pooling operations only shows invariance to small local location
changes in meaningful objects in input. Sometimes, such networks are trained using data augmentation to encode this invariance into the parameters, which restricts the capacity of
the model to learn the content of these objects. A more efﬁcient use of the parameter budget is to encode rotation or
translation invariance into the model architecture, which relieves the model from the need to learn them. To enable the
model to focus on learning the content of objects other than
their locations, we propose to conduct patch ranking of the
feature maps before feeding them into the next layer. When
patch ranking is combined with convolution and pooling operations, we obtain consistent representations despite the location of meaningful objects in input. We show that the patch
ranking module improves the performance of the CNN on
many benchmark tasks, including MNIST digit recognition,
large-scale image recognition, and image retrieval.

Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on many computer vision tasks, including image recognition (Szegedy et al. 2015;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014a; He et al. 2016), semantic segmentation (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), image captioning (Karpathy and Li 2015; Donahue et al. 2015;
Fang et al. 2015), action recognition (Gkioxari, Girshick,
and Malik 2015; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014b), and
video captioning (Yao et al. 2015; Pan et al. 2016). The
success of CNNs comes from their ability to learn the twodimensional structures of images for which objects and patterns may appear at different locations. To detect and learn
patterns despite their locations, the weights of local ﬁlters
are shared when applied to different positions in the image.
Since distortions or shifts of the input can cause the positions of salient features to vary, weight sharing is very important for CNNs to detect invariant elementary features regardless of location changes of these features (Lecun et al.
1998). In addition, pooling also reduces the sensitivity of the

Related Work
The equivalence and invariance of CNN representations to
input image transformations were investigated in (Lenc and
Vedaldi 2015; Cohen and Welling 2015; Gens and Domingos 2014). Speciﬁcally, Cohen and Welling (Cohen and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2534

