Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Uniﬁed Convex Surrogate for the Schatten-p Norm
Chen Xu, Zhouchen Lin,∗ Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, P. R. China
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, P. R. China
xuen@pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn, zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

(Fan and Li 2001) pointed out, the 1 -norm is a loose approximation to the 0 -norm and overpenalizes large entries of
vectors. By an analogy between the rank function of matrices
and the 0 -norm of vectors, the nuclear norm also overpenalizes large singular values. As a tighter approximation to
the rank function, the Schatten-p quasi-norm (0 < p < 1)
is suggested to replace the nuclear norm (Nie, Huang, and
Ding 2012). For the task of matrix completion, the Schattenp quasi-norm has empirically shown to be superior to the
nuclear norm. Moreover, (Zhang, Huang, and Zhang 2013)
theoretically prove that for the matrix completion problem the
Schatten-p quasi-norm with a small p requires much fewer
observed entries than the nuclear norm minimization does.
However, the Schatten-p quasi-norm is non-convex and
non-smooth. So the optimization for problem (1) is much
more challenging. Recently, (Lai, Xu, and Yin 2013) propose iterative reweighted least square (IRucLp) to solve a
smoothed subproblem by approximating the Schatten-p quasinorm at each iteration. They prove that any limit point of the
generated sequence is a stationary point. Moreover, (Lu et al.
2014) propose the iterative reweighted nuclear norm (IRNN)
algorithm. Besides the Schatten-p quasi-norm, IRNN is able
to tackle a variety of regularizations, e.g., MCP (Zhang 2010)
and SCAD (Fan and Li 2001), on the singular values. A similar convergence result as IRcuLq is also established. However,
both of the algorithms involve computing SVD at each iteration, which is expensive for large-scale problems.
Alternative to (1), the bilinear factorization with two factor
matrix norm regularizers is suggested (Srebro, Rennie, and
Jaakkola 2004; Cabral et al. 2013; Shang, Liu, and Cheng
2016a):

Abstract
The Schatten-p norm (0 < p < 1) has been widely used to
replace the nuclear norm for better approximating the rank
function. However, existing methods are either 1) not scalable
for large scale problems due to relying on singular value decomposition (SVD) in every iteration, or 2) speciﬁc to some p
values, e.g., 1/2, and 2/3. In this paper, we show that for any
p, p1 , and p2 > 0 satisfying 1/p = 1/p1 + 1/p2 , there is an
equivalence between the Schatten-p norm of one matrix and
the Schatten-p1 and the Schatten-p2 norms of its two factor
matrices. We further extend the equivalence to multiple factor
matrices and show that all the factor norms can be convex and
smooth for any p > 0. In contrast, the original Schatten-p
norm for 0 < p < 1 is non-convex and non-smooth. As an
example we conduct experiments on matrix completion. To
utilize the convexity of the factor matrix norms, we adopt the
accelerated proximal alternating linearized minimization algorithm and establish its sequence convergence. Experiments
on both synthetic and real datasets exhibit its superior performance over the state-of-the-art methods. Its speed is also
highly competitive.

Introduction
In recent years, low rank matrix minimization has found
wide applications, e.g., matrix completion (Candès and Recht
2009), low rank representation (Liu, Lin, and Yu 2010), multitask learning (Dudik, Harchaoui, and Malick 2012), etc. Often, we can formulate the problem as follows:
min F (X) = min f (X) + λΩ(X),
X

X

(1)

where f (·) : Rm×n → R+ is the loss function, Ω(·) :
Rm×n → R+ is the spectral regularization (Abernethy et
al. 2009) which ensures low rankness, and λ ∈ R+ balances
the two terms.
As the tightest convex envelop of rank function on the unit
ball of matrix operator norm, the nuclear norm regularizer is
often suggested for Ω(X) (Recht, Fazel, and Parrilo 2010;
Candès and Tao 2010). In fact, the nuclear norm is the 1 norm on the vector of singular values. It achieves low rankness by encouraging sparseness on the singular values. As

min F (U, V ) = min f (U V T )+λ (Ωu (U ) + Ωv (V )) , (2)
U,V

U,V

where U ∈ R
and V ∈ Rn×d are the unknown factor matrices. Quite often, d  min{m, n} holds. When
minimizing (2), one only needs to operate on two much
smaller factor matrices in contrast to the full dimensional
X as (1). Thus (2) is better suited for large-size applications.
As (Srebro, Rennie, and Jaakkola 2004) indicated, when
Ωu (U ) + Ωv (V ) = U 2F /2 + V 2F /2, it can be equivalently represented as the surrogate of Ω(X) = X∗ when
enforcing X = U V T . Let r∗ denote the rank of the optimal
X ∗ in (1), (Mazumder, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2010) proved
that the minimum objective function values of (1) and (2) are
m×d

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

926

