Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Attributes for Improved Attributes: A Multi-Task Network
Utilizing Implicit and Explicit Relationships for Facial Attribute Classiﬁcation
Emily M. Hand, Rama Chellappa
{emhand, rama}@umiacs.umd.edu
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD, 20742

may fail. Persons of interest - suspects, or missing persons
- are often described in terms of their physical attributes,
and so attributes can be used to automatically search for individuals in surveillance videos. Attributes have also found
success in image search and retrieval as they can be used to
search a database of images very quickly (Kumar et al. 2009)
(Kumar et al. 2011) (Siddiquie, Feris, and Davis 2011).
Improving the accuracy of attribute classiﬁers is a challenging problem in itself and has been of recent interest due
to the release of several large-scale attribute datasets (Liu
et al. 2015). Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
replaced most traditional methods for feature extraction in
many computer vision problems (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012) (Vinyals et al. 2015). They have proven to
be effective in attribute classiﬁcation as well (Zhang et al.
2014a) (Abdulnabi et al. 2015) (Levi and Hassner 2015).
However, with few exceptions, attributes have been treated
as independent from each other. From a simple example - a
woman wearing lipstick and earrings - we can see that this
is not the case. If the subject is wearing lipstick and earrings, the probability that they are women is much higher
than if they did not exhibit those attributes, and the reverse is also true. Treating each attribute as independent fails
to use the valuable information provided by the other related attributes. Attributes ﬁt nicely into a multi-task learning framework, where multiple problems are solved jointly
using shared information (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2007) (Parameswaran and Weinberger 2010) (Caruana
1997).
We propose a multi-task deep CNN (MCNN) with an auxiliary network (AUX) at the top. The MCNN-AUX network
utilizes information provided by all attributes in three ways:
ﬁrst, by sharing the lower layers of the MCNN for all attributes; second, by sharing the higher layers for similar attributes; and ﬁnally by utilizing all attribute scores from the
trained MCNN in AUX in order to capture attribute relationships at the score level. We are able to achieve state-of-theart performance on most attributes for two large-scale publicly available datasets: CelebA and LFWA (Liu et al. 2015).
The contributions of our work are as follows:

Abstract
Attributes, or mid-level semantic features, have gained popularity in the past few years in domains ranging from activity
recognition to face veriﬁcation. Improving the accuracy of attribute classiﬁers is an important ﬁrst step in any application
which uses these attributes. In most works to date, attributes
have been considered independent of each other. However,
attributes can be strongly related, such as heavy makeup and
wearing lipstick as well as male and goatee and many others.
We propose a multi-task deep convolutional neural network
(MCNN) with an auxiliary network at the top (AUX) which
takes advantage of attribute relationships for improved classiﬁcation. We call our ﬁnal network MCNN-AUX. MCNNAUX uses attribute relationships in three ways: by sharing the
lowest layers for all attributes, by sharing the higher layers for
spatially-related attributes, and by feeding the attribute scores
from MCNN into the AUX network to ﬁnd score-level relationships. Using MCNN-AUX rather than individual attribute
classiﬁers, we are able to reduce the number of parameters in
the network from 64 million to fewer than 16 million and reduce the training time by a factor of 16. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method by producing results on two challenging publicly available datasets achieving state-of-the-art
performance on many attributes.

Introduction
Attributes are mid-level representations used for the recognition of activities, objects, and people (Duan et al. 2012)
(Zheng et al. 2014) (Zhang et al. 2014a). Attributes provide
an abstraction between low-level features and high-level object, or identity labels. They have seen the most success in
face recognition and veriﬁcation (Kumar et al. 2009) (Kumar
et al. 2011). In this domain, attributes include gender, race,
age, hair color, facial hair, etc. These semantic features are
very intuitive, and they allow for human-understandable descriptions of objects, people, and activities. Reliable estimation of facial attributes is useful for many different tasks.
HCI applications may require information about gender in
order to properly greet a user (i.e. Mr. or Ms.) and other attributes such as expression in order to determine the mood of
the user. Facial attributes can be used for identity veriﬁcation
in low quality imagery, where other veriﬁcation methods

• We develop MCNN, a multi-task deep CNN for attribute
classiﬁcation.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We develop AUX, an auxiliary network for MCNN which

4068

