Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

I See What You See: Inferring Sensor and Policy
Models of Human Real-World Motor Behavior
Felix Schmitt, Hans-Joachim Bieg
and Michael Herman
Robert Bosch GmbH
70465 Stuttgart, Germany
<ﬁrst name>.<last name>@de.bosch.com

Constantin A. Rothkopf
Center for Cognitive Science & Dept. of Psychology
Technische Universität Darmstadt
64283 Darmstadt, Germany
rothkopf@psychologie.tu-darmstadt.de

often hold globally and therefore allow signiﬁcantly better generalization than directly learned policies. Given an
objective function and an explicit model of the situational
constraints, the speciﬁc stochastic policy can be obtained
by probabilistic Optimal Control (OC). Conversely, objectives can be inferred from data using probabilistic Inverse
Optimal Control (IOC) (Ramachandran and Amir 2007;
Neu and Szepesvári 2007; Ziebart, Bagnell, and Dey 2010;
Rothkopf and Dimitrakakis 2011).
Besides task objective, sensory uncertainty strongly shapes
human motor behavior. This is because the sensory measurements made by humans are noisy, ambiguous and limited in
scope. For example, visual sensing is restricted to stimuli in
the ﬁeld of view, where disparate objects can look the same
from a single perspective. According to the theory of perception by Bayesian inference (Knill and Richards 1996),
humans fuse those measurements with internal models of
the sensors and the evolution of the situation for decision on
motor actions.
In this work we assume that the human internal model of
the situational dynamics equals the actual dynamics that are
known at inference time. Instead we focus on the sensor
models and their estimation. Speciﬁc sensor models have
been obtained from signal detection experiments, i.e. artiﬁcial tasks, that are e.g. reviewed in (Nash, Cole, and Bigler
2016). For these tasks several inference techniques are available (Acerbi, Ma, and Vijayakumar 2014). However, the validity of the inferred models for natural motor tasks is limited: Tasks like vehicle driving involve several sensors, require closed-loop choice of continuous valued actions and
often show complex situational dynamics. Hence, methods
for inference of sensor models from real-world behavioral
data are needed, as noted in (Nash, Cole, and Bigler 2016).

Abstract
Human motor behavior is naturally guided by sensing the environment. To predict such sensori-motor behavior, it is necessary to model what is sensed and how actions are chosen
based on the obtained sensory measurements. Although several models of human sensing haven been proposed, rarely
data of the assumed sensory measurements is available. This
makes statistical estimation of sensor models problematic. To
overcome this issue, we propose an abstract structural estimation approach building on the ideas of Herman et al.’s Simultaneous Estimation of Rewards and Dynamics (SERD).
Assuming optimal fusion of sensory information and rational
choice of actions the proposed method allows to infer sensor
models even in absence of data of the sensory measurements.
To the best of our knowledge, this work presents the ﬁrst general approach for joint inference of sensor and policy models.
Furthermore, we consider its concrete implementation in the
important class of sensor scheduling linear quadratic Gaussian problems. Finally, the effectiveness of the approach is
demonstrated for prediction of the behavior of automobile
drivers. Speciﬁcally, we model the glance and steering behavior of driving in the presence of visually demanding secondary tasks. The results show, that prediction beneﬁts from
the inference of sensor models. This is the case, especially,
if also information is considered, that is contained in gaze
switching behavior.

Introduction
Prediction models of human motor behavior are important
for several practical applications. For example, an automobile could warn a novice driver of driving errors based on
a model of driving strategies of experienced drivers (Shimosaka, Kaneko, and Nishi 2014). As human behavior can
be very complex, prediction models are often inferred from
data. For prediction in a broad range of situations, as for example encountered in real trafﬁc, models are necessary that
generalize well to unseen instances.
Classically, mappings from situational states to likely actions, stochastic policies, are inferred. However, there is
evidence, that human motor behavior can also be characterized by a task consisting of situational constraints and
an objective (Baron and Kleinman 1969; Todorov and Jordan 2002; Rothkopf, Ballard, and Hayhoe 2007). Objectives

Related Work
Data of human sensory measurements is rarely available.
Hence, inference approaches commonly exploit knowledge of the dynamics and objectives of the speciﬁc motor
task. Such tasks are often modeled as Linear Quadratical
Gaussian (LQG) problems, rendering them computationally
tractable (Todorov and Jordan 2002). Given objective or policy in an LQG setting, internal process models can be estimated by maximization of the expected likelihood of the
observed actions (Golub, Chase, and Byron 2013). How-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3797

