Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Localizing by Describing: Attribute-Guided
Attention Localization for Fine-Grained Recognition
Xiao Liu,∗ Jiang Wang,∗ Shilei Wen, Errui Ding, Yuanqing Lin
Baidu Research
{liuxiao12, wenshilei, dingerrui, linyuanqing}@baidu.com
wangjiangb@gmail.com

locate multiple discriminative object parts. For example in
Figure (b), the method (Liu et al. 2016b) fails to locate the
tail as attention regions.
Humans have a remarkable ability to learn to locate object parts from multiple sources of information. Aside from
strongly labeled object part location and weakly labeled object categories, part descriptions, such as “red wing”, also
plays an important part in the development of object parts
locating ability. In their early ages, children learn to recognize parts and locate object parts by reading or listening
to part descriptions. Part descriptions do not require timeconsuming manually part location labeling, and it is much
stronger than object category labels. We call it part attribute.
Inspired by this capability, we propose a part attributeguided attention localization scheme for ﬁne-grained recognition. Using part attributes as a weak supervision training
signal, reinforcement learning is able to learn part-speciﬁc
optimal localization strategies given the same image as environment state. Based on this intuition, it is reasonable to
expect that distinctive part localizers could be learned as
strategies of looking for and describing the appearances of
different parts. In the proposed scheme, multiple fully convolutional attention localization networks are trained. Each
network predicts the attribute values of a part. We design a
novel reward strategy for learning part localizers and part
attribute predictors.
Part attribute-guided attention localization networks can
more accurately locate object parts (Figure (c)). More importantly, using the part locations and appearance features
from part-attribute guided attention localization networks
leads to considerable performance improvement on ﬁnegrained recognition, as demonstrated on the CUB-200-2011
dataset (Wah et al. 2011). Moreover, part attribute can be acquired in large scale via either human labeling or data mining techniques. It has been successfully employed for image
recognition (Parikh and Grauman 2011; Akata et al. 2013;
Hwang and Sigal 2014), image retrieval (Huang et al. 2015),
face localization (Liu et al. 2015) and image generation (Yan
et al. 2015).
Attention model (Mnih et al. 2014; Ba, Mnih, and
Kavukcuoglu 2015) has been widely used in image caption (Xu and Saenko 2015; Xu et al. 2015), image recognition (Zhang et al. 2016b; Seo et al. 2016), action recognition (Wang et al. 2016), person re-identiﬁcation (Liu et

Abstract
A key challenge in ﬁne-grained recognition is how to ﬁnd
and represent discriminative local regions. Recent attention
models are capable of learning discriminative region localizers only from category labels with reinforcement learning.
However, not utilizing any explicit part information, they are
not able to accurately ﬁnd multiple distinctive regions. In this
work, we introduce an attribute-guided attention localization
scheme where the local region localizers are learned under
the guidance of part attribute descriptions. By designing a
novel reward strategy, we are able to learn to locate regions
that are spatially and semantically distinctive with reinforcement learning algorithm. The attribute labeling requirement
of the scheme is more amenable than the accurate part location annotation required by traditional part-based ﬁne-grained
recognition methods. Experimental results on the CUB-2002011 dataset (Wah et al. 2011) demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed scheme on both ﬁne-grained recognition and
attribute recognition.

Introduction
Humans heavily rely on subtle local visual cues to distinguish ﬁne-grained object categories. For example in Figure (a), human experts differentiate a summer tanager and
a scarlet tanager by the color of wing and tail. In order to
build human-level ﬁne-grained recognition AI systems, it is
also essential to locate discriminative object parts and learn
local visual representation for these parts.
State-of-the-art ﬁne-grained recognition methods (Zhang
et al. 2014; Liu, Shen, and Hengel 2015; Wang et al. 2014;
Krause et al. 2015b; 2015a; Gao et al. 2015; Zhang et al.
2016a) either rely on manually labeled parts to train part detectors in a fully supervised manner, or employ reinforcement learning or spatial-transformer-based attention models (Sermanet, Frome, and Real 2015; Liu et al. 2016b;
Zhao et al. 2016) to locate object parts with object category
annotations in a weakly supervised manner. However, both
types of methods have major practical limitations. Fully supervised methods need time-consuming, error-probing manual object part labeling process, while object labels alone
as a supervision signal is generally too weak to reliably
∗

Equal contribution.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4190

