Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Identifying Unknown Unknowns in the Open World:
Representations and Policies for Guided Exploration
Himabindu Lakkaraju,∗ Ece Kamar,+ Rich Caruana,+ Eric Horvitz+
∗

∗

Stanford University, + Microsoft Research
himalv@cs.stanford.edu, + {eckamar, rcaruana, horvitz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Predictive models deployed in the real world may assign incorrect labels to instances with high conﬁdence. Such errors
or unknown unknowns are rooted in model incompleteness,
and typically arise because of the mismatch between training
data and the cases encountered at test time. As the models are
blind to such errors, input from an oracle is needed to identify these failures. In this paper, we formulate and address the
problem of informed discovery of unknown unknowns of any
given predictive model where unknown unknowns occur due
to systematic biases in the training data. We propose a modelagnostic methodology which uses feedback from an oracle to
both identify unknown unknowns and to intelligently guide
the discovery. We employ a two-phase approach which ﬁrst
organizes the data into multiple partitions based on the feature similarity of instances and the conﬁdence scores assigned
by the predictive model, and then utilizes an explore-exploit
strategy for discovering unknown unknowns across these partitions. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our framework by
varying the underlying causes of unknown unknowns across
various applications. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the ﬁrst algorithmic approach to the problem of
discovering unknown unknowns of predictive models.

Figure 1: Unknown unknowns in an image classiﬁcation
task. Training data comprised only of images of black dogs
and of white and brown cats. A predictive model trained on
this data incorrectly labels a white dog (test image) as a cat
with high conﬁdence.
This mismatch could be a result of unmodeled biases in the
collection of training data or differences between the train
and test distributions due to temporal, spatial or other factors
such as a subtle shift in task deﬁnition. To illustrate, consider
an image classiﬁcation task where the goal is to predict if a
given image corresponds to a cat or a dog (Figure 1). Let
us assume that the training data is comprised of images of
black dogs, and white and brown cats, and the feature set
includes details such as nose shape, presence or absence of
whiskers, color, and shape of the eyes. A predictive model
trained on such data might learn to make predictions solely
based on color despite the presence of other discriminative
features because color can perfectly separate the two classes
in the training data. However, during test time, such a model
would classify an image of a white dog as a cat with high
conﬁdence. The images of white dogs are, therefore, unknown unknowns with regard to such a predictive model.
We formulate and address the problem of informed discovery of unknown unknowns of any given predictive model
when deployed in the wild. More speciﬁcally, we seek to
identify unknown unknowns which occur as a result of systematic biases in the training data. We formulate this as
an optimization problem where unknown unknowns are discovered by querying an oracle for true labels of selected

Introduction
Predictive models are widely employed in a variety of domains ranging from judiciary and health care to autonomous
driving. As we increasingly rely on these models for highstakes decisions, identifying and characterizing their unexpected failures in the open world is critical. We categorize
errors of a predictive model as: known unknowns and unknown unknowns (Attenberg, Ipeirotis, and Provost 2015).
Known unknowns are those data points for which the model
makes low conﬁdence predictions and errs. On the other
hand, unknown unknowns correspond to those points for
which the model is highly conﬁdent about its predictions
but is actually wrong. Since the model lacks awareness of
its unknown unknowns, approaches developed for addressing known unknowns (e.g., active learning (Settles 2009))
cannot be used for discovering unknown unknowns.
Unknown unknowns can arise when data that is used for
training a predictive model is not representative of the samples encountered at test time when the model is deployed.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2124

