Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Topic Aware Neural Response Generation
1

Chen Xing,1,2∗ Wei Wu,4 Yu Wu,3 Jie Liu,1,2 †
Yalou Huang,1,2 Ming Zhou,4 Wei-Ying Ma4

College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{v-chxing, wuwei, v-wuyu, mingzhou, wyma}@microsoft.com {jliu,huangyl}@nankai.edu.cn
and Li 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015a) from large scale social conversation data. Recently, neural network based methods have become mainstream because of their capability to
capture semantic and syntactic relations between messages
and responses in a scalable and end-to-end way. Sequenceto-sequence (Seq2Seq) with attention (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2014; Cho, Courville, and Bengio 2015) represents
a state-of-the-art neural network model for response generation. To engage people in conversation, the response generation algorithm in a chatbot should generate responses that
are not only natural and ﬂuent, but also informative and interesting. MT models such as Seq2Seq with attention, however, tend to generate trivial responses like “me too”, “I see”,
or “I don’t know” (Li et al. 2015) due to the high frequency
of these patterns in data. Although these responses are safe
for replying to many messages, they are boring and carry
little information. Such responses may quickly lead the conversation between human and machine to an end, severely
hurting the user experience of a chatbot.

Abstract
We consider incorporating topic information into a sequenceto-sequence framework to generate informative and interesting responses for chatbots. To this end, we propose a
topic aware sequence-to-sequence (TA-Seq2Seq) model. The
model utilizes topics to simulate prior human knowledge that
guides them to form informative and interesting responses in
conversation, and leverages topic information in generation
by a joint attention mechanism and a biased generation probability. The joint attention mechanism summarizes the hidden
vectors of an input message as context vectors by message attention and synthesizes topic vectors by topic attention from
the topic words of the message obtained from a pre-trained
LDA model, with these vectors jointly affecting the generation of words in decoding. To increase the possibility of topic
words appearing in responses, the model modiﬁes the generation probability of topic words by adding an extra probability item to bias the overall distribution. Empirical studies
on both automatic evaluation metrics and human annotations
show that TA-Seq2Seq can generate more informative and interesting responses, signiﬁcantly outperforming state-of-theart response generation models.

In this paper, we study the problem of response generation for chatbots. Particularly, we target the generation of
informative and interesting responses that can help chatbots
engage their users. Unlike Li et al. (Li et al. 2015) who try
to passively avoid generating trivial responses by penalizing their generation probabilities, we consider solving the
problem by actively bringing content into responses by topics. Given an input message, we predict possible topics that
can be talked about in responses, and generate responses for
the topics. The idea is inspired by our observation on conversations between humans. In human-human conversation,
people often associate an input message with topically related concepts in their mind. Based on the concepts, they
organize content and select words for their responses. For
example, to reply to “my skin is so dry”, people may think
it is a “skin” problem and can be alleviated by “hydrating”
and “moisturizing”. Based on this knowledge, they may give
more informative responses like “then hydrate and moisturize your skin” rather than trivial responses like “me too”.
The informative responses could let other people follow the
topics and continue talking about skin care. “Skin”, “hydrate”, and “moisturize” are topical concepts related to the
message. They represent people’s prior knowledge in conversation. In responding, people will bring content that is
relevant to the concepts to their responses and even directly

Introduction
Human-computer conversation is a challenging task in AI
and NLP. Existing conversation systems include task oriented dialog systems (Young et al. 2013) and non task oriented chatbots. Dialog systems aim to help people complete
speciﬁc tasks such as ordering and tutoring, while chatbots
are designed for realizing natural and human-like conversation with people regarding a wide range of issues in open domains (Perez-Marin 2011). Although previous research focused on dialog systems, recently, with the large amount of
conversation data available on the Internet, chatbots are becoming a major focus of both academia and industry.
A common approach to building the conversation engine
in a chatbot is learning a response generation model within
a machine translation (MT) framework (Ritter, Cherry, and
Dolan 2011; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Shang, Lu,
∗
The work was done when the ﬁrst author was an intern in Microsoft Research Asia.
†
He is the corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3351

