Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cycle-Based Singleton Local Consistencies
Robert J. Woodward,1,2 Berthe Y. Choueiry1

Christian Bessiere2

Constraint Systems Laboratory
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
{rwoodwar|choueiry}@cse.unl.edu

LIRMM-CNRS
University of Montpellier, France
bessiere@lirmm.fr

1

∗

2

We explore further reducing the cost of POAC by localizing the variables on which the singleton test is propagated.
As a ﬁrst step, we mimic the approach of Wallace (2015) for
SAC, restricting POAC to the direct neighborhood of each
variable. Then, we explore a completely new direction: we
restrict POAC to cycles in which a variable participates, the
rationale being that cycles channel propagation and are thus
likely to expose inconsistencies. We propose to use the cycles in a Minimum Cycle Basis (MCB) of a graph, which is
a graph-theoretic concept and can be efﬁciently computed
(Horton 1987). We discuss the resulting consistency properties and algorithms and empirically validate our approach.

Abstract
We propose to exploit cycles in the constraint network of a
Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) to vehicle constraint
propagation and improve the effectiveness of local consistency algorithms. We focus our attention on the consistency
property Partition-One Arc-Consistency (POAC), which is
a stronger variant of Singleton Arc-Consistency (SAC). We
modify the algorithm for enforcing POAC to operate on a
minimum cycle basis (MCB) of the incidence graph of the
CSP. We empirically show that our approach improves the
performance of problem solving and constitutes a novel and
effective localization of consistency algorithms. Although
this paper focuses on POAC, we believe that exploiting cycles, such as MCBs, is applicable to other consistency algorithms and that our study opens a new direction in the design
of consistency algorithms. This research is documented in a
technical report (Woodward, Choueiry, and Bessiere 2016).1

Background
A Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) is deﬁned by P =
(X , D, C). X is a set of variables, and each variable xi ∈ X
has a ﬁnite domain dom(xi ) ∈ D, where (xi , vi ) ∈ P if
vi ∈ dom(xi ). C is a set of constraints deﬁned as relations
over the domains of the variables. The question is to determine whether or not there is an assignment to the variables
that satisﬁes all the constraints. The incidence graph of a
CSP is a bipartite graph where one set of vertices contains
the variables of the CSP and the other set the constraints. An
edge connects a variable and a constraint if and only if the
variable appears in the scope of the constraint. The incidence
graph is the same graph used in the hidden-variable encoding (Rossi, Petrie, and Dhar 1990). We say that (xi , vi ) ∈ P
is SAC iff AC(P ∪ {xi ← vj }) is consistent (the singleton
test), where AC(P ∪ {xi ← vi }) is the CSP after assigning
xi ← vi and enforcing Arc Consistency (AC).

Introduction
Local consistency properties are enforced on a CSP to ﬁlter values from variables’ domains, reducing the size of the
search space. These properties can be enforced either before (i.e., pre-processing) or during (i.e., lookahead) search.
One such consistency property is Singleton Arc-Consistency
(SAC) (Debruyne and Bessière 1997). SAC performs a series of singleton tests by assigning a value to a variable and
enforcing arc consistency (AC) on the entire CSP. While
SAC is a strong form of consistency, enforcing it on a CSP
during search is prohibitively costly in practice. To reduce
the cost of SAC, Wallace (2015) proposed NSAC, restricting AC to the neighborhood of the variable. Bennaceur
and Affane (2001) proposed Partition-One Arc-Consistency
(POAC), a strictly stronger property than SAC. The algorithm for POAC operates similarly to SAC and can both reduce the cost of SAC and increase its ﬁltering. Balafrej et al.
(2014) further reduced the cost of POAC by interrupting the
POAC algorithm as soon as ﬁltering has subsided and before
a ﬁxpoint is reached. Their approach results in an adaptive
version of POAC, APOAC.

Deﬁnition 1 (Bennaceur and Affane 2001) A constraint
network P = (X , D, C) is Partition-One Arc-Consistent
(POAC) iff P is SAC and for all xi ∈ X , for all vi ∈
dom(xi ), for all xj ∈ X, there exists vj ∈ dom(xj ) such
that (xi , vi ) ∈ AC(P ∪ {xj ← vj }).
A cycle basis of a graph is a maximal set of linearly independent cycles: a cycle in the basis, represented as a set
of edges, cannot be obtained by taking the symmetric difference (exclusive-or) of the edges of other cycles in the basis
(Horton 1987). In unweighted graphs, a minimum cycle basis is one with the minimum total length of the cycles. An
MCB is efﬁciently computed but is not unique. We propose
to generate MCBs on the incidence graph of the CSP.

∗
Supported by NSF Grants No. RI-111795 and RI-1619344.
Experiments conducted at the Holland Computing Center of UNL.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

http://consystlab.unl.edu/our work/StudentReports/TR-UNL-CSE-20160004.pdf

5005

