Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Maximum Model Counting
Daniel J. Fremont and Markus N. Rabe and Sanjit A. Seshia
University of California, Berkeley
Email: {dfremont,rabe,sseshia}@berkeley.edu

Song 2009; Klebanov, Manthey, and Muise 2013). Solving #SAT is considered to be a very hard problem (Toda
1991) but effective approximation algorithms have been
found recently (Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013; 2016;
Ermon et al. 2013).
In this paper we deﬁne the maximum model counting
(Max#SAT) problem, which generalizes both MaxSAT and
#SAT and thereby combines the ability to optimize with the
power of succinct encodings of large summations.

Abstract
We introduce the problem Max#SAT, an extension of model
counting (#SAT). Given a formula over sets of variables X,
Y , and Z, the Max#SAT problem is to maximize over the
variables X the number of assignments to Y that can be extended to a solution with some assignment to Z. We demonstrate that Max#SAT has applications in many areas, showing how it can be used to solve problems in probabilistic inference (marginal MAP), planning, program synthesis, and
quantitative information ﬂow analysis. We also give an algorithm which by making only polynomially many calls to
an NP oracle can approximate the maximum count to within
any desired multiplicative error. The NP queries needed are
relatively simple, arising from recent practical approximate
model counting and sampling algorithms, which allows our
technique to be effectively implemented with a SAT solver.
Through several experiments we show that our approach can
be successfully applied to interesting problems.

Deﬁnition 1. Given a propositional formula ϕ(X, Y, Z)
over sets of variables X, Y , and Z, the Max#SAT problem
is to determine maxX #Y. ∃Z. ϕ(X, Y, Z).
Informally, the Max#SAT problem is to maximize over the
variables X the number of assignments to Y such that the
formula ϕ(X, Y, Z) is satisﬁable.
The main technical contribution of this paper is a randomized approximation algorithm for Max#SAT that estimates the maximum count up to a desired multiplicative error and conﬁdence. The algorithm avoids considering each of the exponentially many assignments over
which we maximize and instead encodes the problem in
polynomially many queries to an NP oracle. Speciﬁcally,
given ϕ(X, Y, Z) the algorithm 
considers a new formula
ψ(X, Y1 , . . . , Yk ) = ∃Z1 , . . . , Zk . i ϕ(X, Yi , Zi ), where
each Yi and Zi is a fresh copy of Y and Z. If ψ has N solutions,
then we prove that for a large enough k ∈ O(|X|),
√
k
N approximates the solution to the Max#SAT problem.
Furthermore, uniformly sampling from the solutions of ψ
yields a witnessing assignment to X that achieves close
to the maximum model count with high probability. The
counting and sampling operations need only be approximate, so that we can take advantage of efﬁcient SAT solverbased algorithms (Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2014; 2016;
Chakraborty et al. 2015).
In the second part of the paper we present encodings of
a variety of problems into Max#SAT and demonstrate the
applicability of our approximation algorithm. First we show
that Max#SAT generalizes MaxSAT by giving a reduction.
This also provides a new approach to the rich set of applications of MaxSAT, complementing existing algorithms that
rely on either cardinality constraints (Fu and Malik 2006)
or on the joint use of SAT and mixed integer programming
(MIP) solvers (Davies and Bacchus 2013).

Introduction
Algorithms for the Boolean satisﬁability problem (SAT)
have proved tremendously useful in a variety of application areas, including planning, security, and veriﬁcation.
SAT asks for some solution (a satisfying assignment) of a
Boolean formula, without regard to precisely which solution
we get. The maximum satisﬁability problem (MaxSAT) asks
for an assignment that satisﬁes the highest number of clauses
and thereby enables a search for “good” assignments. A
broad range of discrete optimization problems have thus
been encoded in MaxSAT, and a number of mature algorithms are available capable of solving large instances (Safarpour et al. 2007; Marques-Silva and Planes 2011; Davies
and Bacchus 2013).
A different, quantitative extension of SAT is the Boolean
model counting problem (#SAT), which asks for the number of solutions #X. ψ(X) of a given formula ψ. #SAT
allows us to encode summations over exponentially many
terms succinctly, which enables several applications including probabilistic inference (Sang, Beame, and Kautz
2005) and quantitative information ﬂow analysis (Backes,
Köpf, and Rybalchenko 2009; Newsome, McCamant, and
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3885

