Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Trust-Sensitive Evolution of DL-Lite Knowledge Bases∗
Dmitriy Zheleznyakov, Evgeny Kharlamov, Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{f_name.l_name}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Knowledge evolution in the context of DL KBs has
recently attracted a lot of attention from both practical
and foundational perspectives, see e.g. (Fridman Noy et
al. 2004; Haase and Stojanovic 2005; Flouris et al. 2008;
Konev, Walther, and Wolter 2008; Cuenca Grau et al. 2012;
Wu and Lécué 2014). Model-based approaches (MBAs) are
the most commonly studied. Under MBAs, the result of evolution is the set of ﬁrst-order interpretations M that are models
of N , minimally distant from the models of K. The latter condition corresponds to a widely accepted principle of minimal
change (Eiter and Gottlob 1992). Depending on how minimality and distance are deﬁned, one can obtain various evolution semantics and a number of them have been introduced
and studied (Qi and Du 2009; Calvanese et al. 2010; Wang,
Wang, and Topor 2010; Kharlamov and Zheleznyakov 2011;
Liu et al. 2011; Kharlamov, Zheleznyakov, and Calvanese
2013; Zhuang et al. 2014; Qi et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2015;
Zhuang et al. 2016).
To the best of our knowledge, all previous studies of KB
evolution assume that the new knowledge N should be fully
trusted and thus completely taken on board (see Related
Work section). However, this assumption does not hold in a
wide range of important applications (Suchanek and Weikum
2013) where N comes from a partially trusted source, e.g.,
from the Web or from a source with a limited expertise.
In this work we address this issue for MBAs and study
how an external notion of trust could be used in order to
determine how new knowledge should be integrated with existing knowledge. Following Hunter and Booth (2015), who
studied trust in the context of propositional belief revision,
we assume that the knowledge provider has expertise that
is restricted to a particular area and thus cannot distinguish
between certain states of the application domain—ﬁrst-order
interpretations in our case. We formalise such a notion of trust
as an equivalence relation on ﬁrst-order interpretations and
introduce four natural classes of trust. Then we use trust as
an external mechanism to relativise arbitrary interpretations
(not necessarily models of N ) to models of N by considering
equivalence classes of the latter’s models. This allows us to
deﬁne the result of evolution as a set of minimally distinct
interpretations M selected from these equivalence classes
instead of just models of N as in classical MBAs. Our trustsensitive evolution is generic in the sense that it is applicable
to KBs of any DL, and is backwards-compatible with classi-

Abstract
Evolution of Knowledge Bases (KBs) consists of incorporating new information in an existing KB. Previous studies
assume that the new information should be fully trusted and
thus completely incorporated in the old knowledge. We suggest a setting where the new knowledge can be partially trusted
and develop model-based approaches (MBAs) to KB evolution that rely on this assumption. Under MBAs the result of
evolution is a set of interpretations and thus two core problems
for MBAs are closure, i.e., whether evolution result can be
axiomatised with a KB, and approximation, i.e., whether it
can be (maximally) approximated with a KB. We show that
DL-Lite is not closed under a wide range of trust-sensitive
MBAs. We introduce a notion of s-approximation that improves the previously proposed approximations and show how
to compute it for various trust-sensitive MBAs.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a strong and increasing interest
in Description Logic (DL) knowledge bases (KBs) (Baader et
al. 2003) as a mechanism for representing structured knowledge; in particular, DLs became the foundation for OWL 2,
the standard ontology language of the Semantic Web. A DL
KB K consists of a TBox T that models at the intensional
level the static and structural aspects of an application domain, and an ABox A that models at the extensional level the
current state of affairs or data about individuals.
In many applications KBs are subject to changes, for
instance, when they are constructed from evolving Web
pages (Suchanek and Weikum 2013) or databases (Furche et
al. 2012), or created collaboratively (Bollacker et al. 2008;
Stearns et al. 2001). A typical scenario for such applications
is to incorporate in a given KB K an acquired KB N that expresses new information. In the case where N interacts with
K in an undesirable way, e.g., by causing the KB or relevant
parts of it to become unsatisﬁable, N cannot simply be added
to K. Different ways to address this problem are possible,
corresponding to different approaches for KB evolution.
∗

This research has been partially supported by the EU project
Optique (FP7-IP-318338), the Royal Society, the EPSRC grants
ED3 , DBonto, and MaSI3 .
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1266

