Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-View Correlated Feature Learning by
Uncovering Shared Component
Xiaowei Xue,1 Feiping Nie,2∗ Sen Wang,3 Xiaojun Chang,4 Bela Stantic,3 Min Yao1

1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, P.R. China
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
3
School of Information and Communication Technology, Grifﬁth University, Australia
4
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems (QCIS), University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{xwxue, myao}@zju.edu.cn, {feipingnie, cxj273}@gmail.com, {sen.wang, b.stantic}@grifﬁth.edu.au
2

Liu et al. 2015a; Nie, Li, and Li 2016; Chang et al. 2016a;
Gong et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2014) on multi-view learning
has demonstrated that sophisticated learning algorithms can
perform remarkably better performance than single-view
learning that only uses one type of feature or simply uses
all types of features as one feature.

Abstract
Learning multiple heterogeneous features from different data sources is challenging. One research topic is
how to exploit and utilize the correlations among various features across multiple views with the aim of improving the performance of learning tasks, such as classiﬁcation. In this paper, we propose a new multi-view
feature learning algorithm that simultaneously analyzes
features from different views. Compared to most of the
existing subspace learning methods that only focus on
exploiting a shared latent subspace, our algorithm not
only learns individual information in each view but also
captures feature correlations among multiple views by
learning a shared component. By assuming that such a
component is shared by all views, we simultaneously
exploit the shared component and individual information of each view in a batch mode. Since the objective function is non-smooth and difﬁcult to solve, we
propose an efﬁcient iterative algorithm for optimization
with guaranteed convergence. Extensive experiments
are conducted on several benchmark datasets. The results demonstrate that our proposed algorithm performs
better than all the compared multi-view learning algorithms.

In literatures (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013; Sun 2013), multiview learning can be roughly categorized into three groups:
1) co-training, 2) multiple kernel learning, and 3) subspace learning. Being one of representative works on semisupervised learning, the co-training was ﬁrstly introduced in
(Blum and Mitchell 1998). Assuming that each data point is
described by independent features in two views, co-training
trains a classiﬁer using labeled data in each view. Predictions
on new unlabeled data in one view are mutually used to enlarge the training set of the other view. Other learning techniques have also been combined to achieve better learning
results in different applications. Expectation-maximization
has been combined with co-training in (Nigam and Ghani
2000; Parker and Khan 2015) for lower errors. In (Brefeld
and Scheffer 2004), SVM was used to develop an extended version of co-EM for multi-view learning. In (Yu
et al. 2011), a Bayesian undirected graphical model was
used for co-training. Muslea et al. (Muslea, Minton, and
Knoblock 2002) claimed that active learning is beneﬁcial
to the co-training regarding robustness in the multi-view
learning problem. In Multiple Kernel Learning (MKL), each
kernel can be regarded as a view. A typical MKL algorithm aims to learn an ensemble of multiple kernels for
better performance of a certain application. Over the past
few years, a number of MKL algorithms (Kloft et al. 2008;
Gönen and Alpaydin 2008; Xu et al. 2009; Cortes, Mohri,
and Rostamizadeh 2009; Varma and Babu 2009; Yu et al.
2010) have been proposed and demonstrated that either linear or non-linear combinations of multiple kernels can lead
to better performance eventually. However, most of MKL
algorithms fail to consider correlations between views that
might broadly exist in the real-world scenarios, such as multimedia analysis.

Introduction
In recent years, due to the fact that the data representation
is becoming more diverse than before, the heterogeneous
features fusion has attract much research attention in various applications, such as computer vision (Peng et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2013; Zhu, Li, and Zhang 2016; Chang et al.
2016b), social media analysis (Meng, Tan, and Xu 2014;
Yang et al. 2013b), biomedical research (Liu et al. 2015b;
Nie et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016), etc.
For example, an image can have many representations with
respect to different types of visual features, e.g. texture
and color features. Content-based understanding of the image can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from properly fusing visual
features in different aspects. Multi-view learning has been
well studied as the solution to feature fusion over the past
years. A number of previous works (Zheng et al. 2015;

In the practical applications, such as multimedia domain,
each view is usually represented in a high-dimensional feature space which always leads to the curse of dimension-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2810

