Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Joint Copying and Restricted Generation for Paraphrase
1

Ziqiang Cao,1,2 Chuwei Luo,3 Wenjie Li,1,2 Sujian Li4

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, China
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
{cszqcao, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
luochuwei@whu.edu.cn
lisujian@pku.edu.cn

petitive performance, these models seldom take into account
the two major writing modes of paraphrase.
On the one hand, due to the nature of the task, keywords
of the source text are usually reserved in the target text.
However, with only one decoder generating over the entire vocabulary, a typical Seq2Seq model fails to reﬂect the
copying mode. As a result, many keywords provided in the
source text may be overlooked in the target text. In addition,
certain keywords like named entities are often rare words
and masked as unknown (UNK) tags in Seq2Seq models,
which unavoidably causes the decoder to generate a number
of UNK tags. Although not aiming to explicitly explore the
copying mechanism, the work of (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015) ﬁnds that it largely improves the performance to
add the input-related hand-crafted features to guide the generation.
On the other hand, rewriting also plays a signiﬁcant role in
paraphrase. In this writing mode, although the target words
are not the same as the source words, there are semantic
associations between them. For example, “seabird” is possibly generalized as “wildlife” in summarization, and “the
visually impaired” can be converted into “people who can
not see” in text simpliﬁcation. The decoders in most previous work generate words by simply picking the likely target
words that ﬁt the contexts out of a large vocabulary. This
common practice suffers from two problems. First, the computation complexity is linear to the vocabulary size. In order
to cover enough target words, the vocabulary size usually
reaches 104 or even 105 . Consequently, the decoding process becomes quite time-consuming. Moreover, the decoder
sometimes produces the named entities or numbers which
are common but do not exist in or even irrelevant to the input text, and in turn the meaningless paraphrases.
In this paper, we develop a novel Seq2Seq model called
CoRe, which captures the two core writing modes in paraphrase, i.e., Copying and Rewriting. CoRe fuses a copying decoder and a restricted generative decoder. Inspired by
(Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015), the copying decoder
ﬁnds the position to be copied based on the existing attention
mechanism. Therefore, the weights learned by the attention
mechanism have the explicit meanings in the copying mode.
Meanwhile, the generative decoder produces the words re-

Abstract
Many natural language generation tasks, such as abstractive summarization and text simpliﬁcation, are
paraphrase-orientated. In these tasks, copying and
rewriting are two main writing modes. Most previous
sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) models use a single
decoder and neglect this fact. In this paper, we develop
a novel Seq2Seq model to fuse a copying decoder and
a restricted generative decoder. The copying decoder
ﬁnds the position to be copied based on a typical attention model. The generative decoder produces words
limited in the source-speciﬁc vocabulary. To combine
the two decoders and determine the ﬁnal output, we
develop a predictor to predict the mode of copying or
rewriting. This predictor can be guided by the actual
writing mode in the training data. We conduct extensive experiments on two different paraphrase datasets.
The result shows that our model outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches in terms of both informativeness
and language quality.

Introduction
Paraphrase is a restatement of the meaning of a text using
other words. Many natural language generation tasks are
paraphrase-orientated. For example, abstractive summarization is to use a condensed description to summarize the main
idea of a document, while text simpliﬁcation is to simplify
the grammar and vocabulary of a document. In paraphrase,
copying and rewriting are two main writing modes. Recently, the encoder-decoder structure (aka. SeqsSeq model)
has become more and more popular in many language generation tasks (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Shang, Lu,
and Li 2015). In such a structure, the source text is encoded
by the encoder as a context vector. Then, a decoder decodes
the semantic information in the vector and outputs the target text. Studies such as (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015;
Hu, Chen, and Zhu 2015) have applied the popular SeqsSeq
model initially used in machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014) to the paraphrase task. Despite the comc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3152

