Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

ESPACE: Accelerating Convolutional Neural Networks
via Eliminating Spatial and Channel Redundancy
†

Shaohui Lin,†‡ Rongrong Ji,†‡∗ Chao Chen,†‡ Feiyue Huang,
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, 361005, China
‡
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China

BestImage Lab, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, China
shaohuilin007@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, silentcc@icloud.com, garyhuang@tencent.com
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) with about 600,000 nodes costs
240MB storage (including 61M parameters) and requires
729M FLOP2 to classify one image with size 224 × 224.
Such cost is further intensiﬁed in deeper CNNs, e.g. a 16layer-VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014) with 1.5M
nodes costs 528MB storage (including 144M parameters)
and requires about 15B FLOP to classify one image.
Under such circumstance, the existing CNNs cannot be
directly deployed to scenarios that require fast processing
and compact storage, such as streaming or real-time applications. On one hand, CNNs with million-scale parameters typically tend to be over parameterized and heavily
computed (Denil et al. 2013). Therefore, not all parameters and operations (e.g. convolution or non-linear activation) are essentially necessary in producing a discriminative decision. On the other hand, it is quantitatively shown in
(Ba and Caruana 2014) that, neither shallow nor simpliﬁed
CNNs provide comparable performance to deep CNNs with
billion-scale online operations. Therefore, to accelerate online CNNs predictions without signiﬁcantly decreasing the
decision accuracy, a natural thought is to discover and discard redundant parameters and operations in deep CNNs.
Accelerating CNNs has attracted a few research attention
very recently, most of which focus on accelerating the convolutional layer, which is the most time-consuming part of
CNNs. In the literature, the related works can be further categorized into four groups, i.e. designing compact convolutional ﬁlters, parameters quantization, parameters pruning
and tensor decomposition.
Designing compact convolutional ﬁlters. Using a compact ﬁlter for convolution can directly reduce the computation cost. The key idea is to replace the loose and
over-parametric ﬁlters with compact blocks to improve the
speed, which signiﬁcantly accelerate CNNs like GoogLeNet
(Szegedy et al. 2015), ResNet (He et al. 2015) on several benchmarks. Decomposing 3 × 3 convolution with two
1 × 1 convolutions was used in (Szegedy, Loffe, and Vanhoucke 2016), which achieved state-of-the-art acceleration
performance on object recognition. SqueezeNet (Iandola,
Moskewicz, and Ashraf 2016) was proposed to replace 3 × 3
convolution with 1 × 1 convolution, which created a com-

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed an extensive popularity of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in various computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence applications. However, the performance gains have come at a cost of substantially intensive computation complexity, which prohibits its usage in
resource-limited applications like mobile or embedded devices. While increasing attention has been paid to the acceleration of internal network structure, the redundancy of visual
input is rarely considered. In this paper, we make the ﬁrst
attempt of reducing spatial and channel redundancy directly
from the visual input for CNNs acceleration. The proposed
method, termed ESPACE (Elimination of SPAtial and Channel rEdundancy), works by the following three steps: First,
the 3D channel redundancy of convolutional layers is reduced
by a set of low-rank approximation of convolutional ﬁlters.
Second, a novel mask based selective processing scheme is
proposed, which further speedups the convolution operations
via skipping unsalient spatial locations of the visual input.
Third, the accelerated network is ﬁne-tuned using the training data via back-propagation. The proposed method is evaluated on ImageNet 2012 with implementations on two widelyadopted CNNs, i.e. AlexNet and GoogLeNet. In comparison to several recent methods of CNN acceleration, the proposed scheme has demonstrated new state-of-the-art acceleration performance by a factor of 5.48× and 4.12× speedup
on AlexNet and GoogLeNet, respectively, with a minimal decrease in classiﬁcation accuracy.

Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
demonstrated impressive performance in various computer
vision and artiﬁcial intelligence applications, such as object
recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012)(Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)(Lecun et al. 1998)(Szegedy
et al. 2015)(He et al. 2015), object detection (Girshick et
al. 2014)(Girshick 2015)(Ren et al. 2015), and image retrieval (Gong et al. 2014b). The cutting-edge CNNs are
computationally intensive, in which the speed limitation
mainly resorts to the convolution operations in the convolutional layers1 . For example, an 8-layer AlexNet (Krizhevsky,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this paper, we focus on the acceleration of the convolutional
layers, as it takes up over 80% running time in most existing CNNs,

i.e. AlexNet, GoogLeNet and VGGNet.
2
FLOP: The number of Floating-point operation to classify one
image with CNNs.

1424

