Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automated Negotiating Agents Competition (ANAC)
Catholijn M. Jonker, Reyhan Aydoğan, Tim Baarslag,
Katsuhide Fujita, Takayuki Ito, Koen Hindiks
Interactive Intelligence Group, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Computer Science, Özyeğin University, Istanbul,Turkey
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI), The Netherlands
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan
Institute of Engineering, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan
same set of opponents, negotiations in special domains, and
negotiating against humans. The topics of upcoming challenges is determined by the research community. The meeting during which the results are presented is used to gather
opinions, decisions on the topics are ﬁnalized through emails
and polls.
The next sections discuss the benchmark characteristics of
negotiation scenarios, an overview of which challenges were
posed in what year (Table 1), a short description of GENIUS,
and some future challenges. The references section contains
publications of the results of competitions, descriptions of
ﬁnalist agents, and descriptions of the platforms used.

Abstract
The annual International Automated Negotiating Agents
Competition (ANAC) is used by the automated negotiation
research community to benchmark and evaluate its work and
to challenge itself. The benchmark problems and evaluation
results and the protocols and strategies developed are available to the wider research community.

Motivation and Aims
The negotiations studied are classiﬁed into bilateral and
multilateral. Automated bilateral negotiations were already
studied extensively before the start of the ANAC competition. However, work before ANAC presented individual solutions, claiming improvements over other approaches on
the basis of performing well in rather speciﬁc example domains. The construction of GENIUS1 (Lin et al. 2014) was
done with aim of addressing this problem and immediately
opened the possibility of organizing ANAC. This brought
the research community together and led to signiﬁcant improvements on the agents for automated bilateral negotiations on linear additive domains. In a few years the improvements were getting smaller and the community realized that
it was time to tackle new challenges.The automated negotiating agents competition has the following aims:
1. to provide an incentive for the development of effective
and efﬁcient negotiation protocols and strategies for bidding, accepting and opponent modeling for different negotiation scenarios
2. to collect and develop a benchmark of negotiation scenarios, protocols and strategies
3. to develop a common set of tools and criteria for the evaluation and exploration of new protocols and new strategies against benchmark scenarios, protocols and strategies
4. to set the research agenda for automated negotiation.
Originally, the competition focused on the area of bilateral
multi-issue closed negotiation. Over the years the competition has addressed various topics: varying the number of negotiators, the complexity of the negotiation domains (additive linear versus non-linear), repeated negotiations with the

Benchmark Characteristics
Negotiation scenarios describe the protocol, the domain of
negotiation, and the preference proﬁles. Protocols describe
what information can be exchanged and the timing aspects.
For the sake of research the scenarios also deﬁne what
information the agents can maintain over negotiation
sessions.
Domain Complexity In all competitions (except the
Diplomacy track) we vary the size of the domain: small
domains of some dozens of outcomes, thousands, and
hundreds of thousands (or more) possible outcomes. In
some competitions we use relatively simple structured
domains for which the preference proﬁles can be modelled
using additive linear utility functions, but in others we use
rectilinear hypercubes to model domains having non-linear
interdependencies between issues.
Information Sharing Closed negotiation, when opponents
do not reveal their preferences to each other, is an important class of real-life negotiations. As the game-theoretic
approaches cannot be directly applied to design efﬁcient
negotiating agents due to the lack of information about
opponent, instead, heuristic approaches are used to design
negotiating agents. However, when humans are at the
negotiating table, they typically prefer to share more than
just bids. Negotiators can share some information of what
issues are important to them, can indicate that they like one
offer better than another, and so on. Per competition the
type of information that is shared is indicated. So far, we
never chose for completely open negotiations, i.e., where

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://ii.tudelft.nl/genius

5070

