Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Beneﬁt in Free Information Disclosure
When Selling Information to People
Shani Alkoby

David Sarne

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
shani.alkoby@gmail.com

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
sarned@cs.biu.ac.il

study strategic behavior of such entities is mostly limited
to how they should price their services (Alkoby, Sarne, and
David 2014; Lai et al. 2014; Cheng and Koehler 2003;
Hajaj and Sarne 2014; Sarne, Alkoby, and David 2014b). In
this paper we investigate a complimentary means aiming to
increase the likelihood of information purchase—an a priori
free information disclosure.
The main idea of free information disclosure is that
through the elimination of some of the possible outcomes,
knowing the true outcome becomes highly valuable. For example, consider a passenger that is about to go on a ﬂight
from NY to Paris in order to attend an important business
meeting. Now suppose the possible outcomes of the ﬂight
are: (i) arriving on time, with an a priori probability of
94.4%; (ii) arriving an hour late, with an a priori probability
of 4.1%; or (iii) missing the meeting because the ﬂight gets
canceled due to a union strike, with an a priori probability
of 1.5%. Knowing the true outcome (e.g., by purchasing it
from an oracle or a corrupted union member) has very little value, as the chance of not arriving to the meeting on
time is very small (1.5%). However assume the oracle publicly announces that the ﬂight is not going to arrive on time
(i.e., eliminating the ﬁrst outcome, hence reducing the set
of possible outcomes to the latter two). Now, there is much
value in being able to distinguish between the two remaining
outcomes—the naive posterior probability of ending up with
a canceled ﬂight due to a strike is 27%. Therefore the passenger will be willing to pay a substantial amount in order
to obtain this information. Still, the above naive probability
update process does not take into account the strategic considerations that lead the information provider to publicly disclose some of the information she holds. The incorporation
of the strategic aspect of the interaction results in a somehow
different probabilistic update and in fact we can prove that
free information disclosure is necessarily detrimental in this
case. However, when dealing with people, the above does
not necessarily hold. It is well known that people are often
irrational (Rabin 1998; Kahneman 2000; Azaria et al. 2015;
Buntain, Azaria, and Kraus 2014). Therefore, it is possible
that they will not take into consideration the strategic nature
of the interaction or even fail to properly reason about the
value of information to some extent, making free information disclosure beneﬁcial for the information provider.
This paper provides a comprehensive experimental evalu-

Abstract
This paper studies the beneﬁt for information providers
in free public information disclosure in settings where the
prospective information buyers are people. The underlying
model, which applies to numerous real-life situations, considers a standard decision making setting where the decision
maker is uncertain about the outcomes of her decision. The
information provider can fully disambiguate this uncertainty
and wish to maximize her proﬁt from selling such information. We use a series of AMT-based experiments with people
to test the beneﬁt for the information provider from reducing
some of the uncertainty associated with the decision maker’s
problem, for free. Free information disclosure of this kind
can be proved to be ineffective when the buyer is a fullyrational agent. Yet, when it comes to people we manage to
demonstrate that a substantial improvement in the information provider’s proﬁt can be achieved with such an approach.
The analysis of the results reveals that the primary reason for
this phenomena is people’s failure to consider the strategic
nature of the interaction with the information provider. Peoples’ inability to properly calculate the value of information
is found to be secondary in its inﬂuence.

Introduction
Information providers have become an integral part of almost every aspect of modern life. Information providing
can have many forms. For example, an information provider
can be an expert: a weatherman offering a forecast for the
weather on our upcoming wedding day, an accountant offering information about the worth of a company we plan to
take over on or a mechanic offering a reliable estimate for
the value of a used car we intend to buy. Another example is
information platforms or services such as TripAdvisor that
provides traveling-related information, CarFax that provides
detailed reports on used cars and online credit-report services. Common to all the above, that they aim to provide the
user with information about the identity, nature or value of
the different opportunities that can potentially become available to her in a given environment. The information provided
eliminates much of the uncertainty associated with the outcomes of different decision alternatives, hence its value.
While the study of information providers in multi-agent
settings is extensive, the focus of prior work aiming to
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

985

