Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Boosting for Real-Time
Multivariate Time Series Classiﬁcation
†

Haishuai Wang,† Jun Wu‡
Centre for Quantum Computing & Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney
‡
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
haishuai.wang@student.uts.edu.au; wuj@bjtu.edu.cn

tree). No effective strategy exists to support classiﬁcation for
multivariate time series stream. Intuitively, a trivial solution
is to partition time series into a number of chunks and carry
out classiﬁer learning in each individual subset. This simple solution, however, does not allow time series subsets to
collaborate with each other to train robust models (Wang et
al. 2016). To solve the challenges, we propose, in this paper,
a time series ensemble boosting algorithm for MTS stream
classiﬁcation by learning shapelets from MTS.

Abstract
Multivariate time series (MTS) is useful for detecting
abnormity cases in healthcare area. In this paper, we
propose an ensemble boosting algorithm to classify abnormality surgery time series based on learning shapelet
features. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst learn shapelets by logistic
regression from multivariate time series. Based on the
learnt shapelets, we propose a MTS ensemble boosting
approach when the time series arrives as stream fashion.
Experimental results on a real-world medical dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Boosting Algorithm for Real-time Multivariate
Time Series Classiﬁcation

Introduction

In this section, we ﬁrst propose a method to learn shapelet
features from multivariate time series data. Then, we present
our boosting algorithm to classify abnormality time series
based on the learnt shapelet features.

There is a signiﬁcant public health concern regarding major complications and death following surgery. Forty million Americans undergo surgery yearly. Approximately ﬁve
percent die within a year of their operations, and roughly
ten percent suffer major in-hospital morbidity (e.g., stroke,
heart attack, pneumonia). Early recognition of risk and appropriate management could often prevent or modify these
adverse outcomes. Modern intraoperative monitoring yields
a wealth of data from thousands of operating rooms. Integration and real-time analysis of these data streams has the
potential to revolutionize perioperative care.
The constantly being produced data from medical sensors are often taken as time series, since time series consists
of ordered sequences of pairs (timestamps, data elements)
(Anguera et al. 2016; Sow, Turaga, and Schmidt 2013).
However, the time series are commonly as multivariate time
series (MTS) since the collected data probably from various measure sensors (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure, etc.).
In the process of operation, medical sensors real-time generate data which forms time series data stream. Thus, detecting abnormality time series timely is signiﬁcant to increase
survival rate. This work aims to real-time distinguish abnormalities from normal multivariate time series.
To date, dynamic time warping (DTW) and shapelets are
commonly used for time series classiﬁcation (Grabocka et
al. 2014; Górecki and Łuczak 2015). Unfortunately, existing
DTW and shapelets approaches all work on static time series
datasets with regression or simple classiﬁer (e.g., decision

Shapelet Features Extraction
Assume a multivariate time series databset T is composed
of N -dimensional, each dimension has I training series instances, and each series contains Q-many ordered values,
the multivariate time series is denoted as T (N ×I)×Q . Consider a sliding window of length L. The window starts at
time j on i-th series of n-th dimension Tin ∈ T is deﬁned as
n
n
, · · · , Ti,j+L−1
). When the window slides along a time
(Ti,j
series, there are totally Q − L + 1 ordered sub-sequences
(segments) of a series. We use label 1 to denote abnormality
time series and 0 for others. Thus, we have a label matrix
Y ∈ {0, 1}(N ×I) .
Shapelets are deﬁned as the most discriminative time series segments. The K-most informative shapelets of length
L in n-th dimension are denoted as S n ∈ RK×L .
Based on the learning shapelets on univariate time series
approach presented by (Grabocka et al. 2014), we revise
their method to learn shapelets on multivariate time series.
In n-th dimension of multivariate time series, the distance
between the i-th series Tin and the k-th shapelet Skn is den
among the distance beﬁned as the minimum distance Mi,k
n
tween the shapelet Sk and each segment j of Tin , as shown
in Eq. 1.
L
1 n
n
n 2
Mi,k
= min
(Ti,j+l−1 − Sk,l
)
(1)
j=1,··· ,J L

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

l=1

4999

