Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Towards Continuous Scientific Data Analysis and Hypothesis Evolution
Yolanda Gil,1 Daniel Garijo,1 Varun Ratnakar,1 Rajiv Mayani,1
Ravali Adusumilli,2 Hunter Boyce,2 Arunima Srivastava,2 Parag Mallick2
1

Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California,
4676 Admiralty Way, Marina del Rey CA, 90292, USA. {gil, dgarijo, varunr, mayani}@isi.edu
2Stanford School of Medicine, Canary Center for Early Cancer Detection, Stanford University
1265 Welch Road, Stanford CA 94305, USA. {ravali, hboyce, arus, paragm}@stanford.edu

Our goal is to automatically and continuously analyze
scientific data as it becomes available, so scientists can be
alerted if their prior studies are affected or if new results
are gleamed. In prior work, we developed an approach to
represent hypotheses and link them to relevant data to be
analyzed, test them through lines of inquiry that capture
expert-grade data analysis strategies, and aggregate the
analysis results through meta-reasoning to combine the
evidence gathered and generate revised hypotheses and
confidence values [Gil et al 2016]. We implemented our
approach in the DISK (Automated DIscovery of Scientific
Knowledge) framework, and demonstrated that DISK
could reproduce the results from a seminal cancer article
that reported on comprehensive analyses of two open data
repositories.
In this paper, we report on new work to address automated and continuous hypothesis revision as new data becomes available. The novel contributions of this work are:
1) a framework to continuously select appropriate data to
test the hypotheses under consideration and to launch appropriate analyses, 2) a hypothesis representation that can
represent hypothesis evolution along with supporting evidence, and 3) an implementation of our approach in DISK.
We present a preliminary evaluation in cancer multi-omics,
where new data and new kinds of observations become
available over time and affect prior findings.

Abstract
Scientific data is continuously generated throughout the
world. However, analyses of these data are typically performed exactly once and on a small fragment of recently
generated data. Ideally, data analysis would be a continuous
process that uses all the data available at the time, and
would be automatically re-run and updated when new data
appears. We present a framework for automated discovery
from data repositories that tests user-provided hypotheses
using expert-grade data analysis strategies, and reassesses
hypotheses when more data becomes available. Novel contributions of this approach include a framework to trigger
new analyses appropriate for the available data through lines
of inquiry that support progressive hypothesis evolution,
and a representation of hypothesis revisions with provenance records that can be used to inspect the results. We
implemented our approach in the DISK framework, and
evaluated it using two scenarios from cancer multi-omics: 1)
data for new patients becomes available over time, 2) new
types of data for the same patients are released. We show
that in all scenarios DISK updates the confidence on the
original hypotheses as it automatically analyzes new data.

Introduction
In many areas of science, sensors and instruments are continuously collecting data. Yet most research projects analyze data at a particular point in time, and once articles are
published they are rarely revisited to account for new data.
In some cases, this makes sense since more data may only
be tangentially related, and thus may not be relevant to
include in a joint analysis. However, in many cases the
availability of additional data may significantly affect prior
results, by confirming with additional evidence or invalidating them. In addition, the new data may enable new
types of analyses, leading to important revisions of prior
findings or to entirely new findings.

Motivating Scenarios from Multi-Omics
In many science domains, new data continuously becomes
available to researchers. This is the case with cancer multi-omics, where data for new patients and new kinds of
data are generated continuously. Multi-omic analysis enables the study of the genome (genomics data), its products,
which include expressed RNAs and proteins (transcriptomics and proteomics data respectively), and how those products interact amongst themselves and with the genome to
drive cell behavior (phenotypic data) [Ritchie et al 2015].

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4406

