Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Diversiﬁed Generative Latent
Variable Model for WiFi-SLAM
Hao Xiong, Dacheng Tao
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
hao.xiong@student.uts.edu.au
dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

to a set of wireless signal strength measurements associated
with their ground truth location from a mobile device. Such
approaches have proven to be extraordinarily effective for
robot localization.
Nevertheless, these methods are highly dependent on labeled ground truth location data, restricting their ﬂexibility
and applicability. Put another way, mobile devices cannot
be localized based on raw, unlabeled signal strength data.
Although SLAM methods have been developed that simultaneously estimate the location and map an environment, the
nature of wireless signal strength prohibits the use of standard SLAM in this scenario.
Ferris et al. (Ferris, Fox, and Lawrence 2007) presented Gaussian process latent variable model (GPLVM)based WiFi-SLAM to perform localization without the
need for ground truth-labeled physical locations. They
projected high-dimensional signal strength data into twodimensional latent variables, where the two-dimensional
latent variables were considered the x-y-coordinates of
the robot. GPLVM-based WiFi-SLAM also incorporated
three types of constraints: locations→signal strengths, signal strengths→locations and locations→locations. As a consequence, this technique produced a more accurate signal
strength map that could be further used to estimate the physical locations of mobile devices.
WiFi-SLAM employs GPLVMs (Lawrence 2004) to
project signal strength measurements into a simpler latent
structure. Then, the inferred two-dimensional latent structure is used to ﬁnd the x-y coordinates of the WiFi access points. In practice, the WiFi access points constantly
send signals from widely distributed locations. Therefore,
GPLVM is needed to generate the latent variables of the xy coordinates that span the WiFi signal space as diversely
as possible. However, the GPLVMs in WiFi-SLAM create
highly redundant latent structures without taking diversity
into account. This is because GPLVM places large probability masses on the places where most WiFi access points
are located and, conversely, small probability masses on the
places where the wireless signal are weak.
Rather than creating latent variables with preferences and
redundancy, a unique group of latent variables would ideally
be created on the full characteristics of the signal strength
measurements. In this paper, we propose DGLVM to place
a diversity-encouraging prior on the independent latent dis-

Abstract
WiFi-SLAM aims to map WiFi signals within an unknown
environment while simultaneously determining the location
of a mobile device. This localization method has been extensively used in indoor, space, undersea, and underground
environments. For the sake of accuracy, most methods label
the signal readings against ground truth locations. However,
this is impractical in large environments, where it is hard
to collect and maintain the data. Some methods use latent
variable models to generate latent-space locations of signal
strength data, an advantage being that no prior labeling of
signal strength readings and their physical locations is required. However, the generated latent variables cannot cover
all wireless signal locations and WiFi-SLAM performance is
signiﬁcantly degraded. Here we propose the diversiﬁed generative latent variable model (DGLVM) to overcome these
limitations. By building a positive-deﬁnite kernel function,
a diversity-encouraging prior is introduced to render the generated latent variables non-overlapping, thus capturing more
wireless signal measurements characteristics. The deﬁned objective function is then solved by variational inference. Our
experiments illustrate that the method performs WiFi localization more accurately than other label-free methods.

1

Introduction

Robot localization plays a crucial role in applications such as
activity recognition, surveillance, and content-aware computing. Owing to the portability, low price, and high accuracy of WiFi access points, WiFi-based simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) has been extremely useful for mobile device localization. Exploiting wireless signal strength for robot localization is a relatively novel but
increasingly useful research ﬁeld. Here we propose a new
localization approach that utilizes WiFi access points and
aims to improve robot localization.
There is no deﬁnite link between the WiFi signal strength
and location of a mobile device; therefore, it is difﬁcult to
generate a good likelihood model of signal strength measurements that can be used to accurately predict the physical location of a mobile device. Most methods seek to develop robust likelihood models from calibration data collected in a given environment, where calibration data refers
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3841

