Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Local Centroids Structured Non-Negative Matrix Factorization
1

2

Hongchang Gao,1 Feiping Nie,2,1∗ Heng Huan1∗

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Texas, USA
School of Computer Science, OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{hongchanggao, feipingnie}@gmail.com, heng@uta.edu

To address different problems, numerous variants have
been proposed in the past ten years. For instance, semiNMF and convex-NMF are proposed in (Ding, Li, and Jordan 2010). Semi-NMF relaxes the non-negative constraint
of data matrix and basis matrix, while convex-NMF restricts
the basis is a convex combination of the data points. TriFactorization is proposed in (Ding et al. 2006) to factorize a non-negative data matrix into three non-negative factor matrices. This model performs clustering on both row
space and column space simultaneously, which makes it
suitable for document analysis. To tackle noises and outliers
existing in data matrix, 2,1 -norm NMF and capped norm
NMF are proposed to solve different applications (Kong,
Ding, and Huang 2011; Gao et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2014;
Wang, Nie, and Huang 2015). With these models, NMF has
been widely used for many data mining applications, such as
face recognition (Gao et al. 2015), text and document mining
(Ding, Li, and Peng 2006), human action analysis (Wang,
Nie, and Huang 2016) and so on.
As a clustering method, the two factor matrices of NMF
correspond to the clustering centroid and indicator respectively. The clustering result is indicated by the maximal
element of each indicator vector, which means the corresponding centroid can be viewed as the representative of that
cluster. Almost all the existing NMF methods use only one
centroid to represent each cluster. Such a centroid can be
viewed as a global representative and it depicts its cluster
very coarsely due to losing a lot of local manifold structure.
Data points in real-world applications usually lie in a complicated geometry structure, the global centroid is easy to
fail in depicting its cluster. Therefore, how to capture the
complicated local manifold structure is important to NMF.
In this paper, we propose a novel local centroids structured NMF to handle data points lying in a complicated geometry structure. The novelty lies in three aspects. First,
instead of using single centroid for each cluster, we introduce multiple local centroids for individual cluster such that
the manifold structure can be captured by the local centroids. Second, although there exists multiple local centroids
in each cluster, we do not employ all of them to represent
each data point. To preserve the local manifold information, we only adopt the nearby centroids to represent each
data point. Third, since each data point is encoded by a few
nearby centroids, the clustering indicator cannot be obtained

Abstract
Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) has attracted much
attention and been widely used in real-world applications.
As a clustering method, it fails to handle the case where
data points lie in a complicated geometry structure. Existing
methods adopt single global centroid for each cluster, failing to capture the manifold structure. In this paper, we propose a novel local centroids structured NMF to address this
drawback. Instead of using single centroid for each cluster,
we introduce multiple local centroids for individual cluster
such that the manifold structure can be captured by the local centroids. Such a novel NMF method can improve the
clustering performance effectively. Furthermore, a novel bipartite graph is incorporated to obtain the clustering indicator
directly without any post process. Experiments on both toy
datasets and real-world datasets have veriﬁed the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) has attracted extensive attention during the past two decades. It is to factorize a non-negative matrix into two non-negative factor matrices. Such a non-negativity property makes it easy to interpret
for real-world data mining applications, compared with the
general matrix factorization method, such as SVD and QR
whose elements can be both positive and negative.
The seminal works (Lee and Seung 1999; 2001) give a
parts-based-representation explanation about the factor matrices and propose how to compute them efﬁciently, which
facilitates the development of NMF. Furthermore, the relationship between NMF and K-means, spectral clustering is
disclosed in (Ding, He, and Simon 2005) where NMF is
proved to be a clustering method. To improve its clustering performance, (Ding et al. 2006) proposed the orthogonal NMF where the indicator matrix has the orthogonal constraint. Such a constraint makes the indicator matrix unique
and be easily interpreted in a clustering view (Ding et al.
2006). Then, NMF is widely used for clustering problems.
∗
Corresponding authors. This work was partially supported by
the following grants: NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSFDBI 1356628, NSF-IIS 1619308, NSF-IIS 1633753, NIH R01
AG049371.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1905

