Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Examples-Rules Guided Deep Neural
Network for Makeup Recommendation
Taleb Alashkar1 , Songyao Jiang1 , Shuyang Wang1 , and Yun Fu1,2
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
2
College of Computer & Information Science,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
{taleb, syjiang, shuyangwang, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu
intervention for every step. Some works tried to make the
process more automatic by transferring a complete makeup
style from one face to another like in (Guo and Sim 2009;
Xu, Du, and Zhang 2013). More recently, some works tried
to close the loop by recommending and implementing the
makeup style (Scherbaum et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2013). In
this paper, we aim to answer these two questions by proposing a fully automatic facial makeup recommendation and an
efﬁcient synthesis system. We use a deep neural network
model trained by before and after makeup labeled images
and harnessed by makeup knowledge base system rules. Our
proposed system is based on two main premises: 1) makeup
style elements should be chosen according to the facial attributes. 2) makeup expert knowledge comes from certain
rules of makeup art and their own experience in this domain. The proposed framework starts by analyzing the user’s
facial attributes, then the values of these facial attributes
are passed, as input, to a deep learning based recommendation system. The suggested makeup style will be synthesized automatically on the user facial image to show how the
face will look like after makeup. Fig.1 illustrates a general
overview of our proposed examples-rules guided makeup
recommendation framework. Related work to makeup and
symbolic neural network are discussed brieﬂy.
Makeup recommendation: recently, few works addressed
the problem of facial makeup style suggestion and implementation. In (Scherbaum et al. 2011), they collected 2D
images and 3D models for 56 females before and after professional makeup. Relying on the difference in the facial appearance of the same female, they learned a mapping model
between facial space and makeup space. Makeup suggestion
was done by ﬁnding the closest face in the database to the
test face using Eigen features distance and transferring its
professional makeup to the test face. The few number of examples in the dataset and the ability to transfer the makeup
under different conditions make the generality of this recommendation system questionable. In (Liu et al. 2013), beauty
e-Expert suggestion system for makeup and hair style was
presented. A generative recommendation model was built
by learning the relation between the beauty-related attributes
(facial traits) and beauty attributes (makeup style). The unavailability of images before makeup in the database makes
extracting important facial traits for makeup suggestion like
real skin color, eye shapes and eyes color very difﬁcult. Also

Abstract
In this paper, we consider a fully automatic makeup recommendation system and propose a novel examples-rules guided
deep neural network approach. The framework consists of
three stages. First, makeup-related facial traits are classiﬁed
into structured coding. Second, these facial traits are fed into
examples-rules guided deep neural recommendation model
which makes use of the pairwise of Before-After images and
the makeup artist knowledge jointly. Finally, to visualize the
recommended makeup style, an automatic makeup synthesis
system is developed as well. To this end, a new Before-After
facial makeup database is collected and labeled manually, and
the knowledge of makeup artist is modeled by knowledge
base system. The performance of this framework is evaluated
through extensive experimental analyses. The experiments
validate the automatic facial traits classiﬁcation, the recommendation effectiveness in statistical and perceptual ways and
the makeup synthesis accuracy which outperforms the state
of the art methods by large margin. It is also worthy to note
that the proposed framework is a pioneering fully automatic
makeup recommendation systems to our best knowledge.

Introduction
For thousands of years, people have used facial makeup to
improve or change their look. Facial Makeup can increase
their perceived attractiveness, cancel age cues and give them
different looks for different occasions and events. The ﬁrst
basic question that faces almost every person who likes to
wear makeup is: What is the best makeup style to wear today? Actually, it is not an easy question due to the highly
diversiﬁed makeup styles. The second question after choosing the makeup style is: How will I look like after wearing
this makeup style? It is difﬁcult to foretell that in advance
due to the different look-and-feel of the same makeup style
on different faces. The efforts to answer these both questions
computationally receive more attention in machine learning, multimedia and image analysis domains recently. Heading in this direction started by creating tools online to implement virtual makeup on the user’s photo manually like
TAAZ1 and DailyMakever2 , but such tools require user’s
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
taaz .com
2
dailymakeover .com

941

