Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automatically Extracting Axioms in Classical Planning
(Extended Abstract)
Shuwa Miura and Alex Fukunaga
Department of General Systems Studies
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo
miura-shuwa@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, fukunaga@idea.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Axioms can be used to model derived predicates in domainindependent planning models. Formulating models which use
axioms can sometimes result in problems with much smaller
search spaces than the original model. We propose a method
for automatically extracting a particular class of axioms from
standard STRIPS PDDL models. More speciﬁcally, we identify operators whose effects become irrelevant given some
other operator, and generate axioms that capture this relationship. We show that this algorithm can be used to successfully
extract axioms from standard IPC benchmark instances, and
show that the extracted axioms can be used to signiﬁcantly
improve the performance of an IP-based planner.

(a) Sokoban

(b) Sokoban with Axioms

Figure 1: The search space of the Sokoban domain

1

Introduction

Previous work on derived predicates and axioms for planning
has focused on the advantages of expressivity (compactness)
of domain modeling using axioms, (Thiébaux, Hoffmann,
and Nebel 2005), as well as search algorithms which are
aware of axioms (Ivankovic and Haslum 2015b). Previous
work has shown that axioms are a type of structure which can
be exploited by a search algorithm to solve problems more
efﬁciently, compared to a version of the problem without
explicit axioms.
Consider the single-agent puzzle Sokoban, in which the
player pushes stones around in a maze. The goal is to push
all the stones to their destinations. The standard PDDL formulation of Sokoban used in the International Planning Competition(IPC) consists of two kinds of operators, push and
move. push lets the player push a box in one direction, while
move moves the player into an unoccupied location.
Ivankovic and Haslum (2015a) proposed a new formulation of Sokoban with axioms and showed that this leads
to a problem with a smaller search space (Ivankovic and
Haslum 2015b). They remove the move operators entirely,
and introduce axioms to check whether the player can reach
a box to push it. The reformulated push operators now have
a derived predicate reachable(loc) instead of at-player=loc as
their precondition. The values of the derived predicates are
determined by the following axioms:
1. reachable(loc) ← at-player=loc

2. reachable(loc) ← reachable(from), clear(loc), adj(from,loc)
Intuitively, the ﬁrst axiom means that the current location
of the player is reachable. The second axiom means a location next to a reachable location is also reachable. Figure1
illustrates the search space with and without axioms.
While previous work focused on axioms as expressive domain modelling constructs used by human domain modellers,
this abstract shows that axioms can also be viewed as structure to be discovered and exploited. We investigate a completely automated, reformulation approach which extracts
axioms from standard PDDL domains, solves the reformulated problem instance with an axiom-aware planner, and
then converts the solution to the axiom-enhanced problem
back into a valid plan for the original problem instance.
We propose methods for automatically extracting two
classes of axioms from standard (axiom-free) SAS+(STRIPS)
planning models. Our ﬁrst method partitions the operators in
a SAS+ model into observable operators, which are in some
sense “fundamental” operators, and τ -operators, which are
“auxiliary” operators. Given a list of observable operators to
execute, a set of τ -operators to be executed is implied. For
example, in Sokoban, push are observable operators while
move are τ -operators, since once a push operator is applied,
there must have been a way to reach the location using move
operators. We reformulate the problem such that the preconditions of the observable operators are derived predicates which
are established by τ -operators, and τ -axioms representing
how these derived predicates are implied are added to the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4973

