Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Parameterised Veriﬁcation of Inﬁnite State Multi-Agent Systems
via Predicate Abstraction
Panagiotis Kouvaros and Alessio Lomuscio
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
{p.kouvaros, a.lomuscio}@imperial.ac.uk

counter-abstraction methods have been developed so that
systems composed with an unbounded number of agents can
be analysed. In these techniques the agents can be described
by variables with ﬁnite domain only.
Irrespective of the choice of the programming language,
MAS are typically programmed by using variables with inﬁnite domains (integers, reals, etc.). This makes it difﬁcult
to ensure that a ﬁnite-state model accurately represents the
system to be veriﬁed. To overcome this predicate-abstraction
methods for inﬁnite-state models have recently been put forward (Lomuscio and Michaliszyn 2015; 2016).
These two streams of work can independently deal with
two sorts of unboundedness and potential undecidability
of the veriﬁcation problem: inﬁnite state variables and unbounded number of agents. However, they work in isolation
and cannot presently be combined. It follows that MAS with
an unbounded number of components where each of them
has at least one inﬁnite-state variable cannot be analysed.
In the present paper we develop a solution to this problem
by introducing a technique that combines cut-off generation
and predicate abstraction. The technique ﬁrst uses predicate
abstraction on the templates on the agents, thereby generating ﬁnite abstractions. Sufﬁcient conditions are given for a
cut-off of the system to be generated automatically. Having
established a cut-off, the speciﬁcation can then be checked
on a three-valued semantics on all systems up to the cut-off.
If the speciﬁcation is found either to be true or false, then we
can derive a conclusion on the original, inﬁnite state system.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2,
we give the syntax and semantics for the logic-based technique. In Section 3, we derive the main formal results and
give an algorithm for the veriﬁcation of MAS. We exemplify
the methodology on a widely-adopted scenario in Section 4.
We conclude in Section 5.
Related work. The technique here introduced is related
to the two independent lines of work mentioned above (parameterised veriﬁcation and predicate abstraction). None of
them can address the inﬁnite-state systems we work with
in this paper. The technique here proposed can be seen as
a combination of parameterised veriﬁcation with predicate
abstraction in the MAS domain. To achieve this, not only
stronger conditions on cut-offs need to be identiﬁed, but also
a three-valued semantics on these needs to be given so that
they can be algorithmically checked.

Abstract
We deﬁne a class of parameterised inﬁnite state multi-agent
systems (MAS) that is unbounded in both the number of
agents composing the system and the domain of the variables encoding the agents. We analyse their veriﬁcation problem by combining and extending existing techniques in parameterised model checking with predicate abstraction procedures. The resulting methodology addresses both forms of
unboundedness and provides a technique for verifying unbounded MAS deﬁned on inﬁnite-state variables. We illustrate the effectiveness of the technique on an inﬁnite-domain
variant of an unbounded version of the train-gate-controller.

Introduction
Over the past decade considerable progress has been made in
the development of techniques to verify multi-agent systems
(MAS) against agent-based speciﬁcations. These include
SAT-based and BDD-based veriﬁcation methods (Kacprzak,
Lomuscio, and Penczek 2004; Raimondi and Lomuscio
2005). Current model checkers, such as Verics, MCK and
MCMAS (Kacprzak et al. 2008; Gammie and van der Meyden 2004; Lomuscio, Qu, and Raimondi 2015), can efﬁciently verify large state-spaces.
The methods developed differ in many aspects, including
the speciﬁcations supported and the input language used to
represent the MAS to be analysed. However, they all analyse
ﬁnite-state MAS that have two fundamental assumptions:
ﬁrstly, the number of agents is ﬁnite and known at design
time; secondly, the descriptions of the agents in the system
use variables with ﬁnite domain. While both these assumptions ensure that the veriﬁcation problem remains decidable
(even PTIME-complete in several cases), their applicability
is hampered in real-world applications.
For example, when analysing open MAS where agents
join and leave the system at run time it may not be possible to know at design time how many agents the system
will have at runtime. Similarly, in robotic swarms, the number of agents in a swarm is not known at design time. Recently, proposals to tackle the unbounded nature of agents
have been put forward (Kouvaros and Lomuscio 2013;
2016). Decidable cases have been identiﬁed and cut-offs and
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3013

