Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Probably Approximately Efﬁcient
Combinatorial Auctions via Machine Learning
Gianluca Brero

Benjamin Lubin

Sven Seuken

Department of Informatics
University of Zurich
brero@iﬁ.uzh.ch

Information Systems Department
Boston University School of Management
blubin@bu.edu

Department of Informatics
University of Zurich
seuken@iﬁ.uzh.ch

ample, Afriat (1967) and Lahaie (2010a) studied how to derive value functions that rationalize observations where bidders communicate their favorite bundles at given prices. Lahaie and Parkes (2004) proposed an elicitation algorithm using demand and value queries based on learning algorithms.
However, this algorithm may require a very large amount
of communication between the mechanism and the bidders
(exponential in the number of items).
Blumrosen and Nisan (2009) showed that elicitation
algorithms based on demand queries achieve the best
possible approximation of the optimal allocation under
polynomially-sized communication. However, in the worst
case, these approximations can still be bad. Furthermore, all
of these approaches based on demand queries do not consider the computational burden that demand queries impose
on bidders (Blumrosen and Nisan 2009). Along the same
lines, Scheffel, Ziegler, and Bichler (2012) showed that the
price feedback provided by demand queries may provide a
cognitive challenge for bidders, and may not be effective in
coordinating them towards an efﬁcient outcome.

Abstract
A well-known problem in combinatorial auctions (CAs) is
that the value space grows exponentially in the number of
goods, which often puts a large burden on the bidders and
on the auctioneer. In this paper, we introduce a new design
paradigm for CAs based on machine learning (ML). Bidders
report their values (bids) to a proxy agent by answering a
small number of value queries. The proxy agent then uses
an ML algorithm to generalize from those bids to the whole
value space, and the efﬁcient allocation is computed based on
the generalized valuations. We introduce the concept of probably approximate efﬁciency (PAE) to measure the efﬁciency
of the new ML-based auctions, and we formally show how
the generelizability of an ML algorithm relates to the efﬁciency loss incurred by the corresponding ML-based auction.
To instantiate our paradigm, we use support vector regression (SVR) as our ML algorithm, which enables us to keep
the winner determination problem of the CA tractable. Different parameters of the SVR algorithm allow us to trade off
the expressiveness, economic efﬁciency, and computational
efﬁciency of the CA. Finally, we demonstrate experimentally
that, even with a small number of bids, our ML-based auctions are highly efﬁcient with high probability.

1.2

Machine Learning-based Auctions

Unfortunately, a major challenge when conducting CAs in
practice is the fact that the bundle space grows exponentially in the number of items, which makes it impossible
for the bidders to report their full value function for even
medium-sized problems. The AI community has studied this
problem from multiple angles, recognizing that careful preference elicitation is a formidable challenge in CAs. For ex-

Our goal in this paper is to propose a radically new auction design paradigm which only elicits a small number of
bids from the bidders and then uses a machine learning algorithm to generalize to the whole value space. We are willing
to forego full efﬁciency to signiﬁcantly lower the communication burden on the bidders.
There are numerous challenges that need to be addressed
when using an ML algorithm inside a CA. The primary
worry, of course, is what happens to economic efﬁciency
when the generalized value function is wrong. To address
this question, we introduce a new concept we call Probably
Approximate Efﬁciency (PAE) as a useful relaxation of the
standard efﬁciency notion from auction design. PAE enables
us to capture the efﬁciency of ML-based auctions, by proving that they incur less than an ε loss in efﬁciency, with a
probability 1 − δ. Readers familiar with the Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) concept from ML will notice the
intended similarity to the PAC concept (Kearns and Vazirani
1994); however, while the two concepts are similar in spirit,
they are quite different on a technical level.1

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
While PAC uses generalization errors via an expectation over
all points, we must use point-wise prediction intervals.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial auctions (CAs) allow bidders to submit bids
on bundles of items. They have found widespread applications in practice, for example for the procurement of industrial goods (Sandholm 2013), for selling TV-ad slots (Goetzendorf et al. 2015), and in government spectrum auctions
(Cramton 2013). A motivation for allowing bidders to bid
on bundles, instead of just on individual items, is that this
avoids the “exposure problem” and can increase efﬁciency.

1.1

Preference Elicitation in CAs

397

