Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Generalization Error Bounds for Optimization Algorithms via Stability
Qi Meng,1∗ Yue Wang,2∗ Wei Chen,3 Taifeng Wang,3 Zhi-Ming Ma,4 Tie-Yan Liu3
1

Peking University, qimeng13@pku.edu.cn; 2 Beijing Jiaotong University, 11271012@bjtu.edu.cn
3
Microsoft Research, {wche, taifengw, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com
4
Chinese Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, mazm@amt.ac.cn

include the ﬁrst-order methods such as gradient descent
(GD), stochastic gradient descent (SGD), stochastic variance reduction (SVRG) (Johnson and Zhang 2013), and the
second-order methods such as Newton’s methods and quasiNewton’s methods (Nocedal and Wright 2006). In this paper, for ease of analysis and without loss of generality, we
will take GD, SGD and SVRG as examples. GD calculates
the gradient of the objective function at each iteration and
updates the model towards the direction of negative gradient
by a constant step size. It has been proved that, if the step
size is not very large, GD can achieve a linear convergence
rate (Nesterov 2013). SGD exploits the additive nature of
the objective function in R-ERM, and randomly samples an
instance at each iteration to calculate the gradient. Due to
the variance introduced by stochastic sampling, SGD has to
adopt a decreasing step size in order to guarantee the convergence, and the corresponding convergence rate is sublinear in expectation (Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2011). In
order to reduce the variance in SGD, SVRG divides the optimization process into multiple stages and updates the model
towards a direction of the gradient at a randomly sampled
instance regularized by a full gradient over all the instances.
In this way, SVRG can achieve linear convergence rate in
expectation with a constant step size (Johnson and Zhang
2013).
While the aforementioned convergence analysis can characterize the behaviors of the optimization algorithms in
the training process, what the machine learning community
cares more is the generalization performance of the learned
model on unseen test data. 1 As we know, the generalization
error of a machine learning algorithm can be decomposed
into three parts, the approximation error, the estimation error, and the optimization error. The approximation error is
caused by the limited representation power of the hypothesis space F; the estimation error (which measures the difference between the empirical risk and the expected risk) is
caused by the limited amount of training data (Vapnik and
Kotz 1982; Bousquet and Elisseeff 2002); and the optimization error (which measures the difference between expected

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks can be formulated as Regularized Empirical Risk Minimization (R-ERM), and solved
by optimization algorithms such as gradient descent (GD),
stochastic gradient descent (SGD), and stochastic variance
reduction (SVRG). Conventional analysis on these optimization algorithms focuses on their convergence rates during the
training process, however, people in the machine learning
community may care more about the generalization performance of the learned model on unseen test data. In this paper,
we investigate on this issue, by using stability as a tool. In particular, we decompose the generalization error for R-ERM,
and derive its upper bound for both convex and nonconvex
cases. In convex cases, we prove that the generalization error
can be bounded by the convergence rate of the optimization
algorithm and the stability of the R-ERM process, both in expectation (in the order of O(1/n) + Eρ(T )), where ρ(T ) is
the convergence error and T is the number
of iterations)

 and
in high probability (in the order of O log√1/δ
+
ρ(T
)
with
n
probability 1 − δ). For nonconvex cases, we can also obtain
a similar expected generalization error bound. Our theorems
indicate that 1) along with the training process, the generalization error will decrease for all the optimization algorithms
under our investigation; 2) Comparatively speaking, SVRG
has better generalization ability than GD and SGD. We have
conducted experiments on both convex and nonconvex problems, and the experimental results verify our theoretical ﬁndings.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks can be formulated as Regularized Empirical Risk Minimization (R-ERM). Speciﬁcally,
given a training dataset, the goal of R-ERM is to learn a
model from a hypothesis space by minimizing the regularized empirical risk deﬁned as the average loss on the training
data plus a regularization term.
In most cases, it is hard to achieve an exact minimization of the objective function since the problem might be
too complex to have a closed-form solution. Alternatively,
we seek an approximate minimization by using some optimization algorithms. Widely used optimization algorithms

1

Under a related but different setting, i.e., the data instances
are successively generated from the underlying distribution, people have proven regret bounds for algorithms like SGD (Kakade
and Tewari 2009; Cesa-Bianchi, Conconi, and Gentile 2004) and
SVRG (Frostig et al. 2015).

∗

This work was done when the author was visiting Microsoft
Research Asia.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2336

