Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Gaussian Process for Crop Yield Prediction Based on Remote Sensing Data
Jiaxuan You, Xiaocheng Li, Melvin Low, David Lobell, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{jiaxuan, mwlow, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
chengli1@stanford.edu
Department of Earth System Science, Stanford University
dlobell@stanford.edu
yield prediction task. However, information about weather,
soil properties, and precise land cover data are typically not
available in developing countries, where reliable yield predictions are most needed.
Remote sensing data, on the other hand, are globally available and relatively inexpensive. It is frequently used in computational sustainability applications, such as species distribution modeling (Fink, Damoulas, and Dave 2013), poverty
mapping (Xie et al. 2016; Jean et al. 2016; Ermon et al.
2015), climate modeling (Ristovski et al. 2013), and natural
disaster prevention (Boulton, Shotton, and Williams 2016).
Multi-spectral satellite images, which include information in
addition to the visible wavelengths (RGB), have fairly high
spatial and temporal resolution, and contain a wealth of information on vegetation growth and thus on agricultural outcomes. However, useful features are hard to extract since the
data are high-dimensional and unstructured.
In this paper, we propose an approach based on modern representation learning ideas, which have recently led
to massive improvements in a range of computer vision
tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Karpathy et
al. 2014). We overcome the scarcity of training data by employing a new dimensionality reduction technique. Speciﬁcally, we treat raw images as histograms of pixel counts, and
use a mean-ﬁeld approximation to achieve tractability. Deep
learning architectures, including CNNs and LSTMs, are then
trained on these histograms to predict crop yields. While this
approach performs well, it does not explicitly account for
spatio-temporal dependencies between data points, e.g., due
to common soil properties. We overcome this limitation by
incorporating a Gaussian Process layer on top of our neural
network models. We evaluate our approach on the task of
predicting county-level soybean yield in the United States.
Experimental results show that our model outperforms traditional remote-sensing based methods by 30% in terms of
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and USDA nationallevel estimates by 15% in terms of Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE).

Abstract
Agricultural monitoring, especially in developing countries,
can help prevent famine and support humanitarian efforts.
A central challenge is yield estimation, i.e., predicting crop
yields before harvest.
We introduce a scalable, accurate, and inexpensive method
to predict crop yields using publicly available remote sensing data. Our approach improves existing techniques in three
ways. First, we forego hand-crafted features traditionally
used in the remote sensing community and propose an approach based on modern representation learning ideas. We
also introduce a novel dimensionality reduction technique
that allows us to train a Convolutional Neural Network or
Long-short Term Memory network and automatically learn
useful features even when labeled training data are scarce.
Finally, we incorporate a Gaussian Process component to
explicitly model the spatio-temporal structure of the data
and further improve accuracy. We evaluate our approach on
county-level soybean yield prediction in the U.S. and show
that it outperforms competing techniques.

Introduction
It is estimated that 795 million people still live without an
adequate food supply (FAO 2015), and that by 2050 there
will be two billion more people to feed (Dodds and Bartram
2016). Ending hunger and improving food security are primary goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
of the United Nations (United Nations 2015).
A central challenge of addressing food security issues is
yield estimation, namely being able to accurately predict
crop yields well before harvest. Agricultural monitoring,
especially in developing countries, can improve food production and support humanitarian efforts in light of climate
change and droughts (Dodds and Bartram 2016).
Existing approaches rely on survey data and other variables related to crop growth (such as weather and soil properties) to model crop yield. These approaches are very successful in the United States, where data are plentiful and of
relatively high quality. Comprehensive surveys of weather
parameters such as the Daymet (Thornton et al. 2014) and
land cover types such as the Cropland Data Layer (Boryan et
al. 2011) are publicly available and greatly facilitate the crop

Related Work
Remote sensing data have been widely used for predicting crop yields in the remote sensing community (Bolton
and Friedl 2013; Johnson 2014). However, all existing approaches we are aware of rely on hand-crafted features,

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4559

