Multi-View Clustering via
Deep Matrix Factorization
†

Handong Zhao,† Zhengming Ding,† Yun Fu†‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 02115
‡
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 02115
{hdzhao,allanding,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu
Multi-view data collection

Abstract

View 1

Multi-View Clustering (MVC) has garnered more attention
recently since many real-world data are comprised of different
representations or views. The key is to explore complementary
information to beneﬁt the clustering problem. In this paper,
we present a deep matrix factorization framework for MVC,
where semi-nonnegative matrix factorization is adopted to
learn the hierarchical semantics of multi-view data in a layerwise fashion. To maximize the mutual information from each
view, we enforce the non-negative representation of each view
in the ﬁnal layer to be the same. Furthermore, to respect the
intrinsic geometric structure in each view data, graph regularizers are introduced to couple the output representation of
deep structures. As a non-trivial contribution, we provide the
solution based on alternating minimization strategy, followed
by a theoretical proof of convergence. The superior experimental results on three face benchmarks show the effectiveness of
the proposed deep matrix factorization model.

Layer 1

Layer m

Z m(1)

Z1(1)


View 2

Z1(2)

Z m(2)

Figure 1: Framework of our proposed method. Same shape
denotes the same class. For demonstration purposes, we only
show the two-view case, where two deep matrix factorization
structures are proposed to capture rich information behind
each view in a layer-wise fashion. With the deep structure,
samples from the same class but different views gather close
to each other to generate more discriminative representation.

Introduction
Traditional clustering aims to identify groups of “similar
behavior” in single view data (von Luxburg 2007; Liu et
al. 2015; Steinwart 2015; Tao et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016;
Li, Kong, and Fu 2017). As the real-world data are always captured from multiple sources or represented by
several distinct feature sets (Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013a;
Ding and Fu 2014; Gao et al. 2015; Zhao and Fu 2015;
Wang, Ding, and Fu 2016), MVC is intensively studied recently by leveraging the heterogeneous data to achieve the
same goal. Different features characterize different information from the data set. For example, an image can be
described by different characteristics, e.g., color, texture,
shape and so on. These multiple types of features can provide useful information from different views. MVC aims
to integrate multiple feature sets together, and uncover the
consistent latent information from different views. Extensive research efforts have been made in developing effective
MVC methods (Cai, Nie, and Huang 2013a; Gao et al. 2015;
Xu, Han, and Nie 2016; Zhao, Liu, and Fu 2016). Along
this line, Kumar et al. developed co-regularized multi-view
spectral clustering to do clustering on different views simultaneously with a co-regularization constraint (Kumar, Rai, and

III 2011). Gao et al. proposed to perform clustering on the
subspace representation of each view simultaneously guided
by a common cluster structure for the consistence across different views (Gao et al. 2015). A good survey can be found
in (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013).
Recently, lots of research activities on MVC have achieved
promising performance based on Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) and its variants, because the non-negativity
constraints allow for better interpretability (Guan et al. 2012;
Trigeorgis et al. 2014). The general idea is to seek a common latent factor through non-negative matrix factorization
among multi-view data (Liu et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2014;
2015). Semi Non-negative Matrix Factorization (Semi-NMF),
as one of the most popular variants of NMF, was proposed
to extend NMF by relaxing the factorized basis matrix to
be real values. This practice allows Semi-NMF to have
a wider application in the real world than NMF. Apart
from exploring Semi-NMF in MVC application for the ﬁrst
time, our method has another distinction from the existing NMF-based MVC methods: we adopt a deep structure
to conduct Semi-NMF hierarchically as shown in Figure
1. As illustrated, through the deep Semi-NMF structure,
we push data samples from the same class closer layer

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2921

