Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multiple Kernel k-Means with Incomplete Kernels
Xinwang Liu, Miaomiao Li

Lei Wang

School of Computer
National University
of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

School of Computer Science
and Software Engineering
University of Wollongong
NSW, Australia, 2522

Yong Dou, Jianping Yin,
En Zhu
School of Computer
National University
of Defense Technology
Changsha, China, 410073

one, the work in (Du et al. 2015) develops a robust multiple kernel k-means (MKKM) algorithm that simultaneously ﬁnds the best clustering labels and the optimal combination of kernels. Observing that existing MKKM algorithms do not sufﬁciently consider the correlation among
base kernels, the work in (Liu et al. 2016) designs a matrixinduced regularization to reduce the redundancy and enhance the diversity of the selected kernels. These algorithms have been applied to various applications and demonstrated attractive clustering performance (Yu et al. 2012;
Gönen and Margolin 2014).

Abstract
Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) algorithms optimally combine a group of pre-speciﬁed base kernels to improve clustering performance. However, existing MKC algorithms cannot efﬁciently address the situation where some rows and
columns of base kernels are absent. This paper proposes a
simple while effective algorithm to address this issue. Different from existing approaches where incomplete kernels are
ﬁrstly imputed and a standard MKC algorithm is applied to
the imputed kernels, our algorithm integrates imputation and
clustering into a uniﬁed learning procedure. Speciﬁcally, we
perform multiple kernel clustering directly with the presence
of incomplete kernels, which are treated as auxiliary variables
to be jointly optimized. Our algorithm does not require that
there be at least one complete base kernel over all the samples. Also, it adaptively imputes incomplete kernels and combines them to best serve clustering. A three-step iterative algorithm with proved convergence is designed to solve the resultant optimization problem. Extensive experiments are conducted on four benchmark data sets to compare the proposed
algorithm with existing imputation-based methods. Our algorithm consistently achieves superior performance and the improvement becomes more signiﬁcant with increasing missing
ratio, verifying the effectiveness and advantages of the proposed joint imputation and clustering.

One underlying assumption commonly adopted by the
above-mentioned MKC algorithms is that all of the base kernels are complete, i.e., none of the rows or columns of any
base kernel shall be absent. In some practical applications
such as Alzheimer’s disease prediction (Xiang et al. 2013)
and cardiac disease discrimination (Kumar et al. 2013), however, it is not uncommon to see that some views of a sample are missing, and this causes the corresponding rows and
columns of related base kernels unﬁlled. The presence of incomplete base kernels makes it difﬁcult to utilize the information of all views for clustering. A straightforward remedy may ﬁrstly impute incomplete kernels with a ﬁlling algorithm and then perform a standard MKC algorithm with
the imputed kernels. Some widely used ﬁlling algorithms
include zero-ﬁlling, mean value ﬁlling, k-nearest-neighbor
ﬁlling and expectation-maximization (EM) ﬁlling (Ghahramani and Jordan 1993). Recently, more advanced imputation algorithms have been developed (Trivedi et al. 2010;
Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015; Bhadra, Kaski, and Rousu 2016;
Shao, He, and Yu 2015; Liu et al. 2014; 2015). The work
in (Trivedi et al. 2010) constructs a full kernel matrix for an
incomplete view with the help of the other complete view (or
equally, base kernel). By exploiting the connections of multiple views, the work in (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2015) proposes
an algorithm to accomplish multi-view learning with incomplete views, where different views are assumed to be generated from a shared subspace. In (Shao, He, and Yu 2015),
a multi-incomplete-view clustering algorithm is proposed. It
learns latent feature matrices for all the views and generates
a consensus matrix so that the difference between each view
and the consensus is minimized. In addition, by modelling
both within-view and between-view relationships among
kernel values, an approach is proposed in (Bhadra, Kaski,

Introduction
The recent years have seen many effort devoted to designing effective and efﬁcient multiple kernel clustering (MKC)
algorithms (Zhao, Kwok, and Zhang 2009; Yu et al. 2012;
Gönen and Margolin 2014; Du et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2015a; Zhang et al. 2015; Cao et al.
2015b; Zhang et al. 2016). They aim to optimally combine
a group of pre-speciﬁed base kernels to perform data clustering. For example, the work in (Zhao, Kwok, and Zhang
2009) proposes to ﬁnd the maximum margin hyperplane, the
best cluster labeling, and the optimal kernel simultaneously.
A novel optimized kernel k-means algorithm is presented
in (Yu et al. 2012) to combine multiple data sources for
clustering analysis. In (Gönen and Margolin 2014), the kernel combination weights are allowed to adaptively change
to capture the characteristics of individual samples. Replacing the squared error in k-means with an 2,1 -norm based
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2259

