Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning to Predict Intent from Gaze
During Robotic Hand-Eye Coordination
Yosef Razin, Karen Feigh
School of Aerospace Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
270 Ferst Drive, NW Atlanta, GA 30332

Hradis 2012; Bondareva et al. 2013), none have attempted
to leverage anticipatory eye behavior to improve upon their
predictive capabilities.
Therefore, this research addresses the questions:
1. Can gaze data be used to predict intent, as realized in the
movements of the robotic grasper?
2. Does gaze data signiﬁcantly improve such prediction over
using “hand” movement data alone?
3. Which classiﬁcation algorithm performs this intent prediction best?

Abstract
Effective human-aware robots should anticipate their user’s
intentions. During hand-eye coordination tasks, gaze often
precedes hand motion and can serve as a powerful predictor for intent. However, cooperative tasks where a semiautonomous robot serves as an extension of the human hand
have rarely been studied in the context of hand-eye coordination. We hypothesize that accounting for anticipatory eye
movements in addition to the movements of the robot will
improve intent estimation. This research compares the application of various machine learning methods to intent prediction from gaze tracking data during robotic hand-eye coordination tasks. We found that with proper feature selection,
accuracies exceeding 94% and AUC greater than 91% are
achievable with several classiﬁcation algorithms but that anticipatory gaze data did not improve intent prediction.

1

2

Background

During hand-eye coordination tasks, a trained operator’s
gaze anticipates the target’s position and tends to ﬁxate on
the goal (Sailer, Flanagan, and Johansson 2005; Johansson
et al. 2001; Posner 1980). Fixations are associated with the
task structure and have unique characteristics and routines
depending on the function they serve (Land, Mennie, and
Rusted 1999; Sailer, Flanagan, and Johansson 2005; Hayhoe
2000). In all cases, they tend to last for 200-400 ms and are
characterized by their low velocities (< 100◦ /s) (Salvucci
and Goldberg 2000a). A key feature of task-oriented ﬁxations is how far in advance they anticipate manipulations
(Land, Mennie, and Rusted 1999; Pelz and Canosa 2001;
Johansson et al. 2001; Hayhoe 2000). Depending on the
level of cognitive processing involved, ﬁxations may occur
anywhere from 0.2-10 s before hand movement commences
(Johansson et al. 2001; Land, Mennie, and Rusted 1999;
Hayhoe and Ballard 2005). About 20% of ﬁxations are composed of these look-ahead movements (Mennie, Hayhoe,
and Sullivan 2007; Hayhoe et al. 2003; Pelz and Canosa
2001), and the majority of ﬁxations help gather guiding information for hand movement planning (Mennie, Hayhoe,
and Sullivan 2007).
In dynamic tasks another gaze type that exhibits anticipatory behavior is smooth pursuit. This behavior tracks a
moving target to keep it centered on the fovea, taking 100
ms to lock on to the target using an open-loop strategy and
then switching to closed-loop feedback once the target is acquired. At that point, the 100–ms lag gap is closed and sometimes even reversed, such that the gaze position leads the
target’s (Thier and Ilg 2005). Smooth pursuit tracking has
been shown to improve control of a target’s motion during

Introduction

In an increasingly autonomous world, while the physical
and cognitive burdens of work will be ofﬂoaded to robots,
there will necessarily be tasks that require human interaction
with these ever-ubiquitous intelligent systems. While many
of these interactions may remain simply physical, more intelligent systems will require cognitive interaction, such as
activity recognition and intent prediction, to work safely and
productively with humans.
In visuomotor coordination tasks, it has long been recognized that activity recognition is not limited to processing hand movements but can also be learned from eye behavior (Bednarik, Vrzakova, and Hradis 2012; Bondareva et
al. 2013; Land, Mennie, and Rusted 1999; Gielen, Van den
Heuvel, and Van Gisbergen 1984). It has also been shown
that the eyes have a tendency to anticipate hand movements
when a task’s sequence and targets are being planned or
when the target is moving (Mennie, Hayhoe, and Sullivan
2007; Thier and Ilg 2005; Ma-Wyatt, Stritzke, and Trommershäuser 2010). Thus, gaze data should be able to inform
us of upcoming user intent. This anticipatory information
could prove useful by giving us advance clues for earlier
intent prediction. However, while past studies have applied
machine learning techniques to classify intent from gaze
data (Eivazi and Bednarik 2011; Bednarik, Vrzakova, and
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4596

