Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Counting-Based Reliability Estimation for Power-Transmission Grids∗
Leonardo Duenas-Osorio

Kuldeep S. Meel

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Rice University

Department of Computer Science
Rice University

Roger Paredes

Moshe Y. Vardi

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Rice University

Department of Computer Science
Rice University
One of the key challenging problems in the area of engineering reliability is network reliability, wherein the input to
the problem consists of a network, represented as a graph,
arising out of distribution of water, power, transportation
routes and the like. The problem of the network reliability seeks to measure the likelihood of two points of interest being reachable under conditions such as natural disasters. Early theoretical investigations showed that the problem of network reliability is #P complete (Valiant 1979).
Although graph contraction strategies combined with DNF
counting provide a Fully Polynomial Randomized Approximation Scheme (FPRAS) with error guarantees (Karger
2001), implementation on practical systems does not scale
well due to the requirement of a large number of Monte
Carlo steps. Consequently, recent investigations have focused on advancing algorithmic strategies that build upon
advanced Monte Carlo simulation (Zuev, Wu, and Beck
2015a) and analytical approaches (Lim and Song 2012;
Dueñas-Osorio and Rojo 2011). In addition, inventive sampling methods, such as line sampling and variance reduction
schemes (Fishman 1986), along with graphical models, especially Bayesian networks, provide versatile strategies to
quantify the reliability of complex engineered systems and
their dynamics (Bensi, Kiureghian, and Straub 2013).
Despite signiﬁcant progress, most techniques remain
computationally expensive. As an alternative, when invoking approximations, most methods are unable to guarantee
the quality of the reliability estimation a priori, barring small
instances where exact methods do not time out. Therefore,
design of techniques that offer strong theoretical guarantees
on the quality of estimates and can scale to large real world
instances remains an unattained goal across multiple disciplines.
A promising alternative approach to answer #P queries is
to reduce a #P problem to a #SAT problem, where #SAT
denotes the problem of computing the number of solutions
for a given SAT formula. While computing exact answers to
#SAT is known to be computationally hard, recent advances
in universal hashing-based approaches to #SAT have received wide interest (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2007;
Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013; Ivrii et al. 2015). In
particular, these techniques can provide probably approximately correct (PAC) guarantees, i.e., they compute an estimate that is within a prescribed error tolerance of ε with

Abstract
Modern society is increasingly reliant on the functionality
of infrastructure facilities and utility services. Consequently,
there has been surge of interest in the problem of quantiﬁcation of system reliability, which is known to be #P-complete.
Reliability also contributes to the resilience of systems, so
as to effectively make them bounce back after contingencies.
Despite diverse progress, most techniques to estimate system
reliability and resilience remain computationally expensive.
In this paper, we investigate how recent advances in hashingbased approaches to counting can be exploited to improve
computational techniques for system reliability. The primary
contribution of this paper is a novel framework, RelNet, that
reduces the problem of computing reliability for a given network to counting the number of satisfying assignments of a
Σ11 formula, which is amenable to recent hashing-based techniques developed for counting satisfying assignments of SAT
formula. We then apply RelNet to ten real world powertransmission grids across different cities in the U.S. and are
able to obtain, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst theoretically sound a priori estimates of reliability between several
pairs of nodes of interest. Such estimates will help managing
uncertainty and support rational decision making for community resilience.

1

Introduction

Modern society is increasingly reliant on the availability
of critical facilities and utility services, such as power,
telecommunications, water, gas, and transportation among
others (The White House, Ofﬁce of the Press Secretary,
2016). To ensure adequate service, it is imperative to quantify system reliability, or the probability of the system to remain functional, as well as system resilience, or the ability of the system to quickly return to normalcy when failure is unavoidable (Bruneau et al. 2003). While resilience
assessment requires human decision making principles, it
also heavily depends on intrinsic system reliability. Hence,
the recent focus on community resilience and sustainability has spurred signiﬁcant activity in engineering reliability
(Zio 2009).
∗

The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last
name; this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4488

