Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Object Instance Search Using Fuzzy Objects Matching
Tan Yu,1 Yuwei Wu,1,2 Sreyasee Bhattacharjee,1 Junsong Yuan1
1

Rapid Rich Object Search Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate School,
Nanyang Technological Univeristy, Singapore, 637553
2
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081
{tyu008, dbhattacharjee, jsyuan}@ntu.edu.sg, wuyuwei@bit.edu.cn
Abstract



Recently, global features aggregated from local convolutional
features of the convolutional neural network have shown to
be much more effective in comparison with hand-crafted features for image retrieval. However, the global feature might
not effectively capture the relevance between the query object and reference images in the object instance search task,
especially when the query object is relatively small and there
exist multiple types of objects in reference images. Moreover,
the object instance search requires to localize the object in the
reference image, which may not be achieved through global
representations. In this paper, we propose a Fuzzy Objects
Matching (FOM) framework to effectively and efﬁciently
capture the relevance between the query object and reference
images in the dataset. In the proposed FOM scheme, object
proposals are utilized to detect the potential regions of the
query object in reference images. To achieve high search efﬁciency, we factorize the feature matrix of all the object proposals from one reference image into the product of a set of
fuzzy objects and sparse codes. In addition, we reﬁne the feature of the generated fuzzy objects according to its neighborhood in the feature space to generate more robust representation. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
FOM framework signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-theart methods in precision with less memory and computational
cost on three public datasets.







Figure 1: Hundreds of object proposals tend to overlap with
each other. Through clustering, the object proposals containing the similar objects will be assigned to the same group.


  




 



Figure 2: Hundreds of object proposals can be approximated
by a compact set of fuzzy objects product the corresponding
sparse codes.

The task of object instance search, is to retrieve all the
images containing a speciﬁc object query and localize the
query object in the reference images. It has received a
sustained attention over the last decade, leading to many
object instance search systems (Meng et al. 2010; Jiang,
Meng, and Yuan 2012; Jiang et al. 2015; Tolias, Avrithis,
and Jégou 2013; Tao et al. 2014; Razavian et al. 2014a;
2014b; Tolias, Sicre, and Jégou 2016; Meng et al. 2016;
Bhattacharjee et al. 2016b; 2016a; Mohedano et al. 2016;
Cao et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2016). Since the query object only
occupies a small part of an image, the global representation
may not be effective to capture the relevance between the
query object with reference image. Therefore, the relevance
between the query object and one reference image is not determined by the overall similarity between the query and the
reference image.

Inspired by the success of the object proposal scheme
(Zitnick and Dollár 2014) in object detection, we utilize object proposals as potential object candidates for object instance search. A few hundreds of object proposals with highest objectness scores are selected for each image. In this
case, the relevance between the query object and a reference
image is determined by the best matched object proposal. At
the same time, the best-matched object proposal is then identiﬁed as the detected location of the query object in the reference image. However, exploring the beneﬁts of hundreds
of proposals for each reference image demands the storage
of all object proposals and high computational cost to match
them. It may be unaffordable when the dataset is large.
An important fact to note that, the object proposals from
the same reference image can overlap with each other and
thus produce much redundancy among features representing
these object proposals. Since the object proposals contain-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4320

