Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

StructInf: Mining Structural Inﬂuence from Social Streams
Jing Zhang, Jie Tang,† Yuanyi Zhong† , Yuchen Mo,†
Juanzi Li,† Guojie Song, Wendy Hall, Jimeng Sun‡


Information School, Renmin University of China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University

Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton
‡
Computational Science and Engineering at College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
zhang-jing@ruc.edu.cn, {jietang, lijuanzi}@tsinghua.edu.cn, gjsong@pku.edu.cn, wh@ecs.soton.ac.uk, jsun@cc.gatech.edu
†

Abstract
Social inﬂuence is a fundamental issue in social network analysis and has attracted tremendous attention with the rapid
growth of online social networks. However, existing research
mainly focuses on studying peer inﬂuence. This paper introduces a novel notion of structural inﬂuence and studies how
to efﬁciently discover structural inﬂuence patterns from social streams. We present three sampling algorithms with theoretical unbiased guarantee to speed up the discovery process. Experiments on a big microblogging dataset show that
the proposed sampling algorithms can achieve a 10× speedup
compared to the exact inﬂuence pattern mining algorithm,
with an average error rate of only 1.0%. The extracted structural inﬂuence patterns have many applications. We apply
them to predict retweet behavior, with performance being signiﬁcantly improved.

1

(a) P=0.07%

(b) P=0.11%

(c) P=0.31%

Figure 1: Probability that the target user (white node)
retweets a message on Weibo, conditioned on their neighbors (red nodes) having already retweeted the message.
Figure 1(a), suggesting more active neighbors can improve
the retweet likelihood. On the other hand, the probability
in Figure 1(c) increases to 300% higher than that of Figure
1(b). The difference between them is the relationship between the neighbors. Please note that the target user may
be unaware of such a relationship. How does the network
structure formed by friends matter in inﬂuencing users’ behavior changes? What are the most signiﬁcant inﬂuence
structures hidden in the huge volume of streaming behavior
data? Although social inﬂuence has been extensively studied before (Anagnostopoulos, Kumar, and Mahdian 2008;
Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003; Tang et al. 2009), most
of the existing work focused on peer inﬂuence, and ignored
the effect of such inﬂuence structures. Ugander et al. (2012)
presented the idea of structural diversity and showed that diverse structures of neighboring users can inﬂuence user’s behaviors. However, they only focused on investigating qualitative effects of social inﬂuence, but ignored quantitative
estimation.
In this work, we formalize the problem of mining structural inﬂuence from the social stream. Speciﬁcally, given
large user behavior logs and the network structure among
users, how can we discover inﬂuence structures with high
conﬁdence? The discovered inﬂuence structures can be applied in many different applications, e.g., to be used as features in a paper’s citation network to predict whether the paper will be extensively cited (Shi, Leskovec, and McFarland
2010), or to predict one’s “following” behaviors in a user’s
“following” network (Zhang et al. 2015).
We address the above issue and make the following contributions: (1) we formally deﬁne a novel notion of structural inﬂuence; (2) to handle large streaming behavior data,
we propose an exact and several sampling algorithms to

Introduction

Social inﬂuence occurs when one’s behaviors or opinions
are affected by others. It forms a fundamental mechanism
governing the dynamics of social networks, and recently,
has attracted tremendous attention with the availability of
large online social behavior data. For example, a ﬁeld experiment conducted on Facebook shows strong evidence of
social inﬂuence on political mobilization (Bond et al. 2012).
The theory of three degrees of inﬂuence (Fowler, Christakis,
and others 2008) claims that our behavior can inﬂuence people we have never met. However, the underlying mechanism
is still unclear and a thorough investigation is thus needed.
We show an example of retweet behavior inﬂuence in
three different structures on a dataset of Sina Weibo1 in Figure 1. The red node represents a neighboring user (followee
in Weibo) who retweets a message before time t; the white
node denotes the target user to be studied. The general question is how likely it is that the target user will retweet this
message at time t (0 < t − t ≤ τ , τ is a short time interval), conditioned on different inﬂuence structures. We can
see several interesting patterns. First, the conditional probability in Figure 1(b) increases to 150% higher than that of
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The most popular Chinese microblogging site (weibo.com).

73

