Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Conﬁguration Planning with Temporal Constraints
Uwe Köckemann and Lars Karlsson
Center for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems, Örebro University, Sweden

executed (e.g., robot movement requires robot’s location).
In other scenarios information may be the goal. Consider a
smart home environment equipped with a multitude of sensors that gather information about the inhabitant. Here an
information goal could be ”Is the inhabitant eating at lunch
time?”. There might be many alternative ways to get to this
information. A robot could be used to determine the human
activity with a camera during the requested time. Alternatively, information from contact sensors attached to the door
of the fridge and pressure sensors attached to the seats in
the kitchen could be used to come to the same conclusion.
In addition to the dependencies themselves we may want to
consider costs. Having a robot’s camera detect a human activity for one or two hours is more expensive than using the
alternative described above. As task planning can depend
on available information, we may also have the opposite dependency, e.g., providing information with a speciﬁc sensor
may require task planning. In the above example, the robot
needs to be at a speciﬁc location in order to provide the requested information.

Abstract
Conﬁguration planning is a form of task planning that takes
into consideration both causal and information dependencies
in goal achievement. This type of planning is interesting, for
instance, in smart home environments which contain various
sensors and robots to provide services to the inhabitants. Requests for information, for instance from an activity recognition system, should cause the smart home to conﬁgure itself
in such a way that all requested information will be provided
when it is needed. This paper addresses temporal conﬁguration planning in which information availability and goals are
linked to temporal intervals which are subject to constrains.
Our solutions are based on constraint-based planning which
uses different types of constraints to model different types
of knowledge. We propose and compare two approaches to
conﬁguration planning. The ﬁrst one models information via
conditions and effects of planning operators and essentially
reduces conﬁguration planning to constraint-based temporal
planning. The second approach solves information dependencies separately from task planning and optimizes the cost
of reaching individual information goals. We compare these
approaches in terms of the time it takes to solve problems and
the quality of the solutions they provide.

Constraint-based planning allows to model different types
of knowledge via different types of constraints. The
constraint-based planning problem is solved by integrating
solvers for each of these constraint types. The presented
approach already integrates temporal constraints, resources,
costs, constraints for interaction with humans, and static
knowledge via Prolog. This view of planning is interesting
for conﬁguration planning since it allows us to investigate
different ways to capture information dependencies. The
main contributions of this paper are two constraint-based
solutions to temporal conﬁguration planning. These are, to
the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst approaches that consider
the timing of information and temporal constraints on information goals. The ﬁrst approach relies on task planning to
model information goals and dependencies. Its main appeal
is that it can rely on existing forward planning heuristics and
produce solutions very quickly. However, it does not consider solution quality. The second approach utilizes problem
decomposition to satisfy information dependencies as a subproblem. This sub-problem is formulated as a Constraint
Satisfaction Problem (CSP) with the constraint processing
language MiniZinc (http://www.minizinc.org/). It then uses
task planning to satisfy any open goals that result from the
solution to the information sub-problem (e.g., sensors may

Introduction
Smart home environments contain a large variety of sensors
that can produce different information depending on how
they are used and how their data is processed. To infer, for
instance, if a person is sitting on a chair we could either use a
pressure sensor installed in the chair or point a camera at that
chair and analyze the camera’s feed. Conﬁguration planning
is a form of task planning that explicitly considers information availability either as a goal or as a condition to use certain operators. A robot, for instance, may have to rely on a
camera feed to navigate an apartment. In the context of the
E-care@home project (ecareathome.se) we consider context
inference that may require information to be available during speciﬁc temporal intervals and we employ conﬁguration
planning to ensure that these information goals are met.
Conﬁguration planning is the combination of taskplanning with information goals and dependencies. On one
hand task-planning operators may require information to be
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4589

