Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Solving Indeﬁnite Kernel Support Vector Machine with
Difference of Convex Functions Programming
Hai-Ming Xu,1,2 Hui Xue,1,2,∗ Xiao-Hong Chen,3 Yun-Yun Wang4

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), China
3
College of Science, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, 210016, China
4
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, 210046, China
{heimingx, hxue}@seu.edu.cn, lyandcxh@nuaa.edu.cn, wangyunyun@njupt.edu.cn
2

et al. 2004). The weighted meta-path based similarity matrices for text classiﬁcation in natural language processing
are frequently indeﬁnite (Wang et al. 2016). The sigmoid
kernels in neural networks with various values of the hyperparameters are also mostly indeﬁnite (Vapnik 2013). As a
result, indeﬁnite kernels have become increasingly important in kernel methods and indeﬁnite kernel SVM (IKSVM)
has attracted more and more attentions in machine learning. However, different from the traditional SVMs, IKSVM
boils down to a non-convex optimization which is an NPhard problem.
In the past few years, many algorithms have been proposed to address the IKSVM problem. They generally fall
into two categories: (1) ”Kernel Transformation” which
transforms the indeﬁnite kernel matrix to be PSD and (2)
”Non-convex Optimization” which solves the non-convex
problem directly. In the ﬁrst category, some algorithms
directly transform the eigenspectrum of the kernel matrix. For example, ”Clip” neglects the negative eigenvalues
(Pekalska, Paclik, and Duin 2001), ”Flip” ﬂips the sign of
the negative eigenvalues (Graepel et al. 1999), and ”Shift”
shifts all the eigenvalues by a positive constant (Roth et al.
2003). Other algorithms further consider the indeﬁnite kernel as a noisy observation of some unknown PSD kernel.
Luss and d’Aspremont presented a joint optimization on the
dual model of SVM with an additional regularization term
which measures the similarity between the proxy and the
original indeﬁnite kernel matrices (Luss and d’Aspremont
2008). Chen and Ye reformulated the formulation into a
semi-inﬁnite quadratically constrained linear programming
and proposed a faster algorithm (Chen and Ye 2008). Chen
et al. further introduced a primal model to avoid overﬁtting (Chen, Gupta, and Recht 2009). Gu and Guo incorporated the kernel principal component analysis into the SVM
classiﬁcation and naturally generated a surrogate PSD kernel (Gu and Guo 2012). However, these methods actually
change the indeﬁnite kernels themselves and thus may lead
to the loss of some important information involved in the
kernels.
In the second category, most algorithms aim to solve the
non-convex dual form of IKSVM. For example, Lin and
Lin proposed an SMO-type method to solve the non-convex
dual formulation of IKSVM which can converge to some
stationary points for the non-PSD sigmoid kernel (Lin and

Abstract
Indeﬁnite kernel support vector machine (IKSVM) has recently attracted increasing attentions in machine learning.
Different from traditional SVMs, IKSVM essentially is a
non-convex optimization problem. Some algorithms directly
change the spectrum of the indeﬁnite kernel matrix at the cost
of losing some valuable information involved in the kernels
so as to transform the non-convex problem into a convex one.
Other algorithms aim to solve the dual form of IKSVM, but
suffer from the dual gap between the primal and dual problems in the case of indeﬁnite kernels. In this paper, we directly focus on the non-convex primal form of IKSVM and
propose a novel algorithm termed as IKSVM-DC. According
to the characteristics of the spectrum for the indeﬁnite kernel
matrix, IKSVM-DC decomposes the objective function into
the subtraction of two convex functions and thus reformulates
the primal problem as a difference of convex functions (DC)
programming which can be optimized by the DC algorithm
(DCA). In order to accelerate convergence rate, IKSVM-DC
further combines the classical DCA with a line search step
along the descent direction at each iteration. A theoretical
analysis is then presented to validate that IKSVM-DC can
converge to a local minimum. Systematical experiments on
real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of IKSVMDC compared to state-of-the-art IKSVM related algorithms.

1

Introduction

Support vector machines (SVM) with kernels have been
successfully used in many application areas. In traditional
SVMs, the kernels embed samples into a high-dimensional
(possibly inﬁnite-dimensional) feature space for linear separation, where the corresponding kernel matrix is required to
be symmetric and positive semi-deﬁnite (PSD) (Cristianini
and Shawe-Taylor 2000). The PSD property guarantees that
the problem can be formulated as a convex quadratic programming and yields a global optimum. However, in practice, many real-world applications directly utilize similarity measures for the kernels, most of which are indeﬁnite
rather than PSD. For example, Smith-Waterman and BLAST
scores for evaluating pair-wise similarity between protein
sequences usually generate indeﬁnite kernel matrices (Saigo
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2782

