Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Best-First Width Search: Exploration
and Exploitation in Classical Planning
Nir Lipovetzky

Hector Geffner

The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
nir.lipovetzky@unimelb.edu.au

ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
hector.geffner@upf.edu

computing plans that are not necessarily optimal can be improved by adding forms of exploration to get out of these
plateaus (Xie, Nakhost, and Müller 2012; Xie et al. 2014;
Xie, Müller, and Holte 2014).

Abstract
It has been shown recently that the performance of greedy
best-ﬁrst search (GBFS) for computing plans that are not necessarily optimal can be improved by adding forms of exploration when reaching heuristic plateaus: from random walks
to local GBFS searches. In this work, we address this problem
but using structural exploration methods resulting from the
ideas of width-based search. Width-based methods seek novel
states, are not goal oriented, and their power has been shown
recently in the Atari and GVG-AI video-games. We show ﬁrst
that width-based exploration in GBFS is more effective than
GBFS with local GBFS search (GBFS-LS), and then proceed
to formulate a simple and general computational framework
where standard goal-oriented search (exploitation) and widthbased search (structural exploration) are combined to yield a
search scheme, best-ﬁrst width search, that is better than both
and which results in classical planning algorithms that outperform the state-of-the-art planners.

In this work, we address the problem of heuristic plateaus
in greedy best-ﬁrst search but from a different perspective:
rather than adding exploration to a greedy goal-directed
search, we look at a very effective class of structural exploration methods that have been developed recently, and see
how to extend them with a goal-directed search. The two
perspectives, however, are closely related, and we will look
into this relation too.
The exploration methods that we use are based on the
ideas of width-based search (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012).
Width-based search algorithms were developed in the setting
of classical planning to show that instances of many existing
domains can be solved in low polynomial time when they
feature atomic goals. The ideas have also been used to yield
state-of-art results in classical planning over the standard instances (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012), and more recently
in the Atari games (Lipovetzky, Ramirez, and Geffner 2015;
Shleyfman, Tuisov, and Domshlak 2016), and those of the
General Video-Game AI competition (Geffner and Geffner
2015). Width-based methods are pure exploration methods that are not goal-oriented, and our goal is to integrate
them with heuristic search methods to get the best of both.
For this, we show ﬁrst that GBFS with width-based exploration is more effective than GBFS with local GBFS search
(Xie, Müller, and Holte 2014), and formulate then a simple but general computational framework where standard
goal-oriented search (exploitation) and width-based search
(exploration) are combined to yield a search scheme, that
we call best-ﬁrst width-search, that is better than both and
results in classical planning algorithms that outperform the
state-of-the-art planners.

Introduction
It is well known that action selection in reinforcement learning must balance exploration and exploitation for delivering optimal behavior (Sutton and Barto 1998). The same is
true in probabilistic and non-deterministic planning when
non-admissible heuristics are used, as then non-greedy actions must be considered as well (Bonet and Geffner 2012).
The exploitation and exploration tradeoff is also at the heart
of Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MTCS) algorithms like UCT
(Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006), which are based on optimal
methods developed for arm selection in multi-armed bandit
problems (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002).
In classical planning, exploration is not needed for optimality, as greedy best-ﬁrst search (GBFS) and, indeed,
any best-ﬁrst algorithm (BFS), delivers optimal solutions
when used in anytime mode; i.e., not stopping until completion (Hansen and Zhou 2007). GBFS is the complete
search method of choice in planners such as FF, FD, and
LAMA (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001; Helmert 2006; Richter
and Westphal 2010). The problem of GBFS, however, is
that it often runs into large plateaus where the search gets
lost as no states with better heuristic values are found. Recently it has been shown that the performance of GBFS for

The paper is organized as follows. We provide ﬁrst some
background on classical planning, and heuristic and widthbased search, and look then at GBFS with width-based exploration, best-ﬁrst width search, and ways to combine different best-ﬁrst width searches, presenting in all cases relevant experimental results.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3590

