Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Keyphrase Extraction with Sequential Pattern Mining
Qingren Wang1, Victor S. Sheng2, Xindong Wu1,3
1
Department of Computer Science, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, P.R. China
Depart of Computer Science, University of Central Arkansas, Conway, AR 72035, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Louisiana, Lafayette, Louisiana 70503, USA
+86 13866144175, qingren.wang@mail.hfut.edu.cn, ssheng@uca.edu, xwu@louisiana.edu
2

treated as an independent pattern, Xie et al. (2014) proposed an efficient algorithm SPMW, which combines
wildcards with sequential pattern mining to search
keyphrase candidates. Comparing with frequent word
based approaches, sequential pattern mining with wildcards can discover a richer keyphrase candidate set since
wildcards provide gap constraints with a great flexibility
for mining patterns to capture semantic relations (Agrawal
and Srikant, 1995), which helps improve the quality of
keyphrase extraction. However, repeated document scanning and manually setting gap constraints are two main
weaknesses of sequential-pattern-mining-based approaches.
To solve the two weaknesses, on the basis of a common
sense that words do not repeatedly appear in an effective
keyphrase, we propose a novel algorithm called KCSP for
document-specific keyphrase candidate search using sequential pattern mining with gap constraints. Besides,
since many mechanisms based on TF-IDF have been
shown to work well in practice (Liu et al. 2009 and Hasan
et al. 2010), we propose another mechanism (pattern frequency with entropy) based on entropy and TF-IDF to extract keyphrases from a pattern set. That is, after we obtain
a pattern set of a document using KCSP, we can use the
new TF-IDF mechanism to extract keyphrase from the pattern set. Our approach is referred to as KeyRank hereafter.

Abstract
Existing studies show that extracting a complete keyphrase
candidate set is the first and crucial step to extract high
quality keyphrases from documents. Based on a common
sense that words do not repeatedly appear in an effective
keyphrase, we propose a novel algorithm named KCSP for
document-specific keyphrase candidate search using sequential pattern mining with gap constraints, which only
needs to scan a document once and automatically specifies
appropriate gap constraints for words without users’ participation. The experimental results confirm that it helps improve the quality of keyphrase extraction.

Introduction
A keyphrase is a list of words that capture a main topic
discussed in a document, which can help understand the
main points of this document (Liu et al. 2012). Keyphrases
have been successfully used in many text mining tasks,
such as topic extraction and document summarization.
Many approaches have been proposed to discover high
quality keyphrases from documents. To the best of our
knowledge, all these approaches have a same first step, i.e.,
keyphrase candidate search. Searching a complete
keyphrase candidate set that includes semantic relations in
context is crucial to extract high quality keyphrases.
Previous works simply treated independent or contiguous high frequency words as keyphrase candidates. However, no matter how many contiguous words that a candidate has, it still can be viewed as a high frequency word
alone, and words alone ignore semantic relations in context.
Since a keyphrase candidate is a list of words which can be

Algorithm KCSP
The main steps of KCSP are shown as follows.
• Step 1: KCSP scans a document with length L from left
to right once to obtain every word whose frequency is no
less than the support threshold min_sup, and together
with its corresponding positions, puts them into an array
called WordArray. Any two adjacent positions pos1 and
pos2 (pos1<pos2) of a word w1 can generate an interval
Range[pos1, pos2], which is treated as a gap constraint of
w1 at position pos1. Besides, since the last position of
each word does not have a bigger adjacent position,
KCSP uses L+1 instead.

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
This research has been supported by the Program for Changjiang Scholars
and Innovative Research Team in University (PCSIRT) of the Ministry of
Education, China, under grantIRT13059, the National 973 Program of
China under grant 2013CB329604, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant 61229301, and the US National Science Foundation under grant IIS-1115417.

5003

