Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Envy-Free Mechanisms with Minimum Number of Cuts
Reza Alijani,‡ Majid Farhadi,∗ Mohammad Ghodsi,∗† Masoud Seddighin,∗ Ahmad S. Tajik§
Sharif University of Technology∗ , Duke University‡ , University of Michigan – Ann Arbor§
Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM) – School of Computer Science †
alijani@cs.duke.edu, {m farhadi, mseddighin}@ce.sharif.edu, ghodsi@sharif.edu, tajik@umich.edu

cut might have an additional cost. As an example, suppose
the cake models a processing time that must be fairly allocated among a set of tasks. Every task-switch imposes an
overhead; minimizing total amount of overhead would be
equivalent to minimizing the number of cuts on the cake.
In addition, players may not have any value for very small
pieces made by a large number of cuts. In (Caragiannis, Lai,
and Procaccia 2011), this issue was illustrated by the advertisement example: think of the cake as time and consider
the allocation of advertising time. In such a setting, a large
number of cuts can yield so small periods of time that are not
useful for advertising. In an allocation with small number of
cuts this problem is unlikely.
Stromquist, in (1980), proved the existence of an envyfree division of the cake among n players with n − 1 cuts
which is the minimum number of cuts required to divide
a cake among n players. However, the proof is not constructive and does not yield a polynomial time algorithm. In
(2007), he showed that no ﬁnite protocol can ﬁnd an envyfree allocation with minimum number of cuts for n ≥ 3.
(Deng, Qi, and Saberi 2012) proved that the problem of ﬁnding an envy-free allocation of the cake, with a minimum
number of cuts is PPAD-Complete. They also proposed an
FPTAS for the case of three players.
In a number of the recent papers (e.g. (Caragiannis, Lai,
and Procaccia 2011), (Brams et al. 2012), (Bei et al. 2012),
(Maya and Nisan 2012), (Chen et al. 2013), (Aziz and Ye
2014)) some restricted classes of valuation functions have
been studied. Piecewise constant and piecewise uniform valuation functions are two important special classes of valuation functions which are very important in practice. One of
the important properties of these valuation functions is that
they can be described concisely. (Kurokawa, Lai, and Procaccia 2013) proved that ﬁnding an envy-free allocation (in
Robertson-Webb model) when the valuation functions are
piecewise-uniform is as hard as solving the problem without
any restriction on the valuation functions.
Recently, some studies considered the problem from a
game theoretic viewpoint. Many cake cutting algorithms are
not truthful. For example, even the cut and choose method
which is relatively simple does not guarantee truthfulness. In
(Brânzei et al. 2016), the strategic outcome of the cake cutting algorithms has been studied. They proved the existence
of an approximate subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for a

Abstract
We study the problem of fair division of a heterogeneous
resource among strategic players. Given a divisible heterogeneous cake, we wish to divide the cake among n players
in a way that meets the following criteria: (I) every player
(weakly) prefers his allocated cake to any other player’s share
(such notion is known as envy-freeness), (II) the mechanism
is strategy-proof (truthful), and (III) the number of cuts made
on the cake is minimal. We provide methods, namely expansion process and expansion process with unlocking, for dividing the cake under different assumptions on the valuation
functions of the players.

1

Introduction

The problem of dividing a cake among a set of individuals
has been widely studied in the past 60 years. The subject
was ﬁrst deﬁned by Steinhaus (1948). The description of the
problem is as follows: given a heterogeneous cake and a set
of players, with potentially different tendencies to different
parts of the cake, how to cut the cake and distribute it among
the players in a fair manner?
Several notions are deﬁned for measuring the fairness of
an allocation (see (Procaccia 2014) for details). One of the
most important notions is envy-freeness. An allocation of the
cake is envy-free if each player (weakly) prefers its allocated
share to any other player’s share.
Envy-free resource allocation has been vastly studied in
the literature. For two players, the famous method of cut
and choose guarantees envy-freeness of the allocation. For
three players, Selfridge and Conway designed a protocol for
ﬁnding an envy-free division of the cake. In their method,
a player may receive more than one piece (see (Procaccia
2013) for details). Brams and Taylor generalized this method
to an arbitrary number of players (1995). However, their
method doesn’t guarantee any upper bound on the number
of cuts. Recently, in (2016), Aziz and Mackenzie suggested
a bounded envy-free protocol for any number of players.
In some settings, the number of cuts is also important. In
several papers (e.g. (Stromquist 1980), (Barbanel and Brams
2004), (Stromquist 2007), (Bei et al. 2012)) the cake cutting with minimum number of cuts has been studied. Each
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

312

