Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Multiview-Based Parameter Free Framework for Group Detection
Xuelong Li, Mulin Chen, Feiping Nie, Qi Wang∗
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
xuelong li@opt.ac.cn, chenmulin001@gmail.com, feipingnie@gmail.com, crabwq@gmail.com

and then combine those points with similar motions into the
same group. However, there are always many points on one
pedestrian and the velocities of these points may have big
differences. For example, the points on a pedestrians’ head
may move in the opposite direction to those ones on the feet.
This phenomenon is named as motion deviation in this paper. Due to motion deviation, the velocities of feature points
are too microcosmic to reﬂect the real movement of pedestrians accurately all the time. It’s necessary to develop a stable
feature to perceive the pedestrians’ motion patterns.
Another limitation shared by existing works is the arbitrary clustering procedure. After obtaining the feature
points’ adjacent graph, previous works cluster those points
by thresholding the graph (Lin et al. 2016; Zhou, Tang, and
Wang 2012; Zhou et al. 2014; Shao, Loy, and Wang 2014;
Wu, Ye, and Zhao 2015). This strategies is popular because it
doesn’t need the prior about the desired cluster number, and
it’s helpful in some occasions. However, since crowd densities vary across scenes, it’s not practical to ﬁnd a threshold that suitable for all crowds. In addition, these arbitrary
approaches neglects the intrinsic correlation inside the adjacent graph. To be speciﬁc, if the graph is built with exactly
c connected components, the points should be clustered into
c groups. However, existing works are limited to decide the
group number automatically based on the graph structure.
To alleviate the impact of above issues, a Multiview-based
Parameter Free (MPF) framework is proposed in this study.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
1. A structural context descriptor is designed to express the
structure of feature points. The proposed context descriptor can represent pedestrians’ motion dynamics from the
macroscopic view and is robust to motion deviation.
2. A self-weighted multiview clustering method is developed to simultaneously integrate the motion and context correlations of points. Unlike existing approaches,
the proposed method doesn’t involve any hyperparameter,
which makes it applicable for various clustering tasks.
3. A novel framework for group detection is proposed,
which has salient properties: (1) the incorporation of features on multiple views; (2) the automatic decision of
group number without involving any arbitrary threshold;
(3) the capability of dealing with crowd scenes with varying densities.

Abstract
Group detection is fundamentally important for analyzing
crowd behaviors, and has attracted plenty of attention in artiﬁcial intelligence. However, existing works mostly have limitations due to the insufﬁcient utilization of crowd properties and the arbitrary processing of individuals. In this paper, we propose the Multiview-based Parameter Free (MPF)
approach to detect groups in crowd scenes. The main contributions made in this study are threefold: (1) a new structural context descriptor is designed to characterize the structural property of individuals in crowd motions; (2) an selfweighted multiview clustering method is proposed to cluster
feature points by incorporating their motion and context similarities; (3) a novel framework is introduced for group detection, which is able to determine the group number automatically without any parameter or threshold to be tuned. Extensive experiments on various real world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach, and show its superiority against state-of-the-art group detection techniques.

Introduction
When people walk in a crowd space, they tend to sense each
other and group together. Within each group, the pedestrians exhibit consistent behaviors and share similar properties.
Since groups are the primary components of a crowd and
convey plenty of information about crowd phenomenon, the
detection of groups has motivated a surge of interest in the
context of artiﬁcial intelligence. It also involves a wide range
of practical applications, such as event recognition (Mehran,
Oyama, and Shah 2009; Yuan, Fang, and Wang 2015), crowd
counting (Rabaud and Belongie 2006) and semantic scene
segmentation (Lin et al. 2016). Though many efforts have
been conducted in the past years, the achieved performance
is still unsatisfying.
A major difﬁculty in group detection comes from the inadequate utilization of features. Due to the serve occlusion
in crowd scenes, many state-of-the-art methods detect and
track feature points to avoid identifying pedestrians directly,
∗
Qi Wang and Feiping Nie are the corresponding authors. This
work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 61379094 and Natural Science Foundation Research Project of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2015JM6264.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4147

