Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Psychologically Based Virtual-Suspect for Interrogative Interview Training∗
Moshe Bitan

Galit Nahari

Zvi Nisin

Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
moshe.bitan78@gmail.com

Department of Criminology
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
naharigalit@gmail.com

zvinisin@gmail.com

Ariel Roth

Sarit Kraus

Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
roth.ariel.phil@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

the Investigative Interviewing method and is based on an interrogation plan which begins with a relaxed atmosphere of
acquaintance, then the suspects version of the event is obtained and his/her alibi is veriﬁed, and ﬁnally tough questions are introduced and in some cases accusations are made
against the suspect. Interestingly, interrogators often cycle
back to one or more of these steps according to the suspect’s
state of mind. This training technique has long served its
goals and has proven efﬁcient and effective. Unfortunately,
this time consuming technique requires experienced instructors or actors. Furthermore, the training sessions are carried
out on a one-trainee-at-a-time basis, and are therefore expensive.
Virtual-Suspect systems may offer a solution for this. The
advantages of a computer interrogation training system are
fairly straightforward. First, the system can provide a large
number of scenarios and satisfy greater control over the
Virtual-Suspect’s personality. Second, multiple cadets can
train simultaneously at their convenience with an instructor monitoring their progress. Lastly, detailed reports can be
provided as well as transcripts of an interrogation which can
facilitate instructors in monitoring the training.
In this paper, we present a Virtual-Suspect system. The
system was developed in collaboration with criminology researchers, experienced criminal psychologists and the National Police Department. The system supports different scenario conﬁgurations based on real cases. The responses presented by the Virtual-Suspect are selected based on the psychological state of the suspect, which can be conﬁgured as
well. Furthermore, each interrogator’s statement affects the
Virtual-Suspect’s psychological state, which may lead the
interrogation in different directions. An experiment was conducted comparing the system’s responding mechanism with
that of a human instructor. The experiment was divided into
two phases. First, interrogation simulations were conducted
either using a human instructor, our system or a baseline
random system. Second, participants were asked to read the
transcripts of these simulations and answer a series of questions. The results suggest that humans have difﬁculty differ-

Abstract
In this paper, we present a Virtual-Suspect system which can
be used to train inexperienced law enforcement personnel in
interrogation strategies. The system supports different scenario conﬁgurations based on historical data. The responses
presented by the Virtual-Suspect are selected based on the
psychological state of the suspect, which can be conﬁgured
as well. Furthermore, each interrogator’s statement affects
the Virtual-Suspect’s current psychological state, which may
lead the interrogation in different directions. In addition, the
model takes into account the context in which the statements
are made. Experiments with 24 subjects demonstrate that the
Virtual-Suspect’s behavior is similar to that of a human who
plays the role of the suspect.

Introduction
One of the most important tasks of a police ofﬁcer is to interrogate suspects. The main role of the police interrogation
is to encourage the suspect to inadvertently incriminate himself and to collect further information regarding the case. Often, the physical evidence available in a given investigation
is scarce, which makes the interrogation stage much more
critical. Therefore, police cadets undergo rigorous interrogation training.
One of the leading training techniques is one-on-one interrogation simulation sessions. In these personal sessions, a
trained instructor conducts an interrogation simulation, with
the trainee acting as the investigator. In order to prepare the
inexperienced law enforcement personnel for real-world investigations, the instructor must develop a scenario based on
real cases. Furthermore, the instructor or a hired actor plays
the role of the suspect and portrays different personalities
based on the corresponding scenario. The interrogation uses
∗
This work was supported by the LAW-TRAIN project that has
received funding from the European Union Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program under grant agreement No 653587 and the
ERC (grant No. 267523).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

993

