Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Neuron Learning Machine for Representation Learning
1

Jia Liu,1 Maoguo Gong,1 Qiguang Miao2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
omegaliuj@gmail.com, gong@ieee.org, qgmiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn

feature learning models. From the analysis and experiments,
NLM is capable of learning useful features.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel neuron learning machine (NLM)
which can extract hierarchical features from data. We focus
on the single-layer neural network architecture and propose
to model the network based on the Hebbian learning rule.
Hebbian learning rule describes how synaptic weight changes
with the activations of presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons.
We model the learning rule as the objective function by considering the simplicity of the network and stability of solutions. We make a hypothesis and introduce a correlation based
constraint according to the hypothesis. We ﬁnd that this biologically inspired model has the ability of learning useful features from the perspectives of retaining abstract information.
NLM can also be stacked to learn hierarchical features and reformulated into convolutional version to extract features from
2-dimensional data.

The Model
In the training of an artiﬁcial neural network, Hebbian rule
describes the updating gradient of each connecting weight
Wij = Wij + ΔWij . This can be simpliﬁed by the product
of the values of the units at the two ends of the connection,
i.e., ΔWij = αhi vj , where α is the learning rate.
With the gradient, a model can be obtained by integrating over ΔW . However, it is of great difﬁculty to derive the
integral. The artiﬁcial neural networks are highly simpliﬁed
models inspired from real neural networks. Therefore when
the Hebbian learning rule is applied to the simpliﬁed network, many considerations have to be considered, i.e., locality, cooperativity, weight boundedness, competition, long
term stability, and weight decrease and increase (Kuriscak
et al. 2015). For convenience, we assume that the connecting weight has negligible inﬂuence on the connected hidden unit. Under this omitting assumption, h can be taken as
a set 
of 
constants wrt W
and the integral Tis apparent, i.e.,
max ij Wij hi vj =
ij Wij hi vj = v W h. Although
this term is derived under the hypothesis, optimizing this
term will increase the correlation between Wij and vj hi
which is consistent with the Hebbian rule.
In order to make the network approximate the assumption
and guarantee the long term stability of W and h, a correlation based constraint is introduced. The assumption omits
the effect of W on the hidden units h. Therefore, both positive and negative correlations between W and h should be
minimized which can be represented by the cosine between
the two vectors cos2 (h, W:j ) where W:j is the j-th row of
the matrix W . Meanwhile, the length of W and h should
be limited in order to prevent the inﬁnite increase or decrease of W . Then the correlation constraint can be formulated
between the two vectors
of inner product
 as the square
2
2
2
2
h,
W

=
W

h
cos
(h, W:j ) = W h22 .
:j
:j
2
2
j
j
Then we can obtain the objective function of NLM:

Introduction
The learning behaviours of neurons have been researched for
a long time for revealing the mechanism of human cognition.
One of the most famous theory is the Hebbian learning rule
(Hebb 1949) proposed by Donald Olding Hebb. Hebbian
learning rule can be summarised by the most cited sentence
in (Hebb 1949): “When an axon of cell A is near enough
to excite a cell B and repeatedly or persistently takes part
in ﬁring it, some growth process or metabolic change takes
place in one or both cells such that A’s efﬁciency, as one
of the cells ﬁring B, is increased.” By applying the Hebbian
rule in the study of artiﬁcial neural networks, we can obtain powerful models of neural computation that might be
close to the function of structures found in neural systems of
many diverse species (Kuriscak et al. 2015). Recent works
on Hebbian learning are the series on “biologically plausible
backprop” (Scellier and Bengio 2016) by Bengio, et al. They
linked Hebbian and other biologically formulated rules to
back-propagation algorithm and used them to train the neural network. Hebbian rule gives the updating gradient of the
connecting weights. We establish the model with the single
layer network and attempt to model the updating gradient
as the objective function. We call the model neuron learning
machine (NLM). Hebbian rule itself is unsupervised and we
ﬁnd that NLM has many similar properties to unsupervised

max J(W, b) = v T W h − λW h22

(1)

where λ is a user deﬁned parameter that controls the importance of the two terms.
In convolutional neural networks (CNN), the feature maps
are obtained by Hi = s(I ∗ Wi + bi ) where Hi denotes the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4961

