Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning to Prune Dominated Action
Sequences in Online Black-Box Planning
Yuu Jinnai, Alex Fukunaga
Department of General Systems Studies
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

Such black-box domains present a challenge for searchbased planning, because the pruning techniques which enabled effective search in domains with transparent domain
models are not applicable, leaving us only with brute-force
methods such as breadth-ﬁrst search. However, it was recently shown that Iterative Width (IW) (Lipovetzky and
Geffner 2012), a search strategy which prunes the search
space by focusing only on states which are “novel” compared to previously expanded nodes, can be used as the basis
for a successful, search-based planner for black-box planning (Lipovetzky, Ramirez, and Geffner 2015).
In most traditional planning/search domains, successor
state generation is relatively cheap, while state evaluation
(e.g., calling a heuristic function) tends to be expensive.
For example, in classical planning, powerful but expensive
heuristic functions are often the bottleneck. In contrast, in
black-box domains, successor state generation is expensive,
since the successor computation (Simulate) can be a complex simulation algorithm. State evaluation can also be slow
in black-box domains (it might require running another simulation), or evaluation might be cheap (e.g., in the Arcade
Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al. 2013), evaluation is cheap because the score is computed as a side-effect
of state generation).
Slow state generation introduces a signiﬁcant bottleneck
for black-box planning when the state space is a graph.
When searching in standard domains using algorithms such
as A* or breadth-ﬁrst search, duplicate detection is relatively
cheap (e.g., a hashing operation) and since state generation
is fast, the presence of detectable duplicate states is usually
not a critical issue. In contrast, in black-box domains with
slow state generation, the duplicate check itself is fast (hashing), but by the time a duplicate check is performed, it is
too late – a large cost has been incurred when the duplicate
state has been generated. To avoid this overhead, we must
avoid generating duplicate states. Previously proposed duplicate avoidance mechanisms (c.f. (Taylor and Korf 1993)),
are inapplicable because they depend on the ability to identify duplicate action sequences by analyzing the underlying
transparent domain models.
In this paper, we investigate duplicate avoidance in online planning settings for black-box domains, as exempliﬁed
by the on-line planning for the ALE (Bellemare et al. 2013),
where an agent plays video games by repeating the loop:

Abstract
Black-box domains where the successor states generated by
applying an action are generated by a completely opaque
simulator pose a challenge for domain-independent planning.
The main computational bottleneck in search-based planning
for such domains is the number of calls to the black-box simulation. We propose a method for signiﬁcantly reducing the
number of calls to the simulator by the search algorithm by
detecting and pruning sequences of actions which are dominated by others. We apply our pruning method to Iterated
Width and breadth-ﬁrst search in domain-independent blackbox planning for Atari 2600 games in the Arcade Learning
Environment (ALE), adding our pruning method signiﬁcantly
improves upon the baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Planning is the task of deciding a sequence of actions for
an agent such that the agent achieves some set of goals,
where the goals can include the optimization of some objective function. Much of the previous work in AI planning
assumes that a model of the world and its dynamics is fully
speciﬁed and available to the planner. For example, in classical planning with the standard STRIPS or SAS+ models,
each action a available to the agent is speciﬁed precisely
in terms of its preconditions (constraints on the state vector required to execute a) and effects (changes in the state
vector as a result of executing a). Such transparent domain
models have enabled the development of effective search algorithms which exploit the structure exposed by the model,
e.g., heuristic functions that use the model to estimate the
cost of achieving the goals from a given state.
Recently, planning in black-box domains with much more
opaque domain models has attracted attention, spurred by
interest in developing a game-independent AI playing algorithm for video games (Bellemare et al. 2013). In blackbox planning, a state vector and a set of actions are available, as well as an objective function for evaluating states.
However, the only way to compute the successor state s
resulting from applying an action a to state s is to execute
s = Simulate(s, a), a black-box simulation function for
which the internal dynamics are inaccessible.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

839

