Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Extreme Gradient Boosting and Behavioral Biometrics
Benjamin Manning
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA (benjamin.manning@uga.edu)

One main disadvantage of decision trees is the high
probability of becoming unstable when used on data with
larger numbers of features. In order to remedy this
potential side effect ensemble methods (Dietterrich 2000)
can be used to introduce an iterative training process.
This iteration uses different methods that invoke
building and comparing the results of numerous models
during a single model building session. Random Forest is a
good example of an ensemble learning method where
multiple decisions trees (i.e. the forests) are created during
training and the output is derived by taking the mean of all
of the produced trees within the forest, but a less often used
and often overlooked ensemble approach is Gradient
Boosting.
Gradient Boosting (Friedman 2002) constructs additive
models by “sequentially fitting a simple parameterized
function to current residuals by using the least square at
each iteration.” Put more simply, the model builds multiple
decision trees similar to how Random Forest does, but
Gradient Boosting uses an arbitrary differential loss
function instead of using the mean to make the resulting
predictions.

Abstract
As insider hacks become more prevalent it is becoming
more useful to identify valid users from the inside of a
system rather than from the usual external entry points
where exploits are used to gain entry. One of the main goals
of this study was to ascertain how well Gradient Boosting
could be used for prediction or, in this case, classification or
identification of a specific user through the learning of HCIbased behavioral biometrics. If applicable, this procedure
could be used to verify users after they have gained entry
into a protected system using data that is as human-centric
as other biometrics, but less invasive. For this study an
Extreme Gradient Boosting algorithm was used for training
and testing on a dataset containing keystroke dynamics
information. This specific algorithm was chosen because the
majority of current research utilizes mainstream methods
such as KNN and SVM and the hypothesis of this study was
centered on the potential applicability of ensemble related
decision or model trees. The final predictive model
produced an accuracy of 0.941 with a Kappa value of 0.942
demonstrating that HCI-based behavioral biometrics in the
form of keystroke dynamics can be used to identify the
users of a system.

Trees, Ensembles and Gradient Boosting
Data Science Process

Decision trees are widely used in classification type
problems of this nature as they can predict the value of a
dependent variable just as many other algorithms do, by
learning the values contained in the features of the data or
the independent variables. In this approach the highest
correlating features are used to eventually categorize or
classify related classes of the target or dependent variable.
In this recursive process (Quinlan 1986) ‘splits’ or
‘branches’ of the trees are constructed from each correlated
feature of the data until the correlations are no longer
effective or the target variable is reached at the bottom of
the tree. Along these individual paths binary splits are
derived and are presented often as binary decisions, which
outline the overall relationship the dependent variable has
with the remaining features in the data set.

Data Collection
The keystroke dynamics data (Killourhy and Maxion 2009)
for this study was recorded from fifty-one typists typing
the same single word (.tie5Roanl) four hundred times. The
researchers constructed a data collection system that
recorded different keystroke events such as key-down and
key-up as well as the name of the key that had been
pressed and the correlating time between different key
events. If participants made any errors when entering the
data, they were instructed to retype the word again and
continue with the remaining iterations. This data was then
analyzed to create a word-timing table dataset that
contained 20,400 individual observations and thirty-four
variables: thirty-three features represented the timestamp
of the keystrokes involved in typing the single word and
one variable, representing the dependent variable,

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4969

