Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Denoising Criterion for Variational Auto-Encoding Framework
Daniel Jiwoong Im, Sungjin Ahn, Roland Memisevic, Yoshua Bengio∗
Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms
University of Montreal
Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7
{imdaniel,ahnsungj,memisevr,¡ﬁndme¿}@iro.umontreal.ca

in the inference network, the approximate posterior distribution for each latent variable is conditioned on an observation and the parameters are shared among the latent
variables. Combined with advances in training techniques
such as the re-parameterization trick and the REINFORCE
(Williams 1992; Mnih and Gregor 2014), it became possible to train variational inference models efﬁciently for largescale datasets.
Despite these advances, it is still a major challenge to
obtain a class of variational distributions which is ﬂexible
enough to accurately model the true posterior distribution.
For instance, in the variational autoencoder (VAE), in order to achieve efﬁcient training, each dimension of the latent
variable is assumed to be independent each other and modeled by a univariate Gaussian distribution whose parameters
(i.e., the mean and the variance) are obtained by a nonlinear projection of the input using a neural network. Although
VAE performs well in practice for a rather simple problems
such as generating small and simple images (e.g., MNIST),
it is desired to relax this strong restriction on the variational
distributions in order to apply it to more complex real-world
problems. Recently, there have been efforts in this direction.
(Salimans, Kingma, and Welling 2015) integrated MCMC
steps into the variational inference such that the variational
distribution becomes closer to the target distribution as it
takes more MCMC steps inside each iteration of the variational inference. Similar ideas but applying a sequence of invertible and deterministic non-linear transformations rather
than MCMC are also proposed by (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio 2015) and (Rezende and Mohamed 2015).
On the other hand, the denoising criterion, where the input
is corrupted by adding some noise and the model is asked
to recover the original input, has been studied extensively
for deterministic generative models (Seung 1998; Vincent
et al. 2008; Bengio et al. 2013). These studies showed that
the denoising criterion plays an important role in achieving
good generalization performance (Vincent et al. 2008) because it makes the nearby data points in the low dimensional
manifold to be robust against the presence of small noise
in the high dimensional observation space (Seung 1998;
Vincent et al. 2008; Rifai 2011; Alain and Bengio 2014;
Im, Belghazi, and Memisevic 2016). Therefore, it seems a
legitimate question to ask if the denoising criterion (where
we add the noise to the inputs) can also be advantageous for

Abstract
Denoising autoencoders (DAE) are trained to reconstruct
their clean inputs with noise injected at the input level, while
variational autoencoders (VAE) are trained with noise injected in their stochastic hidden layer, with a regularizer that
encourages this noise injection. In this paper, we show that
injecting noise both in input and in the stochastic hidden
layer can be advantageous and we propose a modiﬁed variational lower bound as an improved objective function in this
setup. When input is corrupted, then the standard VAE lower
bound involves marginalizing the encoder conditional distribution over the input noise, which makes the training criterion intractable. Instead, we propose a modiﬁed training criterion which corresponds to a tractable bound when input is
corrupted. Experimentally, we ﬁnd that the proposed denoising variational autoencoder (DVAE) yields better average loglikelihood than the VAE and the importance weighted autoencoder on the MNIST and Frey Face datasets.

Introduction
Variational inference (Jordan et al. 1999) has been a core
component of approximate Bayesian inference along with
the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method (Neal
1993). It has been popular to many researchers and practitioners because the problem of learning an intractable posterior distribution is formulated as an optimization problem
which has many advantages compared to MCMC; (i) we can
easily take advantage of many advanced optimization tools
(Kingma and Ba 2014a; Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011;
Zeiler 2012), (ii) the training by optimization is usually
faster than the MCMC sampling, and (iii) unlike MCMC,
where it is difﬁcult to decide when to ﬁnish the sampling,
the stopping criterion of variational inference is more clear.
One remarkable recent advance in variational inference
is to use the inference network (also known as the recognition network) as the approximate posterior distribution
(Kingma and Welling 2014; Rezende and Mohamed 2014;
Dayan et al. 1995; Bornschein and Bengio 2014). Unlike
the traditional variational inference where different variational parameters are required for each latent variable,
∗

CIFAR Senior Fellow
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2059

