Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Hybrid Collaborative Filtering Model with
Deep Structure for Recommender Systems
Xin Dong, Lei Yu, Zhonghuo Wu, Yuxia Sun, Lingfeng Yuan, Fangxi Zhang
Ctrip Travel Network Technology (Shanghai) Co., Limited.
Shanghai, P.R.China
{dongxin, yu lei, zh wu, yx sun, lfyuan, fxzhang}@ctrip.com

The most successful approach among CF-based methods
is to learn effective latent factors directly by matrix factorization technique from the user-item rating matrix (Koren et
al. 2009). However, the rating matrix is often very sparse
in real world, causing CF-based methods to degrade signiﬁcantly in learning the appropriate latent factors. In particular, this phenomenon occurs seriously in online travel
agent(OTA) websites such as Ctrip.com, since user access
these websites with lower frequency. Moreover, another limitation for CF-based methods is how to provide recommendations when a new item arrives in the system, which is also
known as the cold start problem. The reason of the existence
about cold start is that the systems cannot recommend new
items which have not yet receive rating information from
users.
In order to overcome the cold start and data sparsity problems, it is inevitable for CF-based methods to exploit additional sources of information about the users or items, also
known as the side information, and hence hybrid CF methods have gained popularity in recent years (Shi, Larson, and
Hanjalic 2014). The side information can be obtained from
user proﬁle and item content information, such as demographics of users, properties of items, etc. Some hybrid CFbased methods (Singh and Gordon 2008; Nickel, Tresp, and
Kriegel 2011; Wang and Blei 2011) have integrated side information into matrix factorization to learn effective latent
factors. However, these methods employ the side information as regularizations and the learned latent factors are often not effective especially when the rating matrix and side
information are very spare (Agarwal, Chen, and Long 2011).
Therefore, it is highly desirable to realize this latent factor
learning problem from such datasets.
Recently, one of the powerful methods to learn effective
representations is deep learning (Hinton and Salakhutdinov
2006; Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006). Thus, with largescale ratings and rich additional side information, it is nature to integrate deep learning in recommender systems to
learn latent factors. Thereby, some researches have made use
of deep learning directly for the task of collaborative ﬁltering. Work (Salakhutdinov, Mnih, and Hinton 2007) employs
restricted Boltzmann machines to perform CF. Although
this method combines deep learning and CF, it does not
incorporate side information, which is crucial for accurate
recommendation. Moreover, work (Van den Oord, Diele-

Abstract
Collaborative ﬁltering(CF) is a widely used approach in
recommender systems to solve many real-world problems.
Traditional CF-based methods employ the user-item matrix
which encodes the individual preferences of users for items
for learning to make recommendation. In real applications,
the rating matrix is usually very sparse, causing CF-based
methods to degrade signiﬁcantly in recommendation performance. In this case, some improved CF methods utilize the increasing amount of side information to address the data sparsity problem as well as the cold start problem. However, the
learned latent factors may not be effective due to the sparse
nature of the user-item matrix and the side information. To
address this problem, we utilize advances of learning effective representations in deep learning, and propose a hybrid
model which jointly performs deep users and items’ latent
factors learning from side information and collaborative ﬁltering from the rating matrix. Extensive experimental results
on three real-world datasets show that our hybrid model outperforms other methods in effectively utilizing side information and achieves performance improvement.

Introduction
In recent years, with the growing number of choices available online, recommender systems are becoming more and
more indispensable. The goal of recommender systems is
to help users in identifying the items that best ﬁt their personal tastes from a large repository of items. Besides, many
commerce companies have been using recommender systems to target their customers by recommending items. Over
the years, various algorithms for recommender systems have
been developed. Such algorithms can roughly be categorized into two groups (Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2014):
content-based and collaborative ﬁltering(CF) based methods. Content-based methods (Lang 1995) utilize user proﬁle
or item content information for recommendation. CF-based
methods (Salakhutdinov and Mnih 2011), on the other hand,
ignore user or item content information and use the past
activities or preferences, such as user buying/viewing history or user ratings on items, to recommendation. Nevertheless, CF-based methods are often preferred to content-based
methods because of their impressive performance (Su and
Khoshgoftaar 2009).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1309

