Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Faster and Simpler Algorithm for Optimal Strategies of Blotto Game
Soheil Behnezhad,∗ Sina Dehghani,∗ Mahsa Derakhshan,∗
MohammadTaghi HajiAghayi,∗ Saeed Seddighin∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
{soheil, dehghani, mahsaa, hajiagha, sseddigh}@cs.umd.edu

tem, each state has a number of electoral votes, and the candidate who receives the majority of electoral votes is elected
as the President of the United States. In all of the states
except Maine and Nebraska, a winner-take-all role determines the electoral votes, and the candidate who gets the
majority of votes in a state will beneﬁt from all the electoral votes of the corresponding state. Since the President
is not elected by the national popular vote directly, any investment in the states that are highly biased toward a party
would be wasted. For example, a Democratic candidate can
count on the electoral votes of states like California, Massachusetts, and New York, and a Republican candidate can
count on the electoral votes of states like Texas, Mississippi,
and South Carolina. This highlights the importance of those
states that are likely to choose either party and would determine the outcome of the election. These states, known as
swing states or battleground states, are the main targets of
a campaign during the election, e.g., the main battleground
states of the 2012 U.S. presidential election were Colorado,
Florida, Iowa, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, Virginia, and Wisconsin. Now answers to the following questions seem to be essential: how can a national campaign distribute its resources like time, human resources, and money
across different battleground states? What is the outcome of
the game between two parties?
One might see the same type of competition between
two companies that are developing new technologies. These
companies need to distribute their efforts across different
markets. The winner of each market would become the
market-leader and takes almost all the beneﬁts of the corresponding market (Kovenock and Roberson 2010; 2012).
For instance, consider the competition between Samsung
and Apple, where they both invest in developing products
like cellphones, tablets, and laptops, and all can have different speciﬁcations. Each product has its own speciﬁc market
and the most plausible brand will lead that market. Again, a
strategic planner with limited resources would face a similar
question: what would be the best strategy for allocating the
resources across different markets?
Colonel Blotto Game. The Colonel Blotto game, which
was ﬁrst introduced in Borel (1921), provides a model
to study the aforementioned problems. This paper was
later discussed in an issue of Econometria (Borel 1953;
Fréchet 1953a; 1953b; von Neumann 1953). Although the

Abstract
In the Colonel Blotto game, which was initially introduced
by Borel in 1921, two colonels simultaneously distribute their
troops across different battleﬁelds. The winner of each battleﬁeld is determined independently by a winner-take-all rule.
The ultimate payoff of each colonel is the number of battleﬁelds he wins. This game is commonly used for analyzing a wide range of applications such as the U.S presidential election, innovative technology competitions, advertisements, etc. There have been persistent efforts for ﬁnding the
optimal strategies for the Colonel Blotto game. After almost a
century Ahmadinejad, Dehghani, Hajiaghayi, Lucier, Mahini,
and Seddighin provided a poly-time algorithm for ﬁnding the
optimal strategies.
They ﬁrst model the problem by a Linear Program (LP) with
exponential number of constraints and use Ellipsoid method
to solve it. However, despite the theoretical importance of
their algorithm, it is highly impractical. In general, even Simplex method (despite its exponential running-time) performs
better than Ellipsoid method in practice.
In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst polynomial-size LP formulation of the optimal strategies for the Colonel Blotto game.
We use linear extension techniques. Roughly speaking, we
project the strategy space polytope to a higher dimensional
space, which results in a lower number of facets for the polytope. We use this polynomial-size LP to provide a novel, simpler and signiﬁcantly faster algorithm for ﬁnding the optimal
strategies for the Colonel Blotto game.
We further show this representation is asymptotically tight in
terms of the number of constraints. We also extend our approach to multi-dimensional Colonel Blotto games, and implement our algorithm to observe interesting properties of
Colonel Blotto; for example, we observe the behavior of players in the discrete model is very similar to the previously studied continuous model.

1

Introduction

In the U.S. presidential election, the President is elected by
the Electoral College system. In the Electoral College sys∗
Supported in part by NSF CAREER award CCF-1053605,
NSF BIGDATA grant IIS-1546108, NSF AF:Medium grant CCF1161365, DARPA GRAPHS/AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0423,
and another DARPA SIMPLEX grant.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

369

