Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Enhancing the Privacy of Predictors
Ke Xu,∗ Swair Shah,∗ Tongyi Cao,† Crystal Maung,∗ Haim Schweitzer∗
{ke.xu5,swair,hschweitzer}@utdallas.edu, tcao@umass.edu, Crystal.Maung@gmail.com

The Main Idea. We consider a predictor fd that starts with
a known linear operator Ad . Zeroing out feature components
in the approximate null space of ATd will not change the prediction of yd , and will typically increase the error of predicting yc . Consider the following toy example:

Abstract
The privacy challenge considered here is to prevent an adversary from using available feature values to predict conﬁdential information. We propose an algorithm providing such
privacy for predictors that have a linear operator in the ﬁrst
stage. Privacy is achieved by zeroing out feature components
in the approximate null space of the linear operator. We show
that this has little effect on predicting desired information.

(x1 , x2 )
(3, 1)
(4, 2)
(5, 1)

The Problem Being Addressed. Consider a company that
develops technology for predicting desired information from
raw data. The privacy concern is the potential inappropriate
use of the client data to predict conﬁdential information that
the client does not wish to expose. Let x be the feature vector, yd the desired labels, and yc the conﬁdential labels. The
goal is to “clean” x so that the cleaned feature vector x̃ can
be used to accurately predict yd , but will typically fail if used
to predict yc . Let fd , fc denote predictors for yd , yc respectively. We wish the following holds:
fd (x̃) = ỹ d ≈ yd ,

eutility = |ỹ d − yd |2

fc (x̃) = ỹ c ≈ yc ,

eprivacy = |ỹ c − yc |2

cleaned (x1 , x2 )
(1, -1)
(1, -1)
(2, -2)

yd
2
2
4

yc
5
8
7

Both yd and yc can be calculated exactly from x1 , x2 by:
yd = x1 − x2 , yc = x1 + 2x2 . Here ATd = (1, −1), with the
vector (1, 1) in its null space. Thus, the vector (x1 , x2 ) can
be cleaned by zeroing out projections on that direction.
After cleaning, the same linear model can still be used
to predict yd from the cleaned features. But it is impossible
to compute yc exactly from the cleaned features, since two
different values of yc must be inferred from two identical
cleaned feature vectors (lines 1, 2).
Cleaning. We have developed several algorithms that
clean feature vectors (Xu et al. 2017), making different assumptions on fc . The simplest one cleans projections on the
exact null space as shown in the above example. We describe
in detail an algorithm that assumes fc to be linear, and estimates it from training data. It is shown below.

Our goal is to maximize eprivacy while minimizing eutility . We
show how to achieve this for predictors with a linear operator in the ﬁrst stage. These include, among others, linear
regression, neural nets, and algorithms that use PCA.

Input: x (feature vector), Ad (from the known predictor),
 (desired value of eutility ), training data (xj , ycj ).
Output: the cleaned feature vector x̃.
1. Use training data to compute Ac so that ycj ≈ ATc xj .
2. For Bd = Ad ATd , Bc = Ac ATc , solve the generalized
eigenvalue problem Bd v = γBc v.
3. Sort the generalized eigenvalues/eigenvectors in increasing
order of γ. The result is denoted by: (v1 , γ1 ), . . . , (vn , γn ).
4. ∀i: ai = viT x, λdi = viT Bd vi , δi = λdi a2i


5. Find the index t such that: ti=1 δi < , t+1
i=1 δi ≥ 

1
1≤i≤t
6. Set αi = 
t
( − k=1 δk )/δt+1 i = t + 1

7. Output x̃ = x − t+1
i=1 αi ai vi .

Related Work. Adapting machine learning terminology
of learning/testing our goal is protecting the privacy of information during testing. It is different from studies concerned
with the privacy of the training data, such as differential
privacy, e.g., (Dwork and Roth 2014; Sarwate and Chaudhuri 2013), where noise is added to blur the distinction between individual items in the training data. Unlike work
on differential privacy we distinguish between desired and
conﬁdential information. Recent studies (Enev et al. 2012;
Hamm 2015) propose similar models with different (or no)
assumptions about the predictors. By contrast, we assume
knowledge of these predictors, yielding different algorithms.
∗

Algorithm 1 for cleaning a feature vector x.

Department of Computer Science, Univ. of Texas at Dallas.
CICS, UMass Amherst.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

Theorem 1: Let x̃ be the result of cleaning the feature vector
x with a user deﬁned parameter . Then eutility = .

5009

