Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Enumerate Lasso Solutions
for Feature Selection
Satoshi Hara,1,3 Takanori Maehara2,3
1. National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
2. Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Japan
3. JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
satohara@nii.ac.jp, maehara.takanori@shizuoka.ac.jp
often used in real applications in various areas such as networks (Brander and Sinclair 1996), databases (Chang et al.
2015), power engineering (Voll et al. 2015), and computational biology (Naor and Brutlag 1994). It has many advantages to enumerate multiple solutions in both theory and applications, as follows.
1. In many real-world tasks, mathematical models include
some inaccuracy/approximations. Therefore, the optimal
solution to the mathematical model is a good approximation but not necessarily the best solution. By enumerating
many solutions, we have a chance to obtain more and better solutions for the real tasks.
2. In many real-world tasks, some constraints are too vague
and complex to formalize. Thus, it is hard to incorporate such constraints in the mathematical model. In such
a case, enumerating solutions and then selecting the one
that satisﬁes the non-formalized constraints would be a
more practical and efﬁcient approach.
3. In theory, the Lasso method can recover the true feature,
if some conditions regarding incoherence are satisﬁed. By
enumerating more than one solution, we have a chance to
recover the true feature even if these conditions are not
satisﬁed.

Abstract
We propose an algorithm for enumerating solutions to
the Lasso regression problem. In ordinary Lasso regression, one global optimum is obtained and the resulting
features are interpreted as task-relevant features. However, this can overlook possibly relevant features not
selected by the Lasso. With the proposed method, we
can enumerate many possible feature sets for human inspection, thus recording all the important features. We
prove that by enumerating solutions, we can recover a
true feature set exactly under less restrictive conditions
compared with the ordinary Lasso. We conﬁrm our theoretical results also in numerical simulations. Finally, in
the gene expression and the text data, we demonstrate
that the proposed method can enumerate a wide variety
of meaningful feature sets, which are overlooked by the
global optima.

1

Introduction

Background and Motivation Feature selection is a procedure that selects a subset of relevant features (i.e., variables)
for model construction. It plays a central role in many tasks
in artiﬁcial intelligence and data mining.
One of the most common feature selection methods
is Lasso regression (Tibshirani 1996; Chen, Donoho, and
Saunders 2001). We consider a prediction problem with n
observations and p predictors. Here, we have a response vector y ∈ Rn and a predictor matrix X ∈ Rn×p . The Lasso regression seeks β ∈ Rp that minimizes 1 -regularized residual sum of squares:
L(β) :=

1
Xβ − y22 + ρβ1
2

Contributions In this study, we make the following contributions:
• We formulate an enumeration version of the Lasso regression problem (Section 3) and propose an algorithm for this
problem, which enumerates solutions with different supports in ascending order of objective values (Section 4).
• We prove an exact support recovery theorem: If there exists a sparse linear model, by setting the regularization
parameter ρ appropriately, we can obtain a solution that
recovers the exact solution by enumerating solutions up
to some threshold (Section 6).
• We conduct experiments to evaluate the proposed algorithm using a synthetic dataset and a real-world dataset
from computational biology and text categorization (Section 7). The results show that using the proposed method,
we can obtain better solutions than the Lasso optimal solution in terms of test error or the solutions tend to involve
important features that are absent in the optimal solution.

(1)

where ρ ∈ R≥0 is a regularization parameter. The optimal
solution β ∗ ∈ Rp to (1) is usually sparse; therefore, we can
extract a set of features as the support of the optimal solution, supp(β ∗ ) = {i : |βi∗ | > 0}.
In this study, instead of ﬁnding a single optimal solution to the Lasso regression problem, we try to enumerate
good solutions with different supports in ascending order
based on their objective values. “Solutions enumeration” is
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1985

