Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Species Distribution Modeling of Citizen Science Data as a
Classiﬁcation Problem with Class-Conditional Noise
1

Rebecca A. Hutchinson,1,2 Liqiang He,1 and Sarah C. Emerson3

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science; 2 Dept. of Fisheries and Wildlife; 3 Statistics Dept.
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
{rah,heli,sarah.emerson}@oregonstate.edu
and location they wish. Each checklist includes the species
that were observed, whether or not the observer is reporting all species they detected, measurements indicating the
effort expended during the observation, and the time, date,
and location of the observation. Note that if the observer reports all the species they detected, we can infer the absence
of the complement of this set of species. Using these types
of records, the eBird database provides a set of instances
for each species (one for each location) with binary labels,
which can be linked with environmental features.
In this paper, we propose to formulate the problem of
species distribution modeling using citizen science data as
a classiﬁcation problem subject to class-conditional label
noise. For the class present, label noise arises from imperfect detection of secretive or cryptic species, a problem long-recognized in ecological studies (MacKenzie et al.
2002). For the absent class, label noise arises due to mistaken identiﬁcations by observers (Royle and Link 2006).
Some popular species distribution modeling approaches assume the absence of these false positives (MacKenzie et al.
2002) because ﬁeld studies often employ highly trained observers, but the variable skill levels of volunteers make this
a tenuous assumption for citizen science data. False positives have received less attention than false negatives in
this domain, though some work has used auxilliary information about surveys to account for them (Miller et al. 2011;
Ruiz-Gutierrez, Hooten, and Campbell Grant 2016).
Since we expect the class-conditional noise rates in this
setting to be asymmetric, this is a challenging learning problem (Scott, Blanchard, and Handy 2013). In this work, we
propose and investigate a model for classiﬁcation with classconditional label noise that leverages features of asymmetric
label noise without requiring multiple labels per example.
The only auxilliary information we require is features of the
noise models, such as are available in the information collected in the eBird protocol on the observation conditions for
each instance. We analyze the identiﬁability of the model,
use simulated data to explore model behavior in a variety of
settings, and apply the model to the eBird data to compare
against alternative approaches.

Abstract
Species distribution models relate the geographic occurrence
pattern of a species to environmental features and are used
for a variety of scientiﬁc and management purposes. One
source of data for building species distribution models is citizen science, in which volunteers report locations where they
observed (or did not observe) sets of species. Since volunteers have variable levels of expertise, citizen science data
may contain both false positives and false negatives in the
location labels (present vs. absent) they provide, but many
common modeling approaches for this task do not address
these sources of noise explicitly. In this paper, we propose to
formulate the species distribution modeling task as a classiﬁcation problem with class-conditional noise. Our approach
builds on other applications of class-conditional noise models to crowdsourced data, but we focus on leveraging features
of the noise processes that are distinct from the class features.
We describe the conditions under which the parameters of our
proposed model are identiﬁable and apply it to simulated data
and data from the eBird citizen science project.

Introduction
A species distribution model (SDM) describes the geographic occurrence pattern of a species in terms of environmental features like climate and habitat variables. SDMs
are useful for a variety of scientiﬁc and management purposes, including making inferences about the habitat requirements for a species and making predictions about
whether a species is likely to persist in new locations. In this
paper, we focus on a variant of species distribution modeling in which individual species are modeled using binary
labels indicating detection or non-detection at a set of locations; that is, we use so-called ’presence-absence’ data rather
than ’presence-background’ or ’occupancy-detection’ data
(Guillera-Arroita et al. 2015).
Citizen science projects engage volunteers in the scientiﬁc
process. In the realms of biology and ecology, the role of
citizen scientists is often to collect data about which species
occur at various locations. In the eBird project, bird watchers
can report their observations to a database at the Cornell Lab
of Ornithology using an online checklist system (Sullivan et
al. 2014). Participants may make observations at any time

Related Work

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Our work builds on research into classiﬁcation settings with
label noise (Menon et al. 2015; Natarajan et al. 2013; Man-

4516

