Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Approximation and Parameterized
Complexity of Minimax Approval Voting
Marek Cygan

Łukasz Kowalik

University of Warsaw, Poland
cygan@mimuw.edu.pl

University of Warsaw, Poland
kowalik@mimuw.edu.pl

Arkadiusz Socała

Krzysztof Sornat

University of Warsaw, Poland
arkadiusz.socala@mimuw.edu.pl

University of Wrocław, Poland
krzysztof.sornat@cs.uni.wroc.pl
desirable properties in the single winner case (Fishburn 1978),
in the multi-winner scenario its merits are often considered
less clear (Laslier and Sanver 2010), e.g., because it fails to reﬂect the diversity of interests in the electorate (Kilgour 2010).
Therefore, numerous alternative rules have been proposed, including Satisfaction Approval Voting, Proportional Approval
Voting, and Reweighted Approval Voting (see Kilgour (2010)
for details). In this paper we study a rule called Minimax
Approval Voting (MAV), introduced by Brams, Kilgour, and
Sanver (2007). Here, we see the votes and the choice as 01 strings of length m (characteristic vectors of the subsets,
i.e., the candidate i is approved if the string contains 1 at
position i). For two strings x and y of the same length the
Hamming distance H(x, y) is the number of positions where
x and y differ, e.g., H(011, 101) = 2. In MAV, we look for
a 0-1 string with k ones that minimizes the maximum Hamming distance to a vote. In other words, MAV minimizes
the disagreement with the least satisﬁed voter and thus it
is highly egalitarian: no voter is ignored and a majority of
voters cannot guarantee a speciﬁc outcome (LeGrand 2004;
Brams, Kilgour, and Sanver 2007).
Our focus is on the computational complexity of computing the choice based on the MAV rule. In the M INIMAX
A PPROVAL VOTING decision problem, we are given a multiset S = {s1 , . . . , sn } of 0-1 strings of length m (also called
votes), and two integers k and d. The question is whether
there exists a string s ∈ {0, 1}m with exactly k ones such
that for every i = 1, . . . , n we have H(s, si ) ≤ d. In the
optimization version of M INIMAX A PPROVAL VOTING we
minimize d, i.e., given a multiset S and an integer k as before,
the goal is to ﬁnd a string s ∈ {0, 1}m with exactly k ones
which minimizes maxi=1,...,n H(s, si ).
A reader familiar with string problems might recognize
that M INIMAX A PPROVAL VOTING is tightly connected with
the classical NP-complete problem called C LOSEST S TRING,
where we are given n strings over an alphabet Σ and the goal
is to ﬁnd a string that minimizes the maximum Hamming
distance to the given strings. Indeed, LeGrand, Markakis, and
Mehta (2007) showed that M INIMAX A PPROVAL VOTING is
NP-complete as well by reduction from C LOSEST S TRING
with binary alphabet. First proof of NP-completeness of M IN IMAX A PPROVAL VOTING was shown using reduction from
V ERTEX C OVER (LeGrand 2004). This motivated the study

Abstract
We present three results on the complexity of M INIMAX
A PPROVAL VOTING. First, we study M INIMAX A PPROVAL
VOTING parameterized by the Hamming distance d from
the solution to the votes. We show M INIMAX A PPROVAL
VOTING admits no algorithm running in time O (2o(d log d) ),
unless the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) fails. This
means that the O (d2d ) algorithm of Misra et al. [AAMAS
2015] is essentially optimal. Motivated by this, we then
show a parameterized approximation scheme, running in time
O ((3/)2d ), which is essentially tight assuming ETH. Finally, we get a new polynomial-time randomized approximation scheme for M INIMAX A PPROVAL VOTING, which runs
2
in time nO(1/ ·log(1/)) · poly(m), almost matching the running time of the fastest known PTAS for C LOSEST S TRING
due to Ma and Sun [SIAM J. Comp. 2009].

1

Introduction

One of the central problems in artiﬁcial intelligence and
computational social choice is aggregating preferences of
individual agents (see the overview of Conitzer (2010)). Here
we focus on multi-winner choice, where the goal is to select
a k-element subset of a set of candidates. Given preferences
of the agents over the candidates, a multi-winner voting rule
can be used to select a subset of candidates that in some
sense are preferred by the agents. This scenario covers a
variety of settings: nations elect members of parliament or
societies elect committees (Chamberlin and Courant 1983),
web search engines choose pages to display in response to a
query (Dwork et al. 2001), airlines select movies available
on board (Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2015), companies
select a group of products to promote (Lu and Boutilier 2011),
etc.
In this work we restrict our attention to approval-based
multi-winner rules, i.e., rules where each voter expresses his
or her preferences by providing a subset of the candidates
which he or she approves. Various voting rules are studied
in the literature. In the simplest one, Approval Voting (AV),
occurrences of each candidate are counted and k most often
approved candidates are selected. While this rule has many
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

459

