Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Plan Recognition Design
Reuth Mirsky, Roni Stern, Ya’akov (Kobi) Gal, Meir Kalech
Department of Information Systems Engineering
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
+972-50-378-1474, dekelr@bgu.ac.il

of actions required to observe before unambiguously identifying the agent’s plan. The paper deﬁnes a new measure,
called worst-case plan distinctiveness, wcpd, which is analogous to the wcd measure in the GRD setting, and presents
the longest sequence of observations that are required to recognize the agent’s plan given a domain. We provide means
of computing and minimizing the wcpd measure and show
in an empirical evaluation the values of this measure in 3
known domains from the literature.

Abstract
Goal Recognition Design (GRD) is the problem of designing a domain in a way that will allow easy identiﬁcation of
agents’ goals. This work extends the original GRD problem
to the Plan Recognition Design (PRD) problem which is the
task of designing a domain using plan libraries in order to
facilitate fast identiﬁcation of an agent’s plan. While GRD
can help to explain faster which goal the agent is trying to
achieve, PRD can help in faster understanding of how the
agent is going to achieve its goal. we deﬁne a new measure
that quantiﬁes the worst-case distinctiveness of a given planning domain, propose a method to reduce it in a given domain
and show the reduction of this new measure in three domains
from the literature.

Plan Recognition Design
We deﬁne a plan library in the standard way it is deﬁned
in the plan recognition literature (Geib and Goldman 2009),
where a plan library is a tuple L = B, C, G, R, where B
is a ﬁnite set of basic actions, C is a ﬁnite set of complex
actions, G ⊆ C the possible goals and R is a set of rules
of the form c → τ | O, where c ∈ C, τ is a string from
(B ∩ C)∗ and O = {(i, j) | ci ≺ cj } where ci , cj refer to
the i-th and j-th actions in τ respectively.
Intuitively, B represents all of the atomically observable
actions an agent can execute, C represents more complex
or abstract actions with G as the goals the agent can try to
achieve and each r ∈ R represents how a complex action
from C can decompose to a sequence of other actions. For
ci , cj ∈ τ , we say that ci ≺ cj if there exists an ordering
constraint (i < j) ∈ O.
A plan is a labeled tree p = (V, E, L), where V and E are
the nodes and edges of the tree, respectively, representing the
actions and their decomposition from the goal to the observable actions and L is a labeling function L : V → B ∪ C
mapping every node in the tree to either a basic or a complex action in the plan library. The root note is called the
goal of the plan and is labeled with a complex action from
G. Each inner node is labeled with a complex action such
that its children nodes are a decomposition of its complex
action into constituent actions according to one of the rules.
Given a set of plans G, we deﬁne P lans(gi ) to be the set of
all plans in G with the root goal gi and Goal(pi ) to be the
root goal of some plan pi in G.
An observation sequence is an ordered set of basic actions
that represents actions carried out by the observed agent. A
plan p describes an observation sequence O iff every observation is mapped to a leaf in the tree in an order that
does not collide with the ordering constraints of the plan.

Introduction
Goal Recognition is the problem of inferring an agent’s goal
from observations given a domain description (Ramırez and
Geffner 2009). Keren et al. (2014) deﬁne Goal Recognition
Design (GRD) as the problem of building a domain in a way
that will minimize the number of observations needed to recognize an agent’s goal. They introduce a worst-case distinctiveness (wcd) measure that is an upper bound on the number of observations needed to solve the GRD problem for a
given domain, and showed how to compute this measure in
domains based on the STRIPS representations.
An alternative representation for a domain is plan libraries (Kabanza et al. 2013; Blaylock and Allen 2006)
which describe agents’ activities as hierarchies of basic and
complex actions. Plan libraries provide a rich representation
but require the GRD task to explicitly reason about the hierarchical structure of the domain.
This work deﬁnes the Plan Recognition Design (PRD)
problem, which is the task of designing a domain using plan
libraries in order to facilitate fast identiﬁcation of an agent’s
plan. In this case, identifying an agent’s plan requires to infer the complete hierarchy of activities the agent is doing,
not just its goal. This is called the Plan Recognition problem,
which is more challenging than the equivalent Goal Recognition problem (Blaylock and Allen 2006). The paper formally deﬁnes PRD as the problem of minimizing the number
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4971

