Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bounded Rationality of Restricted Turing Machines∗
Lijie Chen, Pingzhong Tang, Ruosong Wang
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

unrealistic. To mitigate this difﬁculty, a stylized approach
models such strategies as ﬁnite automata (Rubinstein 1986;
Osborne and Rubinstein 1994), where “equivalent” histories are grouped into state. Under this compact formulation, the set of equilibria has been characterized (Rubinstein 1986), the computation of the best response against
an automata strategy has been investigated (Gilboa 1988;
Ben-porath 1990) and the computation of the Stackelberg
equilibrium has been investigated (Zuo and Tang 2015).
However, restricting strategies to ﬁnite automata loses
generality. For example, in inﬁnitely repeated prisoner’s
dilemma, to model the following strategy:
Play D iff the other played D more than
C in the past,
one must resort to machines such as pushdown automata.
Indeed, in reality, one can do much better than ﬁnite automata: we write computer programs! This inspires researchers to consider the possibility of modeling
the bounded rational agents as general Turing machines.
Megiddo and Wigderson (1986) model a strategy as a general Turing machine and show that, in ﬁnitely repeated
games, computing best response against such a machine is
trivial by another Turing machine. Knoblauch (1994) shows
that in inﬁnitely repeated games and limit-of-means utility,
there exists a Turing machine strategy such that no Turing machine can implement its best response. Nachbar and
Zame (1996) derive the same results, for discounted utility.
However, the general Turing machine model is also unrealistic in that it assumes an agent can perform computation in arbitrarily long time and use arbitrarily large storage space. Taking this into consideration, existing work
has investigated Turing machines with size-restrictions
(aka. restrictions on Kolmogorov complexity). Megiddo and
Wigderson (1986) show that, under a certain hypothesis, cooperation can be approximately sustained in repeated prisoner’s dilemma if we restrict the size of a Turing machine.
Lacote (2005) later shows that cooperation can be sustained
in ﬁnitely repeated games if and only if the Kolmogorv complexity of one player’s strategy is substantially smaller than
the number of rounds.
In this paper, we explore this direction further, by studying a realistic model of bounded rationality, where agents
are conﬁned to use time-restricted or space-restricted Turing
machines to implement their strategies. We ﬁrst use com-

Abstract
Bounded rationality aims to understand the effects of how
limited rationality affects decision-making. The traditional
models in game theory and multiagent system research, such
as ﬁnite automata or unrestricted Turing machine, fall short
of capturing how intelligent agents make decision in realistic applications. To address this problem, we model bounded
rational agents as restricted Turing machines: restrictions on
running time and on storage space. We study our model under the context of two-person repeated games. In the case
where the running time of Turing machines is restricted, we
show that computing the best response of a given strategy is
much harder than the strategy itself. In the case where the
storage space of the Turing machines is restricted, we show
the best response of a space restricted strategy can not be implemented by machines within the same size (up to a constant
factor). Finally, we study how these restrictions affect the set
of Nash equilibria in inﬁnitely repeated games. We show restricting the agent’s computational resources will give rise to
new Nash equilibria.

Introduction
Bounded rationality has been a topic of extensive interest in
artiﬁcial intelligence and multi-agent system research (Larson and Sandholm 2004; 2005; Cavallo and Parkes 2008;
Wright and Leyton-Brown 2010; 2012; Celis et al. 2012;
Chen and Tang 2015; Tang and Zhang 2016; Tang et al.
2017). It refers to the limitations (time, space, information,
etc) agents encounter that prevent them from making a fully
rational decision in realistic settings. This phenomenon has
been widely studied in the realm of repeated games (Osborne and Rubinstein 1994). An important feature of repeated games, often modeled as extensive-form games, is
their gigantic strategy space. A strategy of a player needs
to specify his action choice for any possible history (on
or off the actual play path) where it is his turn to move.
This leads to the difﬁculty that the description of a general strategy costs exponential bits in storage and is highly
∗

This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301, the Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61033001, 61361136003,
61303077, 61561146398, a Tsinghua Initiative Scientiﬁc Research
Grant and a China Youth 1000-talent program.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

444

