Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fine-Grained Car Detection for Visual Census Estimation
Timnit Gebru, Jonathan Krause, Yilun Wang, Duyun Chen, Jia Deng, Li Fei-Fei
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{tgebru, jkrause, yilunw, duchen, feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of Michigan
jiadeng@umich.edu

other projects conducted by disparate government entities.
However, the emergence of large, diverse sets of data generated by people has enabled computer scientists and computational sociologists to gain interesting insights by analyzing massive user texts and social networks (West et al. 2014;
Cheng, Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Leskovec 2014). For
instance Michel et al analyzed over one million books and
presented results related to the evolution of the English language as well as various cultural phenomena (Michel et al.
2011). And Blumenstock et al used mobile phone data to
predict poverty rates in Rwanda (Blumenstock, Cadamuro,
and On 2015).
In contrast to textual data, the use of images for computational social science has been largely unexplored. A snapshot of a street or neighborhood tells a detailed story of its
socioeconomic make up. However, while a few pioneering
works have applied visual scene analysis techniques to infer
characteristics of neighborhoods and cities, they have been
limited in scope and scale. Jean et al used Satellite image
features to predict poverty rates in 5 African countries (Jean
et al. 2016). Similarly, works from Zhou et al, Ordonez et al,
Naik et al and Arietta et al use global image features from
Google Street View images to learn various neighborhood
characteristics (Zhou et al. 2014; Ordonez and Berg 2014;
Naik et al. 2014; Arietta et al. 2014).
Global image features, however, contain limited information about individuals, neighborhoods and cities. In contrast,
afﬂuence (or lack thereof), culture, and even crime can be
inferred by observing houses, people, clothing styles and
types of cars on the street. Ninety ﬁve percent of American
households own automobiles (Chase 2009), and as shown
by prior work (Choo and Mokhtarian 2004) cars are a reﬂection of their owners’ characteristics providing signiﬁcant
personal information. For instance, a large number of Teslas
is a strong indicator of a wealthy neighborhood.
Guided by this intuition we develop a novel computer vision pipeline to predict demographic variables from Google
Street View images. We recognize cars in 50 million images
from 200 of the largest American cities and use the detected
cars to predict income, segregation levels, per capita carbon
emission and crime rates. In addition to accurately predicting ground truth data (e.g. Pearsons r=0.82 for income), we
discover interesting relationships between cars and demographics allowing us to perform a sociological study of our

Abstract
Targeted socio-economic policies require an accurate understanding of a country’s demographic makeup. To that end,
the United States spends more than 1 billion dollars a year
gathering census data such as race, gender, education, occupation and unemployment rates. Compared to the traditional method of collecting surveys across many years which
is costly and labor intensive, data-driven, machine learningdriven approaches are cheaper and faster—with the potential
ability to detect trends in close to real time. In this work, we
leverage the ubiquity of Google Street View images and develop a computer vision pipeline to predict income, per capita
carbon emission, crime rates and other city attributes from a
single source of publicly available visual data. We ﬁrst detect
cars in 50 million images across 200 of the largest US cities
and train a model to predict demographic attributes using the
detected cars. To facilitate our work, we have collected the
largest and most challenging ﬁne-grained dataset reported to
date consisting of over 2600 classes of cars comprised of images from Google Street View and other web sources, classiﬁed by car experts to account for even the most subtle of visual differences. We use this data to construct the largest scale
ﬁne-grained detection system reported to date. Our prediction
results correlate well with ground truth income data (r=0.82),
Massachusetts department of vehicle registration, and sources
investigating crime rates, income segregation, per capita carbon emission, and other market research. Finally, we learn interesting relationships between cars and neighbourhoods allowing us to perform the ﬁrst large scale sociological analysis
of cities using computer vision techniques.

Introduction
Many government and non-government projects are dedicated to studying cities and their inhabitants. For example, the American Community Survey (ACS) collects data
related to the demographic makeup of the US, the Environmental Protection Agency gathers data pertaining to
city pollution, and private organizations such as car dealerships gather information regarding the relationship between cars and demographics. Traditionally, the most prevalent method for obtaining such personal, demographic and
environmental information is through costly surveys such
as the US census, American community survey (ACS) and
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4502

