Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

TaGiTeD: Predictive Task Guided Tensor Decomposition
for Representation Learning from Electronic Health Records
Kai Yang,1,2 Xiang Li,3 Haifeng Liu,3 Jing Mei,3 Guotong Xie,3
Junfeng Zhao,1,2∗ Bing Xie,1,2 Fei Wang4
1

Software Engineering Institute, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Key Laboratory of High Confdence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100871,China
3
IBM Research-China, Beijing, China
4
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Cornell University
{smileyk, zhaojf, xiebing} @pku.edu.cn, {lixiang, liuhf, meijing,XIEGUOT} @cn.ibm.com, feiwang03@gmail.com
2

In order to overcome those challenges, researchers usually do not directly work with raw EHRs. Instead, they ﬁrst
project the medical events in a lower dimensional space and
then build follow up analytical algorithms in that space. The
process of obtaining such space is usually called representation learning, and the different dimensions in that space
are usually referred to novel EHR representations. Many
approaches have been adopted or developed for representation learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). With
the new representations, not only the dimensionality of EHR
is reduced, but also the entries are becoming denser (Macskassy et al. 2014).
Recently, Ho et al. (Ho, Ghosh, and Sun 2014) proposed
a representation approach from EHR with tensor decomposition. The advantage of their method, comparing to traditional vector based approaches, is the capability of capturing high order event interactions through tensors. This is
crucial because in reality, it is unlikely only single medical event contributes to a speciﬁc healthcare problem, high
order event interactions always matter. The authors showed
that the learned EHR representations (a.k.a. phenotypes) are
not only leading to better prediction performance, but also
highly interpretable.
However, despite the success, there are still limitations in
those existing tensor based approaches.

Abstract
With the better availability of healthcare data, such as Electronic Health Records (EHR), more and more data analytics methodologies are developed aiming at digging insights
from them to improve the quality of care delivery. There are
many challenges on analyzing EHR, such as high dimensionality and event sparsity. Moreover, different from other
application domains, the EHR analysis algorithms need to
be highly interpretable to make them clinically useful. This
makes representation learning from EHRs of key importance.
In this paper, we propose an algorithm called Predictive Task
Guided Tensor Decomposition (TaGiTeD), to analyze EHRs.
Speciﬁcally, TaGiTeD learns event interaction patterns that
are highly predictive for certain tasks from EHRs with supervised tensor decomposition. Compared with unsupervised
methods, TaGiTeD can learn effective EHR representations in
a more focused way. This is crucial because most of the medical problems have very limited patient samples, which are
not enough for unsupervised algorithms to learn meaningful
representations form. We apply TaGiTeD on real world EHR
data warehouse and demonstrate that TaGiTeD can learn representations that are both interpretable and predictive.

Introduction
With the rapid development of computer technologies, more
and more healthcare data, such as Electronic Health Records
(EHR), are becoming readily available. In the current big
data era, those healthcare data are invaluable resources that
carry important insights for the various aspects of care delivery. Data analytics technologies, such as data mining and
machine learning, are important tools for digging those insights out from the healthcare data.
There are many aspects that are unique for patient EHRs
that make their analysis very challenging. For example,
many heterogeneous medical events, such as diagnosis, procedures, medications and lab tests are all included. This
makes the dimensionality of EHR very high (because of the
large number of unique medical events). Also every patient
only has a limited number of visits to hospitals or clinical
facilities. Thus the patient EHRs are usually very sparse.

• They are unsupervised. Typically unsupervised learning
will need many more samples to achieve meaningful results comparing to supervised learning methods (Goodfellow, Courville, and Bengio 2012). Different from other
application domains like image or speech analysis (Hinton et al. 2012), we always have limited patient samples
in healthcare problems, which means we cannot obtain as
many data as we want. This will make the results of completely unsupervised learning not reliable.
• They are two-stage. Existing algorithms typically work in
a two-stage way. In the ﬁrst stage they learn novel EHR
representations. In the second stage they build analytical
models, such as predictive models, on top of those representations. There is no guarantee that the representations
learned from the ﬁrst stage can lead to good performance
in the second stage.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this paper, we propose a novel EHR representation

2824

