Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Leveraging Saccades to Learn Smooth Pursuit: A Self-Organizing
Motion Tracking Model Using Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Arjun Yogeswaran, Pierre Payeur
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Ottawa
800 King Edward Ave, Ottawa, Canada
ayoge099@uottawa.ca, ppayeur@uottawa.ca
work proposes a computational model to illustrate the theory
by which smooth pursuit behaviour can emerge through exposure to real-world data, and demonstrates it as a motion
tracking method which is tested on natural video. Generalpurpose machine learning algorithms are used to highlight the
theory’s robustness by operating without customized models.
Newborns cannot track motion, but can observe targets by
redirecting their eyes through saccades (Aslin 1988). Saccades are sharp movements of the eye to change the ﬁxation
point, or gaze, and allow the brain to gather more information and learn better sensory-motor control (Canﬁeld and
Kirkham 2001). Smooth pursuit is non-existent at infants
under 8 weeks of age (Aslin 1981) and improves with age
as they mature (Richards and Holley 1999; von Hofsten and
Rosander 1997). As it improves, tracking involves alternating between saccadic and smooth pursuit movements. This
work posits that, when an infant uses a saccade to look at
something and ﬁnds that the object has moved by the time it
gets there, the brain must learn to produce a better prediction
of how to move in the future; getting better at predicting
trajectories facilitates learning to control its gaze to follow
that trajectory. Controlling the gaze, instead of only receiving data, allows an additional level of interaction with the
visual data available in the world. Smooth pursuit behavior
can emerge via self-organization based on real-world stimuli
and through feedback generated by saccades; the proposed
model will illustrate this process.
Adams et al. (2012) use active inference, which builds on
action and perception to minimize surprise through online
learning, to model smooth pursuit. On simulations, when
the network is presented with a 1-dimensional sinusoidallymoving black target on a white background, it learns to predict the trajectory using gaze movements such that pursuit behaviour emerges. Active inference uses the generative model
to represent sensory information regarding position and uses
those same variables to generate action. This is a principle
that is also implemented by the proposed method. However,
the proposed method does not hardcode prior beliefs and
learns them from the data. Also, the proposed simulations
occur on more complex data. Denil et al. (2012) use a deep
network and particle ﬁltering to estimate the trajectory of a
target through recognition at each time step by accumulating
information from local gaze searches (Larochelle and Hinton 2010). Wang and Yeung (2013) also perform tracking

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a biologically-plausible model to
explain the emergence of motion tracking behaviour in early
development using unsupervised learning. The model’s training is biased by a concept called retinal constancy, which
measures how similar visual contents are between successive
frames. This biasing is similar to a reward in reinforcement
learning, but is less explicit, as it modulates the model’s learning rate instead of being a learning signal itself. The model
is a two-layer deep network. The ﬁrst layer learns to encode
visual motion, and the second layer learns to relate that motion
to gaze movements, which it perceives and creates through
bi-directional nodes. By randomly generating gaze movements
to traverse the local visual space, desirable correlations are
developed between visual motion and the appropriate gaze
to nullify that motion such that maximal retinal constancy
is achieved. Biologically, this is similar to using saccades to
look around and learning from moments where a target and
the saccade move together such that the image stays the same
on the retina, and developing smooth pursuit behaviour to
perform this action in the future. Restricted Boltzmann machines are used to implement this model because they can
form a deep belief network, perform online learning, and act
generatively. These properties all have biological equivalents
and coincide with the biological plausibility of using saccades
as leverage to learn smooth pursuit. This method is unique
because it uses general machine learning algorithms, and their
inherent generative properties, to learn from real-world data.
It also implements a biological theory, uses motion instead
of recognition via local searches, without temporal ﬁltering,
and learns in a fully unsupervised manner. Its tracking performance after being trained on real-world images with simulated
motion is compared to its tracking performance after being
trained on natural video. Results show that this model is able
to successfully follow targets in natural video, despite partial
occlusions, scale changes, and nonlinear motion.

Introduction
Smooth pursuit is the process by which the eye tracks a moving object in its ﬁeld of view (Thier and Ilg 2005), and is
driven by the direction and speed of a stimulus, resulting in
continual shifts of the eye such that the moving target always
falls approximately in the center of the ﬁeld of view. How this
mechanism develops is still under considerable debate. This
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4313

