Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Authorship Attribution with Topic Drift Model
Min Yang,1,2 Dingju Zhu,1∗ Yong Tang,1 Jingxuan Wang2
1

South China Normal University, China
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
myang@cs.hku.hk {zhudj,ytang}@scnu.edu.cn jingxuan@hku.hk
2

authors’ interests and writing styles may change over time,
and automatically learn this drift from raw data. Second,
our model provides a natural way to measure the similarity
of latent topics of interest, which helps modeling the speed
of interest drift, as well as measuring the similarity between
the author and the text. Third, our model takes the ordering
of words into account, so that the topics reﬂect the semantics
of the context.

Abstract
Detecting authorship attribution is an active research direction due to its legal and ﬁnancial importance. The goal is to
identify the authorship of anonymous texts. In this paper, we
propose a Topic Drift Model (TDM), monitoring the dynamicity of authors’ writing style and latent topics of interest. Our
model is sensitive to the temporal information and the ordering of words, thus it extracts more information from texts.

Model description

Introduction

We apply a Topic Drift Model (TDM) (Yang et al. 2016) for
modeling the dynamic evolution of individual author’s interest. We assume that there are W different words in the vocabulary and there are D documents in corpus. In addition,
these documents belong to T topics, where T is a hyperparameter speciﬁed by the user. We use an p-dimensional
interest vector vec(a, d) ∈ Rp to represent the interests of
author a when he/she writes document d. Two authors have
similar interests if the distance between their interest vectors
is small.
Let t be the time that document d was written. Let d
be the last document that author a has written before he/she
writes the current document, and let the timestamps for d
be t (t ≤ t). We deﬁne a joint distribution on the vectors vec(a, d). It is a multivariate normal distribution on Rp
taking the form N (μd , Σd ). Firstly, we specify the mean
μd := vec(a,d ). This deﬁnition implies that the new interests of authors have connections to the history. Second, we
deﬁne the covariance matrix to characterize the interest drift
of the author Σd := σ(t − t )σ(t − t )I. Here, σ(x) is an
increasing function of x. It means that as more time passed,
the covariance matrix entries get bigger, indicating that the
interest of author is less likely to concentrate on its mean –
the interest vector when he/she wrote the earlier document
d .
Following the idea of (Yang, Cui, and Tu 2015), we represent the topic model as Gaussian mixture model of vectors
which encode words, sentences and documents. Each mixture component is associated with a speciﬁc topic. Given
the Gaussian mixture model λ, the generative process is
described as follow: for each word w in the vocabulary,
we sample its topic z(w) from the multinomial distribution
π := (π1 , π2 , . . . , πT ) (T is the number of topics) and sample its vector representation vec(w) from Gaussian distribu-

Most of the early work on AA focuses on formal texts with
only a few candidate authors while researchers have recently
turned their attention to informal texts and tens of thousands
of authors (see Section 2). As the length of texts decreases
and the number of candidate authors increases, ﬁnding the
author of texts remains a challenge.
Capturing authors’ writing style is crucial for authorship
attribution. Most current AA approaches neglect the temporal changes in authors’ writing style, which may lead to
poor performance of AA for authors who change their writing styles constantly. Moreover, most existing AA models
make the bag-of-word assumption, which neglects the ordering of words and semantics of the context though these
factors are important in identifying author’s writing.
Inspired by (Yang, Cui, and Tu 2015; Yang et al. 2016), in
this paper, we introduce a novel Topic Drift Model (TDM)
for modeling the dynamic evolution of individual author’s
latent topics of interest. TDM learns the representation of
words and authors’ latent topics as vectors. The similarity
between these vectors may be represented by their Euclidean
distance. Each author’s topics of interest are represented by
a sequence of vectors, where the speed of the topic drifting
is controlled by the similarity of consecutive vectors. The
TDM model also captures the fact that co-authors usually
share common topics, by making their interest vectors positively correlated. Finally, we assign the given text to the
author whose interest vector has highest similarity with the
author interest vector of the given text.
Our model has three advantages over the previous similarity based AA approaches. First, it captures the fact that the
∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5015

