Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Optimizing Positional Scoring Rules for Rank Aggregation
Ioannis Caragiannis

Xenophon Chatzigeorgiou

University of Patras
caragian@ceid.upatras.gr

University of Patras
chatzigeorgiou@ceid.upatras.gr

George A. Krimpas

Alexandros A. Voudouris

University of Patras
krimpas@ceid.upatras.gr

University of Patras
voudouris@ceid.upatras.gr
tives that she has no idea about would be rather impossible,
given their huge number. Instead, this task would be much
easier if workers focused on small sets of alternatives. The
requester could give each worker a different set of few alternatives to rank. Then, processing smaller inputs would be
easier for the requester as well.
This approach has been recently exploited in the context
of ordinal peer grading in MOOCs; see (Caragiannis, Krimpas, and Voudouris 2015; 2016; Raman and Joachims 2014;
Shah et al. 2013) for approaches of this ﬂavour. In such settings, the task of grading an exam with many participating
students is outsourced to the students themselves. Each student is given a small number of exam papers to rank and
the ﬁnal grading (a ranking of all students) is obtained by
aggregating the inputs provided by the students.
In a rating application we envision, users of a hotel booking system are asked to rank hotels they have stayed recently
in a speciﬁc city and the rating application aims to compute
a full ranking of the hotels (or, possibly, different rankings
for different relevant criteria). Clearly, each user can provide meaningful feedback for just a few hotels. Again, in
this scenario, the system might ask each user to focus only
on a subset of the hotels she knows.
Besides the different sets of alternatives each individual
is asked to rank in the above scenarios, another implicit feature is that there is an underlying true ranking of all alternatives (e.g., the ranking of exam papers in terms of their
quality or the ranking of hotels in terms of their facilities)
that we would like to compute when aggregating the individual preferences. Can we do so using simple voting-like
rules? We follow an optimization approach which can be described with the following question: Assuming that we have
partial knowledge of the underlying true ranking and access
to sampled proﬁles, which is the rule that yields an outcome
that is as consistent as possible to (our partial knowledge
of) the underlying true ranking when applied to the sampled
proﬁles?
We study the above question for positional scoring rules
(or, simply, scoring rules), which have played a central role
in social choice theory. Two factors that have led to this decision are their simplicity and effectiveness; simplicity follows by their deﬁnition and effectiveness is justiﬁed by our
experimental results. In particular, we consider settings in
which each agent is asked to rank the same number d of

Abstract
Nowadays, several crowdsourcing projects exploit social
choice methods for computing an aggregate ranking of alternatives given individual rankings provided by workers. Motivated by such systems, we consider a setting where each
worker is asked to rank a ﬁxed (small) number of alternatives
and, then, a positional scoring rule is used to compute the
aggregate ranking. Among the apparently inﬁnite such rules,
what is the best one to use? To answer this question, we assume that we have partial access to an underlying true ranking. Then, the important optimization problem to be solved is
to compute the positional scoring rule whose outcome, when
applied to the proﬁle of individual rankings, is as close as
possible to the part of the underlying true ranking we know.
We study this fundamental problem from a theoretical point
of view and present positive and negative complexity results.
Furthermore, we complement our theoretical ﬁndings with
experiments on real-world and synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Social choice theory (Brandt et al. 2016) studies voting
rules (also known as social choice or social welfare functions) that compute a winning alternative or a ranking of
the available alternatives from voter preferences. Typically,
the preference of each voter is supposed to be a ranking
over all available alternatives. We deviate from this assumption and, instead, we focus our attention to settings
in which each voter (or, better, agent for our purposes)
ranks only a small subset of the alternatives. Such incomplete rankings seem to be non-standard in the literature;
(de Weerdt, Gerding, and Stein 2016; Dwork et al. 2001;
Sculley 2007) are some notable exceptions.
The setting we have in mind is motivated by crowdsourcing (Law and von Ahn 2011) and rating applications. For example, assume that a requester would like to rank a huge set
of alternatives using expert opinions from a crowd of workers. Asking each worker for her opinion on the whole set
of alternatives (i.e., for a full ranking) would possibly result
in poor information. Most probably, the worker will not be
aware of most of the alternatives. Even if she tries to obtain
additional information, coming up with consistent comparisons between alternatives that she knows well and alternac 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

430

