Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automatic Curriculum Graph Generation for Reinforcement Learning Agents
Maxwell Svetlik

Matteo Leonetti

Jivko Sinapov

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, USA

University of Leeds
Leeds, UK

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, USA

Rishi Shah

Nick Walker

Peter Stone

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, USA

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, USA

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, USA

of transferring knowledge from one task to another. We evaluate our method on discrete and continuous RL domains and
the results show that employing the generated curricula leads
to a substantial speed-up in learning performance.

Abstract
In recent years, research has shown that transfer learning
methods can be leveraged to construct curricula that sequence
a series of simpler tasks such that performance on a ﬁnal
target task is improved. A major limitation of existing approaches is that such curricula are handcrafted by humans
that are typically domain experts. To address this limitation,
we introduce a method to generate a curriculum based on
task descriptors and a novel metric of transfer potential. Our
method automatically generates a curriculum as a directed
acyclic graph (as opposed to a linear sequence as done in existing work). Experiments in both discrete and continuous domains show that our method produces curricula that improve
the agent’s learning performance when compared to the baseline condition of learning on the target task from scratch.

1

2
2.1

Background

Markov Decision Process

A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a 5-tuple
S, A, P, R, γ where S is the set of states, A is the set of
possible actions, P is the transition function, R is the reward function, and γ is the discount factor. We represent an
instance of MDP t as a task. The goal of the agent
 is to maximize the expected value of the return Gt = t≥0 γ t Rt+1 .
An agent can learn the optimal policy π ∗ by learning the
optimal action-value function Q∗ (s, a) which gives the expected return for taking action a in state s and acting optimally thereafter.
In our experiments, the action-value function was learned
using either the Q-learning algorithm (Watkins and Dayan
1992) or SARSA (Singh and Sutton 1996).

Introduction

Increasingly, reinforcement learning (RL) agents are being tasked with challenging problems that may be unfeasible to learn directly. To address such situations, transfer learning (TL) methods reuse knowledge learned in a
source task so that an agent can learn a difﬁcult target task
faster or converge to a better policy (Taylor and Stone 2009;
Lazaric 2012). Most recently, TL methods have been leveraged for the problem of curriculum learning in which the
goal is to construct a curriculum where an agent learns a
sequence of tasks (Narvekar et al. 2016; Peng et al. 2016).
The major limitation of current approaches to curriculum
learning is that the curriculum is typically hand-crafted or
designed by a human, often an expert in the domain. In addition, most TL methods do not generalize to simultaneous
transfer from multiple source tasks to a given target task.
Thus, each hand-crafted curriculum is represented as a linear sequence of tasks, which does not afford parallelization
of tasks when learning.
To address these issues, we introduce a framework for automatic construction of a curriculum. Our method allows an
agent to transfer from multiple source tasks into a single target task and, as a result, the generated curriculum is represented as a Directed Acyclic Graph. The construction of the
curriculum graph is based on a novel measure of task relatedness, that utilizes task descriptors to estimate the beneﬁt

2.2

Potential-based Reward Shaping

The method proposed in this paper uses reward shaping (Ng, Harada, and Russell 1999) as a means to transfer knowledge from one or more source tasks to a target
task. In reward shaping, the reward signal is modiﬁed by
adding additional reward, driving the agent towards the desired behavior. The reward function becomes R (s, a, s ) =
R(s, a, s ) + F (s, a, s ), where F is the shaping function.
If the reward is sparse, the agent may have no feedback
for many actions, making learning more difﬁcult. The shaping function can ﬁll these gaps, providing advice on the
value of the actions. We use potential-based look-ahead advice (Wiewiora, Cottrell, and Elkan 2003), where the reward
function is augmented by the potential-based advice function:
(1)
F (s, a, s , a ) = γφ(s , a ) − φ(s, a)
If φ is a potential function over states and actions, its impact on the value function is nondisruptive, allowing the
true value function to be recovered (Wiewiora, Cottrell, and
Elkan 2003).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2590

