Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

TweetFit: Fusing Multiple Social Media and
Sensor Data for Wellness Proﬁle Learning
Aleksandr Farseev

Tat-Seng Chua

farseev@u.nus.edu
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
13 Computing Dr, Singapore 117417

chuats@comp.nus.edu.sg
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
13 Computing Dr, Singapore 117417
2016) with wide availability of data from wearable sensors,
it seems reasonable to combine multimodal content from
different social networks with sensor data for joint processing (Jain and Jalali 2014). Such integration will narrow the
gap between users’ online representation and actual physical
status, which is the right step towards realizing the ideal of
360◦ user proﬁling (Farseev et al. 2016).
This article focuses on the problem of individual wellness
user proﬁling based on data from multiple social networks
and wearable sensors. Here, an individual wellness proﬁle
involves personal user attributes (Farseev et al. 2016) such as
demographics (age, gender, occupation, etc.) (Farseev et al.
2015), Body Mass Index (BMI) category1 , personality (Buraya et al. 2017), or chronic disease tendency (Akbari et al.
2016). In our study, we focus on two important personal
wellness attributes - BMI category and “BMI Trend’ (the
direction of BMI ﬂuctuation over time - Increase/Decrease).
Both attributes are closely related and correlated to one’s
overall health. For example, Field et al. (2001) discovered
that people whose BMI is higher than 35.0 are approximately 20 times more likely to develop diabetes. Other beneﬁts of such attributes include: a) BMI category can be further
used in public health domain to monitor wellness tendencies
of social media users at the global level; b) “BMI Trend”
information can be utilized by users to rectify their lifestyle
(i.e. via interactive mobile application or a “Smart Watch” ),
and by doctors to gain a complete picture of patient’s health.
There are three challenges in addressing individual wellness proﬁling: 1) Data gathering. The data from modern
social media services and sensor devices is often stored in independent web resources and hidden behind the privacy settings. Furthermore, the data from wearable sensors as well
as personal attributes such as BMI or demography are often not publicly accessible. It is thus necessary to implement data collection and cross-source user account mapping techniques to support large-scale social media research.
2) Data representation. Besides the textual data, social media services involve data of various modalities. For example, in Instagram, users share recently taken pictures and

Abstract
Wellness is a widely popular concept that is commonly applied to ﬁtness and self-help products or services. Inference
of personal wellness-related attributes, such as body mass index or diseases tendency, as well as understanding of global
dependencies between wellness attributes and users’ behavior is of crucial importance to various applications in personal
and public wellness domains. Meanwhile, the emergence of
social media platforms and wearable sensors makes it feasible
to perform wellness proﬁling for users from multiple perspectives. However, research efforts on wellness proﬁling and integration of social media and sensor data are relatively sparse,
and this study represents one of the ﬁrst attempts in this direction. Speciﬁcally, to infer personal wellness attributes, we
proposed multi-source individual user proﬁle learning framework named “TweetFit”. “TweetFit” can handle data incompleteness and perform wellness attributes inference from sensor and social media data simultaneously. Our experimental results show that the integration of the data from sensors
and multiple social media sources can substantially boost the
wellness proﬁling performance.

Introduction
During the past decade, social multimedia services have
drastically increased its impact on people’s daily life. For example, more than half of American smartphone users were
reported to spend an average of 144 minutes per day browsing their mobile devices, aiming to stay socially connected
with their friends. Meanwhile, these users often follow the
so-called Quantiﬁed Self tendency, which includes measuring and publishing various signals from wearable sensors
(such as heart rate, body acceleration or physical location).
These data is of crucial importance for research in wellness
domain since it describes users’ actual physical condition,
which is related to users’ well-being. At the same time, recent works demonstrated the great potential of social media data for wellness-related research (Mejova et al. 2015;
Akbari et al. 2016). However, most of these works are descriptive in nature and do not study the integration of data
from social media and wearable sensors. Considering that
most Internet-active adults actively use more than four social media services in their everyday life (GlobalWebIndex

1

The BMI measure is deﬁned as the body mass divided by the
square of the body height. Based on BMI, an individual can be categorized into one out of 8 BMI categories, namely “Severe Thinness”, “Moderate Thinness”, “Mild Thinness”, “Normal”, “Pre
Obese”, “Obese”, “Obese II”, and “Obese III” (WHO 2011).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

95

