Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Active Search for Sparse Signals with Region Sensing
Yifei Ma

Roman Garnett

Jeff Schneider

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh PA 15213, US
yifeim@cs.cmu.edu

Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, MO, USA
garnett@wustl.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh PA 15213, US
schneide@cs.cmu.edu

large contiguous regions of space. For example, an aerial
robot carrying a radiation sensor will sense a region of space
whose area depends on its altitude. How can such a robot
dynamically trade off the ability to make noisier observations of larger regions of space against making higher-ﬁdelity
measurements of smaller regions?
To simplify the discussion, we will limit such region sensing observations to reveal the average value of an underlying
function on a rectangular region of space, corrupted by independent observation noise. Noisy binary search is a simple
realization of active search using such an observation scheme.
This mechanism turns out to be sufﬁciently informative in
the cases that we analyze to offer insights into a variety of
search problems.
The ability to make aggregate region measurements in
noisy environments has rarely been considered in previous
work. Bayesian optimization, which has been used for localization of sparse signals (Carpin et al. 2015; Ma et al. 2015;
Hernández-Lobato, Hoffman, and Ghahramani 2014; Jones,
Schonlau, and Welch 1998), usually considers only point
measurements of an objective function. Notice that point observations can be considered in our framework if the allowed
region sensing actions are constrained to be arbitrarily small.
On the other extreme, compressive sensing (Donoho 2006;
Candès and Wakin 2008; Wainwright 2009), considers scenarios where every measurement can reveal information about
the entire environment through linear projection with arbitrary coefﬁcients. This is not always a realistic assumption, as
for example for an aerial robot, which can only sense its immediate vicinity. Between the two extremes, Jedynak, Frazier,
and Sznitman (2012); Rajan et al. (2015); Haupt et al. (2009);
Carpentier and Munos (2012); Abbasi-Yadkori (2012); Yue
and Guestrin (2011) considered policies for search where observations can be made on any arbitrary subset of the search
space, including discontiguous subsets, which is also often
incompatible with the constraints in physical search systems.
Another assumption we make, common for example in
compressive sensing, is sparsity. We assume that there are
only a small number of strong signals in the environment;
our goal is to recover these signals. Sparsity is necessary for
the deﬁnition of active search problems; otherwise, for dense
or weak signals, there is usually no better search approach
than simply exhaustively mapping the entire space.
In addition to applicability in real search settings, spar-

Abstract
Autonomous systems can be used to search for sparse signals
in a large space; e.g., aerial robots can be deployed to localize
threats, detect gas leaks, or respond to distress calls. Intuitively,
search algorithms may increase efﬁciency by collecting aggregate measurements summarizing large contiguous regions.
However, most existing search methods either ignore the possibility of such region observations (e.g., Bayesian optimization
and multi-armed bandits) or make strong assumptions about
the sensing mechanism that allow each measurement to arbitrarily encode all signals in the entire environment (e.g.,
compressive sensing). We propose an algorithm that actively
collects data to search for sparse signals using only noisy
measurements of the average values on rectangular regions
(including single points), based on the greedy maximization
of information gain. We analyze our algorithm in 1d and show
that it requires Õ(n/μ2 + k2 ) measurements to recover all of k
signal locations with small Bayes error, where μ and n are the
signal strength and the size of the search space, respectively.
We also show that active designs can be fundamentally more
efﬁcient than passive designs with region sensing, contrasting with the results of Arias-Castro, Candes, and Davenport
(2013). We demonstrate the empirical performance of our
algorithm on a search problem using satellite image data and
in high dimensions.

1

Introduction

Active search describes the problem where an agent is given a
target to search for in an unknown environment and actively
makes data-collection decisions so as to locate the target as
quickly as possible. Examples of this setting include using
aerial robots to detect gas leaks, radiation sources, and human
survivors of disasters. The statistical principles for efﬁcient
designs of measurements date back to Gergonne (1815), but
the growing trend to apply automated search systems in a
variety of environments and with a variety of constraints has
drawn much research attention recently, due to the need to
address the disparate aspects of new applications.
One possibility in such active search scenarios we aim
to explore, inspired by the robotic aerial search setting but
with statistical insights that we hope to generalize, is the
opportunity to take aggregate measurements that summarize
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2315

