Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Obvious Strategyproofness Needs
Monitoring for Good Approximations
Diodato Ferraioli

Carmine Ventre

DIEM, Università degli Studi di Salerno, Italy
dferraioli@unisa.it

CSEE, University of Essex, UK
carmine.ventre@gmail.com

of the agents. However, in such a body of work, this property remains unsatisfactorily vague. An orthogonal approach
is that of veriﬁably truthful mechanisms (Brânzei and Procaccia 2015), wherein agents can run some algorithm to effectively check that the mechanism is incentive compatible.
Nevertheless, these veriﬁcation algorithms can run for long
(i.e., time exponential in the input size) and are so far known
only for quite limited scenarios. Importantly, moreover, they
seem to transfer the question from the mechanism itself to
the veriﬁcation algorithm.
Li (2015) has recently formalized the aforementioned idea
of simple mechanisms, by introducing the concept of Obviously Strategy-Proof (OSP) mechanisms. This notion stems
from the observation that the very same mechanism can be
more or less truthful in practice depending on the implementation details. For example, in lab experiments, Vickrey’s
famous second-price mechanism results to be “less” truthful when implemented via a sealed-bid auction, and “more”
truthful when run via an ascending auction. The quite technical deﬁnition of OSP formally captures how implementation
details matter by looking at a mechanism as an extensiveform game; roughly speaking, OSP demands that strategyproofness holds among subtrees of the game (see below for
a formal deﬁnition). An important validation for the ‘obviousness’ is further provided by Li (2015) via a characterization of these mechanisms in terms of agents with limited
cognitive abilities (i.e., agents with limited skills in contingent reasoning). Speciﬁcally, Li shows that a strategy is obviously dominant if and only if these “limited” agents can
recognize it as such.
Nevertheless, for all its signiﬁcant aspects, there appear
to be hints that the notion of OSP mechanisms might be too
restrictive. Ashlagi and Gonczarowski (2015) prove, for example, that no OSP mechanism can return a stable matching
– thus implying that the Gale-Shapley matching algorithm is
not OSP despite its apparent simplicity.
Our contribution. We investigate the power of OSP mechanisms in more detail from a theoretical computer science
perspective. In particular, we want to understand the quality
of approximate solutions that can be output by OSP mechanisms. To answer this question, we focus on two fundamental optimization problems, machine scheduling (Archer and
Tardos 2001) and facility location (Moulin 1980), arguably
(among) the paradigmatic problems in AMD.

Abstract
Obvious strategyproofness (OSP) is an appealing concept as
it allows to maintain incentive compatibility even in the presence of agents that are not fully rational, e.g., those who struggle with contingent reasoning (Li 2015). However, it has been
shown to impose some limitations, e.g., no OSP mechanism
can return a stable matching (Ashlagi and Gonczarowski
2015).
We here deepen the study of the limitations of OSP mechanisms by looking at their approximation guarantees for basic optimization problems paradigmatic of the area, i.e., machine scheduling and facility location. We prove a number of
bounds on the approximation guarantee of OSP mechanisms,
which show that OSP can come at a signiﬁcant cost. However, rather surprisingly, we prove that OSP mechanisms can
return optimal solutions when they use monitoring — a novel
mechanism design paradigm that introduces a mild level of
scrutiny on agents’ declarations (Kovács, Meyer, and Ventre
2015).

Introduction
Algorithmic Mechanism Design (AMD) is by now an established research area in computer science that aims at conceiving algorithms resistant to selﬁsh manipulations. As the
number of parties (a.k.a., agents) involved in the computation increases, there is, in fact, the need to realign their individual interests with the designer’s. Truthfulness is the chief
concept to achieve that: in a truthful mechanism, no selﬁsh
and rational agent has an interest to misguide the mechanism. A valid question of recent interest is, however, how
easy it is for the selﬁsh agents to understand that it is useless (and possibly costly) to strategize against the truthful
mechanism at hand.
Recent research has come up with different approaches
to deal with this question. Some authors (Sandholm and
Gilpin 2003; Babaioff et al. 2014; Chawla et al. 2010;
Adamczyk et al. 2015) suggest to focus on “simple” mechanisms; e.g., in posted-price mechanisms one’s own bid is
immaterial for the price paid to get some goods of interest – this should immediately suggest that trying to play
the mechanism is worthless no matter the cognitive abilities
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

516

