Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Mechanism Design for Multi-Type Housing Markets
Sujoy Sikdar

Sibel Adalı

Lirong Xia

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
sikdas@rpi.edu

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
sibel@cs.rpi.edu

Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
xial@cs.rpi.edu

2012); patients may want to allocate multiple types of medical resources, including surgeons, nurses, rooms, and equipments (Huh, Liu, and Truong 2013).
Mechanism design for single-type housing markets is a
well-established ﬁeld in economics, often referred to as
housing markets (Shapley and Scarf 1974). In housing markets, the most sensible solution concept is the strict core,
which is the set of allocations where no group of agents
have incentive to deviate by exchanging their initial endowments within the group. Strict core is desirable because
it is an intuitive stable solution, and when agents’ preferences are linear orders, the strict core allocation always exists and is unique, which can be computed in polynomial
time by Gale’s celebrated Top-Trading-Cycles (TTC) algorithm (Shapley and Scarf 1974; Roth and Postlewaite 1977;
Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez 1999). TTC enjoys many desirable axiomatic properties including individual rationality,
Pareto optimality, and group strategy-proofness (Bird 1984).
Many extensions of TTC to other single-type housing markets have been proposed and studied. See more details in
Related Work.
In sharp contrast to the popularity of housing markets,
there is little research on multi-type housing markets, despite their importance and generality. A potential reason for
the absence of positive results is that the strict core can be
empty or multi-valued in multi-type housing markets (Konishi, Quint, and Wako 2001). Therefore, as Sönmez and
Ünver (2011) noted: “Positive results of this section [on
housing markets] no longer hold in an economy in which
one agent can consume multiple houses or multiple types of
houses”. This is the problem we address in this paper and
provide a number of positive results, a ﬁrst in this ﬁeld.

Abstract
We study multi-type housing markets, where there are p ≥ 2
types of items, each agent is initially endowed one item of
each type, and the goal is to design mechanisms without monetary transfer to (re)allocate items to the agents based on their
preferences over bundles of items, such that each agent gets
one item of each type. In sharp contrast to classical housing
markets, previous studies in multi-type housing markets have
been hindered by the lack of natural solution concepts, because the strict core might be empty.
We break the barrier in the literature by leveraging AI techniques and making natural assumptions on agents’ preferences. We show that when agents’ preferences are lexicographic, even with different importance orders, the classical top-trading-cycles mechanism can be extended while preserving most of its nice properties. We also investigate computational complexity of checking whether an allocation is in
the strict core and checking whether the strict core is empty.
Our results convey an encouragingly positive message: it is
possible to design good mechanisms for multi-type housing
markets under natural assumptions on preferences.

Introduction
In this paper, we ask the following question: is it possible at all to design good mechanisms for multi-type housing markets? In multi-type housing markets (Moulin 1995;
Konishi, Quint, and Wako 2001; Wako 2005; Klaus 2008),
there are multiple types of items, for example houses and
cars, each agent is initially endowed with one item of each
type. The goal is to design mechanisms without monetary
transfer to (re)allocate items to the agents based on their
preferences over bundles of items, such that each agent gets
one item of each type.
Multi-type housing markets are often described using
examples of houses and cars as metaphors for indivisible items. However, the allocation problem is applicable to
many other types of items and scarce resources. For example, students may want to exchange papers and dates for
presentation (Mackin and Xia 2016); in cloud computing,
agents may want to allocate multiple types of resources,
including CPU, memory, and storage (Ghodsi et al. 2011;

Our contributions
In this paper, we present novel algorithms building on AI
techniques in preference representation and reasoning for
allocation in multi-type housing markets. We assume that
agents’ preferences are represented by arbitrary acyclic CPnets (Boutilier et al. 2004). Different agents may have arbitrarily different CP-net structure. We also assume that
agents’ preferences are lexicographic, meaning that agents
have arbitrary importance orders over item types.
We propose the following natural extension of TTC,
which we call Multi-type TTC (MTTC) for multi-type hous-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

684

