Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Extensive-Form Perfect Equilibrium
Computation in Two-Player Games
Gabriele Farina

Nicola Gatti

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria
Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
I-20133, Milan, Italy
nicola.gatti@polimi.it
the PPAD class (Koller, Megiddo, and von Stengel 1996).
However, the concept of NE is not satisfactory in extensiveform games, and NE reﬁnements are studied (Selten 1975).
When information is perfect, the concept of Subgame Perfect Equilibrium (SPE) is satisfactory, while it is not when
information is imperfect. In this latter case, reﬁnements are
usually based on the idea of perturbations representing mistakes of the players. In a Quasi-Perfect Equilibrium (QPE)—
proposed by van Damme— a player maximizes their utility
in each decision node taking into account the future mistakes of the opponents only, whereas, in an Extensive-Form
Perfect Equilibrium (EFPE)—proposed by Nobel prized
Selten—, players maximize their utility in each decision
node keeping into account the future mistakes of both themselves and their opponents (Hillas and Kohlberg 2002). The
sets of QPEs and EFPEs may be disjoint, requiring different
techniques. Given a speciﬁc perturbation, computing a QPE
is PPAD-complete (Miltersen and Sørensen 2010) and can
be done by summing the perturbation to the constant terms
in the linear constraints of the sequence form (von Stengel
1996); due to this reason, we say that this pertubation is
additive. However, the problem of efﬁciently computing an
EFPE is still open. The scientiﬁc challenge is intrinsic to the
EFPE deﬁnition: it is based on a perturbation over the agent
form, but the agent form is computationally inefﬁcient, presenting highly non-linear equilibrium constraints. The only
previous attempt is (Gatti and Iuliano 2011), but no proof is
provided about neither the soundness (speciﬁcally, the perturbations proposed do not match the deﬁnition of EFPE)
nor polynomial-time cost of each algorithm iteration.
We show that ﬁnding an EFPE is PPAD-complete in 2player general-sum games and can be done by means of
Lemke’s algorithm with an extra polynomial computation
cost due to a numeric perturbation, and that it is in FP in 2player zero-sum games and can be done by linear programming with the same perturbation for the general-sum case.
The table below summarizes the results known so far. ‘(∗)‘
denotes original contribution discussed in this paper.

Abstract
We study the problem of computing an Extensive-Form
Perfect Equilibrium (EFPE) in 2-player games. This
equilibrium concept reﬁnes the Nash equilibrium requiring resilience with respect to a speciﬁc vanishing
perturbation, representing mistakes of the players at
each decision node. The scientiﬁc challenge is intrinsic to the EFPE deﬁnition: it requires a perturbation
over the agent form, but the agent form is computationally inefﬁcient due to the presence of highly nonlinear constraints. We show that the sequence form can
be exploited in a non-trivial way and that, for generalsum games, ﬁnding an EFPE is equivalent to solving a
suitably perturbed linear complementarity problem. We
prove that Lemke’s algorithm can be applied, showing
that computing an EFPE is PPAD-complete. In the notable case of zero-sum games, the problem is in FP and
can be solved by linear programming. Our algorithms
also allow one to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium when players cannot perfectly control their moves, being subject
to a given execution uncertainty, as is the case in most
realistic physical settings.

Introduction
Computing solutions of games is currently one of the hottest
problems in computer science, as providing optimal strategies to autonomous agents interacting strategically is central
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008).
Finding a Nash Equilibrium (NE)—the basic solution concept for non-cooperative games—is PPAD-complete even in
2-player games (Chen, Deng, and Teng 2009) and it is unlikely that there is a polynomial-time algorithm, since it is
commonly believed that FP ⊂ PPAD ⊂ FNP. We recall that
a search problem is in PPAD if there exists a path-following
algorithm whose iterations have a polynomial-time cost. In
the case of 2-player normal-form games, this algorithm is
provided by (Lemke and Howson 1964).
Extensive-form games provide a richer representation of
strategic interaction situations than the normal form. The
study of extensive-form games is much more involved than
that of normal-form games. A variation of Lemke-Howson’s
algorithm, called Lemke’s algorithm, ﬁnds an NE in a 2player extensive-form game showing that the problem is in

Solution concept
Nash (NE)
Subgame Perfect (SPE)
Quasi Perfect (QPE)
Extensive-Form Perfect (EFPE)

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

502

General-sum
PPAD-complete
PPAD-complete
PPAD-complete
PPAD-complete (∗)

Zero-sum
FP
FP
FP
FP (∗)

