Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Hierarchical Latent Variable Encoder-Decoder Model for Generating Dialogues
Iulian Vlad Serban

Alessandro Sordoni∗

Ryan Lowe

Laurent Charlin

University of Montreal
2920 chemin de la Tour,
Montréal, QC, Canada

Maluuba Inc
2000 Rue Peel,
Montréal, QC, Canada

McGill University
3480 Rue University,
Montréal, QC, Canada

HEC Montréal
3000 chemin de la Côte-SainteCatherine, Montréal, QC, Canada

Joelle Pineau

Aaron Courville and Yoshua Bengio†

McGill University
3480 Rue University,
Montréal, QC, Canada

University of Montreal
2920 chemin de la Tour,
Montréal, QC, Canada
is dominated by local statistics of the language (e.g. word cooccurrences), while across utterances there is a distinct source
of variance characterized by aspects such as conversation
topic and speaker goals. If a model only injects variability at
the word level, it will have to decide on the conversation topic
and speaker goals incrementally as it generates the words inside each utterance. This may lead to incoherent topics and
inconsistent user goals (Pietquin and Hastie 2013).

Abstract
Sequential data often possesses hierarchical structures with
complex dependencies between sub-sequences, such as found
between the utterances in a dialogue. To model these dependencies in a generative framework, we propose a neural networkbased generative architecture, with stochastic latent variables
that span a variable number of time steps. We apply the proposed model to the task of dialogue response generation and
compare it with other recent neural-network architectures. We
evaluate the model performance through a human evaluation
study. The experiments demonstrate that our model improves
upon recently proposed models and that the latent variables
facilitate both the generation of meaningful, long and diverse
responses and maintaining dialogue state.

We attack this problem in the natural language generation setting, speciﬁcally for (unstructured) dialogue response generation. Given a dialogue context in natural language, the model is tasked with generating an appropriate response word by word. This task has been investigated recently by many researchers using the sequenceto-sequence framework (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011;
Lowe et al. 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015b; Li et al. 2016;
Serban et al. 2016). Such models are not speciﬁcally designed
for the goal-oriented setting, in which dialogue systems were
originally developed (Gorin, Riccardi, and Wright 1997;
Young 2000; Singh et al. 2002; Young et al. 2013). Nevertheless, major software companies are now developing nongoal-oriented models, which daily interact with millions of
people. Two examples are Microsoft’s Xiaolice (Markoff and
Mozur 2015) and Google’s Smart Reply system (Kannan
et al. 2016), which at its core uses a sequence-to-sequence
model. Currently, these models do not incorporate a hierarchical generation structure. Consequently, they cannot represent
higher level variability and often fail to generate meaningful,
diverse on-topic responses (Li et al. 2016).

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have recently demonstrated excellent results on a number of machine learning
problems involving the generation of sequential structured
outputs (Goodfellow, Courville, and Bengio 2015), including dialogue (Vinyals and Le 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015b;
Serban et al. 2016), language modelling (Graves 2012;
Mikolov and others 2010) machine translation (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Cho and others 2014) and speech recognition (Hinton and others 2012). However, the underlying
RNNs often follow a shallow (ﬂat) generation process, where
the model variability or stochasticity only occurs when an
output (e.g. word) is sampled. Injecting all the variability at
the output level is often limiting, because the model is forced
to generate all high-level structure locally on a step-by-step
basis (Boulanger-Lewandowski, Bengio, and Vincent 2012;
Bayer and Osendorfer 2014; Chung et al. 2015; Denton et
al. 2015). In particular, this is a problem for sequential data
such as natural language data, which naturally possess a hierarchical generation process with complex intra-sequence
dependencies. For instance, natural language dialogue has at
least two levels of structure; within an utterance the structure
∗

Motivated by these shortcomings, we develop a hierarchical latent variable RNN architecture to explicitly model
generative processes with multiple levels of variability. The
model is a hierarchical sequence-to-sequence model with
a continuous high-dimensional latent variable attached to
each dialogue utterance, trained by maximizing a variational
lower bound on the log-likelihood. In order to generate a
response, the model ﬁrst generates a sample of the continuous latent variable – representing the high-level semantic
content of the response – and then it generates the response
word by word conditioned on the latent variable. We apply the model to generate responses for Twitter conversations (Ritter, Cherry, and Dolan 2011; Sordoni et al. 2015b;

A. S. was at University of Montreal when this work was carried

out.

†

Y. B. is a CIFAR Senior Fellow
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3295

