Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Theoretical Analysis of First Heuristics
of Crowdsourced Entity Resolution
Arya Mazumdar and Barna Saha
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{arya,barna}@cs.umass.edu

ER can be cast as a clustering problem. Consider a set of n
elements V that must be clustered into k disjoint parts Vi , i =
1, 2, . . . , k. The true underlying clusters Vi ∈ [n], i ∈ [1, k]
are unknown to us, and so is k. Each of these Vi s represents
an entity. Each element v ∈ V has a set of attributes. A
similarity function is used to estimate the similarity of the
attribute sets of two nodes u and v. If u and v represent the
same entity, then an ideal similarity function will return 1, and
if they are different, then it will return 0. However, in practice,
it is impossible to ﬁnd an ideal similarity function, or even
a function close to it. Often, some attribute values may be
missing or incorrect, and that leads to similarity values that
are noisy representation of the ideal similarity function. Any
automated process that uses such similarity function is thus
prone to make errors. To overcome this difﬁculty, a relatively
recent line of works propose to use human knowledge via
crowdsourcing to boost accuracy of ER (Davidson et al. 2014;
Firmani, Saha, and Srivastava 2016; Verroios and GarciaMolina 2015; Gruenheid et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2012; 2013;
Vesdapunt, Bellare, and Dalvi 2014; Yi et al. 2012; Whang,
Lofgren, and Garcia-Molina 2013). Human based on domain
knowledge can match and distinguish entities with complex
representations, where automated strategies fail.
Motivating example. Consider the following illustrative example shown in Figure 1. The Walt Disney, commonly known
as Disney, is an American multinational media and entertainment company that owns and licenses 14 theme parks
around the world. 1 Given the six places (r1 ) Disney World,
(r2 ) Walt Disney World Resort, (r3 ) Walt Disney Theme
Park, Orlando, (r4 ) Disneyland, (r5 ) Disneyland Park,
humans can determine using domain knowledge that these
correspond to two entities: r1 , r2 , r3 refer to one entity, and
r4 , r5 refer to a second entity.
Answering queries by crowd could be time-consuming and
costly. Therefore, a crowd based ER strategy must attempt to
minimize the number of queries to the oracle while resolving
the clusters exactly. Having access to ideal crowd answers, a
good ordering of comparing record pairs is (r1 , r2 ), (r2 , r3 ),
(r4 , r5 ), (r1 , r5 ). After the ﬁrst three pairs have been compared, we can safely infer as “matching” the remaining pair
(r1 , r3 ) leveraging transitive relations. After the last pair in
the ordering has been compared, we can safely infer as “non-

Abstract
Entity resolution (ER) is the task of identifying all records
in a database that refer to the same underlying entity, and
are therefore duplicates of each other. Due to inherent ambiguity of data representation and poor data quality, ER is
a challenging task for any automated process. As a remedy,
human-powered ER via crowdsourcing has become popular
in recent years. Using crowd to answer queries is costly and
time consuming. Furthermore, crowd-answers can often be
faulty. Therefore, crowd-based ER methods aim to minimize
human participation without sacriﬁcing the quality and use a
computer generated similarity matrix actively. While, some of
these methods perform well in practice, no theoretical analysis
exists for them, and further their worst case performances do
not reﬂect the experimental ﬁndings. This creates a disparity in
the understanding of the popular heuristics for this problem. In
this paper, we make the ﬁrst attempt to close this gap. We provide a thorough analysis of the prominent heuristic algorithms
for crowd-based ER. We justify experimental observations
with our analysis and information theoretic lower bounds.

1

Introduction

Entity resolution (ER, record linkage, deduplication, etc.)
seeks to identify which records in a data set refer to the
same underlying real-world entity (Fellegi and Sunter 1969;
Elmagarmid, Ipeirotis, and Verykios 2007; Getoor and
Machanavajjhala 2012; Larsen and Rubin 2001; Christen
2012). Our ability to represent information about real-world
entities in very diverse ways makes this a complicated problem. For example, collecting proﬁles of people and businesses, or speciﬁcations of products and services from websites and social media sites can result in billions of records
that need to be resolved. These entities are identiﬁed in a wide
variety of ways, complicated further by language ambiguity,
poor data entry, missing values, changing attributes and formatting issues. ER is a fundamental task in data processing
with wide-array of applications. There is a huge literature on
ER techniques; many include machine learning algorithms,
such as decision trees, SVMs, ensembles of classiﬁers, conditional random ﬁelds, unsupervised learning etc. (see (Getoor
and Machanavajjhala 2012) for a recent survey). Yet, ER remains a demanding task for any automated strategy yielding
low accuracy.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

970

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Walt_Disney_Company

