Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Context-Speciﬁc Word/Character Embeddings
Xiaoqing Zheng, Jiangtao Feng, Yi Chen, Haoyuan Peng, Wenqing Zhang
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{zhengxq, fengjt16, yi chen15, hypeng15, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

model (NNLM) (Bengio et al. 2003), C&W (Collobert et al.
2011), and continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) (Mikolov et
al. 2013a); (b) using a word to predict its surrounding words,
such as the Skip-gram (Mikolov et al. 2013a) as well as
its extensions, multi-sense Skip-gram (MSSG) (Neelakantan
et al. 2014) and proximity-ambiguity sensitive (PAS) Skipgram (Qiu et al. 2014). However, they suffer one or both of
the following signiﬁcant drawbacks.
First, the context is often represented by a sum (or an average) of the surrounding words’ feature vectors. Those context representations may not represent word meanings well
because the meaning of a word is affected by its adjacent
words and the rules to combine them. Each context word in
general does not contribute equally to the meaning of the target word, and thus the simple sum or average operation can
not capture this compositionality.
Second, most of the existing methods create a singleprototype embedding for each word. This single-prototype
representation is problematic because many words are intrinsically polysemous, and a single-prototype model is incapable of capturing phenomena of homonymy and polysemy. It is also important to be reminded that languages differ in the degree of polysemy they exhibit. For example, Chinese with its (almost) complete lack of morphological marking for parts of speech certainly exhibits a higher degree of
polysemy than English (Packard 2004).
Recent models on learning multiple representations per
word (Reisinger and Mooney 2010; Huang et al. 2012) generally work as follows: for each word, ﬁrst cluster its contexts into a set of clusters, and then derive multiple representations (each for a cluster) of the word from the clusters of
similar contexts. In these models, each context is represented
by a vector composed of the occurrences of its neighboring words or a weighted average of the surrounding words’
vector. Such context deﬁnitions neglect the relative order of
words in the context window, which impairs the quality of
the multi-prototype representations derived by the clustering
based on such context representations. In fact, the order of
words does matter to the meaning of those they form. Besides, those models set the equal number of prototypes for
each word, although different numbers were tested to determine the optimal number of prototypes.
We argue that the degree of polysemy in polysemous
words depends on the number of distinct contexts in which

Abstract
Unsupervised word representations have demonstrated improvements in predictive generalization on various NLP
tasks. Most of the existing models are in fact good at capturing the relatedness among words rather than their “genuine” similarity because the context representations are often
represented by a sum (or an average) of the neighbor’s embeddings, which simpliﬁes the computation but ignores an
important fact that the meaning of a word is determined by
its context, reﬂecting not only the surrounding words but also
the rules used to combine them (i.e. compositionality). On the
other hand, much effort has been devoted to learning a singleprototype representation per word, which is problematic because many words are polysemous, and a single-prototype
model is incapable of capturing phenomena of homonymy
and polysemy. We present a neural network architecture to
jointly learn word embeddings and context representations
from large data sets. The explicitly produced context representations are further used to learn context-speciﬁc and multiprototype word embeddings. Our embeddings were evaluated
on several NLP tasks, and the experimental results demonstrated the proposed model outperformed other competitors
and is applicable to intrinsically “character-based” languages.

Introduction and Motivation
Much recent research has been devoted to deep learning algorithms which achieved impressive results on various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. The best results obtained on supervised learning tasks involve an unsupervised
learning phase, usually in an unsupervised pre-training step
to learn distributed word representations (also known as
word embeddings). Such semi-supervised learning strategy
has been empirically proven to be successful by using unlabeled data to supplement the supervised models for better generalization (Collobert et al. 2011; Socher et al. 2011;
dos Santos and Zadrozny 2014; Zheng, Chen, and Xu 2013;
Pei, Ge, and Chang 2014).
Due to the importance of unsupervised pre-training in
deep neural network methods, many models have been proposed to learn word embeddings. The two main model families are: (a) predicting or scoring the target word based on
its local context, such as the neural probabilistic language
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3393

