Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Ambiguity Aversion Model for
Decision Making under Ambiguity
1

2

Wenjun Ma,1 Xudong Luo,2∗ Yuncheng Jiang1†

School of Computer Science, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
Institute of Logic and Cognition, Department of Philosophy, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

of experimental observation on the human’s choices in real
world, for example, the Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg 1961)
and the Machina Paradox (Machina 2009). (ii) Some of them
can solve the paradoxes but conditionally by applying some
additional parameters setting. In other words, it is unclear
why a decision maker will select different bounds of parameter variations in various situation. Thus, the prediction of
such models in new decision problems is doubtful. More details discussion can be found in related work section.
To tackle the above problems, this paper will identify a set
of basic principles that should be followed by a preference
ordering for decision making under ambiguity. Then we will
construct a decision model to set a determinate preference
ordering based on expected utility intervals and the emotion
of ambiguity aversion by using evidence theory of Dempster
and Shafer (D-S theory) (Shafer 1976) and the generalised
Hartley measure (Dubois and Prade 1985). Accordingly, we
will reveal some insightful properties of our model. Finally,
we will valid our model by solving two famous paradoxes.
This paper advances the state of art in the ﬁeld of
decision-making under uncertainty in the following aspects:
(i) identify a set of basic principles for comparing intervalvalued expected utilities; (ii) give a normative decision
model for decision making under ambiguity; (iii) disclose
a set of properties, which are consistent with human’s intuitions; and (iv) use our model to solve both well-known
Ellsberg paradox and Machina paradox without any extra
parameters setting, which most of the existing models cannot.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. First,
we recap some basic concepts of D-S theory. Second, we
give the formal deﬁnition of decision problems under ambiguity. Third, we discuss some principles for setting a proper
preference ordering in decision making under ambiguity.
Fourth, we present the our decision making model that employs the ambiguity aversion to ﬁnd an optimal choice based
on a set of basic principles. Fifth, we also reveal some properties of our model. Sixth, we validate our model by showing that it can solve well both Ellsberg paradox and Machina
paradox. Seventh, we discuss the related work. Finally, we
conclude the paper with the further work.

Abstract
In real life, decisions are often made under ambiguity,
where it is difﬁcult to estimate accurately the probability of each single possible consequence of a choice.
However, this problem has not been solved well in existing work for the following two reasons. (i) Some
of them cannot cover the Ellsberg paradox and the
Machina Paradox. Thus, the choices that they predict
could be inconsistent with empirical observations. (ii)
Some of them rely on parameter tuning without offering
explanations for the reasonability of setting such bounds
of parameters. Thus, the prediction of such a model in
new decision making problems is doubtful. To the end,
this paper proposes a new decision making model based
on D-S theory and the emotion of ambiguity aversion.
Some insightful properties of our model and the validating on two famous paradoxes show that our model
indeed is a better alternative for decision making under
ambiguity.

.

Introduction
In real life, due to some factors such as time pressure, lack
of data, noise disturbance, and random outcome of some attributes, decisions often have to be made in the case that no
precise probability distributions over the single possible outcomes are available. In order to distinguish these cases from
the risk cases (in which the possible outcomes of choice are
already formulated in terms of a unique probability distribution), we called such cases decision making under ambiguity. Since decision making under ambiguity is inevitable
in real-world applications, this topic is a central concern
in decision science (Tversky and Kahneman 1992) as well
as artiﬁcial intelligence (Dubois, Fargier, and Perny 2003;
Liu 2006; Yager and Alajlan 2015).
In the literature, various theoretic models have been proposed with the aim of capturing how ambiguity can affect
decision making and some of them are based on DempsterShafer theory (Shafer 1976). However, the existing models
still have drawbacks: (i) Some of them still violate a series
∗

The corresponding author: luoxd3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
The corresponding author: ycjiang@scnu.edu.cn
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

Preliminaries
This section recaps some basic concepts of D-S theory.

614

