Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

DECK: Discovering Event Composition Knowledge from
Web Images for Zero-Shot Event Detection and Recounting in Videos
Chuang Gan,†∗ Chen Sun,‡∗ Ram Nevatia §
†

IIIS, Tsinghua University
‡
Google Research
§
University of Southern California

approach MED and MER tasks under the zero-shot setting:
we assume no positive video examples are available during
training; rather, only the event query itself can be used. We
name the zero-shot MED task as ZeroMED, and zero-shot
MER task as ZeroMER. Although previous work exists for
ZeroMED, to the best of our knowledge none have studied
the important problem of ZeroMER.
Zero-shot event detection and recounting are both challenging tasks. A common approach used for zero-shot object and action recognition (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Mensink, Gavves, and Snoek 2014) is to represent the categories by banks of human-interpretable semantic concepts (e.g. attributes, actions, objects), where each
concept is associated with a pre-trained classiﬁer. It then detects an unseen category by specifying a subset of related
concepts manually or following hand-designed rules, and
combining their conﬁdence scores. For event detection, (Wu
et al. 2014) follows this approach and requires the users to
provide a list of related concepts for every event query, thus
making it difﬁcult to explore the large-scale video collections. Moreover, users are usually unfamiliar with the internal operations of the system, and unable to determine
which concepts will work well with the system. To avoid
manual speciﬁcation of concepts, an alternative approach
aims at constructing classiﬁers of unseen categories directly
from classiﬁers of observed categories (Frome et al. 2013;
Norouzi et al. 2014). This is achieved by computing semantic similarities of category labels based on their continuous
word representations (Mikolov et al. 2013). However, this
approach implicitly assumes that unseen categories have semantically similar counterparts in the observed categories,
which may not always hold.
In light of the above challenges, we adopt the conceptbased zero-shot learning scheme, but design a fully automatic algorithm to select relevant concepts for an event. We
name the information used to select relevant concepts as
event composition knowledge, and propose to discover such
knowledge from web images. Given an event query, we pass
it to an Web image search engine (e.g. Google) and collect
the highest ranking returned images. We then apply our bank
of image-based concept classiﬁers to these images, the concepts with the highest average responses are chosen as eventrelevant. For example, the web images retrieved with keyword birthday party have high responses of candle, balloon

Abstract
We address the problem of zero-shot event recognition in consumer videos. An event usually consists of multiple humanhuman and human-object interactions over a relative long period of time. A common approach proceeds by representing
videos with banks of object and action concepts, but requires
additional user inputs to specify the desired concepts per
event. In this paper, we provide a fully automatic algorithm to
select representative and reliable concepts for event queries.
This is achieved by discovering event composition knowledge
(DECK) from web images. To evaluate our proposed method,
we use the standard zero-shot event detection protocol (ZeroMED), but also introduce a novel zero-shot event recounting (ZeroMER) problem to select supporting evidence of the
events. Our ZeroMER formulation aims to select video snippets that are relevant and diverse. Evaluation on the challenging TRECVID MED dataset show that our proposed method
achieves promising results on both tasks.

1

Introduction

We address the tasks of multimedia event detection (MED)
and recounting (MER) from unconstrained user-generated
videos of the kind we may ﬁnd in social media sites. The
goal of MED is to generate a single high-level event label
for a given video. A high-level event label represents a broad
category of activities, e.g. a birthday party. Each such event
is typically composed of a number of lower-level actions
depicting human-human or human-object interactions but
these actions and their temporal ordering may vary widely
for the same event in different videos. The high intra-class
variations of such events make the task of MED very challenging. MER adds a further layer of complexity by aiming
to provide event-speciﬁc supporting evidence in the form of
short video snippets accompanied with text descriptions. It
is useful for users to quickly focus on relevant video snippets
and decide if the video contents meet their needs.
Existing MED and MER systems usually require video
examples for training. However, it is cumbersome to collect
training videos for a user to start classifying and recounting
videos from a database; users would prefer to ﬁnd videos
by just giving an event name. Due to this observation, we
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.

4032

