Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Transfer of Knowledge through Collective Learning
Mohammad Rostami
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
mrostami@seas.upenn.edu

shot transfer is feasible. That is, after learning few tasks, it
is possible to learn a new task without data.
Most MTL algorithms are designed to learn task models
simultaneously in a batch by a single agent. Only recently,
suitable TL and MTL algorithm have been designed for lifelong learning of multiple consecutive tasks (Ruvolo & Eaton
2013), combining the goals of TL and MTL. The current
task is learned efﬁciently with the help of knowledge transfer
from previous learned tasks. Then the new obtained knowledge is used to update the knowledge repository. My goal is
to study and explore lifelong learning in a multi-agent scenario, where multiple MTL learners try to learn collectively
to improve their performance. Despite practical importance,
this scenario has not been well explored in the literature.

Abstract
Learning fast and efﬁciently using minimal data has been
consistently a challenge in machine learning. In my thesis, I explore this problem for knowledge transfer for multiagent multi-task learning in a life-long learning paradigm.
My goal is to demonstrate that by sharing knowledge between
agents and similar tasks, efﬁcient algorithms can be designed
that can increase the speed of learning as well as improve
performance. Moreover, this would allow for handling hard
tasks through collective learning of multiple agents that share
knowledge. As an initial step, I study the problem of incorporating task descriptors into lifelong learning of related tasks
to perform zero-shot knowledge transfer. Zero-shot learning
is highly desirable because it leads to considerable speedup
in handling similar sequential tasks. Then I focus on a multiagent learning setting, where related tasks are learned collectively and/or address privacy concerns.

Multi-Agent Multi-Task Lifelong Learning
MTL hypothesizes that relationships between the tasks can
be used to improve generalization performance and increase
learning speed, relative to learning each task in isolation.
MTL has been been mostly studied in a batch learning settings. Only recently MTL has been extended to a lifelong
learning setting, in which tasks arrive consecutively and
learned online (Ruvolo & Eaton 2013). However, most existing approaches consider only a single agent and require
that the task data are processed at centrally processing unit.
However, given the huge modern datasets and data centers,
there exist cases that involve multiple distributed heterogeneous agents, each learning multiple tasks e.g., a number
of different service robots operating in different locations.
For such cases, we can develop mechanisms to share knowledge between agents without sharing the local data e.g., to
preserve privacy, and beneﬁt from knowledge transfer between the agents to improve aggregate performance. Only a
few previous works have investigated this scenario for MTL
(Wang et al. 2005). This problem has not yet been explored
in a lifelong learning setting.
To address the above challenges, we can formulate an
MTL problem over a network of agents. The topology of
this network can describe the communication modes of the
agents and their relatedness. We can deﬁne two sets of global
and local knowledge bases which are learned in an iterative alternating procedure, using techniques from distributed
optimization e.g., ADMM, to solve the resulting problem.
Our problem would involve a composite “sum of convex”

Introduction
The most common setting for a machine learning problem is
to learn a single task in isolation. Regression, classiﬁcation,
and reinforcement learning (RL) are standard task examples
in machine learning literature. However, learning these tasks
is mostly a dynamic, time-dependent process and might involve multiple tasks. As lifelong learners, humans tend not
to learn tasks in isolation. Through evolution, humans have
developed skills to extract information from learned tasks,
store knowledge, and reuse this learned knowledge on future
tasks to avoid redundant learning and improve performance.
In the machine learning literature, the above strategy has
been investigated through the study of transfer learning (TL)
and multi-task learning (MTL). The goal in TL is to use what
has been learned from source tasks to improve performance
on a target task. Although transfer learning can increase performance on a target task, the learning is unidirectional from
source tasks to the target task. In contrast, MTL focuses on
learning a group of related tasks more efﬁciently. The goal of
MTL is to optimize a shared knowledge repository to transfer knowledge and jointly to learn task models. MTL can
also be performed in an online setting, where the tasks arrive
sequentially (Ruvolo & Eaton 2013). In some cases, zeroc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5050

