Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SummaRuNNer: A Recurrent Neural Network Based
Sequence Model for Extractive Summarization of Documents
Ramesh Nallapati, Feifei Zhai,∗ Bowen Zhou
nallapati@us.ibm.com, ffzhai2012@gmail.com, zhou@us.ibm.com
IBM Watson
1011 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

CNNs, where they use weighted-sum pooling over sentence
representations to represent documents. The weights are
learned from attention over sentence representations based
on the query.
Recently, with the emergence of strong generative neural
models for text (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), abstractive techniques are also becoming increasingly popular. For
example, (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015) proposed an attentional feed-forward network for abstractive summarization of sentences into short headlines. Further developing on
their work, (Nallapati, Zhou, and Xiang 2016) propose a set
of recurrent neural network based encoder-decoder models
that focus on various aspects of summarization like handling
out-of-vocabulary words and modeling syntactic features of
words in the sentence. In a follow-up work (Nallapati et al.
2016), they also propose abstractive techniques for summarization of large documents into multi-sentence summaries,
using the CNN/DailyMail corpus1 .
Despite the emergence of abstractive techniques, extractive techniques are still attractive as they are less complex,
less expensive, and generate grammatically and semantically correct summaries most of the time. In a very recent work, Cheng and Lapata (2016) proposed an attentional
encoder-decoder for extractive single-document summarization and applied to the CNN/Daily Mail corpus.
Like (Cheng and Lapata 2016), our work also focuses
only on sentential extractive summarization of single documents using neural networks. We use the same corpus used
by (Nallapati et al. 2016) and (Cheng and Lapata 2016) for
our experiments, since its large size makes it attractive for
training deep neural networks such as ours, with several
thousands of parameters.
Our main contributions are as follows: (a) we propose
SummaRuNNer, a simple recurrent network based sequence
classiﬁer that outperforms or matches state-of-the-art models for extractive summarization; (b) the simple formulation
of our model facilitates interpretable visualization of its decisions; and (c) we present a novel training mechanism that
allows our extractive model to be trained end-to-end using
abstractive summaries.

Abstract
We present SummaRuNNer, a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) based sequence model for extractive summarization
of documents and show that it achieves performance better
than or comparable to state-of-the-art. Our model has the additional advantage of being very interpretable, since it allows
visualization of its predictions broken up by abstract features
such as information content, salience and novelty. Another
novel contribution of our work is abstractive training of our
extractive model that can train on human generated reference
summaries alone, eliminating the need for sentence-level extractive labels.

1

Introduction

Document summarization is an important problem that has
many applications in information retrieval and natural language understanding. Summarization techniques are mainly
classiﬁed into two categories: extractive and abstractive. Extractive methods aim to select salient snippets, sentences or
passages from documents, while abstractive summarization
techniques aim to concisely paraphrase the information content in the documents.
A vast majority of the literature on document summarization is devoted to extractive summarization. Traditional
methods for extractive summarization can be broadly classiﬁed into greedy approaches (e.g., (Carbonell and Goldstein
1998)), graph based approaches (e.g., (Radev and Erkan
2004)) and constraint optimization based approaches (e.g.,
(McDonald 2007)).
Recently, neural network based approaches have become popular for extractive summarization. For example,
(Kageback et al. 2014) employed the recursive autoencoder
(Socher et al. 2011) to summarize documents, producing
best performance on the Opinosis dataset (Ganesan, Zhai,
and Han 2010). (Yin and Pei 2015) applied Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) to project sentences to continuous
vector space and then select sentences by minimizing the
cost based on their ‘prestige’ and ‘diverseness’, on the task
of multi-document extractive summarization. Another related work is that of (Cao et al. 2016), who address the problem of query-focused multi-document summarization using
∗

Work was done while the author was an employee at IBM.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3075

https://github.com/deepmind/rc-data

