Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Variational Autoencoder for
Semi-Supervised Text Classiﬁcation
Weidi Xu, Haoze Sun, Chao Deng, Ying Tan
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education),
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
wead hsu@pku.edu.cn, pkucissun@foxmail.com, cdspace678@pku.edu.cn, ytan@pku.edu.cn

In this paper, Semi-supervised Sequential Variational Autoencoder (SSVAE) is proposed for semi-supervised sequential text classiﬁcation. The SSVAE consists of a Seq2Seq
structure and a sequential classiﬁer. In the Seq2Seq structure,
the input sequence is ﬁrstly encoded by a recurrent neural
network, e.g., LSTM network (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997) and then decoded by another recurrent neural network
conditioned on both latent variable and categorical label.
However, if the vanilla LSTM network is adopted as the decoder, the SSVAE will fail to make use of unlabeled data and
result in a poor performance.
The explanation is given by carefully analyzing the gradient of the classiﬁer from a perspective of reinforcement
learning (RL), which reveals how the classiﬁer is driven by
the decoder using unlabeled data. By comparing the gradient
of the classiﬁer w.r.t. unlabeled objective function to REINFORCE algorithm (Williams 1992), we realize that only if
the decoder is able to make difference between correct and
incorrect categorical labels, can the classiﬁer be reinforced to
improve the performance. Vanilla LSTM setting will mislead
the decoder to ignore the label input and hence fails in the
sequence classiﬁcation task.
To remedy this problem, the inﬂuence of categorical information is increased by feeding label to the decoder RNN at
each time step. This minor modiﬁcation turns out to bring
SSVAE into effect. Speciﬁcally, we made an investigation
on two potential conditional LSTM structures. Experimental
results on IMDB and AG’s News corpus show that their performances are close and both of them are able to outperform
pure-supervised learning methods by a large margin. When
using only 2.5K labeled IMDB samples, 10.3% classiﬁcation
error can still be obtained, which outperforms supervised
LSTM by 7.7%. The better one is able to achieve very competitive results compared with previous advanced methods.
Combined with pretraining method, our model can obtain
the current best results on IMDB dataset. Although LSTM is
utilized as the classiﬁer in this paper, it should be noted that
the classiﬁer can be easily replaced by other more powerful
models to achieve better results.
In addition, motivated by the aforementioned interpretation, we reduce the computational complexity of SemiVAE by
estimating the gradient of unlabeled objective function using
sampling. In order to reduce the high variance caused by sampling, the baseline method from the RL literature is adopted.

Abstract
Although semi-supervised variational autoencoder (SemiVAE)
works in image classiﬁcation task, it fails in text classiﬁcation
task if using vanilla LSTM as its decoder. From a perspective
of reinforcement learning, it is veriﬁed that the decoder’s capability to distinguish between different categorical labels is
essential. Therefore, Semi-supervised Sequential Variational
Autoencoder (SSVAE) is proposed, which increases the capability by feeding label into its decoder RNN at each time-step.
Two speciﬁc decoder structures are investigated and both of
them are veriﬁed to be effective. Besides, in order to reduce
the computational complexity in training, a novel optimization
method is proposed, which estimates the gradient of the unlabeled objective function by sampling, along with two variance
reduction techniques. Experimental results on Large Movie
Review Dataset (IMDB) and AG’s News corpus show that
the proposed approach signiﬁcantly improves the classiﬁcation accuracy compared with pure-supervised classiﬁers, and
achieves competitive performance against previous advanced
methods. State-of-the-art results can be obtained by integrating
other pretraining-based methods.

1

Introduction

Semi-supervised learning is a critical problem in the text classiﬁcation task due to the fact that the data size nowadays is
increasing much faster than before, while only a limited subset of data samples has their corresponding labels. Therefore
lots of attention has been drawn from researchers over machine learning and deep learning communities, giving rise to
many semi-supervised learning methods (Socher et al. 2013;
Dai and Le 2015).
Variational autoencoder is recently proposed by Kingma
and Welling; Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra, and it has
been applied for semi-supervised learning (Kingma et al.
2014; Maaløe et al. 2016), to which we refer as SemiVAE.
Although it has shown strong performance on image classiﬁcation task, its application in sequential text classiﬁcation problem has been out of sight for a long time. Since
variational autoencoder has been veriﬁed to be effective at
extracting global features from sequences (e.g., sentiment,
topic and style) (Bowman et al. 2016), it is also promising in
the semi-supervised text classiﬁcation task.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3358

