Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Preference Elicitation in DCOPs
for Scheduling Devices in Smart Buildings
Atena M. Tabakhi
Department of Computer Science
New Mexico State University
amtabakh@cs.nmsu.edu

{1, . . . , H} to denote the set of time intervals and θ : T →
R+ to represent the price function associated with the pricing schema deﬁned by an energy provider. Within each smart
building hi ∈ H, there is a set of (smart) electric devices Zi
networked together and controlled by a home automation
system. All the devices are uninterruptible (i.e., they cannot
be stopped once they are started). We use szj and δzj to denote, respectively, the start time and duration (expressed in
multiple time intervals) of device zj ∈ Zi .
The energy consumption of each device zj is ρzj kWh for
each hour that it is on. It will not consume any energy if it
is off. We use the indicator function φtzj to indicate the state
of the device zj at time step t, whose value is 1 exclusively
when the device zj is on at time step t.
Additionally, the execution of a device zj is characterized by a cost and a discomfort value. The cost represents
the monetary expense for the user to schedule zj at a given
time. We use Cit to denote the aggregated cost of the buildat time step t, expressed as: Cit = Pit · θ(t), where
ing hi
Pit = zj ∈Zi φtzj · ρzj is the aggregate power consumed by
building hi at time step t.
The discomfort value μtzj ∈ R describes the degree of dissatisfaction for the user to schedule the device zj at a given
time step t. Additionally, we use Uit to denote the aggregated
discomfort
 associated to the user in building hi at time step
t: Uit = zj ∈Zi φtzj · μzj (t).
The SBDS problem is the problem of scheduling the devices of each building in the neighborhood in a coordinated
fashion so as to minimize the monetary costs and, at the
same time, minimize the discomfort of users. While this
is a multi-objective optimization problem, we combine the
two objectives into a single objective through the use of a
weighted sum:
 
αc · Cit + αu · Uit ,
(1)
minimize

Abstract
Researchers have used Distributed Constraint Optimization
Problems (DCOPs) as a powerful approach to model various
multi-agent coordination problems, taking into account their
preferences and constraints. A core limitation of this model
is the assumption that all agents’ preferences are speciﬁed
a priori. However, in a number of application domains such
knowledge become available only after being elicited from
users in these domains. In this abstract, we explore the effects of preference elicitation in our motivating application of
scheduling smart appliances with the aim of reducing users’
electricity bill cost as well as increasing their comfort.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs)
(Modi 2003; Yeoh and Yokoo 2012) are suitable to model
problems that are distributed in nature, such as nurse
scheduling, meeting scheduling, and supply chain management. While the ﬁeld has matured signiﬁcantly over the past
decade, existing DCOPs assume that their constraint utilities
are known a priori. In some application domains, these utilities are only known after they are queried or elicited from
experts or users in the domain.
Our motivating application is the smart device scheduling problem in a network of smart buildings. The goal is to
schedule a number of smart devices such as smart thermostat
and smart washers that optimizes the occupants’ preferences
of those building subject to that the peak energy demand
does not exceed the energy utility deﬁned limit.
A priori knowledge on the constraint utilities is not feasible in our motivating application. Therefore, the key challenge is in the elicitation of user preferences to populate the
constraints cost tables. We propose several methods to select
a subset of k cost tables to elicit, from each agent, with the
highest impact on the solution quality.

t∈T hi ∈H

Scheduling of Devices in Smart Buildings

where αc and αu are weights in the open interval (0, 1) ⊆ R
such that αc + αu = 1.

The Smart Building Devices Scheduling (SBDS) problem
is composed of a neighborhood H of smart buildings that
are able to communicate with one another, whose energy
demands are served by an energy provider. We use T =

DCOP Representation
We map the SBDS problem to a DCOP so that each building
in the SBDS problem is mapped to an agent in our DCOP
model. The start time of each device is mapped to a decision

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4989

