Robsut Wrod Reocginiton via Semi-Character Recurrent Neural Network∗
Keisuke Sakaguchi,† Kevin Duh,‡ Matt Post,‡ Benjamin Van Durme†‡
†

‡

Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University
Human Language Technology Center of Excellence, Johns Hopkins University
{keisuke,kevinduh,post,vandurme}@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract

According

to

a

research

Language processing mechanism by humans is generally
more robust than computers. The Cmabrigde Uinervtisy
(Cambridge University) effect from the psycholinguistics
literature has demonstrated such a robust word processing
mechanism, where jumbled words (e.g. Cmabrigde / Cambridge) are recognized with little cost. On the other hand,
computational models for word recognition (e.g. spelling
checkers) perform poorly on data with such noise.
Inspired by the ﬁndings from the Cmabrigde Uinervtisy effect, we propose a word recognition model based on a semicharacter level recurrent neural network (scRNN). In our
experiments, we demonstrate that scRNN has signiﬁcantly
more robust performance in word spelling correction (i.e.
word recognition) compared to existing spelling checkers and
character-based convolutional neural network. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the model is cognitively plausible by
replicating a psycholinguistics experiment about human reading difﬁculty using our model.

Softmax

Softmax

Softmax

Softmax

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

b

i

e

Aoccdrnig

b

i
to

e

b

i
a

e

b

i

e

rscheearch

Figure 1: Schematic Illustration of semi-character recurrent
neural network (scRNN).

Robustness is an important and useful property for various
tasks in natural language processing, and we propose a computational model which replicates this robust word recognition mechanism. The model is based on a standard recurrent
neural network (RNN) with a memory cell as in long shortterm memory (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). We use
an RNN because it has shown to be state-of-the-art language
modeling (Mikolov et al. 2010) and it is also ﬂexible to realize the ﬁndings from the Cmabrigde Uinervtisy effect. Technically, the input layer of our model consists of three subvectors: beginning (b), internal (i), and ending (e) character(s) of the input word (Figure 1). This semi-character level
recurrent neural network is referred as scRNN.

Introduction
Despite the rapid improvement in natural language processing by computers, humans still have advantages in situations
where the text contains noise. For example, the following
sentences, introduced by a psycholinguist (Davis 2003), provide a great demonstration of the robust word recognition
mechanism in humans.
Aoccdrnig to a rscheearch at Cmabrigde Uinervtisy,
it deosn’t mttaer in waht oredr the ltteers in a wrod
are, the olny iprmoetnt tihng is taht the frist and lsat
ltteer be at the rghit pclae. The rset can be a toatl
mses and you can sitll raed it wouthit porbelm. Tihs
is bcuseae the huamn mnid deos not raed ervey lteter
by istlef, but the wrod as a wlohe.

First, we review previous work on the robust word recognition mechanism from psycholinguistics literature. Next,
we describe technical details of scRNN which capture the
robust human mechanism using recent developments in neural networks. As closely related work, we explain characterbased convolutional neural network (CharCNN) proposed
by Kim et al. (2015). Our experiments show that the scRNN
signiﬁcantly outperforms commonly used spelling checkers
and CharCNN by (at least) 42% for jumbled word correction
and 3% and 14% in other noise types (insertion and deletion). We also show that scRNN replicates recent ﬁndings
from psycholinguistics experiments on reading difﬁculty depending on the position of jumbled letters, which indicates
that scRNN successfully mimics (at least a part of) the robust word recognition mechanism by humans.

This example shows the Cmabrigde Uinervtisy (Cambridge University) effect, which demonstrates that human
reading is resilient to (particularly internal) letter transposition.
∗
Parts of this manuscript are intentionally jumbled to demonstrate the robust word processing ability of you, the reader.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3281

