Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bilateral k-Means Algorithm for Fast Co-Clustering
†

‡

Junwei Han,†∗ Kun Song,† Feiping Nie,‡∗ Xuelong Li§

School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
§
Center for OPTIMAL, State Key Laboratory of Transient Optics and Photonics, Xi’an Institute
of Optics and Precision Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China.
{junweihan2010, songkun123000, feipingnie}@gmail.com, xuelong li@ieee.org
Ailem, Role, and Nadif 2015; Liu and Lin 2015; Han et
al. 2015; Cheng et al. 2015). In those tasks, the data sets
are often represented by sparse matrices, and most of the
related co-clustering methods (Ding, Li, and Jordan 2010;
Ding et al. 2006) are based on checkerboard co-cluster
model (as illustrate in Figure 1). In fact, the checkerboard
co-cluster model is not quit suitable for those applications.
The checkerboard co-cluster supposes every element in the
data matrix should belong to one co-cluster, however, much
of the entries of sparse matrix equals to zero which contribute none to the co-clustering. In real applications, the
sparse data matrices are often mixed with noises which may
change the values of elements equaling zero. It would reduce
the co-clustering performance greatly. Therefore, according
to the duality of the sample clustering and features clustering, using the diagonal co-cluster structure (as illustrate in
Figure 1.) instead of the checkerboard co-cluster model in
those applications is a reasonable choice.
Among the diagonal co-cluster based algorithms, bipartite
spectral graph partition (BSGP) approach (Inderjit 2001) is
the most famous one due to its notable performance. Its variants have been applied in many ﬁelds (Zhang et al. 2004;
Li, Wu, and Chang 2012; Trivedi et al. 2012). However,
BSGP is computationally prohibitive for large data collections since it involves the singular value decomposition in
the solution process, which severely limits the range of
BSGP in the real world applications. In addition, BSGP is
based on bipartitioning Ncuts of a spectral graph. When
dealing with multipartitioning problem, it needs to relax
the origin discrete problem to a continuous problem ﬁrstly,
then use k-means algorithm to output discrete result. In this
discrete-continuous-discrete transformation procedure, the
ﬁnal resulting optimization problem is much deviate from
the original objective problem of BSGP, and the performance of BSGP would be damaged.
In this paper, we propose a novel co-clustering method
named bilateral k-means algorithm (BKM), by discovering
the shortages of BSGP. Our proposed method is interesting
from following perspectives:
1. Different from BSGP transforming the optimization
problem of minimizing normalized cuts into a continuous relaxation, BKM relaxes the minimum normalized cuts problem to a special non-negative matrix decomposition (NMF)
which involves constraints of indicator matrices. Such indi-

Abstract
With the development of the information technology, the
amount of data, e.g. text, image and video, has been increased
rapidly. Efﬁciently clustering those large scale data sets is
a challenge. To address this problem, this paper proposes a
novel co-clustering method named bilateral k-means algorithm (BKM) for fast co-clustering. Different from traditional
k-means algorithms, the proposed method has two indicator
matrices P and Q and a diagonal matrix S to be solved, which
represent the cluster memberships of samples and features,
and the co-cluster centres, respectively. Therefore, it could
implement different clustering tasks on the samples and features simultaneously. We also introduce an effective approach
to solve the proposed method, which involves less multiplication. The computational complexity is analyzed. Extensive experiments on various types of data sets are conducted.
Compared with the state-of-the-art clustering methods, the
proposed BKM not only has faster computational speed, but
also achieves promising clustering results.

Introduction
Co-clustering, also referred as biclustering, seeks to cluster
the set of samples and the set of features in a data matrix simultaneously. By doing permutations of rows and columns,
the co-clustering algorithms aim to reorganize the initial data
matrix into homogeneous blocks. These blocks also called
co-clusters can therefore be deﬁned as subsets of the data
matrix characterized by a set of observations and a set of
features whose elements are similar. The surveys of types
of co-cluster and the related co-clustering algorithms are referred in literatures (Madeira and Oliveira 2004; Tanay, Sharan, and Shamir 2005; Charrad and Ahmed 2011). Since coclustering algorithms utilize the relations between samples
clusters and feature clusters, they make the data sets more
predictable and the co-clustering performance more excellent compared with traditional one-side clustering.
Recently, several research topics involving co-clustering
become hot issues due to the development of internet technology. Examples include text data mining, image retrieving, image segmentation, and video analysis (Zhang et al.
2004; Lu, Yuan, and Yan 2013; Lu, Wu, and Yuan 2014;
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1969

