Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Towards Better Understanding the Clothing Fashion Styles:
A Multimodal Deep Learning Approach
Yihui Ma,1 Jia Jia,1∗ Suping Zhou,3 Jingtian Fu,12 Yejun Liu,12 Zijian Tong4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
2
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
4
Sogou Corporation, Beijing, China
jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Lin 2015) builds an integrated application system to parse a
set of clothing images jointly. Besides, people try to analyse
visual features by adding occasion and scenario elements.
(Liu et al. 2012) considers occasions in dressing and focus
on scenario-oriented clothing recommendation. Although a
latest work (Jia et al. 2016) proposes to appreciate the aesthetic effects of upper-body menswear, it still lacks universality and ignores that the collocation of top and bottom
has a signiﬁcant impact on fashion styles. Thus, there still
remain two challenges for us: 1) how to quantitatively describe the fashion styles of various clothing, 2) how to model
the subtle relationship between visual features and fashion
styles, especially considering the clothing collocations.

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to better understand the clothing fashion
styles. There remain two challenges for us: 1) how to quantitatively describe the fashion styles of various clothing, 2)
how to model the subtle relationship between visual features
and fashion styles, especially considering the clothing collocations. Using the words that people usually use to describe
clothing fashion styles on shopping websites, we build a
Fashion Semantic Space (FSS) based on Kobayashi’s aesthetics theory to describe clothing fashion styles quantitatively
and universally. Then we propose a novel fashion-oriented
multimodal deep learning based model, Bimodal Correlative
Deep Autoencoder (BCDA), to capture the internal correlation
in clothing collocations. Employing the benchmark dataset
we build with 32133 full-body fashion show images, we use
BCDA to map the visual features to the FSS. The experiment
results indicate that our model outperforms (+13% in terms of
MSE) several alternative baselines, conﬁrming that our model
can better understand the clothing fashion styles. To further
demonstrate the advantages of our model, we conduct some
interesting case studies, including fashion trends analyses of
brands, clothing collocation recommendation, etc.

1

In this paper, we aim to better understand the clothing fashion styles and propose our solutions from two aspects. First, we build a Fashion Semantic Space (FSS) based
on the Image-Scale Space in aesthetic area proposed by
(Kobayashi 1995). By computing the semantic distances using WordNet::Similarity (Pedersen, Patwardhan, and Michelizzi 2004), we coordinate the most often used 527 aesthetic
words on clothing section of Amazon to FSS. Second, we
propose a fashion-oriented multimodal deep learning based
model, Bimodal Correlative Deep Autoencoder (BCDA), to
capture the correlation between visual features and fashion
styles by utilizing the intrinsic matching rules of tops and
bottoms. Speciﬁcally, we regard the tops and bottoms as two
modals of clothing collocation, and leverage the shared representation of multimodal deep learning to learn the relationship between the modalities. In addition, we improve the
process of feature learning by taking the clothing categories
(e.g. suit, coat, leggings, etc.) as correlative labels. Connecting BCDA to a regression model, we ﬁnally map the visual
features to the FSS. Employing 32133 full-body fashion images downloaded from fashion show websites as our experimental data, we conduct several experiments to evaluate the
mapping effects between visual features and coordinate values in FSS. The results indicate that the proposed BCDA
model outperforms (+13% in terms of MSE) several alternative baselines. Besides, we also show some interesting cases

Introduction

What are the most popular clothing fashion styles of this season? Reported by Vogue1 , romantic, elegant and classic are
the top trends during the Fall 2016 Couture collection. Exploring the fashion runway images, these styles rely heavily
on some speciﬁc visual details, such as nipped waist, lapel
collar, matched with high-waistlines dress or pencil trousers.
Since clothing fashion styles beneﬁt a lot from visual details, can we bridge the gap between them automatically?
Many efforts have been made towards this goal. For example, (Wang, Zhao, and Yin 2014) presents a method to parse
reﬁned texture attribute of clothing, while (Yang, Luo, and
∗
Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows

38

