Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Sentiment Analysis
with Signed Social Networks
Kewei Cheng,1 Jundong Li,1 Jiliang Tang,2 Huan Liu1
1. Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, 85281, USA
2. Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 48824, USA
{kcheng18, jundongl, huan.liu}@asu.edu, tangjili@msu.edu

2011; Hu et al. 2013b; Tang et al. 2015b). Also, understanding sentiments can naturally advance a variety of realworld applications, such as recommendations, marketing
and disaster relief (Ding and Liu 2007; Pang and Lee 2008;
Zhang et al. 2014).
Traditional sentiment analysis methods either work in a
supervised way to build classiﬁers from manually annotated sentiment labels (Pang and Lee 2004; Pang, Lee, and
Vaithyanathan 2002) or are performed in an unsupervised
scenario with a pre-deﬁned sentiment lexicon (O’Connor et
al. 2010; Wiebe, Wilson, and Cardie 2005; Wilson, Wiebe,
and Hoffmann 2005). More often than not, social media
data is distinct from traditional i.i.d. text data – they are
not independently created but are inherently linked by user
interactions. Another unique property is that social media
data is often unlabeled, while sentiment labels are costly
and labor-intensive to obtain. Motivated by sentiment consistency (Abelson 1983) and emotional contagion (Hatﬁeld,
Cacioppo, and Rapson 1994) in social science theories, rich
sources of sentimental signals may exist among user interactions, and there are a surge of research (Hu et al. 2013b;
Wang et al. 2015a; Tang et al. 2015b) attempting to exploit
user interactions in understanding and predicting sentiment
polarity of social media data. Nonetheless, most of them are
supervised or semi-supervised by employing feature selection techniques (Li et al. 2016).
Aforementioned approaches predominantly focus on unsigned social networks where only positive user interactions
are observed. In addition to positive links, many real-world
social media platforms also consist of negative links, such
as distrust relations in Epinions1 and foes in Slashdot2 . The
availability of negative links (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and
Kleinberg 2010b) brings about richer source of information
and recent advances in signed network mining show that
negative links have some added value over positive interactions. Furthermore, many learning tasks (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010a; Tang, Aggarwal, and Liu
2016) are enhanced by the modeling of negative links. Recent advances in signed social network analysis motivate us
to investigate if negative links could also help us perform
sentiment analysis, especially when the sentiment labels are

Abstract
Huge volumes of opinion-rich data is user-generated in social
media at an unprecedented rate, easing the analysis of individual and public sentiments. Sentiment analysis has shown
to be useful in probing and understanding emotions, expressions and attitudes in the text. However, the distinct characteristics of social media data present challenges to traditional
sentiment analysis. First, social media data is often noisy, incomplete and fast-evolved which necessitates the design of
a sophisticated learning model. Second, sentiment labels are
hard to collect which further exacerbates the problem by not
being able to discriminate sentiment polarities. Meanwhile,
opportunities are also unequivocally presented. Social media
contains rich sources of sentiment signals in textual terms and
user interactions, which could be helpful in sentiment analysis. While there are some attempts to leverage implicit sentiment signals in positive user interactions, little attention is
paid on signed social networks with both positive and negative links. The availability of signed social networks motivates us to investigate if negative links also contain useful
sentiment signals. In this paper, we study a novel problem of
unsupervised sentiment analysis with signed social networks.
In particular, we incorporate explicit sentiment signals in textual terms and implicit sentiment signals from signed social
networks into a coherent model SignedSenti for unsupervised
sentiment analysis. Empirical experiments on two real-world
datasets corroborate its effectiveness.

Introduction
The popularity of social media services greatly diversiﬁes
the way people communicate and socialize, enabling users to
share and exchange opinions in different aspects. The sheer
volume of opinion-rich data provides rich sources in understanding individual and public opinions. For example, unveiling the opinions of customers is valuable for business
advertisers in devising better targeted marketing tactics (Liu
2012); politicians could also adjust their campaign strategies according to the aggregated sentiments of tweets about
election (O’Connor et al. 2010). As a traditional way to
identify subjective information from source materials, sentiment analysis has received increasingly attention (Taboada
et al. 2011; Kamvar and Harris 2011; Bollen, Mao, and Pepe

1

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

3429

http://www.epinions.com/
https://slashdot.org/

