Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A SAT-Based Approach for Solving
the Modal Logic S5-Satisﬁability Problem
Thomas Caridroit, Jean-Marie Lagniez, Daniel Le Berre,
Tiago de Lima and Valentin Montmirail
CRIL, Univ. Artois and CNRS, F62300 Lens, France
{caridroit,lagniez,leberre,delima,montmirail}@cril.fr
Using a SAT-oracle in the context of modal logic is not
new: a comprehensive overview of previous works can be
found for example in (Sebastiani and Tacchella 2009). However, most of them tackle the satisﬁability of modal logic
K. *SAT (Giunchiglia, Giunchiglia, and Tacchella 1999;
Giunchiglia and Tacchella 2000; Giunchiglia et al. 2000;
Giunchiglia, Tacchella, and Giunchiglia 2002) uses a SAToracle to decide the satisﬁability of 8 diﬀerent modal logics, including K, but not S5. In the same spirit as our
work, a translation of modal logic K to SAT has been
proposed in Km2SAT (Giunchiglia and Sebastiani 2000;
Sebastiani and Vescovi 2009). More recently, the solver
InKreSAT (Kaminski and Tebbi 2013) proposed an innovative SAT-based system where the SAT solver drives the development of a tableaux method. Theoretically, an approach
based on Satisﬁability Modulo Theory (Areces, Fontaine,
and Merz 2015) has also been proposed. None of those
methods are applicable to modal logic S5.
The number of variables required to reduce S5-SAT to
SAT depends on an upper bound of the number of possible
worlds to be considered in the S5-model. Minimizing that
upper bound is thus crucial to obtain CNF formulas of reasonable size. We propose a new upper bound based on a syntactical property of the formula, that we call “diamond degree”. We provide some experimental evidences that our approach improves signiﬁcantly the state-of-the-art S5 solvers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we
ﬁrst present the modal logic S5 and the diﬀerent bounds on
the size of a S5-models; then we detail the reduction from
S5-SAT to SAT, parameterized by the number of worlds to
consider. We present two improvements to reduce the size
of the SAT encoding: a better upper bound on the number of
worlds to consider and structural caching. Finally, we compare experimentally the eﬃciency of our approach to stateof-the-art S5 solvers.

Abstract
We present a SAT-based approach for solving the modal logic
S5-satisﬁability problem. That problem being NP-complete,
the translation into SAT is not a surprise. Our contribution is
to greatly reduce the number of propositional variables and
clauses required to encode the problem. We ﬁrst present a
syntactic property called diamond degree. We show that the
size of an S5-model satisfying a formula φ can be bounded
by its diamond degree. Such measure can thus be used as
an upper bound for generating a SAT encoding for the S5satisﬁability of that formula. We also propose a lightweight
caching system which allows us to further reduce the size of
the propositional formula. We implemented a generic SATbased approach within the modal logic S5 solver S52SAT. It
allowed us to compare experimentally our new upper-bound
against previously known one, i.e. the number of modalities
of φ and to evaluate the eﬀect of our caching technique. We
also compared our solver against existing modal logic S5
solvers. The proposed approach outperforms previous ones
on the benchmarks used. These promising results open interesting research directions for the practical resolution of others
modal logics (e.g. K, KT, S4)

Introduction
Over the last twenty years, modal logics have been used in
various areas of artiﬁcial intelligence like formal veriﬁcation
(Fairtlough and Mendler 1994), game theory (Lorini and
Schwarzentruber 2010), database theory (Fitting 2000) and
distributed computing (VII, Crary, and Harper 2005) for example. More recently, the modal logic S5 was used for contingent planning (Niveau and Zanuttini 2016) and in knowledge compilation (Bienvenu, Fargier, and Marquis 2010).
For this reason, automated reasoning in modal logics has
been vastly studied (e.g. (Sebastiani and Villaﬁorita 1998;
Masssacci 2000; Sebastiani and Vescovi 2009)).
Ladner (Ladner 1977; Fagin et al. 1995) showed that the
satisﬁability problem for several modal logics including K,
KT and S4 is PSPACE-Complete while it is NP-Complete
for S5 (see (Halpern and Rêgo 2007) for more details). Since
SAT solvers became a quite eﬃcient practical NP-oracle for
many problems, we are interested in studying SAT encoding for the S5-SAT problem from a practical perspective.

Preliminaries
Let P be a ﬁnite non-empty set of propositional variables.
The language L of the modal logic S5 is the set of formulas
φ deﬁned by the following grammar in BNF:
φ ::=  | p | ¬φ | φ ∧ φ | φ ∨ φ | φ | φ
where p ranges over P. A formula of the form φ (box phi)
means φ is necessarily true. A formula of the form φ (di-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3864

