Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cross-Domain Ranking via Latent Space Learning


†

Jie Tang,† Wendy Hall‡

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
‡
Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, UK
jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn, wh@ecs.soton.ac.uk

ing needs consider all the interrelated domains, which may
have a different feature space or different feature distributions; (2) the numbers of labeled training examples in the
interrelated domains may be very unbalanced (e.g., thousands versus a few). Cross-domain ranking is also different
from transfer learning (Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2007;
Dai et al. 2007), whose goal is to utilize the training data
from a source domain to help learn a model for the target
domain.
The problem of cross-domain ranking is non-trivial and
poses challenges, because the pooled training data may improve the performance of a ranking function or may make
the ranking performance worse. A fundamental issue is how
to measure the correlation between different domains and
how to learn all the ranking functions by taking advantage
of the correlation.
To address these challenges, we propose a uniﬁed crossdomain ranking model: BayCDR. BayCDR uses a latent feature space deﬁned across multiple interrelated domains to
measure the correlation between domains. Examples from
different domains are mapped onto the latent space via a
projection matrix, where a common feature set is discovered by using a regularization method. Given a prior distribution of the ranking model and a ranking rule based on
a weighted average over an ensemble of ranking models,
BayCDR adopts an EM-style algorithm to learn a posterior distribution of the ranking model in the latent space.
We show that learning multiple ranking functions simultaneously can reduce the ranking errors. In addition, to scale
to large datasets, BayCDR is designed with an efﬁcient distributed learning algorithm that is implemented and tested
under the Map-Reduce framework. Experimental results on
several real ranking tasks show the effectiveness and efﬁciency of BayCDR.

Abstract
We study the problem of cross-domain ranking, which addresses learning to rank objects from multiple interrelated domains. In many applications, we may have multiple interrelated domains, some of them with a large amount of training data and others with very little. We often wish to utilize
the training data from all these related domains to help improve ranking performance. In this paper, we present a uniﬁed
model: BayCDR for cross-domain ranking. BayCDR uses a
latent space to measure the correlation between different domains, and learns the ranking functions from the interrelated
domains via the latent space by a Bayesian model, where
each ranking function is based on a weighted average model.
An efﬁcient learning algorithm based on variational inference
and a generalization bound has been developed. To scale up
to handle real large data, we also present a learning algorithm under the Map-Reduce programming model. Finally,
we demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of BayCDR
on large datasets.

Introduction
Cross-domain ranking addresses a common situation that
arises when applying machine learning to many emerging
applications over interrelated domains on the Web. In such
applications, it may be possible to collect ample training
data (e.g., user-rated reviews) for some domains, but at the
same time little or no data for the other domains. This leads
to a situation where some ranking functions perform well for
some domains, but poorly for the other domains. Therefore,
it becomes highly desirable to ﬁnd a way to pool together
the training data across the interrelated domains, in order to
improve the ranking accuracy over all domains.
While much related work has been conducted—for example, transfer learning (Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2007;
Dai et al. 2007), domain adaptation (Ben-David et al. 2006),
multi-task learning (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2006;
Crammer, Kearns, and Wortman 2006), learning to rank
(Herbrich, Graepel, and Obermayer 2000)—there are only
a few theoretical studies of the cross-domain ranking problem. The major difference between the cross-domain ranking problem and the learning to rank (Herbrich, Graepel, and Obermayer 2000) is that (1) cross-domain rank-

Problem Formulation
The cross-domain ranking problem can be formalized as
follows.
Input: Let T be the number of domains, and for each domain t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, we are given nt retrieved objects for
q
q
), . . . , (xqt1 , ytn
)} ∈ RK × R, where
query q: {(xqt1 , yt1
t
q
xti is expressed as a K-dimensional feature vector, and
q
∈ {r1 , . . . , rlt } denotes the ranking level assigned to
yti
the object for the query q. Notation lt denotes the number of

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2618

