Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sherlock: Scalable Fact Learning in Images
Mohamed Elhoseiny,1,2 Scott Cohen,1 Walter Chang,1 Brian Price,1 Ahmed Elgammal2
1

Adobe Research

2

Rutgers University, Computer Science Department

Abstract
The human visual system is capable of learning an unbounded
number of facts from images including not only objects but
also their attributes, actions and interactions. Such uniform
understanding of visual facts has not received enough attention. Existing visual recognition systems are typically modeled differently for each fact type such as objects, actions,
and interactions. We propose a setting where all these facts
can be modeled simultaneously with a capacity to understand
an unbounded number of facts in a structured way. The training data comes as structured facts in images, including (1) objects (e.g., <boy>), (2) attributes (e.g., <boy, tall>), (3) actions (e.g., <boy, playing>), and (4) interactions (e.g., <boy,
riding, a horse >). Each fact has a language view (e.g., <
boy, playing>) and a visual view (an image). We show that
learning visual facts in a structured way enables not only a
uniform but also generalizable visual understanding. We propose and investigate recent and strong approaches from the
multiview learning literature and also introduce a structured
embedding model. We applied the investigated methods on
several datasets that we augmented with structured facts and
a large scale dataset of > 202,000 facts and 814,000 images.
Our results show the advantage of relating facts by the structure by the proposed model compared to the baselines.

Figure 1: Visual Facts in Images
between objects (“dog chasing cat”); see Fig 1 for other
examples.
• Generalization: ability to generalize to facts that have
zero or few examples during training.
• Scalability: ability to learn an unbounded number of facts
in one model.
• Structure: ability to provide a structured understanding
of facts, for example that “baby” is the subject and has an
attribute of “smiling”.
• Bi-directionality: ability to retrieve a linguistic representation of an image, and the ability to retrieve images given
language description of a fact.

Introduction

Existing visual understanding systems may be categorized by two trends: (1) fact-level systems and (2) high-level
systems. Fact level systems include object recognition, action recognition, attribute recognition, and interaction recognition (e.g., (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015), (Zhang et al.
2014), (Chen and Grauman 2014), (Zhou et al. 2014),
(Gkioxari and Malik 2015), (Antol, Zitnick, and Parikh
2014a)). These systems are usually evaluated separately for
each fact type (e.g., objects, actions, interactions, attributes,
etc.) and are therefore not uniform. Typically, these systems have a ﬁxed dictionary of facts (assuming that facts are
found during training in at least tens of examples), and they
treat facts independently. Such systems cannot generalize
fact learning outside of the dictionary and will not scale to
an unbounded number of facts, since model size scales with
the number of facts. Furthermore, these recognition systems
are typically uni-directional, only able to return the conditional probability of a fact given an image. In the zero/fewshot learning setting (e.g., (Romera-Paredes and Torr 2015;
Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009)), only a few or

It is a capital mistake to theorize in advance of the
facts. -Sherlock Holmes (The Adventure of the Second Stain)
Despite recent signiﬁcant advances in Computer Vision,
there is still a large gap between humans and machines in visual understanding. The human visual system is capable of
efﬁciently acquiring visual knowledge by learning different
types of facts in a never ending way from many or few examples, aided by the ability to generalize from other known
facts with related structure. For example, a human can learn
the concept of climbing and generalize it to rare interactions
like “hippo climbing fence”. To bridge this gap, we carefully
focus on ﬁve desirable characteristics
• Uniformity: ability to handle objects (“dog”), attributes
(“brown dog”), actions (“dog running”) and interactions
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4016

