Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

AniDraw: When Music and Dance Meet Harmoniously
Yaohua Bu,12† Taoran Tang,12† Jia Jia,1∗ Zhiyuan Ma,1 Songyao Wu,2 Yuming You1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
2
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{byh15, ttr15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

In this paper, we present a demo, AniDraw, which can help
users practice the coordination between their hands, mouth
and eyes by combing the elements of music, painting and
dance. Users can sketch a cartoon character through multitouch screens and then hum songs, which will drive the cartoon character to dance to create a lively animation. In technical realization, we apply the mechanism of acoustic driving
in which AniDraw extracts time-domain acoustic features to
map to the intensity of dances, frequency-domain ones to map
to the style of dances, and high-level ones including onesets
and tempos to map to start, duration and speed of dances.
AniDraw can not only stimulate users’ enthusiasm in artistic
creation, but also enhance their esthetic ability on harmony.

Figure 1: Technical realization framework of AniDraw.
users, AniDraw can also improve their mental and physical
health, because it can not only help users to obtain a sense
of achievement in artistic creation, but also enhance their
rhythmicity and body coordination by practicing their eyes,
hands and mouths together.

Introduction
In art, music and dance are closely related, yet they are
taught separately in traditional model of art education,
which forms an invisible shackle of creativity. Therefore,
we present an iPad-based application named AniDraw that
can explore the potential relationship of different art forms
when applied in art education. AniDraw supports users to
draw cartoon characters at will and make them dance to their
humming songs in real time.
Most audio-visual multimodal integration applications
are not realized in real time (Rafﬂe et al. 2007). Motivated
by this kind of existing applications using audio driving animation (Levine et al. 2009), Anidraw improves in that it can
take an arbitrary sketched character as input, and is tailored
for music and dance (rather than conversational speech). We
will demonstrate the contributions as: (1) Firstly, propose
the method of semi-auto recognition with predeﬁned skeleton model to locate carton characters joint even if they are
not complete. (2) Secondly, use acoustic features to drive
dance movement generation in real time to realize the harmony of music and dance.
Furthermore, AniDraw offers children the opportunity to
explore and nurture their creative and artistic instincts, and
strengthen their perceptions. For middle-aged and elderly

Technical Realization
In Figure 1, we elaborate our framework of acoustic driving mechanism, which mainly involves three units including
skeleton recognition, acoustic feature extraction and mapping to dance, and our own library of dance movement. Details are stated in the following sections.

Skeleton Recognition
We use skeleton animation to represent characters drawn by
users, which connects all the nodes of key body parts into a
tree structure, and construct a set of afﬁnity transformation
to represent the action space. In order to take better segments
of characters, we separate the cartoon character into predeﬁned parts including the skin and 13 typical body parts.

Acoustic Feature Extraction
Acoustic driving means to extract acoustic features of user’s
songs in real time and based on these to determine the action
at next time-step. We extract time-domain features including loudness and pitch, frequency-domain features including Fourier Transform Spectrum and MFCC, and high-level
features including onsets and tempos. We use YIN-FFT algorithm ( Brossier et al. 2006 ) to detect base frequency. And
for detecting the Starting Point of Notes in complex ﬁelds,
we take a robust algorithm (Duxbury et al. 2003) which combines the energy and phrase.

∗

Corresponding author: J.Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Joint ﬁrst authors: Yaohua Bu, Taoran Tang (According to the
last alphabetical order)
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5083

