Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Incorporating Domain-Independent
Planning Heuristics in Hierarchical Planning
Vikas Shivashankar

Ron Alford

David W. Aha

Knexus Research Corporation
National Harbor, MD
vikas.shivashankar@knexusresearch.com

MITRE
McLean, VA
ralford@mitre.org

Navy Center for Applied Research in AI
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington, DC
david.aha@nrl.navy.mil

heuristics, is applied to Hierarchical Task Network (HTN)
planning, the resulting decision problem is NP-hard. Therefore, if we want to leverage DIP problem relaxation techniques to develop efﬁciently computable heuristics for hierarchical planning formalisms, we need to not only relax the
problem, but also relax the hierarchical semantics.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of incorporating
DIP heuristics into another hierarchical planning formalism
called Hierarchical Goal Network (HGN) planning (Shivashankar et al. 2012) via a systematic relaxation of its semantics. We chose HGN planning because it is possible to
represent hierarchical knowledge similar to HTN planning,
and at the same time work with goals instead of tasks, which
makes it easier to incorporate techniques from DIP. In particular, our main contributions are as follows:

Abstract
Heuristics serve as a powerful tool in modern domainindependent planning (DIP) systems by providing critical
guidance during the search for high-quality solutions. However, they have not been broadly used with hierarchical planning techniques, which are more expressive and tend to scale
better in complex domains by exploiting additional domainspeciﬁc knowledge. Complicating matters, we show that for
Hierarchical Goal Network (HGN) planning, a goal-based hierarchical planning formalism that we focus on in this paper, any poly-time heuristic that is derived from a deleterelaxation DIP heuristic has to make some relaxation of the
hierarchical semantics. To address this, we present a principled framework for incorporating DIP heuristics into HGN
planning using a simple relaxation of the HGN semantics we
call Hierarchy-Relaxation. This framework allows for computing heuristic estimates of HGN problems using any DIP
heuristic in an admissibility-preserving manner. We demonstrate the feasibility of this approach by using the LMCut
heuristic to guide an optimal HGN planner. Our empirical
results with three benchmark domains demonstrate that simultaneously leveraging hierarchical knowledge and heuristic guidance substantially improves planning performance.

Hardness of Delete-Relaxed HGN Planning. We
show
that, like HTN planning, delete-relaxed HGN planning
is also NP-hard, meaning that we need to relax HGN
semantics to develop efﬁcient HGN analogues of arbitrary
DIP heuristics.
Hierarchy-Relaxed HGN Planning. Next, we propose one
such relaxation called Hierarchy-Relaxation, and prove
that Hierarchy-Relaxed HGN (HRHGN) Planning can be
compiled into DIP. This provides a principled framework
to incorporate any DIP heuristic h into HGN planning:
given an HGN planning problem P , we can hierarchyrelax it to the HRHGN problem Phr , compile Phr into
the DIP problem Pdip and use h to compute a heuristic estimate h(Pdip ) for P . We show that this framework
is admissibility-preserving: admissible DIP heuristics will
translate into admissible HGN heuristics.

Introduction
The primary goal of AI planning research has been to develop planning systems that can efﬁciently generate highquality plans. Search heuristics serve as a powerful tool
in achieving this by guiding the search algorithms towards
high-quality solutions. While domain-independent planning
(DIP) algorithms have greatly beneﬁted in this regard by the
development of informative search heuristics that permit efﬁcient optimal/anytime plan generation, this is less true in
hierarchical planning formalisms, where planners typically
resort to brute-force search algorithms and rely on sophisticated domain-speciﬁc knowledge to control the search.
The main reason for the capability gap is that while DIP
heuristics are typically developed by devising a principled
relaxation of the original planning problem that is easier to
solve (usually in P), analogous relaxations do not work in
hierarchical planning formalisms. For example, Alford et al.
(2014) showed that when delete-relaxation, a problem relaxation technique in DIP that is the source of many powerful

Optimal HGN Planner Guided by the LMCut Heuristic.
We demonstrate the feasibility of this approach by incorporating the admissible DIP heuristic LMCut (Helmert
and Domshlak 2009) into an optimal HGN planning
algorithm, which we call Hierarchically-Optimal Goal
Decomposition Planner using LMCut (HOGL). Our experiments on three benchmark domains demonstrate that
HOGL’s ability to simultaneously leverage hierarchical
knowledge and DIP heuristics allows it to outperform
state-of-the-art optimal DIP algorithms and blind search
HGN planning algorithms. Furthermore, they also show
that the use of LMCut, a state-of-the-art heuristic, allows

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3658

