Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Three New Algorithms to Solve N-POMDPs
Yann Dujardin

Tom Dietterich

Iadine Chadès

CSIRO
yann.dujardin@csiro.au

School of EECS
Oregon State University
tgd@oregonstate.edu

CSIRO
iadine.chades@csiro.au

2012). Until recently, POMDP algorithms have focused on
providing near-optimal solutions regardless of the number
of α-vectors required. Indeed, current algorithms require
many α-vectors even when solving small problems (Poupart,
Kim, and Kim 2011). Here, we contribute to bridging the
gap between POMDP solvers and their end users by providing approximate solutions that can be represented with
a small number of α-vectors. The recently-published algorithm α-min was a ﬁrst attempt at approximately solving
ﬁnite-horizon POMDPs given a limit N on the number of
α-vectors (Dujardin, Dietterich, and Chadès 2015). We call
this problem N-POMDP. α-min is however a greedy algorithm and does not provide satisfying performance guarantees. Here, we propose three new algorithms, based on a
common approach, α-min-2, that directly searches for subsets of α-vectors of size N. α-min-2-fast (heuristic) and αmin-2-p (with performance guarantees) are designed to work
in complement of an existing POMDP solver, and α-min-2solve (heuristic) is a solver itself. The new approach allows
to solve inﬁnite-horizon or ﬁnite-horizon problems and is
able to outperform α-min.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we introduce
POMDPs and the α-min principles. Next we formalize the
N-POMDP problem. Then we present the α-min-2 principle and the three related algorithms: α-min-2-fast, α-min-2p and α-min-2-solve. Finally we apply the three algorithms
to well-known benchmark problems and discuss the results.

Abstract
In many ﬁelds in computational sustainability, applications
of POMDPs are inhibited by the complexity of the optimal solution. One way of delivering simple solutions is to
represent the policy with a small number of α-vectors. We
would like to ﬁnd the best possible policy that can be expressed using a ﬁxed number N of α-vectors. We call this
the N-POMDP problem. The existing solver α-min approximately solves ﬁnite-horizon POMDPs with a controllable
number of α-vectors. However α-min is a greedy algorithm
without performance guarantees, and it is rather slow. This
paper proposes three new algorithms, based on a general approach that we call α-min-2. These three algorithms are able
to approximately solve N-POMDPs. α-min-2-fast (heuristic)
and α-min-2-p (with performance guarantees) are designed to
complement an existing POMDP solver, while α-min-2-solve
(heuristic) is a solver itself. Complexity results are provided
for each of the algorithms, and they are tested on well-known
benchmarks. These new algorithms will help users to interpret solutions to POMDP problems in computational sustainability.

Introduction
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP)
provide a powerful tool for sequential decision-making under uncertainty. In computational sustainability, POMDPs
are increasingly being applied to help solve important problems in biodiversity conservation. For example, rules of
thumb were derived using POMDPs to best manage and
monitor cryptic species such as the critically endangered
Sumatran Tigers (Chadès et al. 2008; McDonald-Madden et
al. 2011), or the invasive parasitic plant species branched
broomrape with long-lasting microscopic seeds (Regan,
Chadès, and Possingham 2011). More recently, POMDPs
were employed to adaptively manage renewable natural resources (Fackler and Paciﬁci 2014; Springborn and
Sanchirico 2013) and migratory shorebirds threatened by the
uncertain consequences of sea level rise (Nicol et al. 2015;
2013). Despite this growing interest, POMDP solutions are
often too complex to be analyzed and communicated efﬁciently to stakeholders, which prevents the deployment of
POMDP solutions (Tulloch et al. 2015; Nicol and Chadès

POMDPs, N-POMDPs and the α-min
principle
POMDPs and related work
POMDPs are models of sequential decision-making when
the decision-maker does not have complete information
about the current state of the system (Sigaud and Buffet
2013). Formally, a discrete ﬁnite-horizon POMDP is speciﬁed as a tuple {S, A, O, τa , Ωa , R, H}, where
• H = {0, ..., T − 1} are called “time steps”, T ∈ N. H is
called the time horizon.
• S, ∀t ∈ H, st ∈ S is the state of the system at t.
• A, ∀t ∈ H, at ∈ A is the action taken at t.
• O, ∀t ∈ H, zt ∈ O is the observation at t.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4495

