Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Equivalence and Inconsistency of
Answer Set Programs with External Sources∗
Christoph Redl
Institut für Informationssysteme, Technische Universität Wien
Favoritenstraße 9-11, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
redl@kr.tuwien.ac.at

&synonym[car ](X) might be used to ﬁnd the synonyms
X of car , e.g. automobile. Also recursive data exchange between the program and external sources is supported, which
leads to high expressiveness of the formalism.
In this paper, we present a characterization of equivalence
and of inconsistency of HEX-programs. Since well-known
ASP extensions (such as programs with aggregates (Faber,
Leone, and Pfeifer 2011) and constraint ASP (Gebser, Ostrowski, and Schaub 2009)) amount to special cases of HEXprograms, the results are interesting beyond the speciﬁc formalism. Our approach is based on a recent technique for
inlining of external atoms and a generalization of results
by Woltran [2007] from ordinary ASP programs to HEXprograms. We are able to show that equivalence can be
characterized similarly to ordinary ASP progams, which is
convenient; however, due to the support for external atoms
and the use of the FLP-reduct (Faber, Leone, and Pfeifer
2011) instead of the GL-reduct (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988))
in the semantics of HEX-programs, this result is not immediate. Afterwards, we derive also a characterization of inconsistency of a program wrt. program extensions, which we call
persistent inconsistency. While the main results are decision
criteria based on programs and their reducts, we further derive a criterion for checking persistent inconsistency based on
unfounded sets; this is driven by possible applications. We
then give an outlook of an intended application of the results
to algorithmic improvements.
The structure of the paper is as follows:

Abstract
HEX -programs extend of answer-set programs (ASP) with external sources. In previous work, notions of equivalence of
ASP programs under extensions have been developed. Most
well-known are strong equivalence, which is given for programs P and Q if P ∪ R and Q ∪ R have the same answer
sets for arbitrary programs R, and uniform equivalence, which
is given if this is guaranteed for sets R of facts. More ﬁnegrained approaches exist, which restrict the set of atoms in
the added program R. In this paper we provide a characterization of equivalence of HEX-programs. Since well-known ASP
extensions (e.g. constraint ASP) amount to special cases of
HEX , the results are interesting beyond the particular formalism. Based on this, we further characterize inconsistency of
programs wrt. program extensions. We then discuss possible
applications of the results for algorithms improvements.

1

Introduction

Answer-Set Programming (ASP) is a declarative programming paradigm based on nonmonotonic programs and a multimodel semantics (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991). In previous
works, characterizations of equivalence of answer set programs under programs extensions have been developed. That
is, two programs P and Q are considered to be equivalent if
P ∪ R and Q ∪ R have the same answer sets for all programs
R of a certain type, which depends on the notion of equivalence. Most importantly, for strongly equivalent programs
we have that P ∪ R and Q ∪ R have the same answer sets for
any program R (Lifschitz, Pearce, and Valverde 2001), while
uniformly equivalent programs guarantee this only if R is a
set of facts (Eiter and Fink 2003). Later, these notions were
extended to the non-ground case (Eiter et al. 2005a). A more
ﬁne-grained approach is the one by Woltran [2007], where R
can contain rules other than facts, but the sets of atoms which
can occur in rule heads and bodies are restricted.
HEX -programs are an extension of ASP with external
sources such as description logic ontologies and Web resources. So-called external atoms pass information from
the logic program (given by predicate extensions and constants), to an external source, which in turn returns values to the program. For instance, the external atom

• In Section 2 we recapitulate HEX-programs and an approach for external atom inlining.
• Based on this inlining approach, Section 3 characterizes
equivalence of HEX-programs, which generalizes results
by Woltran [2007]. The generalization of strong (Lifschitz,
Pearce, and Valverde 2001) and uniform equivalence (Eiter
and Fink 2003) correspond to special cases thereof.
• In Section 4 we present a characterization of inconsistency
of HEX-programs wrt. program extensions, which we call
persistent inconsistency. This characterization is derived
from the previously presented notion of equivalence.
• Section 5 presents envisaged applications of the results.

∗
This research has been supported by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) project P27730.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• In Section 6 we discuss related work and conclude.
For space reasons, proofs are outsourced to the extended

1229

