Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Active Discriminative Text Representation Learning
Ye Zhang

Matthew Lease

Byron C. Wallace

Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
yezhang@utexas.edu

School of Information
University of Texas at Austin
ml@utexas.edu

College of Computer & Information Science
Northeastern University
byron@ccs.neu.edu

classiﬁcation using modern neural models. We posit that
the importance of representation learning (Bengio 2009)
with neural models motivates exploring a rather different approach to AL for neural models vs. classic techniques.
In this work, we propose an AL method for convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), which have recently achieved
strong performance across many diverse text classiﬁcation
tasks (Kim 2014; Zhang and Wallace 2015; Johnson and
Zhang 2014; Zhang, Roller, and Wallace 2016; Zhang, Marshall, and Wallace 2016). These models ﬁrst project words
in texts into a low dimensional embedding layer, and then
apply convolution operations on the resultant matrix.
While CNNs (and neural networks more generally) have
demonstrated excellent performance when one has access to
large amounts of training data, how can we make the best
use of CNNs when annotation resources are scarce? Because
word embedding estimation and tuning (for a speciﬁc text
classiﬁcation task) may be viewed as representation learning, it is reasonable to optimize feature vectors before expending effort to tune the parameters of a model that accepts
these as input. Indeed, adjusting the former will render updates to the latter potentially useless. Thus, we argue that the
objective in AL (at least at the outset) should primarily be to
select instances that result in better representations.
More speciﬁcally, we propose a novel AL approach for
sentence classiﬁcation in which we select instances that contain words likely to most affect the embeddings. We achieve
this by calculating the expected gradient length (EGL) with
respect to the embeddings for each word comprising the remaining unlabeled sentences. We show that this approach allows us to rapidly learn discriminative, task-speciﬁc embeddings. For example, when classifying the sentiment of sentences, we ﬁnd that selecting examples in this way quickly
pushes the embeddings of ‘bad’ and ‘good’ apart (Figure
3, bottom row). Ultimately, results show our AL method improves accuracy over several baseline AL approaches, across
sentence and document classiﬁcation tasks considered.
This method selects instances based on a max operator
over the gradients expected for the individual words in a
text, and thus is less appropriate for longer texts such as documents. Therefore, we extend our approach for document
classiﬁcation by linearly combining two scores: one corresponding to individual word embeddings and one measuring
the overall uncertainty regarding instances.

Abstract
We propose a new active learning (AL) method for text classiﬁcation with convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In AL,
one selects the instances to be manually labeled with the aim
of maximizing model performance with minimal effort. Neural models capitalize on word embeddings as representations
(features), tuning these to the task at hand. We argue that AL
strategies for multi-layered neural models should focus on selecting instances that most affect the embedding space (i.e.,
induce discriminative word representations). This is in contrast to traditional AL approaches (e.g., entropy-based uncertainty sampling), which specify higher level objectives.
We propose a simple approach for sentence classiﬁcation
that selects instances containing words whose embeddings
are likely to be updated with the greatest magnitude, thereby
rapidly learning discriminative, task-speciﬁc embeddings.
We extend this approach to document classiﬁcation by jointly
considering: (1) the expected changes to the constituent word
representations; and (2) the model’s current overall uncertainty regarding the instance. The relative emphasis placed
on these criteria is governed by a stochastic process that favors selecting instances likely to improve representations at
the outset of learning, and then shifts toward general uncertainty sampling as AL progresses. Empirical results show that
our method outperforms baseline AL approaches on both sentence and document classiﬁcation tasks. We also show that, as
expected, the method quickly learns discriminative word embeddings. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
on AL addressing neural models for text classiﬁcation.

Introduction
In active learning (AL), the machine learning algorithm being trained is allowed to select the examples to be manually
annotated by the teacher (Settles 2010). The idea is that by
selecting training data cleverly, rather than at i.i.d. random,
better models can be learned with less effort, and thus at
lower cost. This approach is attractive in scenarios in which
labels are expensive but unlabeled data is plentiful.
There has been a wealth of work on AL approaches
for traditional machine learning methods in general (Settles 2010), and for text classiﬁcation in particular (Tong and
Koller 2002; McCallumzy and Nigamy 1998; Wallace et al.
2010). However, almost no work has considered AL for text
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3386

