Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Rethinking the Link Prediction
Problem in Signed Social Networks
Xiaoming Li, Hui Fang,∗ Jie Zhang
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
∗
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, China
{lixiaoming@ntu.edu.sg, fang.hui@mail.shufe.edu.cn, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg}

formation in signed networks. This framework, grounded on
both well-known theories and sound observations, can serve
as a leading guidance for research on the new problem.

Abstract
We rethink the link prediction problem in signed social networks by also considering “no-relation” as a future status of a
node pair, rather than simply distinguishing positive and negative links proposed in the literature. To understand the underlying mechanism of link formation in signed networks, we
propose a feature framework on the basis of a thorough exploration of potential features for the newly identiﬁed problem.
Grounded on the framework, we also design a trinary classiﬁcation model, and experimental results show that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.

Problem Statement
Formally, let G = (V, E P , E N , X) denote a signed social
network, where V is the node set; E P , E N are the positive and negative link sets respectively; X refers to the norelation set. Gt = (V, EtP , EtN , Xt ) denotes the snapshot of
the network at time t. Our research question is: Given a series of network snapshots G0 , G1 , ..., Gt , and any node pair
(i, j) where xij ∈ Xt , to predict the connection status of xij
P
N
at time t + 1 , which can belong to Et+1
, Et+1
or Xt+1 .

Introduction
The increasing interest in signed social networks has
brought great impact on many traditional research topics,
one of which is link prediction. Link prediction in unsigned
networks mainly aims to predict the future connection status
between two nodes (linked or not). But, connection status in
signed networks can be three situations: positive, negative or
no-relation, enlarging the difﬁculty of link prediction.
On the other hand, link sign prediction in signed networks
focuses on predicting signs of existing links (Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010), which is a binary classiﬁcation problem. In other words, it ignores the no-relation
status. However, most link prediction applications in signed
networks cannot be simply treated as sign prediction problem as aforementioned. For example, in voting prediction,
a user might vote a candidate entity as positive or negative,
but in most cases, the user will choose not to vote the entity.
Therefore, the existing methods that ignore the no-relation
status are not directly applicable. In addition, instead of predicting the future relationship status of any two nodes, these
approaches actually consider a static network as they assume
the existence of links with uncertain signs.
In this paper, we identify a relatively new research problem which takes an initial step to consider ‘no-relation’ as
a future dyad status for link prediction in signed networks.
Besides, we investigate the link prediction from the temporal dimension. We then propose a structured feature framework for the new problem on the basis of a thorough feature
analysis to reveal the underlying mechanism regarding link

Feature-based Link Prediction
We ﬁrst identify and combine the representative features to
discriminate the three link statuses, and further propose a
feature-based model to minimize the error between the predicted link status and the ground truth:

λ1
λ2
2
2
min
α,β

l(Sij , L(αf (ui , uj ) + βuij )) +

2

α2 +

2

β2

where Sij is the ground truth of link status. L(·) is the link
prediction function with the value of 1, -1 or 0, which represents positive, negative or no-relation respectively. In this
paper, the multinomial logistic regression model is adopted
as link prediction function. Variables mainly consist of two
parts: per-dyad side, uij is the feature set of dyad (i,j); pernode side, f (ui , uj ) is the function to leverage node-side
feature ui and uj . Loss function l(·,·) is user-speciﬁed and
application-depended. λ21 α22 and λ22 β22 are regularizers.
For link prediction in signed networks, an ideal feature
is expected to well distinguish the three link statuses, however, as indicated before, there is no previous feature study
considering the three statuses together. To ﬁll this gap, we
propose a feature framework for the new research problem,
aiming to serve as a guidance and elicit more related research. We not only adopt existing features in the previous
studies (Tang, Chang, and Liu 2014) on both unsigned and
signed network scenarios, but also derive new features based
on our analysis and observations. We then combine and summarize these features into six major categories, and both theoretically and experimentally explore the inﬂuence of each
category on link formation in signed networks, as follows.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4955

