Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Streaming Classiﬁcation with Emerging
New Class by Class Matrix Sketching∗
1

2

Xin Mu,1,2 Feida Zhu,3 Juan Du,3 Ee-Peng Lim,3 Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore, 178902
{mux, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {fdzhu, juandu, eplim}@smu.edu.sg
those problems are equivalent to one of the three tasks,
without addressing classiﬁcation or model update.

Abstract
Streaming classiﬁcation with emerging new class is an important problem of great research challenge and practical
value. In many real applications, the task often needs to handle large matrices issues such as textual data in the bag-ofwords model and large-scale image analysis. However, the
methodologies and approaches adopted by the existing solutions, most of which involve massive distance calculation,
have so far fallen short of successfully addressing a real-time
requested task. In this paper, the proposed method dynamically maintains two low-dimensional matrix sketches to 1)
detect emerging new classes; 2) classify known classes; and
3) update the model in the data stream. The update efﬁciency
is superior to the existing methods. The empirical evaluation shows the proposed method not only receives the comparable performance but also strengthens modelling on largescale data sets.

• In real-time streaming tasks, the solution should not only
increase classiﬁcation quality but also decrease computational cost when utilizing large-scale data. In the previous
works (Haque, Khan, and Baron 2016; Al-Khateeb et al.
2012; Masud et al. 2011), data with high dimension is
still a big issue when deploying in real-time application
because most of them are based on distance calculation or
tree structure.
• Concept drift is very common in the SENC problem, and
an efﬁcient updating strategy needs to be adopted in the
systems or algorithms to overcome this issue.
The matrix sketching approach is one way to model largescale matrix as low-dimension approximation, and has been
used in many data mining tasks such as textual data mining and large-scale image analysis (Achlioptas and McSherry 2007; Metwally, Agrawal, and El Abbadi 2006). In
particular, when the SENC problem meets large-scale data,
we should try to explore a low-dimensional space for data
analysis so that the model can be implemented on streaming
within limited time and space cost.
Based on the technique Frequent-Directions (Liberty
2013), which can produce low-dimensional matrix from
large-scale matrix approximations in streaming model, we
propose SENC-MaS, a framework for Streaming classiﬁcation with Emerging New Class emerging by class Matrix
Sketching modelling. The main idea is to maintain a lowdimensional structure dynamically in the long data stream
to approximate original information, and build the classiﬁer and the detector by using this structure. The proposed
framework contains two low-dimensional matrix sketches
for approximating original global and local information.
The former matrix sketching is produced on the whole data
set for new class detection, whereas the latter sketching is
built on each class as local information for classiﬁcation. We
conduct empirical studies on the benchmark data sets and a
real-world topic of news data set to validate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of our approach.
Our main contributions are (1) the proposed framework
is able to identify new class and classify known classes in
stream; (2) the model update is efﬁcient due to the lowdimension characteristic of class matrix sketching; and (3)

Introduction
The problem of classiﬁcation under Streaming Emerging
New Class (SENC), which aims to maintain the predictive
accuracy for identifying the novel class and the known class
in the stream, has recently been attracting an increasing
amount of attention and effort due to both the signiﬁcant
research challenges (Masud et al. 2011; Parker and Khan
2015; Haque, Khan, and Baron 2016) and the immense practical value (Abdallah et al. 2016). A common example in industry is the topic categorization in the news stream, where
a new topic of news may arise when a new event occurred.
There are three main challenges when we explore solutions for the SENC problem:
• The distinguishing challenge is that, under no instances
from new classes observed in the training set, the high
performance of three tasks including detection, classiﬁcation and update needs to be ensured simultaneously. It
is also different from traditional classiﬁcation problem
or novel class detection (or anomaly detection) because
∗

This research was supported by the NSFC (61333014,
61321491); the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s
Ofﬁce, Singapore under its International Research Centres in Singapore Funding Initiative and Pinnacle lab for analytics at Singapore Management University.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2373

