Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-View Clustering and Semi-Supervised
Classiﬁcation with Adaptive Neighbours
1

Feiping Nie,1 Guohao Cai,1 Xuelong Li2
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
2
Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{feipingnie@gmail.com, caiguohao1@gmail.com, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn}
data to accomplish some clustering work, but methods which
properly combine various views containing different fractional information will improve the clustering performance.
Recently, varieties of multi-view clustering algorithms have
been proposed. (Selee et al. 2007) introduced a new tensor
decomposition called Implicit Slice Canonical Decomposition (IMSCAND) in which each similarity matrix is stored
as a slice in a tensor. (Chaudhuri et al. 2009) proposed multiview clustering method via Canonical Correlation Analysis
(CCA), it computes two sets of variables and maximizes the
correlation between them in the embedded space. (Kumar,
Rai, and III 2011) proposed a co-regularized approach for
multi-view spectral clustering in which they co-regularize the
clustering hypotheses to make different graphs agree with
each other. (Cai et al. 2011) proposed multi-modal spectral
clustering (MMSC) algorithm to integrate heterogeneous image feature, it learns a commonly shared Laplacian matrix by
unifying different modals and add a non-negative relaxation
to improve the robustness of image clustering. (Li et al. 2015)
proposed a new large-scale multi-view spectral approach
(MVSC) based on bipartite graph. In general, graph-based
methods are pretty conspicuous for efﬁciency and excellent
clustering performance.

Abstract
Due to the efﬁciency of learning relationships and complex
structures hidden in data, graph-oriented methods have been
widely investigated and achieve promising performance in
multi-view learning. Generally, these learning algorithms construct informative graph for each view or fuse different views
to one graph, on which the following procedure are based.
However, in many real world dataset, original data always
contain noise and outlying entries that result in unreliable and
inaccurate graphs, which cannot be ameliorated in the previous methods. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view
learning model which performs clustering/semi-supervised
classiﬁcation and local structure learning simultaneously. The
obtained optimal graph can be partitioned into speciﬁc clusters directly. Moreover, our model can allocate ideal weight
for each view automatically without additional weight and
penalty parameters. An efﬁcient algorithm is proposed to optimize this model. Extensive experimental results on different
real-world datasets show that the proposed model outperforms
other state-of-the-art multi-view algorithms.

Introduction
In many real world applications, such as multi-camera surveillance system, abundant data collected from different views
are available. Usually each view captures partial information
but they together admit the same clustering structure. Nowadays, we have easier access to data that contain heterogeneous
features representing samples from different views in many
scientiﬁc ﬁelds, such as pattern recognition, computer vision,
genetics, data mining, etc. For example, in visual data, an
image could be represented by different descriptors, such as
SIFT (Lowe 2004), HOG (Dalal, Triggs, and Schmid 2006),
GIST (Oliva and Torralba 2001), LBP (Ojala, Pietikäinen,
and Mäenpää 2002); in ResearchIndex network, the keywords
of a speciﬁc paper and its citations can be regarded as two
separate views; in biological data, each human gene can be
measured by gene expression, Array-comparative genomic
hybridization (arrayCGH), Single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) and methylation.
Numerous clustering methods have been proposed in the
past decades, it might be satisfying for an individual view of

For multiple learning in semi-supervised learning, Cotraining (Blum and Mitchell 1998) is a representative
paradigm. It ﬁrstly trains two classiﬁers with labeled data,
and classiﬁes the unlabeled data separately. Next some predicted data that are of most conﬁdence are added to the other
classiﬁer’s training set, then the procedure repeats. (Tian and
Kuang 2010) proposed an alignment-based semi-supervised
learning model to classify gene expression data samples by
seeking an optimal alignment between different samples’
probe series. Under the manifold assumption, graph-based
methods trade labeled and unlabeled examples as vertices of a
graph and utilize edges to propagate information from labeled
ones to unlabeled ones. (Cai et al. 2013) introduced an adaptive multi-modal semi-supervised classiﬁcation (AMMSS)
algorithm which considers each type of feature as one modality, it learns a shared class indicator matrix and weights for
different modalities. (Karasuyama and Mamitsuka 2013) use
sparse weights to linearly combine different graphs to implement label propagation (SMGI).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2408

