Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SeqGAN: Sequence Generative
Adversarial Nets with Policy Gradient
Lantao Yu,† Weinan Zhang,†∗ Jun Wang,‡ Yong Yu†
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ‡ University College London
{yulantao,wnzhang,yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn, j.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

of sequence increases. To address this problem, (Bengio et al.
2015) proposed a training strategy called scheduled sampling
(SS), where the generative model is partially fed with its own
synthetic data as preﬁx (observed tokens) rather than the true
data when deciding the next token in the training stage. Nevertheless, (Huszár 2015) showed that SS is an inconsistent
training strategy and fails to address the problem fundamentally. Another possible solution of the training/inference discrepancy problem is to build the loss function on the entire
generated sequence instead of each transition. For instance,
in the application of machine translation, a task speciﬁc sequence score/loss, bilingual evaluation understudy (BLEU)
(Papineni et al. 2002), can be adopted to guide the sequence
generation. However, in many other practical applications,
such as poem generation (Zhang and Lapata 2014) and chatbot (Hingston 2009), a task speciﬁc loss may not be directly
available to score a generated sequence accurately.
General adversarial net (GAN) proposed by (Goodfellow
and others 2014) is a promising framework for alleviating the
above problem. Speciﬁcally, in GAN a discriminative net D
learns to distinguish whether a given data instance is real or
not, and a generative net G learns to confuse D by generating
high quality data. This approach has been successful and
been mostly applied in computer vision tasks of generating
samples of natural images (Denton et al. 2015).
Unfortunately, applying GAN to generating sequences has
two problems. Firstly, GAN is designed for generating realvalued, continuous data but has difﬁculties in directly generating sequences of discrete tokens, such as texts (Huszár 2015).
The reason is that in GANs, the generator starts with random
sampling ﬁrst and then a determistic transform, govermented
by the model parameters. As such, the gradient of the loss
from D w.r.t. the outputs by G is used to guide the generative model G (paramters) to slightly change the generated
value to make it more realistic. If the generated data is based
on discrete tokens, the “slight change” guidance from the
discriminative net makes little sense because there is probably no corresponding token for such slight change in the
limited dictionary space (Goodfellow 2016). Secondly, GAN
can only give the score/loss for an entire sequence when it
has been generated; for a partially generated sequence, it is
non-trivial to balance how good as it is now and the future
score as the entire sequence.
In this paper, to address the above two issues, we fol-

Abstract
As a new way of training generative models, Generative Adversarial Net (GAN) that uses a discriminative model to guide
the training of the generative model has enjoyed considerable
success in generating real-valued data. However, it has limitations when the goal is for generating sequences of discrete
tokens. A major reason lies in that the discrete outputs from the
generative model make it difﬁcult to pass the gradient update
from the discriminative model to the generative model. Also,
the discriminative model can only assess a complete sequence,
while for a partially generated sequence, it is non-trivial to
balance its current score and the future one once the entire
sequence has been generated. In this paper, we propose a sequence generation framework, called SeqGAN, to solve the
problems. Modeling the data generator as a stochastic policy in
reinforcement learning (RL), SeqGAN bypasses the generator
differentiation problem by directly performing gradient policy
update. The RL reward signal comes from the GAN discriminator judged on a complete sequence, and is passed back to
the intermediate state-action steps using Monte Carlo search.
Extensive experiments on synthetic data and real-world tasks
demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements over strong baselines.

Introduction
Generating sequential synthetic data that mimics the real one
is an important problem in unsupervised learning. Recently,
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with long short-term
memory (LSTM) cells (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
have shown excellent performance ranging from natural language generation to handwriting generation (Wen et al. 2015;
Graves 2013). The most common approach to training an
RNN is to maximize the log predictive likelihood of each
true token in the training sequence given the previous observed tokens (Salakhutdinov 2009). However, as argued in
(Bengio et al. 2015), the maximum likelihood approaches
suffer from so-called exposure bias in the inference stage:
the model generates a sequence iteratively and predicts next
token conditioned on its previously predicted ones that may
be never observed in the training data. Such a discrepancy between training and inference can incur accumulatively along
with the sequence and will become prominent as the length
∗

Weinan Zhang is the corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2852

