Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Landmark-Based Heuristics for Goal Recognition
Ramon Fraga Pereira,† Nir Oren,‡ Felipe Meneguzzi†
†Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
ramon.pereira@acad.pucrs.br
felipe.meneguzzi@pucrs.br
‡University of Aberdeen, United Kingdom
n.oren@abdn.ac.uk

every plan must satisfy (or execute) at some point in every
plan execution to achieve a goal. Although landmarks are
often used to build planning algorithms (Richter and Westphal 2010), our approach allows goal recognition heuristics
to rule out candidate goals whose landmarks are inconsistent
with the observations.
Our contribution is twofold. First, we develop a new
heuristic approach for goal recognition that obviates the
need to execute a planner multiple times (Ramı́rez and
Geffner 2009) yielding substantial runtime gains. Second,
we develop two goal recognition heuristics which exploit
landmarks. The ﬁrst of our heuristics estimates goal completion by considering the ratio between achieved and extracted landmarks of a candidate goal. The second heuristic
uses a landmark uniqueness value, representing the information value of the landmark for some speciﬁc candidate
goal when compared to landmarks for all candidate goals.
This latter heuristic then estimates which candidate goal is
correct by summing the uniqueness value of the achieved
landmarks from the observations. We empirically evaluate
our goal recognition heuristics against the current state-ofthe-art (2009) by using a dataset developed by Ramı́rez and
Geffner (2009; 2010), and a dataset we generated for other
planning domains with larger problems. We show that our
heuristics are substantially faster and more accurate than the
state-of-the-art for datasets that contain several domains and
problems where recognizing the intended goal is non-trivial.

Abstract
Automated planning can be used to efﬁciently recognize
goals and plans from partial or full observed action sequences. In this paper, we propose goal recognition heuristics
that rely on information from planning landmarks — facts or
actions that must occur if a plan is to achieve a goal when
starting from some initial state. We develop two such heuristics: the ﬁrst estimates goal completion by considering the
ratio between achieved and extracted landmarks of a candidate goal, while the second takes into account how unique
each landmark is among landmarks for all candidate goals.
We empirically evaluate these heuristics over both standard
goal/plan recognition problems, and a set of very large problems. We show that our heuristics can recognize goals more
accurately, and run orders of magnitude faster, than the current state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Goal recognition is the task of recognizing agents’ goals
from partial or full observed action sequences. Most goal
and plan recognition approaches (Avrahami-Zilberbrand and
Kaminka 2005; Geib and Goldman 2009; Mirsky et al.
2016) employ plan libraries to represent agent behavior
(i.e., a library that describes all plans for achieving goals),
and plan recognition techniques which use such libraries
are analogous to parsing. However, work that use classical
planning domain deﬁnitions to represent potential agent behavior bring goal and plan recognition closer to automated
planning (Ramı́rez and Geffner 2009; Ramı́rez and Geffner
2010; Pattison and Long 2010; Keren, Gal, and Karpas
2014; E.-Martı́n, R.-Moreno, and Smith 2015; Sohrabi, Riabov, and Udrea 2016; Pereira and Meneguzzi 2016). These
approaches — which do not use plan libraries — show that
automated planning techniques can be used to efﬁciently
recognize goals and plans. In many domains where goal and
plan recognition are important (e.g., smart environments,
user monitoring and crime detection), plan libraries may be
unavailable, making this second class of approaches important. In this paper, we propose two goal recognition heuristics based on planning techniques that rely on planning landmarks (Hoffmann, Porteous, and Sebastia 2004). In automated planning, landmarks are properties (or actions) that

2
2.1

Background

Planning

Planning is the problem of ﬁnding a sequence of actions
that achieves a goal from an initial state (Ghallab, Nau, and
Traverso 2004). A state is a ﬁnite set of facts that represent logical values according to some interpretation. Facts
can be either positive, or negated ground predicates. A predicate is denoted by an n-ary predicate symbol p applied to a
sequence of zero or more terms (τ1 , τ2 , ..., τn ). An operator is represented by a triple a = name(a), pre(a), eff (a)
where name(a) represents the description or signature of a;
pre(a) describes the preconditions of a — a set of facts or
predicates that must exist in the current state for a to be executed; eﬀ (a) = eﬀ (a)+ ∪ eﬀ (a)− represents the effects of
a, with eff (a)+ an add-list of positive facts or predicates, and

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3622

