Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Collective Multiagent Sequential Decision Making Under Uncertainty
Duc Thien Nguyen, Akshat Kumar, Hoong Chuin Lau
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{dtnguyen.2014,akshatkumar,hclau}@smu.edu.sg

them (Varakantham, Adulyasak, and Jaillet 2014; Sonu,
Chen, and Doshi 2015; Robbel, Oliehoek, and Kochenderfer
2016). Instead, interaction among agents is primarily inﬂuenced by the number of agents, similar to well known congestion games (Meyers and Schulz 2012). Planning in such
anonymous agent settings has many applications in urban
transportation (Varakantham et al. 2012).
To address such anonymous planning setting, our main
contribution is a new framework called collective decentralized Dec-MDPs (CDec-MDPs) for collective multiagent decision making under uncertainty, and developing a model
free sampling approach to optimize policies in this framework. Our framework is inﬂuenced by recent advances in
the graphical models literature for inference with aggregate
data such as collective graphical models (Sheldon and Dietterich 2011; Nguyen et al. 2016) and the notion of exchangeability (Niepert and Van den Broeck 2014) in lifted inference. We establish several basic properties of CDec-MDPs
such as its agent count based sufﬁcient statistic. As the
space of counts is combinatorial, optimizing policies over
counts is intractable. Therefore, we develop an inferencebased algorithm for planning in CDec-MDPs. However,
the standard planning-as-inference strategy where the planning problem is translated to that of inference in a graphical model suffers from poor convergence and local optima in our case (Toussaint, Harmeling, and Storkey 2006;
Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2015). Therefore, we develop a novel approach by combining the notion of ﬁctitious play from game theory (Meyers and Schulz 2012), exchangeable variable models from lifted inference (Niepert
and Van den Broeck 2014) and the inference based planning (Toussaint, Harmeling, and Storkey 2006). Furthermore, our approach is model free and requires only aggregated count-based samples from a simulator. Empirically, it
scales to a real world supply-demand taxi matching problem
with 8000 taxis, and provides signiﬁcant quality improvements over previous best approaches.
Related work: Recently, (Robbel, Oliehoek, and Kochenderfer 2016; Sonu, Chen, and Doshi 2015) also develop
models to exploit anonymity in multiagent planning. Their
model assumes a pre-deﬁned interaction graph among
agents, whereas interaction among agents in our model is
based on counts without any ﬁxed graph. In Sonu et al., a
plan is computed in interactive POMDP model for an in-

Abstract
Multiagent sequential decision making has seen rapid
progress with formal models such as decentralized MDPs
and POMDPs. However, scalability to large multiagent systems and applicability to real world problems remain limited. To address these challenges, we study multiagent planning problems where the collective behavior of a population
of agents affects the joint-reward and environment dynamics. Our work exploits recent advances in graphical models
for modeling and inference with a population of individuals such as collective graphical models and the notion of ﬁnite partial exchangeability in lifted inference. We develop
a collective decentralized MDP model where policies can be
computed based on counts of agents in different states. As
the policy search space over counts is combinatorial, we develop a sampling based framework that can compute open
and closed loop policies. Comparisons with previous best approaches on synthetic instances and a real world taxi dataset
modeling supply-demand matching show that our approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms them w.r.t.solution quality.

1

Introduction

Multiagent sequential decision making has seen rapid
progress with the development of formal models such as
decentralized MDPs and POMDPs (Bernstein et al. 2002).
Dec-(PO)MDPs capture planning problems where agents
act based on different partial information about the environment and about each other to maximize a global reward
function. Applications of Dec-POMDPs include coordinating planetary rovers (Becker et al. 2004), multi robot coordination (Amato et al. 2015), and improving throughput in
wireless networks (Pajarinen, Hottinen, and Peltonen 2014).
However, scalability of algorithms to large scale problems
has been limited due to high computational complexity.
To scale up Dec-(PO)MDP algorithms, several restricted class of models have been proposed with transition/observation independence (Nair et al. 2005; Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2011), event driven interactions (Becker, Zilberstein, and Lesser 2004), and weak coupling (Spaan and Melo 2008; Witwicki and Durfee 2010).
Recently, there is an increasing interest in settings where
the identity of agents does not affect interactions among
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3036

