Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Leukocyte Detection Technique in Blood Smear
Images Using Plant Growth Simulation Algorithm
Deblina Bhattacharjee, Anand Paul*
The Graduate School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea
deblina0210@knu.ac.kr, anand@knu.ac.kr*

experienced haematologists. As such highly labour intensive
routine procedures have an increased possibility of an intra
and inter-observer variability, new ways for cell analysis are
being formed using digital image processing techniques to
develop more reliable systems for disease diagnosis. In
addition to it, the cell differentials vary with respect to their
shape, features, contrast between cell boundaries and
background, positions and size which pose as further
challenges for leukocyte detection. As WBCs are quasicircular in shape, the problem of their detection in smear
images has been solved in context of a circle detection task
in this paper. Interestingly, detecting circular features in
medical images are extremely important with a broad scope
extending from blood cells to ovarian cells and liver cells
(Karkavitsas and Rangoussi 2007) and this problem has been
solved using PGSA in this article. PGSA having been
introduced in the year 2005 (Tong et al. 2005) has never been
applied to image processing techniques before. The PGSA
based circle detector randomly selects three points
representing the candidate circles on the edge pixel map of
the smear image. Upon validation of the existence of the
candidate solution on the edge map, a fitness function is used
to measure the resemblance between the candidates with the
actual WBCs. The set of candidate solutions evolve via
successive iteration of PGSA based on the values of the
fitness function such that they can fit into the actual WBC
on the image. The approach forms a subpixel detector that
can effectively identify leukocytes in real images. Thus, this
paper uses the highly efficient PGSA by proposing a new
leukocyte detector algorithm that optimally recognizes
leukocytes under varied complex conditions solved as a
circle detection problem.

Abstract
For quite some time, the analysis of leukocyte images has
drawn significant attention from the fields of medicine and
computer vision alike where various techniques have been
used to automate the manual analysis and classification of
such images. Analysing such samples manually for detecting
leukocytes is time-consuming and prone to error as the cells
have different morphological features. Therefore, in order to
automate and optimize the process, the nature-inspired Plant
Growth Simulation Algorithm (PGSA) has been applied in
this paper. An automated detection technique of white blood
cells embedded in obscured, stained and smeared images of
blood samples has been presented in this paper which is based
on a random bionic algorithm and makes use of a fitness
function that measures the similarity of the generated
candidate solution to an actual leukocyte. As the proposed
algorithm proceeds the set of candidate solutions evolves,
guaranteeing their fit with the actual leukocytes outlined in
the edge map of the image. The experimental results of the
stained images and the empirical results reported validate the
higher precision and sensitivity of the proposed method than
the existing methods. Further, the proposed method reduces
the feasible sets of candidate points in each iteration, thereby
decreasing the required run time of load flow, objective
function evaluation, thus reaching the goal state in minimum
time and within the desired constraints.

Introduction
Out of the numerous fields where nature-inspired methods
have been applied to solve pressing problems, medical
image processing is one such field where bionic methods
have been used invariably, especially focused on object
detection. In this paper, the problem of leukocyte detection
in blood smear images has been solved where the highly
efficient PGSA (Tong et al. 2005) has been applied for the
automated analysis and classification of white blood cell
(WBC) from such images. WBCs or leukocytes, hold
paramount significance in the diagnosis of a number of
diseases. However, performing the WBC tests and analysing
them manually is tough and requires highly skilled and

Background
As per the existing conventional method of Hough
Transform for circle detection in digital images (Muammar

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

17

