Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Checking the Consistency of Combined
Qualitative Constraint Networks
Quentin Cohen-Solal, Maroua Bouzid, Alexandre Niveau
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS, GREYC, 14000 Caen, France
{quentin.cohen-solal, maroua.bouzid, alexandre.niveau}@unicaen.fr

tial constraints are transformed by formalism change, scale
change, or temporal transition, respectively.
We study in particular consistency checking in the context of our framework; we focus on general results that are
common to the three kinds of combination, using a simple, well-known instance of a loose integration as a running
example. Speciﬁcally, we identify sufﬁcient conditions so
that the generalized algebraic closure can be used to check
the consistency of networks over some subclass – which is
therefore tractable. To sum up, we propose a framework for
representing knowledge, reasoning, and identifying tractable
fragments, in a uniﬁed way, for the three kinds of combination; however, for space reasons, this paper only applies it to
loose integrations and spatio-temporal sequences.
We begin by recalling concepts related to temporal and
spatial formalisms, then we give some background on combinations of formalisms, notably loose integrations and
spatio-temporal sequences. Section 3 introduces our framework and Section 4 establishes our tractability results, which
are then illustrated on the combination of size and topology.

Abstract
We study the problem of consistency checking for constraint
networks over combined qualitative formalisms. We propose
a framework which encompasses loose integrations and a
form of spatio-temporal reasoning. In particular, we identify
sufﬁcient conditions ensuring the polynomiality of consistency checking, and we use them to ﬁnd tractable subclasses.

1

Introduction

Temporal and spatial reasoning is omnipresent in our daily
lives. Computers can achieve them using quantitative approaches; however, for human-computer interaction, quantitative data is often unavailable or unnecessary. This is
why research has been carried out about qualitative approaches to temporal and spatial reasoning – such as the
interval algebra of Allen (1983) – not only in artiﬁcial
intelligence but also in geographical information systems,
databases, and multimedia (Chittaro and Montanari 2000;
Chen et al. 2015). Some recent research has focused on
the combination of qualitative approaches in order to increase their number of applications. One of the most popular combinations is loose integration (Wölﬂ and Westphal
2009). Spatio-temporal formalisms are other kinds of combinations (Ligozat 2013), allowing the processing of temporal sequences of spatial information (Westphal et al. 2013).
Multi-scale reasoning, the ability to reason at different levels of detail, is also a form of combination (Hobbs 1985;
Li and Nebel 2007; Cohen-Solal, Bouzid, and Niveau 2015).
This paper introduces a formal framework capturing the
common structure of loose integrations, multi-scale representations, and temporal sequences of spatial information;
all of these can indeed be seen as tuples of constraint networks having interdependencies. With loose integrations,
each network is based on a different formalism, whereas
with multi-scale and spatio-temporal representations all networks are based on the same formalism but hold on different
scales and different time periods, respectively. Moreover, in
each case, constraints in one network of the tuple can entail constraints between the same variables in the other networks. The entailed constraints correspond to how the ini-

2

Background and Related Work

Qualitative Temporal and Spatial Formalisms
In the context of qualitative temporal and spatial reasoning,
we are particularly interested in checking the consistency of
temporal or spatial descriptions, encoded by relations between spatial or temporal entities of a set U. Each relation is
a set of basic relations from a set B: this represents the uncertainty about the actual basic relation – e.g., x {<, =} y
means that either x < y or x = y. The set of all relations
forms a non-associative relation algebra A = 2B (Ligozat
2013, Ch. 11). Well-known algebras include the interval algebra of Allen (1983), but also the point algebra PA (Vilain, Kautz, and van Beek 1989), whose basic relations are
BPA = {<, =, >}, and the algebra RCC8 of topological relations (Randell, Cui, and Cohn 1992), whose basic relations
are described in Fig. 1. There are several operators over relations in A: inverse of a relation r, denoted by r̄, intersection of r1 and r2 , denoted by r1 ∩ r2 , and (weak) composition
of r1 and r2 (Renz and Ligozat 2005), denoted by r1  r2 .
These operators allow one to reason, by reducing the uncertainty about basic relations of entities: x r y ⇐⇒ y r̄ x;
x r1 y ∧ x r2 y ⇐⇒ x (r1 ∩ r2 ) y; and x r1 y ∧ y r2 z =⇒

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1084

