Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Towards User Personality Proﬁling from Multiple Social Networks
Kseniya Buraya,1 Aleksandr Farseev,2 Andrey Filchenkov,3 Tat-Seng Chua4
13

ITMO University
49 Kronverksky Pr., St. Petersburg, 197101, Russia, +78122329704
24
National University of Singapore
21 Lower Kent Ridge Rd, Singapore, 119077, +6565166666
Email: ksburaya@corp.ifmo.ru, farseev@u.nus.edu, aﬁlchenkov@corp.ifmo.ru, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

most social networks users use more than one social network in their daily life (Farseev et al. 2015a), it is reasonable to utilize multiple data sources and modalities to solve
personality proﬁling task.
There are several personality categorization schemes
adopted by the research community. One of the most widely
embraced typologies is called Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
(MBTI), that was proposed by Mayer and Briggs in 1985
and based on Carl Jung’s theory. The typology is designed
to exhibit psychological preferences on how people perceive the world around them and distinguishes 16 personality types. Meanwhile, it was also discovered that social media services exceedingly affect and reﬂect the way their users
communicate with the world and among themselves (Kaplan
and Haenlein 2010). Based on these observations, it follows
that MBTI categorization schema naturally ﬁts social media
research. Further, according to the previous studies (Farseev
et al. 2015b; Farseev and Chua 2017) and our ﬁndings, social media users reveal their personal attributes differently
in different social media platforms. For example, they may
post photos in photo-sharing services, such as Instagram, or
perform check-ins in location-based social networks, such
as Foursquare. All this data describes users from the 360◦
view and, thus, plays an essential role in social media-based
personality proﬁling.
However, personality proﬁling from multiple social networks is associated with the following challenges:

Abstract
The exponential growth of online social networks has inspired us to tackle the problem of individual user attributes
inference from the Big Data perspective. It is well known
that various social media networks exhibit different aspects of
user interactions, and thus represent users from diverse points
of view. In this preliminary study, we make the ﬁrst step towards solving the signiﬁcant problem of personality proﬁling from multiple social networks. Speciﬁcally, we tackle the
task of relationship prediction, which is closely related to our
desired problem. Experimental results show that the incorporation of multi-source data helps to achieve better prediction
performance as compared to single-source baselines.

User proﬁling plays an increasingly important role in many
application domains (Farseev, Samborskii, and Chua 2016).
One of the critical components of user proﬁling is personality proﬁling (Pennebaker, Mehl, and Niederhoffer 2003),
which seeks to identify one’s mental and emotional characteristics. Knowing these personal attributes can help to understand reasons behind one’s behaviour (Pennebaker, Mehl,
and Niederhoffer 2003), select suitable individuals for particular tasks (Song et al. 2015), and motivate people to undertake new challenges in their life. Up to now, there have
been several research attempts towards personality proﬁling. For example, some research groups have investigated
this problem from the social science point of view (Pennebaker, Mehl, and Niederhoffer 2003). However, most of
these works are descriptive in nature and rely on manual
data collection procedures, which explains the absence of
large-scale research in the ﬁeld. With the recent growth of
the Web, personality proﬁling can be approached by taking advantage of the abundance of data from online social
networks. For example, such data has been utilized by several studies and evaluations devoted to automatic personality
proﬁling, such as TwiSty (Verhoeven, Daelemans, and Plank
2016) or PAN (Rangel et al. 2015). Even though these studies made a signiﬁcant progress towards automatic personality proﬁling, most of them were carried out on data from a
single source (i.e. Twitter) or of a single modality (i.e. Text).
Such personality proﬁling may lead to a sub-optimal performance (Farseev and Chua 2017). Taking into account that

• Cross-source user identiﬁcation. Often, it is not possible
to identify multiple social networks accounts that belong
to the same person, while some users use a limited number
of social networks.
• Ground-truth collection. Not all online resources with
MBTI information about their users are approved by psychologists, while only a limited number of social networks posts is equipped with the references to trusted
MBTI proﬁling resources.
• Temporal changes of users’ personality. Users’ personality trends vary over time under the inﬂuence of different
life aspects and external factors, which requires additional
consideration during the data modeling process.
• Data source fusion. Effective fusion of multi-view data
from different sources in one model is a challenging problem (Song et al. 2015).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4909

