Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deterministic versus Probabilistic
Methods for Searching for an Evasive Target
Sara Bernardini

Maria Fox, Derek Long

Chiara Piacentini

Department of Computer Science
Royal Holloway, University of London
Egham, Surrey, UK, TW20 0EX
sara.bernardini@rhul.ac.uk

Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK, WC2R 2LS
ﬁrstname.lastname@kcl.ac.uk

Department of Mechanical
and Industrial Engineering
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada, ON M5S
chiara.piacentini@utoronto.ca

other using probabilistic reasoning tools. Probabilistic reasoning, and the Bayesian framework in particular, is traditionally used to guide the search process. Based on an initial
set of assumptions regarding the target’s behaviour, the observer starts exploring the area of operation (AoO). At regular intervals, as it gathers imperfect observations, it updates
its knowledge of the object’s likely location. As time passes,
it explores a larger portion of the AoO and its understanding
of the target’s position improves, but its resources decrease.
Optimising this trade-off is the goal of automated decision
making for search. Since search naturally lends itself to this
Bayesian formulation, several solutions within this framework have been attempted (Chung and Furukawa 2006;
Furukawa, Durrant-Whyte, and Lavis 2007; Lavis and Furukawa 2008). However, we have recently shown that a
Bayesian formulation of search can be compiled into a deterministic planning problem and solved with automated planning tools (Bernardini et al. 2016). If a few comparisons between different probabilistic approaches to search have been
already carried out (Chung and Burdick 2012), we are not
aware of any comparative analysis on alternative paradigms,
such as the deterministic and the probabilistic ones.

Abstract
Several advanced applications of autonomous aerial vehicles
in civilian and military contexts involve a searching agent
with imperfect sensors that seeks to locate a mobile target
in a given region. Effectively managing uncertainty is key to
solving the related search problem, which is why all methods devised so far hinge on a probabilistic formulation of the
problem and solve it through branch-and-bound algorithms,
Bayesian ﬁltering or POMDP solvers. In this paper, we consider a class of hard search tasks involving a target that exhibits an intentional evasive behaviour and moves over a large
geographical area, i.e., a target that is particularly difﬁcult
to track down and uncertain to locate. We show that, even
for such a complex problem, it is advantageous to compile
its probabilistic structure into a deterministic model and use
standard deterministic solvers to ﬁnd solutions. In particular,
we formulate the search problem for our uncooperative target both as a deterministic automated planning task and as a
constraint programming task and show that in both cases our
solution outperforms POMDPs methods.

1

Introduction

In a search mission, an aerial vehicle, the observer, wishes
to locate the position on the ground of an object, the target.
The search problem has been studied extensively for stationary targets or targets moving according to predicable external forces, such as currents and wind, both in the context
of operations research (Stone 1975; Benkoski, Monticino,
and Weisinger 1991) and that of robotics (He, Bachrach,
and Roy 2010; Furukawa et al. 2012; Ragi and Chong 2013;
Lin and Goodrich 2014). However, the problem of searching
for a target that moves according to its own intentions remains much less explored. We consider here the particularly
hard task of searching for a moving target that is uncooperative with the observer. We assume that the target moves
over a large geographical area that offers several opportunities for hiding, which will make it even more difﬁcult for the
observer to discover the target.
In this paper, we offer not only an efﬁcient solution for
large-scale search for evasive targets, but also a comparative analysis between two completely different approaches
to this problem: one exploiting deterministic solvers and the

To carry out this analysis, we adopt the following method
(Bernardini, Fox, and Long 2014; 2015). We discretise the
search problem in space and in time: we consider a grid laid
over the AoO and a set of equally spaced time points from
the start to the end of the mission. We make the observer use
standard search patterns (spirals and lawnmowers) to survey
the grid cells in the AoO. If, while executing patterns, the
observer ﬁnds the target, it abandons its search strategy and
starts tracking the target. In this context, the search problem
is reformulated as ﬁnding a sequence of patterns to execute,
S = (σ1 , . . . , σk̄ ), that maximises the probability of ﬁnding
the target. Extending our previous work (Bernardini et al.
2016), we carefully tailor a probabilistic model to capture
this problem. We then encode it in three different ways: (i)
as a POMDP; (ii) as an automated planning task; and (iii)
as a constraint programming (CP) task. While POMDPs are
generally regarded as the elective method for problems under uncertainty, planning and CP are powerful paradigms for
deterministic reasoning. When comparing the results, our
conclusions are twofold. On the one hand, we show that
POMDP solvers, considered to be inefﬁcient on large and
complex problems, can in fact deal with them when under-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3709

