Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Pareto Optimality in Social Distance Games
Alkida Balliu

Michele Flammini

Dennis Olivetti

Gran Sasso Science Institute, Italy.
alkida.balliu@gssi.infn.it

DISIM - University of L’Aquila
& Gran Sasso Science Institute, Italy.
michele.ﬂammini@univaq.it

Gran Sasso Science Institute, Italy.
dennis.olivetti@gssi.infn.it

to FHGs, called Social Distance Games (SDGs) (Brânzei
and Larson 2011). SDGs are a family of coalitional games
where the agent utility is measured in terms of closeness to
the other members of the coalition. They can be seen as an
extension of FHGs in which agents not directly connected
to an agent i in a given coalition still contribute to her utility according to a properly deﬁned measure proportional to
the inverse of their distances from i. More precisely, given
a social graph G where nodes are agents and edges express
preferences, the utility ofagent i in a given coalition P is de1
, where dP (i, j)
ﬁned as u(i, P ) = |P1 | vj ∈P \{vi } dP (i,j)
is the shortest path distance between i and j in the subgraph
of G induced by P . If i and j are disconnected in P , then
dP (i, j) = ∞. Thus, the utility of an agent is given by her
harmonic centrality divided by the size of the coalition, or
in other words by the average inverse distance from all the
other nodes in her coalition.
Stable solutions in general induce suboptimal outcomes.
In this respect, two measures of decrease of performance due
to Nash dynamics are well established in the research community: the Price of Anarchy (Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou 1999) and the Price of Stability (Correa, Schulz, and
Moses 2004; Anshelevich et al. 2008).
As far as Pareto stability is concerned, an analogous measure has been deﬁned in (Elkind, Fanelli, and Flammini
2016), called Price of Pareto Optimality (PPO for short),
which represents the ratio between the optimal social welfare and the social welfare of the worst Pareto optimal outcome of that game. While the PPO is the analogue of the
price of anarchy for Nash equilibria, a corresponding measure related to the price of stability is meaningless, since an
optimal solution is also Pareto optimal.
The various fundamental notions of stability such as core
stability, Nash stability, Pareto stability and individual stability have been already investigated in the context of HGs and
FHGs (Brandl, Brandt, and Strobel 2015; Aziz et al. 2015;
Suryapratim, Hideo, and Tayfun 2001; Bogomolnaia and
Jackson 2002; Brânzei and Larson 2009; Gairing and Savani
2010; Elkind, Fanelli, and Flammini 2016; Bilò et al. 2014;
Bilò et al. 2015).
Surprisingly, despite the privileged role of harmonic centrality with respect to the other centrality indices remarked
in (Boldi and Vigna 2014) which elects it as the best centrality measure, to the best of our knowledge SDGs have been

Abstract
We investigate Pareto stability in Social Distance Games,
that are coalition forming games in which agents utilities are
proportional to their harmonic centralities in the respective
coalitions, i.e., to the average inverse distance from the other
agents. Pareto optimal solutions have been already considered in the literature as outcomes arising from the strategic
interaction of the agents. In particular, they are stable under the deviation of the grand coalition, as they do not permit a simultaneous deviation by all the agents making all of
them weakly better off and some strictly better off. We ﬁrst
show that, while computing a Pareto stable solution maximizing the social√welfare is NP-hard in bounded degree graphs,
a 2min{Δ, n}-approximating one can be determined in
polynomial time, where n is the number of agents and Δ
the maximum node degree. We then determine asymptotically
tight bounds on the Price of Pareto Optimality for several
classes of social graphs arising from the following combinations: unbounded and bounded node degree, undirected and
directed edges, unweighted and weighted edges.

1

Introduction

Coalition forming games have been largely investigated in
the scientiﬁc literature (Drèze and Greenberg 1980; Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002; Elkind and Wooldridge 2009;
Olsen 2012). Hedonic games (HG) (Drèze and Greenberg 1980) are coalition forming games in which the outcomes are coalitions and agents have preferences over these
coalitions. HGs where agents are part of a social graph
and utilities depend on agents’ centralities have also been
studied (McSweeney, Mehrotra, and Oh 2012; Elkind and
Wooldridge 2009; Olsen 2012). Fractional Hedonic Games
(FHGs) are a subclass of HGs in which each agent’s utility
is her average value for the members of her coalition (Aziz,
Brandt, and Harrenstein 2014).
Two remarkable centrality measures considered in this
setting are degree and harmonic centrality. Among the various notions (degree, harmonic, closeness, betweenness,
eigenvector, . . . ), harmonic centrality has been identiﬁed as
one of the best indexes, as it is the unique one satisfying a set
of desirable properties (Boldi and Vigna 2014). Harmonic
centrality induces another important class of games related
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

349

