Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Building an End-to-End Spatial-Temporal
Convolutional Network for Video Super-Resolution
Jun Guo and Hongyang Chao
School of Data and Computer Science, and
SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People’s Republic of China

the mapping via simple interpolation, e.g., bicubic, and
Lanczos (Duchon 1979). Recent approaches are mostly
learning-based. Among them, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are well received. In the pioneer work of SRCNN (Dong et al. 2014), a 3-layer CNN was constructed to
learn the mapping end-to-end. VDSR (Kim, Kwon Lee, and
Mu Lee 2016a) further extended SRCNN to a much deeper
(20-layer) network, and has achieved the best performance
among single-frame approaches. Nevertheless, single-frame
approaches completely ignore valuable temporal information, whereas adjacent frames within a video usually share
similar contents. If an approach can correctly capture frame
variations over time, intuitively it can better reconstruct an
HR frame by utilizing details of its adjacent LR frames. In
consequence, single-frame approaches used to produce unsatisfactory results.
On the contrary, multi-frame approaches take the underlying relation of frames into account. Many previous
works (Katsaggelos, Molina, and Mateos 2007; Babacan,
Molina, and Katsaggelos 2011; Liu and Sun 2011; Ma et al.
2015) regularize the LR to HR mapping via motion-related
priors. For example, Babacan et al. (2011) reconstructed HR
videos subject to rotation and translation among LR frames.
Liu and Sun (2011) utilized a more complex motion form,
estimating optical ﬂow, noise level, and blur kernel simultaneously from LR data. DEL (Liao et al. 2015) realized that
accurately estimating motion by a single algorithm is difﬁcult. To resolve this issue, it employed various optical ﬂow
algorithms to generate HR candidates (called “drafts”) and
then learned a CNN to select the best draft. DEL runs much
faster, and has become the state-of-the-art multi-frame approach on VSR. Despite the success of DEL, we still ﬁnd
its limitations in three aspects: 1) The draft generation procedure is independent of the training of the CNN, so their
powers cannot be well combined; 2) Motion is only one kind
of temporal information. Other information like color variations is not well explored in DEL; 3) The CNN in DEL is
not deep enough (i.e., has only 4 layers), which limits its
capability of exploiting high-frequency redundancies.
To overcome these issues, in this paper, we propose a
deep Spatial-Temporal CNN (STCN) as an end-to-end mapping between LR and HR video frames. Our model consists of three components: a spatial component, a temporal
component, and a reconstruction component. Motivated by

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end deep network for video superresolution. Our network is composed of a spatial component
that encodes intra-frame visual patterns, a temporal component that discovers inter-frame relations, and a reconstruction
component that aggregates information to predict details. We
make the spatial component deep, so that it can better leverage spatial redundancies for rebuilding high-frequency structures. We organize the temporal component in a bidirectional
and multi-scale fashion, to better capture how frames change
across time. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is
highlighted on two datasets, where we observe substantial improvements relative to the state of the arts.

Introduction
Video Super-Resolution (VSR) is a classical problem in
computer vision. This problem targets at estimating highresolution (HR) frames from a low-resolution (LR) video
sequence. To date, as the popularity of high-resolution devices such as HDTV, there is great demand for converting
low-resolution sequences into high-quality high-resolution
sequences, so that they can be pleasantly viewed on those
devices. What’s more, various visual tasks (e.g., pedestrian
detection (Daniel Costea and Nedevschi 2016), action recognition (Alfaro, Mery, and Soto 2016), and video segmentation (Kundu, Vineet, and Koltun 2016)) largely rely on the
quality of input videos for high performance. As a result,
VSR has attracted more and more attention.
For VSR, an LR video is usually treated as a blurred,
down-sampled and noisy version of the corresponding HR
video. This task is highly ill-posed, as most high-frequency
information has been lost during the irreversible blurring
and down-sampling operations. Practical VSR approaches
assume that much high-frequency information is redundant
and thus may be reconstructed from LR videos. In general,
these approaches can be divided into two categories: singleframe approaches, and multi-frame approaches.
Single-frame approaches mainly come from the area
of image super-resolution. Given an LR video, these approaches process each video frame individually, mapping LR frames to the HR space and then concatenating them to form an HR sequence. Early works model
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4053

