Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Discrete Personalized Ranking for Fast
Collaborative Filtering from Implicit Feedback
Yan Zhang, Defu Lian,∗ Guowu Yang
Big Data Research Center, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
yixianqianzy@gmail.com, dove@uestc.edu.cn, guowu@uestc.edu.cn

goal of recommender systems, matrix factorization has been
equipped with ranking based objective functions, such as
WR-MF (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008), BPR-MF (Rendle
et al. 2009), CoﬁRank (Weimer et al. 2007), LA-LDA (Yin
et al. 2015) and ListCF (Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2010), to
directly generating a preference ranking of items for each
user. To extract top-k preferred items for each user, recommendation systems need compute users’ preference for all
items and rank them by preference descendingly. Thus recommendation of time complexity O(nmr + nm log k) is a
critical efﬁciency bottleneck.
Fortunately, hashing techniques, encoding real-valued
vectors into compact binary codes, could a promising approach to tackle this challenge, since inner product in this
case could be efﬁciently achieved by bit operations, i.e.,
Hamming distance. One can even use a fast and accurate indexing methods for ﬁnding approximate top-K preferred items with sublinear or logarithmic time complexity (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012; Muja and Lowe 2009).
Due to challenging discrete constraints, the learning of the
compact binary codes is generally NP-hard (Håstad 2001),
but can resort to a two-stage procedure (Liu et al. 2014b;
Zhou and Zha 2012; Zhang et al. 2014), which consists
of relaxed optimization via discarding the discrete constraints, and subsequent binary quantization. But according
to (Zhang et al. 2016), these two-stage approaches oversimplify original discrete optimization, resulting in a large
quantization loss, thus a principle hashing framework called
Discrete Collaborative Filtering was proposed for direct discrete optimization. Unfortunately, the objective function of
this framework is for rating prediction instead of for personalized item ranking, thus without aligning with the ultimate
goal of recommendation system.
To this end, we propose a learning-based hashing framework called Discrete Personalized Ranking, which directly
addresses the discrete optimization problem of personalized
ranking from implicit feedback. In particular, DPR replaces
user/item latent representation with binary codes and optimizes the objective – the Area Under ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristics) Curve (Rendle et al. 2009). The reason why targeting for implicit feedback is that personalized
ranking in this case is more challenging due to the necessity of comparing the preference of each user’s positivelypreferred items with others. Additionally, DPR imposes the

Abstract
Personalized ranking is usually considered as an ultimate goal
of recommendation systems, but it suffers from efﬁciency issues when making recommendations. To this end, we propose
a learning-based hashing framework called Discrete Personalized Ranking (DPR), to map users and items to a Hamming space, where user-item afﬁnity can be efﬁciently calculated via Hamming distance. Due to the existence of discrete constraints, it is possible to exploit a two-stage learning procedure for learning binary codes according to most
existing methods. This two-stage procedure consists of relaxed optimization by discarding discrete constraints and subsequent binary quantization. However, such a procedure has
been shown resulting in a large quantization loss, so that
longer binary codes would be required. To this end, DPR directly tackles the discrete optimization problem of personalized ranking. And the balance and un-correlation constraints
of binary codes are imposed to derive compact but informatics binary codes. Based on the evaluation on several datasets,
the proposed framework shows consistent superiority to the
competing baselines even though only using shorter binary
code.

Introduction
Recommender systems have been recently used in a growing
number of e-commerce websites for helping their customers
ﬁnd desirable products to purchase. The ultimate goal of
such systems is to present personalized ranking list for each
user. However, a growing scale of users and products renders todays’s recommendation much more challenging. Taking a Taobao user as an example, a recommendation system
should make fast response to recommend products from a
billion-scale collection by analyzing her browsing, purchasing and searching history.
Dimension reduction techniques such as matrix factorization has been shown to balance perfectly between accuracy
and efﬁciency in recommendation. Such matrix factorization
methods factorize a n × m user-item matrix to map both
users and items into a joint r-dimensional latent space. Then
users’ preference for items could be efﬁciently predicted
by inner product between them. To align with the ultimate
∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1669

