Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Word Embeddings with Convolutional
Feature Learning and Subword Information
Shaosheng Cao∗ and Wei Lu
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372
{shaosheng cao, luwei}@sutd.edu.sg

techniques to represent linguistic units and to capture contextual/structural information in word embedding learning.
Similar to previous work (Bian, Gao, and Liu 2014;
dos Santos and Zadrozny 2014; Chen et al. 2015; Cotterell
and Schütze 2015; Bojanowski et al. 2016), we integrate
the subword information in the ﬁrst feature layer in our
model training. In contrast, we improve upon the existing
literature by explicitly adding derivational and inﬂectional
morphology features to our subword feature layer. Different from popular approaches, e.g., continuous bag-of-words
and skipgram, that capture contextual information as a metaprediction task, we make use of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to capture the structural information of the
context words when learning the word embeddings.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach that focuses
on fusing fruitful subword information and learning convolutional features that improve the quality of word embeddings. We evaluate our approach on different word similarity
and word analogy tasks using standard benchmark datasets
and our model can outperform other state-of-the-art word
embedding learning methods.

Abstract
We present a novel approach to learning word embeddings by
exploring subword information (character n-gram, root/afﬁx
and inﬂections) and capturing the structural information of
their context with convolutional feature learning. Speciﬁcally,
we introduce a convolutional neural network architecture that
allows us to measure structural information of context words
and incorporate subword features conveying semantic, syntactic and morphological information related to the words.
To assess the effectiveness of our model, we conduct extensive experiments on the standard word similarity and word
analogy tasks. We showed improvements over existing stateof-the-art methods for learning word embeddings, including
skipgram, GloVe, char n-gram and DSSM.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, words are represented using count-based vectors in a sparse high dimension space where each word in
the vocabulary is represented by a single dimension. In contrast, word embeddings are low dimensional distributed representations of words in a real-valued vector space. Such
dense representations can be learned from data, and they
have proven to be effective in improving the performance on
many natural language processing (NLP) tasks, e.g., chunking, named entity recognition, and language modelling (Collobert and Weston 2008; Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010;
Socher et al. 2013). Thus the quest to ﬁnd robust word embedding is of particular interest in the NLP community.
Most existing approaches regard words as individual
atomic units when learning their embeddings. By doing so,
the resulting word embeddings lack linguistic information
that might be captured by the subword features. Subword
information, such as roots, afﬁxes, character n-grams and
inﬂections, typically conveys useful features that captures
derivational and/or inﬂectional morphological information
that can be exploited in the embedding learning process.
Additionally, important structural information such as word
order needs to be captured to enrich the syntactic properties of the resulting word embeddings (Ling et al. 2015). It
remains an active research topic in search of the effective

2. Related Work
In this section, we discuss related work on word embedding
learning and the applications of convolutional feature learning.

2.1 Word Embeddings
The task of learning word embeddings has received a signiﬁcant amount of interest recently. Bengio et al. (2006)
proposed a neural network-based language model which can
yield word embeddings. Improved approaches were later introduced to mitigate the high computational cost of neural language models (Morin and Bengio 2005; Mnih and
Hinton 2009). Mikolov et al. (2010) introduced a recurrent
neural network approach to learning word embeddings by
capturing long distance relationship among words. Subsequently, the skipgram model was introduced and has since
gained its popularity due to the open release of its implementation in the word2vec package1 (Mikolov et al. 2013a;
2013b). Thereafter, CWINDOW and Structured Skip-Ngram
were proposed as variant implementations of word2vec to

∗

Currently with AI Department, Ant Financial Services Group.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3144

The package also contains an alternative model called CBOW.

