Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Deep Learning Approach for Arabic
Caption Generation Using Roots-Words
Vasu Jindal
University of Texas at Dallas, Texas, USA
vasu.jindal@utdallas.edu

al. 2014), (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015), (Vinyals et al. 2015),
we map these fragments to a set of root words in Arabic
rather than actual words or sentences in English. We used
deep belief networks pre-trained by Restricted Boltzmann
Machines to select different root words associated with the
image fragments and extract the most appropriate words for
the image. A rank based approach is used to select the best
image-sentence pairing from other false image sentences
pairings. Finally, we use dependency tree relations to create sentence captions from the obtained words. Our main
contribution in this paper is three-fold:

Abstract
Automatic caption generation is a key research ﬁeld in the
machine learning community. However, most of the current
research is performed on English caption generation ignoring
other languages like Arabic and Persian. In this paper, we propose a novel technique leveraging the heavy inﬂuence of root
words in Arabic to automatically generate captions in Arabic. Fragments of the images are associated with root words
and deep belief network pre-trained using Restricted Boltzmann Machines are used to extract words associated with image. Finally, dependency tree relations are used to generate
sentence-captions by using the dependency on root words.
Our approach is robust and attains BLEU-1 score of 34.8.

• Mapping of image fragments onto root words in Arabic
rather than actual sentences or words/fragments of sentences as suggested in previously proposed approaches.

With the increase in number of devices with cameras, there
is a widespread interest in generating automatic captions
from images and videos. Generating image description have
huge impact in the ﬁelds of information retrieval, accessibility for the vision impaired, categorization of images
etc. Additionally, generation automatic descriptions of images can be used as a frame by frame approach to describe
videos and explain their context. Automatic generation of
image descriptions is a widely researched problem. However, most visual recognition models and approaches in this
ﬁelds are focused on Western languages, ignoring Semitic
and Middle-Eastern languages like Arabic, Hebrew, Urdu
and Persian. As discussed further in related works, almost
all major caption generation models have validated their approaches using English. This is primarily due to the signiﬁcant dialects between different forms of Arabic and the challenges in translating images to natural sounding sentences.
Arabic is ranked as the ﬁfth most native language among
the population. Furthermore, Arabic has tremendous impact
on the social and political aspects in the current community
and is listed as one of the six ofﬁcial languages of the United
Nations. Given the high inﬂuence of Arabic, it is necessary
for a robust approach to generate captions of images in Arabic.
In this paper, we propose a three-stage root word based for
generation of captions in Arabic for images. Brieﬂy, we ﬁrst
create fragments of images using a previously trained deep
neural network on ImageNet. However, unlike other published approaches for English caption generation (Socher et

• Finding most appropriate words for an image by choosing
set of vowels required to be added to the root words using
Deep Learning
• Using dependency tree relations of these obtained words
to ﬁnally form sentences in Arabic
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that
leverage root words dependency relation to generate captions in Arabic. We rely on previously published approaches
speciﬁcally ImageNet and Caffe on object detection to extract features from the images. For the purpose of clarity, we
use the term root-words throughout this paper to represent
the roots of an Arabic word.

Arabic Morphology
Arabic belongs to the family of Semitic languages and has
signiﬁcant morphological, syntactical and semantical differences from other languages. The base words of Arabic inﬂect to express eight main features. Verbs inﬂect for aspect,
mood, person and voice. Nouns and adjectives inﬂect for
case and state. Arabic morphology consists from a bare root
verb form that is trilateral, quadrilateral, or pentaliteral. The
derivational morphology can be lexeme = Root + Pattern or
inﬂection morphology (word = Lexeme + Features) where
features are noun speciﬁc, verb speciﬁc or single letter conjunctions. We leverage this critical aspect of Arabic morphology to generate the captions of image. For example, the
root meaning write has the form k-t-b. More words can be
formed using vowels and additional consonants in the root

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4941

