Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Predicting Demographics of High-Resolution
Geographies with Geotagged Tweets
Omar Montasser, Daniel Kifer
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16801
ovm5033@psu.edu, dkifer@cse.psu.edu
ple of people prepared by the U.S. Census Bureau, contains 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year moving average estimates of
demographics but with lower resolutions (county-level and
blockgroup-level) and higher error. Another important issue is that the administrative boundaries change every census, for example, the 2000 block-level boundaries are different from the 2010 block-level boundaries. This raises challenges for researchers who study populations over decades
because they need to crosswalk from one census to the next.
So, to compare 2000 demographics with 2010 demographics, they need to ﬁgure out how would the 2000 demographics look like using boundary deﬁnitions from 2010.

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting demographics of geographic units given geotagged Tweets that are
composed within these units. Traditional survey methods that
offer demographics estimates are usually limited in terms of
geographic resolution, geographic boundaries, and time intervals. Thus, it would be highly useful to develop computational methods that can complement traditional survey methods by offering demographics estimates at ﬁner geographic
resolutions, with ﬂexible geographic boundaries (i.e. not conﬁned to administrative boundaries), and at different time intervals. While prior work has focused on predicting demographics and health statistics at relatively coarse geographic
resolutions such as the county-level or state-level, we introduce an approach to predict demographics at ﬁner geographic
resolutions such as the blockgroup-level. For the task of predicting gender and race/ethnicity counts at the blockgrouplevel, an approach adapted from prior work to our problem
achieves an average correlation of 0.389 (gender) and 0.569
(race) on a held-out test dataset. Our approach outperforms
this prior approach with an average correlation of 0.671 (gender) and 0.692 (race).

1

Using geotagged Tweets to predict demographics of geographic units can be a complementary method to survey
collection methods as long as their bias can be corrected.
This would be a cheaper and faster approach to estimate demographics data at resolutions ﬁner than what traditional
sources offer. In addition, this approach is not conﬁned to
administrative geographic boundaries but can be adapted to
custom geographic boundaries. Also, it is more ﬂexible by
permitting collecting demographics data at different time intervals (e.g. 6 months).

Introduction

We present a method to predict demographics of highresolution geographic units using geotagged Tweets. The
main idea is to learn to predict demographics of a region
based on characteristics of Tweets in that region. An important aspect of our approach is that we do not require labeling of individual Tweets. To evaluate our method, we train
models to predict gender and race/ethnicity demographics
of Census predeﬁned geographies at different resolutions
(block, blockgroup, tract, and county) using 2010 Census
demographics data as ground truth. At the block-level, we
achieve an average correlation of 0.585 (gender) and 0.487
(race) on a held-out test dataset. We ﬁnd that our approach
signiﬁcantly improves upon the results of a competing approach adapted from prior work. We also ﬁnd that for 95%
of blocks, blockgroups, tracts, and counties with at least 100
Twitter users, the relative prediction error is at most 1.98,
1.15, 0.90, and 0.78 respectively.

Social media data has become increasingly important with
applications to many ﬁelds such as health (Culotta 2014a)
and sociolinguistics (Eisenstein et al. 2014). Furthermore,
social media has been used to complement traditional survey methods as a faster and cheaper approach to collect information and make predictions (Benton et al. 2016).
Collecting demographics data is usually a long and costly
process which limits the rate and resolution at which this
collection may be performed. The U.S. Census Bureau
releases a population census every 10 years with demographics data on multiple geographic resolutions (U.S. Census Bureau 2010). These geographic resolutions follow a hierarchy: each state is divided into counties, then each county
is divided into tracts, then each tract is divided into block
groups, and each block group is divided into blocks. The
census contains demographics data at the block-level and
moving up to the state-level. Also, The American Community Survey (ACS), which is a statistical survey of a sam-

We discuss related work in Section 2, we introduce necessary deﬁnitions, notations, and formally deﬁne the problem
in Section 3, we describe our approach in Section 4, and we
present experiments in Section 5.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1460

