Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Discover Multiple Novel Labels in
Multi-Instance Multi-Label Learning∗
1

2

Yue Zhu,1,2 Kai Ming Ting,3 Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
3
Federation University, Victoria 3842, Australia
{zhuy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, kaiming.ting@federation.edu.au
Pham et al. (2015) has proposed a probabilistic model
to identify novel instances in MIML setting. They have assumed that all novel instances have the same label. The
novel instances, however, may actually belong to different
labels. In many applications, a learned model is not only
required to detect novel instances, but also able to classify
these instances into one of the multiple novel labels. For
example, it is desirable to distinguish multiple new voices
in bird song recognition, which may correspond to different
birds which are the new arrivals in the area.
In this paper, we aim to discover multiple novel labels
in MIML learning, and propose a discriminative approach
called DMNL. The contributions of this paper are: (1) formalize the multiple novel labels discovering problem in MIML
learning; (2) propose the ﬁrst approach to effectively discover novel labels by formulating the problem as a nonnegative orthogonal constrained optimization, minimizing a
bag-level loss plus a clustering regularization; (3) propose
two new evaluation metrics for novel labels discovery.
In contrast to Pham et. al. (2015)’s probabilistic approach,
our discriminative approach has the following advantages:
(a) DMNL discovers multiple novel labels, rather than dealing
with one novel label only. (b) DMNL’s computational cost
increases linearly, rather than increasing exponentially w.r.t.
the number of bag labels.
There are two other lines of related works: (i) classincremental learning (Da, Yu, and Zhou 2014; Kuzborskij,
Orabona, and Caputo 2013) mainly focuses on one novel
class under a SISL setting; and (ii) MIML learning with
weak labels (Yang, Jiang, and Zhou 2013) tries to recover
the missing known labels for each bag. They could not be
applied to discover multiple novel labels in MIML learning,
where both known labels and novel labels must be modeled
simultaneously.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We provide the conceptual overview of the proposed approach, the
preliminaries, the problem formalization, the proposed approach, and the optimization method in the next ﬁve sections. Experimental results are presented before conclusion.

Abstract
Multi-instance multi-label learning (MIML) is a learning
paradigm where an object is represented by a bag of instances
and each bag is associated with multiple labels. Ordinary
MIML setting assumes a ﬁxed target label set. In real applications, multiple novel labels may exist outside this set, but
hidden in the training data and unknown to the MIML learner.
Existing MIML approaches are unable to discover the hidden novel labels, let alone predicting these labels in the previously unseen test data. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst
approach to discover multiple novel labels in MIML problem
using an efﬁcient augmented lagrangian optimization, which
has a bag-dependent loss term and a bag-independent clustering regularization term, enabling the known labels and multiple novel labels to be modeled simultaneously. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is validated in experiments.

Introduction
In traditional supervised learning, an object is represented
by a single instance associated with a single label (SISL). In
many real applications, however, an object can be simultaneously associated with multiple labels, whereas the object can
be described by multiple instances. An image in the image
classiﬁcation task, for example, can be divided into multiple
patches (as multiple instances); and the image can be tagged
with multiple semantic labels (Zhou and Zhang 2007). The
Multi-instance multi-label learning (MIML) framework has
been established to handle this kind of complex objects
(Zhou et al. 2012).
Many MIML approaches have been proposed recently
(Nguyen 2010; Zhang 2010; Briggs, Fern, and Raich 2012;
Huang, Gao, and Zhou 2014). Almost all of them assume
that all bags belong to a ﬁxed target label set. However, this
assumption is frequently violated. Some novel labels may
exist but hidden in training data, even though they do not
exist in the initial target label set for some reasons. It is important to build a model which can attune itself to novel labels (Zhou 2016): not only to identify them in the training
data, but enable the learned model to predict new objects
with these novel labels.

Conceptual Overview

∗

This research was supported by the NSFC (61333014) and the
111 Program (B14020).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In our work, we discover multiple novel labels in both
instance-level annotation and bag-level prediction tasks in
MIML setting. Speciﬁcally, we design a new discriminative

2977

