Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cascade Subspace Clustering∗
1

Xi Peng,1 Jiashi Feng,2 Jiwen Lu,3 Wei-Yun Yau,1 Zhang Yi4

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore; 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, P. R. China.
pangsaai@gmail.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg, lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn, wyyau@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, zhangyi@scu.edu.cn

seeks a low-dimensional subspace to ﬁt each group of data
points and separates these data in the projection space with
the following two steps: 1) learning low-dimensional representation for a given data set, and 2) clustering data based on
the representation. Through exploiting the low-dimensional
subspace structure, both the problem of dimensionality curse
and linear inseparability can be effectively alleviated.
During the past several years, most existing subspace
clustering methods focus on how to learn a good data representation that is beneﬁcial to discover the inherent clusters (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013; Liu et al. 2013; Feng et
al. 2014; Wang, Zhu, and Yuan 2014; Hu et al. 2014;
Peng, Yi, and Tang 2015; Xiao et al. 2015; Peng et al.
2016c). Like the standard spectral clustering (SC) (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001), those methods cluster data by: 1)
building an afﬁnity graph to describe the relationship among
data points. 2) using the graph as a prior to learn lowdimensional data representation, and 3) performing kmeans
on the obtained representation to obtain clustering results. In
fact, the ﬁrst two steps can be regarded as conducting manifold learning (Belkin and Niyogi 2003; Wang, Lin, and Yuan
2016) which preserves a similarity graph from input space
into a low-dimensional one.
Although those subspace clustering methods have shown
encouraging performance, we observe that they suffer from
the following limitations. First, most subspace clustering
methods learn data representation via shallow models which
may not capture the complex latent structure of big data.
Second, the methods require to access the whole data set
as the dictionary, and thus making difﬁculty in handling
large scale and dynamic data set. To solve these problems,
we believe that deep learning could be an effective solution
thanks to its outperforming representation learning capacity and fast inference speed. In fact, (Peng et al. 2016b;
Yang, Parikh, and Batra 2016; Xie, Girshick, and Farhadi
2016) have very recently proposed to learn representation
for clustering using deep neural networks. However, most
of them do not work in an end-to-end manner which however is generally believed to be the major factor for the success of deep learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013;
Lecun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015).
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end trainable
deep subspace clustering method, termed cascade subspace
clustering (CSC). Our basic idea comes from an assump-

Abstract
In this paper, we recast the subspace clustering as a veriﬁcation problem. Our idea comes from an assumption that
the distribution between a given sample x and cluster centers Ω is invariant to different distance metrics on the manifold, where each distribution is deﬁned as a probability map
(i.e. soft-assignment) between x and Ω. To verify this socalled invariance of distribution, we propose a deep learning based subspace clustering method which simultaneously
learns a compact representation using a neural network and
a clustering assignment by minimizing the discrepancy between pair-wise sample-centers distributions. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to reformulate clustering
as a veriﬁcation problem. Moreover, the proposed method is
also one of the ﬁrst several cascade clustering models which
jointly learn representation and clustering in end-to-end manner. Extensive experimental results show the effectiveness of
our algorithm comparing with 11 state-of-the-art clustering
approaches on four data sets regarding to four evaluation metrics.

Introduction
Data clustering is a popular unsupervised learning technique
to analyze unlabeled data (Jain, Murty, and Flynn 1999),
which aims to group a collection of samples into different
clusters by simultaneously minimizing inter-cluster similarity and maximizing intra-cluster similarity. Two challenging
problems in applying clustering in realistic data are the curse
of high-dimensionality and linear inseparability of the inherent clusters – which have attracted numerous researches
during the past several decades. These two problems are actually two sides of one coin. Speciﬁcally, many real-world
data such as images and documents are very high dimensional, which are generally believed to be separated better
within non-Euclidean space. In other words, it is difﬁcult to
separate these data using Euclidean distance based clustering approaches such as vanilla kmeans.
To cluster high-dimensional data, various methods have
been proposed (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2001; Zhao and Tang
2009; Yu et al. 2015), among which subspace clustering is
quite popular (Vidal 2011). Subspace clustering implicitly
∗

Corresponding Author: Zhang Yi.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2478

