Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Predicting Latent Narrative Mood
Using Audio and Physiologic Data
Tuka AlHanai and Mohammad Mahdi Ghassemi*
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139, USA
tuka@mit.edu, ghassemi@mit.edu

lot” may communicate gratitude, or anger, depending on the
tonality, pitch and intonation of the spoken delivery.
Given it’s importance for communication, the consequences of misreading emotional intent can be severe, particularly in high-stakes social situations such as salary negotiations or job interviews. For those afﬂicted by chronic
social disabilities such as Asberger’s syndrome, the inability to read subtle emotional ques can lead to a variety of
negative consequences, from social isolation to depression
(Müller, Schuler, and Yates 2008; Cameron and Robinson
2010). Machine-aided assessments of historic and real-time
interactions may help facilitate more effective communication for such individuals by allowing for long-term social
coaching and in-the-moment interventions.
In this paper, we present the ﬁrst steps toward the realization of such a system. We present a novel multi-modal
dataset containing audio, physiologic, and text transcriptions
from 31 narrative conversations. As far as we know, this
is the ﬁrst experimental set-up to include individuals engaged in natural dialogue with the particular combination
of signals we collected and processed: para-linguistic cues
from audio, linguistic features from text transcriptions (average postive/negative sentiment score), Electrocardiogram
(ECG), Photoplethysmogram (PPG), accelerometer, gyroscope, bio-impedance, electric tissue impedance, Galvanic
Skin Response (GSR), and skin temperature.
The emotional content of communication exists at multiple levels of resolution. For instance, the overall nature of
a story could be positive but it may still contain sad moments. Hence, we present two analyses in this paper. In the
ﬁrst analysis, we train a Neural Network (NN) to classify the
overall emotional nature of the subject’s historic narration.
In the second analysis, we train a NN to classify emotional
content, in real-time. We also show how the optimization of
network topology, and the placement of features within the
topology improves classiﬁcation performance.

Abstract
Inferring the latent emotive content of a narrative requires
consideration of para-linguistic cues (e.g. pitch), linguistic
content (e.g. vocabulary) and the physiological state of the
narrator (e.g. heart-rate). In this study we utilized a combination of auditory, text, and physiological signals to predict the
mood (happy or sad) of 31 narrations from subjects engaged
in personal story-telling.
We extracted 386 audio and 222 physiological features (using the Samsung Simband) from the data. A subset of 4 audio, 1 text, and 5 physiologic features were identiﬁed using
Sequential Forward Selection (SFS) for inclusion in a Neural
Network (NN). These features included subject movement,
cardiovascular activity, energy in speech, probability of voicing, and linguistic sentiment (i.e. negative or positive). We
explored the effects of introducing our selected features at
various layers of the NN and found that the location of these
features in the network topology had a signiﬁcant impact on
model performance.
To ensure the real-time utility of the model, classiﬁcation was performed over 5 second intervals. We evaluated
our model’s performance using leave-one-subject-out crossvalidation and compared the performance to 20 baseline models and a NN with all features included in the input layer.

Introduction
Human communication depends on a delicate interplay between the emotional intent of the speaker, and the linguistic content of their message. While linguistic content is delivered in words, emotional intent is often communicated
though additional modalities including facial expressions,
spoken intonation, and body gestures. Importantly, the same
message can take on a plurality of meanings, depending on
the emotional intent of the speaker. The phrase ”Thanks a
* Both authors contributed equally to this work. Tuka AlHanai
would like to acknowledge the Al-Nokhba Scholarship and the Abu
Dhabi Education Council for their support. Mohammad Ghassemi
would like to acknowledge the Salerno foundation, The NIH Neuroimaging Training Grant (NTP-T32 EB 001680), the Advanced
Neuroimaging Training Grant (AMNTPT90 DA 22759). The authors would also like to acknowledge Hao Shen for aiding with data
labeling, and Kushal Vora for arranging access to the Simbands.
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Literature Review
Cognitive scientists indicate that emotional states are
strongly associated with quantiﬁable physical correlates including the movement of facial muscles, vocal acoustics,
peripheral nervous system activity, and language use (Barrett, Lindquist, and Gendron 2007). The detection of a latent
emotional state by a machine agent is strongly inﬂuenced

948

