Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Collaborative User Clustering for Short Text Streams
Shangsong Liang† , Zhaochun Ren† , Emine Yilmaz† , and Evangelos Kanoulas‡
†

University College London, London, United Kingdom
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{shangsong.liang, zhaochun.ren, emine.yilmaz}@ucl.ac.uk, e.kanoulas@uva.nl
‡

by also utilizing each user’s collaborative information, i.e.
their friends’ posts, from which we can infer users’ collaborative interests for further improvement of the clustering.
Speciﬁcally, we propose a User Collaborative Interest
Tracking topic model, abbreviated as UCIT, for our collaborative user clustering. Our UCIT topic model is a dynamic multinomial Dirichlet mixture topic model that can
infer and track each user’s dynamic interests based not only
on the user’s posts but also his followees’ posts for user clustering. Traditional topic models such as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) and author topic
model (Rosen-Zvi et al. 2004a) have been widely used to
uncover topics of documents and users. These topic models
ignore collaborative information, do not work well as they
assume documents are long texts, or can not be directly applied in the context of short text streams as they assume the
documents are in static collections.
In our UCIT topic model, to alleviate the sparsity problem in short texts, and by following previous work (Yan et
al. 2013; 2015), we extract word-pairs in each short text, and
form a word-pair set for each user to explicitly capture word
co-occurrence patterns for the inference of users’ topic distributions. To track users’ dynamic interests, UCIT assumes
that users’ interests change over time and can be inferred by
integrating the interests at previous time periods with newly
observed data in the streams. To enhance the performance
of dynamic user clustering in streams, UCIT infers not only
a user’s but also his followees’ interests from the his own
posts and also his followees’ posts.
The contributions of the paper are threefold: (1) We propose a topic model that can collaboratively and dynamically
track each user’s and his followees’ interests. (2) We propose
a collapsed Gibbs sampling for the inference of our UCIT
topic model. (3) We provide a thorough analysis of UCIT
and of the impact of its key ingredients in user clustering,
and demonstrate its effectiveness compared to the state-ofthe-art algorithms.

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of user clustering in the
context of their published short text streams. Clustering users
by short text streams is more challenging than in the case of
long documents associated with them as it is difﬁcult to track
users’ dynamic interests in streaming sparse data. To obtain
better user clustering performance, we propose a user collaborative interest tracking model (UCIT) that aims at tracking
changes of each user’s dynamic topic distributions in collaboration with their followees’, based both on the content of
current short texts and the previously estimated distributions.
We evaluate our proposed method via a benchmark dataset
consisting of Twitter users and their tweets. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our proposed UCIT model
that integrates both users’ and their collaborative interests for
user clustering by short text streams.

Introduction
Popular microblogging platforms provide a light-weight,
easy form of communication that enables users to broadcast
and share information about their recent activities, opinions
and status via short texts (Kwak et al. 2010). A good understanding and clustering of users’ dynamic interests underlying their posts are critical for further design of applications
that cater for users of such platforms, such as time-aware
user recommendation (Arru, Gurini, and Gasparetti 2013)
and personalized microblog search (Vosecky, Leung, and Ng
2014). In this paper, we study the problem of collaborative
user clustering in the context of short text streams. Our goal
is to infer users’ and their collaborative topic distributions
over time and dynamically cluster users that share interests
in streams.
Most previous work (Chen et al. 2015; Xie et al. 2015) on
user clustering uses collections of static, long documents,
and hence makes the assumption that users’ interests do not
change over time. Recent work (Zhao et al. 2016) clusters
users in the context of short documents streams, however it
ignores any collaborative information, such as friends’ messages. Our hypothesis is that accounting for this information
is critical, especially for those users with limited activity, infrequent posts, and thus sparse information. In this work we
dynamically cluster users in the context of short documents,

Related Work
Topic models provide a suite of algorithms to discover
hidden thematic structure in a collection of documents. A
topic model takes a set of documents as input, and discovers a set of “latent topics”—recurring themes that are discussed in the collection—and the degree to which each doc-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3504

