Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Add Data into Business Process Veriﬁcation:
Bridging the Gap between Theory and Practice
Riccardo De Masellis,1 Chiara Di Francescomarino,1
Chiara Ghidini,1 Marco Montali,2 Sergio Tessaris2
1

2

FBK-IRST, Via Sommarive 18, 38050 Trento, Italy
Free University of Bozen–Bolzano, piazza Università, 1, 39100 Bozen-Bolzano, Italy

Abstract

oﬀer only basic features (such as Data Type checks) without
considering the interaction between control- and data-ﬂow,
or they fail to incorporate data into veriﬁcation questions,
thus producing misleading answers. This does not come as a
surprise as, when analyzing the evolution of data in a process
which interacts with the external world, unboundedly many
new, i.e., fresh, data values have (in general) to be considered,
making veriﬁcation of even simple properties undecidable.
On the theoretical side there is a signiﬁcant body of literature on the boundaries of decidability and complexity for the
veriﬁcation of data-aware processes against diﬀerent formal
properties. The problem of these frameworks is that either
they are far from the modeling languages used in real BPM
suites, and lacking any tool support, or the data model is not
adequate for expressive scenarios (See § 2 and § 7).
In this paper we aim at bridging the gap between theory and practice by providing a concrete framework, called
RAW-SYS (from: Relational-AWare SYStem) for modeling
and verifying data-aware processes as represented by well
established BPM suites. In particular we provide:
1. a language for modeling the control-ﬂow, the data and
their interaction based on the most popular, yet formal, frameworks for modeling these three components,
namely Petri Net (PN) (Van Der Aalst 1998), relational
models, and actions à la Data Centric Dynamic System
(DCDS) (Bagheri Hariri et al. 2013) (§ 4);
2. a reference architecture that mimics how data-aware processes are represented by well established BPM suites (§ 2)
and an encoding of such an architecture in RAW-SYS (§ 4);
3. a decidable, yet very expressive, customization of the reference architecture to enable formal veriﬁcation (§ 5);
4. an actual veriﬁcation mechanism based on an encoding
of RAW-SYS into an action language which allows for
exploiting automated planners (§ 6).

The need to extend business process languages with the capability to model complex data objects along with the control
ﬂow perspective has lead to signiﬁcant practical and theoretical advances in the ﬁeld of Business Process Modeling
(BPM). On the practical side, there are several suites for control ﬂow and data modeling; nonetheless, when it comes to
formal veriﬁcation, the data perspective is abstracted away due
to the intrinsic diﬃculty of handling unbounded data. On the
theoretical side, there is signiﬁcant literature providing decidability results for expressive data-aware processes. However,
they struggle to produce a concrete impact as being far from
real BPM architectures and, most of all, not providing actual
veriﬁcation tools. In this paper we aim at bridging such a gap:
we provide a concrete framework which, on the one hand,
being based on Petri Nets and relational models, is close to
the widely used BPM suites, and on the other is grounded on
solid formal basis which allow to perform formal veriﬁcation
tasks. Moreover, we show how to encode our framework in an
action language so as to perform reachability analysis using
virtually any state-of-the-art planner.

1

Introduction

The need to extend business processes with the capability to handle complex data objects has been increasingly recognized both in the BPM and AI areas and has
led to signiﬁcant practical and theoretical advances in the
BPM ﬁeld (Hull 2008; Meyer, Smirnov, and Weske 2011;
Reichert 2012; Calvanese, De Giacomo, and Montali 2013;
Hull and Motahari Nezhad 2016). On the practical side,
several well-established suites, capturing both the process
control-ﬂow and its relevant data, are nowadays available
as commercial and non-commercial tools. Examples are the
Bizagi BPM Suite, Bonita BPM, Camunda and YAWL. Despite diﬀerent modeling choices all such tools share a common feature: the way data are modiﬁed is often hidden
inside the logic of activities/tasks implemented, e.g., with
Java classes, hence resulting in an essentially activity-centric
model, where data are introduced in an ad-hoc way as a sort
of “procedural attachment” (Calvanese, De Giacomo, and
Montali 2013). As a consequence, when coming to the formal veriﬁcation of data related aspects, these tools either

2

Motivations and Architecture

Commercial and non-commercial BPM suites, such as
the ones listed in Table 1, nowadays support the modeling of both control and data ﬂow and provides consistency and veriﬁcation support. Focusing on the latter we can identify three diﬀerent levels at which control and data ﬂow are veriﬁed. We illustrate them with
the help of the following simple example where activity A is followed by an exclusive choice (xor-split) that

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1091

