Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Sparse Task Relations in Multi-Task Learning
Yu Zhang, Qiang Yang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zhangyu,qyang}@cse.ust.hk

to help learn model parameters. However, in real-world applications, such a priori information on task relations may be not
easy to obtain or even does not exist, bringing difﬁculties to
the wide use of such approaches. In recent years, many multitask methods are proposed to learn the task relations directly
from data. Usually the task relations appear in different forms
and hence different approaches are proposed to learn them.
For example, the multi-task feature learning method proposed
in (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2006) aims at learning a
common subset of features for all the tasks based on groupsparsity regularizers after some linear transformation on the
original feature representation, and the multi-task feature selection method (Obozinski, Taskar, and Jordan 2006) adopts
the same idea by learning the common features based on the
original feature representation. By assuming that the model
parameters of all the tasks share a low-rank subspace, Ando
and Zhang (Ando and Zhang 2005) directly learn the shared
subspace as well as the task-speciﬁc spanning coefﬁcients
under a non-convex formulation and then Chen et al. (Chen
et al. 2009) relax the non-convex formulation to a convex
one, which is easier to solve. With a similar idea to (Ando
and Zhang 2005), Pong et al. (Pong et al. 2010) use the trace
norm regularization to learn a low-rank parameter matrix
and then Han and Zhang (Han and Zhang 2016) extend it
to the capped trace norm penalty. The task clustering approach such as (Xue et al. 2007; Jacob, Bach, and Vert 2008;
Kang, Grauman, and Sha 2011; Jawanpuria and Nath 2012;
Han and Zhang 2015a) can detect the cluster structure among
tasks where tasks from a cluster are similar to each other
in terms of model parameters or feature representations. All
these methods in this approach can identify task clusters
but in different ways, including utilizing the Dirichlet process in (Xue et al. 2007), devising some regularizer inspired
by the k-means clustering in (Jacob, Bach, and Vert 2008),
integer programming in (Kang, Grauman, and Sha 2011),
group-sparsity regularizers in (Jawanpuria and Nath 2012;
Han and Zhang 2015a) and so on. Interestingly, Han and
Zhang (Han and Zhang 2015b) propose a method to learn
hierarchical structure among tasks based on sequential constraints. Moreover, several methods directly learn pairwise
relations among tasks, where the pairwise relations are represented by a covariance matrix (Bonilla, Chai, and Williams
2007; Zhang and Yeung 2010a; 2010b; Zhang and Schneider
2010) or just a square matrix (Zhang 2013). The task relations

Abstract
In multi-task learning, when the number of tasks is large, pairwise task relations exhibit sparse patterns since usually a task
cannot be helpful to all of the other tasks and moreover, sparse
task relations can reduce the risk of overﬁtting compared with
the dense ones. In this paper, we focus on learning sparse
task relations. Based on a regularization framework which
can learn task relations among multiple tasks, we propose a
SParse covAriance based mulTi-taSk (SPATS) model to learn
a sparse covariance by using the 1 regularization. The resulting objective function of the SPATS method is convex, which
allows us to devise an alternating method to solve it. Moreover,
some theoretical properties of the proposed model are studied.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (Caruana 1997; Baxter 1997), which is
inspired by human learning ability, aims to help improve the
generalization performance of several tasks simultaneously
by leveraging useful but hidden common knowledge among
them. Multi-task learning has many applications in various
areas, including data mining, computer vision, bioinformatics,
and health informatics.
A key issue in multi-task learning is to understand the
relations between tasks since this understanding can be incorporated into the learning process to improve the generalization performance of all the tasks. At the early stage, many
multi-task methods focus on utilizing a priori information on
the task relations. For example, based on the domain knowledge that all the tasks are similar to each other, Evgeniou and
Pontil (Evgeniou and Pontil 2004) extend the support vector
machine to the multi-task setting by proposing a regularizer
to enforce the model parameters of all the tasks to be close
to the average one and Evgeniou et al. (Evgeniou, Micchelli,
and Pontil 2005) as well as Kato et al. (Kato et al. 2007)
devise some Laplacian-based regularizers depending on the
given task similarity graphs to make the model parameters
corresponding to any pair of similar tasks close to each other.
Moreover, Han et al. (Han et al. 2014) utilize the given hierarchical structure among different tasks as a priori information
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2914

