Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Framework for Minimal Clustering
Modiﬁcation via Constraint Programming
Chia-Tung Kuo

S. S. Ravi

Thi-Bich-Hanh Dao

University of California, Davis
tomkuo@ucdavis.edu

University at Albany
sravi@albany.edu

University of Orleans
thi-bich-hanh.dao@univ-orleans.fr

Christel Vrain

Ian Davidson

University of Orleans
Christel.Vrain@univ-orleans.fr

University of California, Davis
davidson@cs.ucdavis.edu
and CANNOT-LINK, which cannot be used to balance cardinality of males/females and 2) there is no guarantee the
resultant clustering found will be similar to the original.
An alternative we explore in this paper is to start with the
initial clustering and minimally modify it whilst removing
the undesirable properties. Though in this work the initial
clustering is given by an algorithm, in practice it may be
generated from an existing solution to a clustering problem
or a set partition induced in any manner.
We can view this proposed work as being related to but
quite different to constrained clustering. Constrained clustering allows domain experts to inject human guidance into
clustering a priori before the clustering algorithm begins.
This work instead allows providing guidance a posteriori
after the clustering is found. This has the advantage of allowing feedback to be injected for any clustering algorithm.
In short, we provide a principled way to generate a new minimally modiﬁed clustering whilst retaining most of the original solution.

Abstract
Consider the situation where your favorite clustering algorithm applied to a data set returns a good clustering but there
are a few undesirable properties. One adhoc way to ﬁx this
is to re-run the clustering algorithm and hope to ﬁnd a better
variation. Instead, we propose to not run the algorithm again
but minimally modify the existing clustering to remove the
undesirable properties. We formulate the minimal clustering
modiﬁcation problem where we are given an initial clustering
produced from any algorithm. The clustering is then modiﬁed
to: i) remove the undesirable properties and ii) be minimally
different to the given clustering. We show the underlying feasibility sub-problem can be intractable and demonstrate the
ﬂexibility of our constraint programming formulation. We
empirically validate its usefulness through experiments on social network and medical imaging data sets.

Introduction
Consider the situation where you wish to cluster your egonetwork (those people you have a direct friendship link to)
into k groups and invite each group to a separate dinner
party. For each person you know their interests, location,
gender and age. After applying your favorite clustering algorithm you have k very cohesive clusters except perhaps the
range of ages for some cluster is too large or one cluster has
too many females compared to males. Heuristically trying
to move points from one cluster to another until a satisfactory result is found is not a viable approach as we show the
intractability of re-clustering data to reduce cluster diameter
(see Theorems (1) and (2)). Simply removing data points to
get desirable clusters undermines the intended use of clustering in the ﬁrst place. For example we can’t just leave out
some friends from the dinner parties. A more principled approach is to add constraints and reapply the clustering algorithm with the hope that the resultant clustering is similar to
the previous yet free of the undesirable properties. However,
this approach has several issues: 1) most constrained clustering algorithms (Basu, Davidson, and Wagstaff 2008) deal
with simple instance level constraints, such as MUST-LINK


 
 

 

 

 


 

 




 

Figure 1: A schematic workﬂow for our clustering modiﬁcation setting. The initial clustering Π can be produced in any
manner.
Our approach is as follows and shown in Figure 1. We
start with an initial clustering, Π, the output of any clustering
algorithm or any other process that produces a set partition;
this initial clustering has a corresponding clustering summary of properties S. Note this summary need not be with
respect to the features used in the clustering algorithm. For
example, in our experimental section we cluster Facebook
data based only on the friend-network topology and summarize it based on user proﬁle information. The user then modiﬁes S, leading to a modiﬁed summary S  . Our approach then
looks for a Π that satisﬁes the modiﬁed summary S  but is

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1389

