Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Selﬁsh Knapsack
Itai Feigenbaum and Matthew P. Johnson
Lehman College and the Graduate Center, City University of New York

1, 12 and 12 respectively. If the agents report truthfully, the
mechanism chooses {b, c} as the solution; however, if agent
1 hides item b and reports her set of items to be {a}, the chosen solution becomes {a}, increasing agent 1’s utility from
3
3
4 to 1 while decreasing social welfare from 2 to 1.
To incentivize truthful reporting, we look for strategyproof (SP) mechanisms, where truth-telling is a dominant strategy equilibrium (no agent can beneﬁt from misreporting). As Example 1 suggests, such mechanisms cannot always achieve optimality, so we seek mechanisms that
approximate optimality well. Speciﬁcally, we try to design
SP mechanisms with small worst-case approximation ratios.
A mechanism is α-approximate if it provides, on every instance, social welfare value of at least α1 times the optimal
welfare, as long as the agents are truthful; the worst-case approximation ratio of a mechanism is the smallest such α.1
While we aspire to design SP mechanisms, we note that one
of our mechanisms actually fails to be SP, giving agents an
incentive to misreport. Nevertheless, as long as agents’ (usually non-truthful) reports follow a Bayes-Nash equilibrium
(BNE) or a coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE), our mechanism still generates a high fraction of the optimal welfare
on every instance.
We emphasize that agents can misreport the existence of
items, but not their properties—their size and value; that is,
the planner has the power to verify the size and value of
the reported items. One example of such a scenario is the
allocation of a scientiﬁc resource, like time on a particle
accelerator or NSF funding. Scientists submit research proposals, each requesting a certain amount of resource, which
would provide a certain expected scientiﬁc value. This expected scientiﬁc value is evaluated/conﬁrmed by an impartial expert. Since scientists can avoid submitting some of
their proposals, the problem of choosing which proposals to
accept in order to maximize total expected scientiﬁc value
falls within our model.2 Another example is the allocation
of advertising time on a video-sharing website, using a sim-

Abstract
We consider a strategic variant of the knapsack problem:
the items are owned by agents, and agents can misrepresent their sets of items—either by hiding items (understating), or by reporting fake ones (overstating). Each agent’s
utility equals the total value of her items included in the knapsack. We wish to maximize social welfare, and attempt to design mechanisms that lead to small worst-case approximation ratios at equilibrium. We provide a randomized mechanism with attractive strategic properties: it has a price of anarchy of 2 for Bayes-Nash and coarse correlated equilibria. For
overstating-only agents, it becomes strategyproof, and has a
matching lower bound. For the case of two understating-only
agents,
we provide a specialized randomized strategyproof
√
5+4 2
≈
1.522-approximate mechanism, and a lower bound
7√
of 5 25−9 ≈ 1.09. When all agents but one are honest,
√
we provide a deterministic strategyproof 1+2 5 ≈ 1.618approximate mechanism with a matching lower bound. The
latter two mechanisms are also useful in problems beyond the
one in consideration.

1

Introduction

We study a strategic variant of the knapsack problem, in
which there are n agents, each owning a set of items, where
each item has a value and size. A social planner must design
a mechanism to choose which items to include in a knapsack
of a certain capacity, where the total size of the chosen items
cannot exceed the capacity. Each agent gets a utility equal
to the total value of her own items included in the knapsack,
while the designer wishes to maximize social welfare (the
sum of the utilities of the agents, which amounts to the total value of the items in the knapsack). However, the set of
items each agent owns is private information, and an agent
may choose not to disclose all of her items (may report any
subset of them). We call this the understating model (UM).
Revealing all items might not be in an agent’s best interest:
Example 1. Assume the knapsack’s capacity is 1. Consider
a mechanism which always chooses an optimal (social welfare maximizing) solution based on the reported items. Assume agent 1’s true item set is {a, b} and agent 2’s true item
set is {c}, where a, b and c have values 1, 34 and 34 and sizes

1
The optimal welfare on an instance is the value of an optimal
solution of the knapsack problem deﬁned by the agents’ true sets
of items.
2
We assume that scientists are not allowed to make partial use
of the resource allocated to an accepted proposal: they cannot use
a fraction of the resource and produce a corresponding fraction of
the value.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

509

