Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Cornhole: A Widely-Accessible AI Robotics Task
Nate Derbinsky

Tyler M. Frasca

Wentworth Institute of Technology
550 Huntington Ave
Boston, MA 02115

Tufts University
419 Boston Avenue
Medford, MA 02155

Abstract

 
 


In this paper we present the game of cornhole as a compelling, accessible, and adaptable AI robotics task. Cornhole
is a fun and social game with simple rules, but involves strategy and physical training for humans to play competitively;
thus, developing a robot that can play at the level of even the
average human player presents a multitude of opportunities
for curricular integration at a variety of levels. We characterize the AI tasks involved with the game, and present results
and resources gained from preliminary offerings.

 
 



 
 


 
 




Cornhole1 is a game in which players take turns throwing
bean bags at angled platforms, each with a hole (e.g. see
Figure 1). Though typically a casual social game, competitive cornhole has also been gaining traction – for example, ESPN covered the American Cornhole Organization’s
World Championships of Cornhole (2015). Despite this attention, to our knowledge, no one has attempted to build a
robot that can play the game, and so we see cornhole as an
exciting, yet accessible, AI robotics task for undergraduate
education with a diverse and adaptable set of challenges.

Figure 2: Court layout, viewed from above; the right board
includes an example game state (foul bags not shown).

Rules of the Game
According to the American Cornhole Organization (ACO;
2016), the game can be played by 2 players (1 per team,
“singles”) or 4 players (2 per team, “doubles”). Once each
player on a side of the court (see Figure 2) has pitched all
(4) of their bags, the “frame” has ended and scoring commences: each bag that remains on the board (a “woody”)
gains 1 point, each bag that passes through the cornhole
board hole at anytime within the frame (a “cornhole”) gains
3 points, and any other bags (each a “foul”) do not affect the
score. It is important to note that while pitching, it is possible for one player to [un]intentionally cause a prior bag
in the frame, from either team, to transition between states
(e.g. an aggressive player could knock another player’s bag
off the board) – this is why scoring must wait till the end of
a frame. Typically “cancellation” scoring is used: the points
of one player cancel out the points of their opponent, and so
up to one team can score per frame. For example, consider
the state illustrated on the right board of Figure 2: Red earns
one (1) woody and one (1) cornhole, while Blue earns two
(2) woodies and zero (0) cornholes, and so 4 points - 2 points
= 2 points are awarded to Red for that frame. If playing singles, the players switch court sides and repeat; in doubles,
the other two players then toss from the opposite board. The
game ends when a team’s score reaches or exceeds 21 points.

Figure 1: Example play, one player “pitches” a bag at a time.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Depending upon the region, the sport may be known by a variety of names, including dummy boards, [bean] bag toss, dadhole,
doghouse, Baggo, or Bags.

4771

