Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

When and Why Are Deep Networks Better than Shallow Ones?
1

2

Hrushikesh Mhaskar,1,2 Qianli Liao,3 Tomaso Poggio3

Department of Mathematics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125
Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, CA, 91711
3
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines, McGovern Institute for Brain Research
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139

• We show that the approximation of functions with a
compositional structure – such as f (x1 , · · · , xd ) =
h1 (h2 · · · (hj (hi1 (x1 , x2 ), hi2 (x3 , x4 )), · · · )) – can be
achieved with the same degree of accuracy by deep and
shallow networks but that the number of parameters, the
VC-dimension and the fat-shattering dimension are much
smaller for the deep networks than for the shallow network with equivalent approximation accuracy. It is intuitive that a hierarchical network matching the structure of
a compositional function should be “better” at approximating it than a generic shallow network but universality
of shallow networks asks for the non-obvious characterization of “better”. Our result makes clear that the intuition is indeed correct and provides a formal framework
and quantitative bounds. From the point of view of machine learning shallow networks cannot exploit the prior
of compositionality and the much smaller associated complexity. From the point of view of approximation theory
see (Poggio et al. 2016) for references on lower bounds.

Abstract
While the universal approximation property holds both for hierarchical and shallow networks, deep networks can approximate the class of compositional functions as well as shallow
networks but with exponentially lower number of training parameters and sample complexity. Compositional functions are
obtained as a hierarchy of local constituent functions, where
“local functions” are functions with low dimensionality. This
theorem proves an old conjecture by Bengio on the role of
depth in networks, characterizing precisely the conditions under which it holds. It also suggests possible answers to the
the puzzle of why high-dimensional deep networks trained
on large training sets often do not seem to show overﬁt.

1

Introduction

Here are three main open questions about Deep Neural Networks. The ﬁrst question is about the power of the architecture – which classes of functions can it approximate well?
The second question is about generalization capability: why
large deep networks trained with SGD often appear to be immune to overﬁtting? The third question is about learning the
unknown coefﬁcients from the data: why is SGD so unreasonably efﬁcient, at least in appearance? Are good minima
easier to ﬁnd in deep rather than in shallow networks? In this
paper we describe a set of approximation theory results that
include an answer to why and when deep networks are better than shallow – the ﬁrst question – and suggest a possible
answer to the second one. We formulate our results by using the idealized model of a deep network as a binary tree.
As we discuss here our main results described for the binary
tree model also apply (apart from different constants) to the
very deep convolutional networks of the ResNet type which
have only a few stages of pooling and subsampling.
This paper compares shallow (one-hidden layer) networks
with deep networks (see for example Figure 1). Both types
of networks use the same small set of operations – dot products, linear combinations, a ﬁxed nonlinear function of one
variable, possibly convolution and pooling. The logic of the
paper is as follows.
• Both shallow (a) and deep (b) networks are universal, that
is they can approximate arbitrarily well any continuous
function of d variables on a compact domain.

• The most interesting deep networks to which our results
apply are the deep convolutional networks. Interestingly,
the weight sharing property though helpful is not the key
property: locality of the functions approximated at each
stage is key.
• Why do compositional functions appear in so many problems in vision, text and speech? We argue that the basic
properties of locality at different scales and shift invariance in many natural signals such as images and text implies that many (but not all) tasks on such inputs can be
solved by compositional algorithms. Of course, there are
many signals or problems that cannot be solved by shift
invariant, scalable algorithms. Thus for the many problems that are not compositional we do not expect any advantage of deep convolutional networks.

2

Previous work

The success of Deep Learning poses again an old theory
question: why are multi-layer networks better than onehidden-layer networks? Under which conditions? The question is relevant in several related ﬁelds from machine learning to function approximation and has appeared many times
before.
Most Deep Learning references these days start with

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2343

