Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Safe Prediction
for Semi-Supervised Regression∗
Yu-Feng Li, Han-Wen Zha, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{liyf,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn; zhahw12@gmail.com

Priebe 2011; Li et al. 2013). It is highly desirable to study
safe SSL scheme that on one side could often improve performance, on the other side will not hurt performance, since
the users of SSL wont expect that SSL with the usage of
more data performs worse than certain direct supervised
learning with only labeled data. Recently several proposals (Li and Zhou 2005; 2015; Balsubramani and Freund
2015; Krijthe and Loog 2015; Li, Kwok, and Zhou 2016;
Li, Wang, and Zhou 2016) have been developed to alleviate
such a fundamental challenge for semi-supervised classiﬁcation (SSC), while the efforts on semi-supervised regression
(SSR) remain to be limited.
In this work we consider the question of how to learn
a safe prediction from multiple semi-supervised regressors.
To our knowledge, such a question has not been thoroughly
studied. Speciﬁcally, let {f1 , . . . , fb } be multiple SSR predictions and f0 be the prediction of certain direct supervised
learner, where fi ∈ Ru , i = 0, . . . , b; b and u refer to the
number of regressors and unlabeled instances. How to derive a ﬁnal prediction g(f1 , . . . , fb , f0 ), such that for regression measurement g(f1 , . . . , fb , f0 ) could often be better than
f0 , meanwhile it would not be worse than f0 .
We present a S AFER (SAFE semi-supervised Regression)
method. Without domain knowledge about the reliabilities
of learners, S AFER proposes to maximize the performance
gain of g(f1 , . . . , fb , f0 ) against f0 assuming that the weights
of SSR learners are from a convex set. This is formulated as a saddle-point convex-concave optimization (Nesterov 2013). In order to alleviate the computational overhead
and to understand how the proposal works, we represent safe
SSR problem as a geometric projection issue, which brings
two prominent advantages. i) The resultant new formulation is a simple convex quadratic program and much easier
to solve. ii) One can show that S AFER is provably safe and
have already achieved the maximal performance gain, if the
ground-truth label assignment is realized by a convex linear
combination of base SSR learners, which provides insight to
help understand safe SSR. Experimental results on a broad
range of datasets validate that S AFER clearly improves safeness of SSR, in addition obtains highly comparable performance with state-of-the-art approaches.
In the following, we ﬁrst review several related works and
then present the S AFER method. Next we show the experiment. Finally we conclude this paper.

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) concerns how to improve
performance via the usage of unlabeled data. Recent studies
indicate that the usage of unlabeled data might even deteriorate performance. Although some proposals have been developed to alleviate such a fundamental challenge for semisupervised classiﬁcation, the efforts on semi-supervised regression (SSR) remain to be limited. In this work we consider the learning of a safe prediction from multiple semisupervised regressors, which is not worse than a direct supervised learner with only labeled data. We cast it as a geometric projection issue with an efﬁcient algorithm. Furthermore,
we show that the proposal is provably safe and has already
achieved the maximal performance gain, if the ground-truth
label assignment is realized by a convex linear combination
of base regressors. This provides insight to help understand
safe SSR. Experimental results on a broad range of datasets
validate the effectiveness of our proposal.

Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) concerns the problem on
how to improve learning performance via the usage of additional unlabeled data. Such a learning framework has received a great deal of attention owing to immense demands
in real-world applications from medical diagnosis to intrusion detection (Zhu and Goldberg 2009). Many SSL methods have been developed, e.g., generative model (Miller and
Uyar 1997; Nigam et al. 2000), graph-based method (Blum
and Chawla 2001; Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003;
Zhou et al. 2004), disagreement-based method (Blum and
Mitchell 1998; Zhou and Li 2010) and semi-supervised
SVMs (Bennett and Demiriz 1999; Joachims 1999).
Despite the success of SSL, however, a considerable
amount of empirical studies reveal that SSL with the exploitation of unlabeled data might even deteriorate learning performance (Cozman, Cohen, and Cirelo 2002; Chawla
and Karakoulas 2005; Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2006;
Zhu and Goldberg 2009; Balcan and Blum 2010; Yang and
∗

This research was supported by the NSFC (61333014, 6140
3186), JiangsuSF (BK20140613), MSRA research fund and 863
Program (2015AA015406).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2217

