Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Linearization of Belief Propagation
on Pairwise Markov Random Fields
Wolfgang Gatterbauer
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213

Willsky 2006; Su and Wu 2015; Weiss and Freeman 2001).
Semi-supervised node classiﬁcation. BP is also a versatile formalism for semi-supervised learning; i.e., assigning classes to unlabeled nodes while maximizing the number of correctly labeled nodes (Koller and Friedman 2009,
ch. 4). The goal is to predict the most probable class for
each node in a network independently, which corresponds
to the Maximum Marginal (MM) assignment (Domke 2013;
Weiss 2000). Let P be a probability distribution over a set
of random variables X ∪ Y. MM-inference (or “MM decoding”) searches for the most probable assignment yi for each
unlabeled node Yi independently, given evidence X = x:

Abstract
Belief Propagation (BP) is a widely used approximation for
exact probabilistic inference in graphical models, such as
Markov Random Fields (MRFs). In graphs with cycles, however, no exact convergence guarantees for BP are known, in
general. For the case when all edges in the MRF carry the
same symmetric, doubly stochastic potential, recent works
have proposed to approximate BP by linearizing the update
equations around default values, which was shown to work
well for the problem of node classiﬁcation. The present paper
generalizes all prior work and derives an approach that approximates loopy BP on any pairwise MRF with the problem
of solving a linear equation system. This approach combines
exact convergence guarantees and a fast matrix implementation with the ability to model heterogenous networks. Experiments on synthetic graphs with planted edge potentials show
that the linearization has comparable labeling accuracy as BP
for graphs with weak potentials, while speeding-up inference
by orders of magnitude.

1

MM(y|x) = {arg max P(Yi = yi |X = x)|Yi ∈ Y}
yi

Notice that this problem is simpler than ﬁnding the actual
marginal distribution. It is also different from ﬁnding the
Maximum A-Posteriori (MAP) assignment (the “most probable conﬁguration”), which is the mode or the most probable
joint classiﬁcation of all non-evidence variables:1

Introduction

MAP(y|x) = arg max P(Y = y|X = x)
y

Belief Propagation (BP) is an iterative message-passing
algorithm for performing inference in graphical models
(GMs), such as Markov Random Fields (MRFs). BP calculates the marginal distribution for each unobserved node,
conditional on any observed nodes (Pearl 1988). It achieves
this by propagating the information from a few observed
nodes throughout the network by iteratively passing information between neighboring nodes. It is known that when
the graphical model has a tree structure, then BP converges
to the true marginals (according to exact probabilistic inference) after a ﬁnite number of iterations. In loopy graphs,
convergence to the correct marginals is not guaranteed; in
fact, it is not guaranteed at all, and using BP can lead to welldocumented convergence problems (Sen et al. 2008). While
there is a lot of research on convergence of BP (Elidan, McGraw, and Koller 2006; Ihler, Fisher III, and Willsky 2005;
Mooij and Kappen 2007), exact criteria for convergence are
not known (Murphy 2012), and most existing bounds for BP
on general pairwise MRFs give only sufﬁcient convergence
criteria, or are for restricted cases, such as when the underlying distributions are Gaussians (Malioutov, Johnson, and

Convergent message-passing algorithms. There has
been much research on ﬁnding variations to the update equations of BP that guarantee convergence. These algorithms
are often similar in structure to the non-convergent algorithms, yet it can be proven that the value of the variational
problem (or its dual) improves at each iteration (Hazan and
Shashua 2008; Heskes 2006; Meltzer, Globerson, and Weiss
2009). Another body of recent papers have suggested to
solve the convergence problems of MM-inference by linearizing the update equations. Krzakala et al. study a form
of linearization for unsupervised classiﬁcation called “spectral redemption” in the stochastic block model. That model
is unsupervised and has no obvious way to include supervision in its setup (i.e., it is not clear how to leverage labeled nodes). Donoho, Maleki, and Montanari propose “approximate message-passing” (AMP) as an iterative thresh1
See (Murphy 2012, ch. 5.2.1) for a detailed discussion on why
MAP has some undesirable properties and is not necessarily a “representative” assignment. While in theory it is arguably preferable
to compute marginal probabilities, in practice researchers often use
MAP inference due to the availability of efﬁcient discrete optimization algorithms (Korč, Kolmogorov, and Lampert 2012).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3747

