Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Querying Partially Labelled Data to Improve a K-nn Classiﬁer
Vu-Linh Nguyen, Sébastien Destercke, Marie-Hélène Masson
UMR CNRS 7253 Heudiasyc, Sorbonne Université,
Université de Technologie de Compiègne CS 60319 - 60203 Compiègne cedex, France
{linh.nguyen, sebastien.destercke, mylene.masson}@hds.utc.fr

within a pool of data with missing labels. The case of partial labels shares similarities with this task, but also has
some important differences. First, the information provided
by partial labels should be used in the learning process to
determine which one should be queried. Second, in active
learning the default assumption that labels are missing-atrandom (MAR) is reasonable, which is not necessarily the
case with partial labels. For example, the partiality of the labels may be due to some speciﬁc values of features, or to
the fact that some situations are more ambiguous than others for the labeller. A ﬁrst possible solution is then to make
some assumptions about the incompleteness process generating partial labels (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011), which
may be difﬁcult to check in practice. A second approach
(adopted in this paper) is to adopt a robust view consisting
in considering all possible replacements of the partial labels.
More speciﬁcally, we look at the popular K-nn classiﬁers
(Cover and Hart 1967; Wu et al. 2008), for which different
algorithms handling partial labels already exist (Hüllermeier
and Beringer 2006; Zhang and Yu 2015). In order to ﬁnd
which instance to query, we propose in Section a general
scheme based on measuring the potential impact of knowing the true label of a given instance. We then propose speciﬁc measures to assess this impact. The ﬁrst one, explained
in Section , is simply based on the number of decisions in
which the instance participates, while the other ones explained in Section also consider whether a partial label introduces some ambiguity in the decision, using some notions
issued from social choice theory (Moulin et al. 2016) to do
so. Finally, some experiments in Section show the effectiveness of our proposals.

Abstract
When learning from instances whose output labels may be
partial, the problem of knowing which of these output labels
should be made precise to improve the accuracy of predictions arises. This problem can be seen as the intersection of
two tasks: the one of learning from partial labels and the one
of active learning, where the goal is to provide the labels of
additional instances to improve the model accuracy. In this
paper, we propose querying strategies of partial labels for the
well-known K-nn classiﬁer. We propose different criteria of
increasing complexity, using among other things the amount
of ambiguity that partial labels introduce in the K-nn decision rule. We then show that our strategies usually outperform
simple baseline schemes, and that more complex strategies
provide a faster improvement of the model accuracies.

Introduction
Recently, the problem of learning models from imprecise
output labels, where we only know the true label to belong to some set, has gained some interest. Such labels appear for example in image labeling (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar
2011) or language processing (Yang and Vozila 2014). In
such problems, partial labels may come from easy to obtain high-level information (for instance, character names
in subtitles to identify those characters present in an image/video). The problem of learning from partial labels is
known under various names: “learning with partial labels”
(Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011), “learning with ambiguous
labels” (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006) or “superset label
learning” (Liu and Dietterich 2014). In these works, authors
have either proposed general schemes to learn from partial
labels, for instance by adapting the loss function to partial
labels (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011), or to adapt speciﬁc
algorithms (such as K-nn or decision trees) to the case of
partial labels (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006).
In general, the less partial are the labels, the better these
techniques will perform. In the spirit of active learning techniques, this paper addresses the problem of ﬁnding which
partial labels should be disambiguated by an oracle (expert)
in order to achieve better performances. In active learning,
one classically starts from a set of labelled data, and queries

General Setting and Querying Schema
This section introduces the basic notations used in this paper
as well as our general querying scheme.

Setting
In our setting, we assume that we have a training set D =
{(xn , yn )|n = 1, . . . , N } used to make predictions, with
xn ∈ RP the features and yn ⊆ Ω = {λ1 , . . . , λM } potentially imprecise labels. As usual when working with partial labels (Cour et al. 2009; Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011;
Yang and Vozila 2014), we assume that yn contains the true
label. We also assume that we have one unlabelled target set

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2401

