Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Transfer Learning for Deep Learning on Graph-Structured Data
Jaekoo Lee, Hyunjae Kim, Jongsun Lee, Sungroh Yoon
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
sryoon@snu.ac.kr

ducing the complexity of parameters (Schmidhuber 2015;
Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015).
In reality, there exist a wide variety of data types in which
we need more general non-grid structures to represent and
model complex interactions among entities. Examples include social media mining and protein interaction studies.
For such applications, a graph can provide a natural way
of representing entities and their interactions (Deo 2016).
For graph-structured input, it is more challenging to ﬁnd
the statistical characteristics that can be assumed for gridstructured input (Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff, Bruna, and LeCun 2015).
Theoretical challenges including the above and practical
limitations, such as data quantity/quality and training efﬁciency, make it difﬁcult to apply conventional deep learning approaches directly, igniting research on adapting deep
learning to graph-structured data (Bruna et al. 2013; Henaff,
Bruna, and LeCun 2015; Jain et al. 2015; Li et al. 2015).
In many graph analysis methods, the structural properties
derived from input graphs play a crucial role in uncovering hidden patterns (Koutra, Vogelstein, and Faloutsos 2013;
Lee, Kim, and Yoon 2015). The representation learning capability of deep networks is useful for automatically detecting data-driven structural features, and deep learning approaches have reported promising results.
In this paper, we attempt to advance deep learning for
graph-structured data by incorporating another key component: transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2010). By overcoming
the common assumption that training and test data should be
drawn from the same feature space and distribution, transfer
learning between task domains can alleviate the burden of
collecting data and training models for a new task. Given the
importance of structural characteristics in graph analysis, the
core of our proposal is to transfer the data-driven structural
features learned by deep networks from a source domain to
a target domain, as informally shown in Fig. 1 (bottom). In
the context of graphs, we call the transferred information the
intrinsic geometric information.
Starting from this intuitive baseline, we need to ﬁll in
many details to implement transfer learning for deep learning on graph data. In particular, we need to answer two important questions: (Q1) under what condition can we expect
a successful knowledge transfer between task domains and
(Q2) how do we actually perform the transfer most effec-

Abstract
Graphs provide a powerful means for representing complex
interactions between entities. Recently, new deep learning approaches have emerged for representing and modeling graphstructured data while the conventional deep learning methods,
such as convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural
networks, have mainly focused on the grid-structured inputs
of image and audio. Leveraged by representation learning capabilities, deep learning-based techniques can detect structural characteristics of graphs, giving promising results for
graph applications. In this paper, we attempt to advance deep
learning for graph-structured data by incorporating another
component: transfer learning. By transferring the intrinsic geometric information learned in the source domain, our approach can construct a model for a new but related task in
the target domain without collecting new data and without
training a new model from scratch. We thoroughly tested our
approach with large-scale real-world text data and conﬁrmed
the effectiveness of the proposed transfer learning framework
for deep learning on graphs. According to our experiments,
transfer learning is most effective when the source and target domains bear a high level of structural similarity in their
graph representations.

Introduction
Recently, many deep neural network models have been
adopted successfully in various ﬁelds (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015; Schmidhuber 2015). In particular, convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012) for image and video recognition and recurrent
neural networks (RNN) (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)
for speech and natural language processing (NLP) often deliver unprecedented levels of performance. Deep learning
has also triggered advances in implementing human-level
intelligence (e.g., in the game of Go (Silver et al. 2016)).
CNN and RNN extract data-driven features from input data (e.g., image, video, and audio data) structured in
typically low-dimensional regular grids (see Fig. 1, top).
Such grid structures are often assumed to have statistical
characteristics (e.g., stationarity and locality) to facilitate
the modeling process. Learning algorithms then take advantage of this assumption and boost performance by rec 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2154

