Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Beyond Monte Carlo Tree Search: Playing Go with
Deep Alternative Neural Network and Long-Term Evaluation
Jinzhuo Wang, Wenmin Wang, Ronggang Wang, Wen Gao†
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
jzwang@pku.edu.cn, wangwm@ece.pku.edu.cn, rgwang@ece.pku.edu.cn, wgao@pku.edu.cn
†

tree to simulate and evaluate each action. However, the playing strength of MCTS-based Go programs is still far from
human-level due to its major limitation of uneven performance. Well known weaknesses include capturing race or
semeai, positions with multiple cumulative evaluation errors, ko ﬁghts, and close endgames (Rimmel et al. 2010;
Huang and Müller 2013). We attribute it to the following reasons. First, the effectivity of truncating search tree is based
on prior knowledge and far away from perfect play (Müller
2002). Second, when the board is spacious especially at
opening, simulation is expensive and useless. Besides, the
outputs of leaves in Monte Carlo tree are difﬁcult to be precisely evaluated (Browne et al. 2012). Last but most important, MCTS does not follow professionals’ way of playing
since professionals hardly make brute simulation of every
possible future positions. Instead, in most situations, they
ﬁrst obtain some candidates using pattern analysis and determine the optimal one by evaluating these candidates.
Recently as deep learning revolutionizes and gradually
dominate many tasks in computer vision community, researcher start to borrow deep learning techniques for move
prediction and develop computer Go systems (Clark and
Storkey 2015; Maddison et al. 2015; Tian and Zhu 2016;
Silver et al. 2016). However, compared with visual signals
(e.g. 224 × 224 in image domain), Go board has a much
smaller size (19 × 19), which poses the importance of relative position. This is consistent with playing Go as situation
can dramatically alter with a minor change in position. On
the other hand, existing DCNNs often mine such contexts
by stacking more convolutional layers (e.g. up to 13 layers
in (Silver et al. 2016)) to exploit high-order encodings of
low-level features. Simply increasing layers not only suffers
parameter burden but also does not embed contexts of local
features and its evolutions.
Based on the above discussions, this paper introduces a
computer Go system consisting of two major parts. The ﬁrst
part is a novel deep architecture used to provide a probability distribution of legal candidates learned from professionals’ records. These candidates are further sent to a long-term
evaluation part by considering local future impact instead of
immediate reward. We expect the model focus on several
suggested important regions rather than blind simulation of
every corner in the board. The primary contributions of this
work are summarized as follows.

Abstract
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) is extremely popular in
computer Go which determines each action by enormous simulations in a broad and deep search tree. However, human
experts select most actions by pattern analysis and careful
evaluation rather than brute search of millions of future interactions. In this paper, we propose a computer Go system
that follows experts way of thinking and playing. Our system
consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is a novel deep alternative neural network (DANN) used to generate candidates of
next move. Compared with existing deep convolutional neural network (DCNN), DANN inserts recurrent layer after each
convolutional layer and stacks them in an alternative manner.
We show such setting can preserve more contexts of local features and its evolutions which are beneﬁcial for move prediction. The second part is a long-term evaluation (LTE) module
used to provide a reliable evaluation of candidates rather than
a single probability from move predictor. This is consistent
with human experts nature of playing since they can foresee
tens of steps to give an accurate estimation of candidates. In
our system, for each candidate, LTE calculates a cumulative
reward after several future interactions when local variations
are settled. Combining criteria from the two parts, our system
determines the optimal choice of next move. For more comprehensive experiments, we introduce a new professional Go
dataset (PGD), consisting of 253, 233 professional records.
Experiments on GoGoD and PGD datasets show the DANN
can substantially improve performance of move prediction
over pure DCNN. When combining LTE, our system outperforms most relevant approaches and open engines based on
MCTS.

Introduction
Go is a game of profound complexity and draws a lot attention. Although its rules are very simple (Müller 2002), it
is difﬁcult to construct a suitable value function of actions
in most of situations mainly due to its high branching factors and subtle board situations that are sensitive to small
changes.
Previous solutions focus on simulating future possible interactions to evaluate candidates. In such methods, Monte
Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Gelly and Silver 2011) is the
most popular one, which constructs a broad and deep search
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1576

