Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Associative Memory Using Dictionary Learning and Expander Decoding
Arya Mazumdar

Ankit Singh Rawat∗

College of Information & Computer Science
University of Massachusetts Amherst
arya@cs.umass.edu

Research Laboratory of Electronics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
asrawat@mit.edu

the dataset and mapping erroneous vectors to the associated
correct vectors are referred to as learning phase and recall
phase, respectively.
The overarching goal of designing an associative memory that can store a large dataset (ideally containing exp(n)
message vectors using a neural network with O(n) nodes)
while ensuring robustness to a large number of errors (ideally Ω(n) errors) during the recall phase has led to multiple
research efforts in the literature. The binary Hopﬁeld networks, as studied in (Hopﬁeld 1982; McEliece et al. 1987),
provide one of the earliest designs for the associative memories. Given a dataset containing binary vectors from {±1}n ,
Hopﬁeld networks learn this dataset in the form of an nnode weighted graph by employing Hebbian learning (Hebb
2005), i.e., the weighted adjacency matrix of the graph is deﬁned by summing the outer products of all message vectors
in the dataset. However, in their most general form, these
networks suffer from small capacity. In (McEliece et al.
1987), McEliece
et al. show that these networks can only

store O logn n ) message vectors when these messages correspond to arbitrary n-length binary vectors and the recall
phase is required to tolerate linear Ω(n) random errors. This
has motivated the researchers to look at various generalizations of Hopﬁeld networks (see, (Gross and Mezard 1984;
Jankowski, Lozowski, and Zurada 1996; McEliece and
Posner 1985; Muezzinoglu, Guzelis, and Zurada 2003;
Tanaka and Edwards 1980) and references therein). However, these solutions again fail to simultaneously achieve
both large capacity and error tolerance.
One remedy to small capacity is to design associative
memories with structural assumptions on the dataset. This
approach has been considered in (Gripon and Berrou 2011;
Hillar and Tran 2014; Karbasi, Salavati, and Shokrollahi
2014; Kumar, Salavati, and Shokrollahi 2011; Mazumdar
and Rawat 2015; Salavati and Karbasi 2012). In particular in (Gripon and Berrou 2011), Gripon et al. store a
dataset comprising O(n2 ) sparse vectors in the form of
cliques in a neural network. In (Hillar and Tran 2014),
Hillar and Tran design
a Hopﬁeld network with n nodes
√
that can store ∼ 2 2n /n1/4 message vectors and is robust against n/2 random errors. In (Karbasi, Salavati, and
Shokrollahi 2014; Kumar, Salavati, and Shokrollahi 2011;
Salavati and Karbasi 2012; Mazumdar and Rawat 2015), the
message vectors that need to be stored are assumed to consti-

Abstract
An associative memory is a framework of content-addressable
memory that stores a collection of message vectors (or a
dataset) over a neural network while enabling a neurally feasible mechanism to recover any message in the dataset from
its noisy version. Designing an associative memory requires
addressing two main tasks: 1) learning phase: given a dataset,
learn a concise representation of the dataset in the form of a
graphical model (or a neural network), 2) recall phase: given
a noisy version of a message vector from the dataset, output
the correct message vector via a neurally feasible algorithm
over the network learnt during the learning phase. This paper
studies the problem of designing a class of neural associative memories which learns a network representation for a
large dataset that ensures correction against a large number
of adversarial errors during the recall phase. Speciﬁcally, the
associative memories designed in this paper can store dataset
containing exp(n) n-length message vectors over a network
n
with O(n) nodes and can tolerate Ω( polylogn
) adversarial errors. This paper carries out this memory design by mapping
the learning phase and recall phase to the tasks of dictionary
learning with a square dictionary and iterative error correction
in an expander code, respectively.

1

Introduction

Associative memories aim to address a problem that naturally arises in many information processing systems: given a
dataset M which consists of n-length vectors, design a mechanism to concisely store this dataset so that any future query
corresponding to a noisy version of one of the vectors in the
dataset can be mapped to the correct vector. An associative
memory based solution to this problem is broadly required
to have two key components: 1) dataset must be stored in
the form of a neural network (graph) and 2) the mechanism
to map a noisy query to the associated valid vector should
be implementable in an iterative neurally feasible manner
over the network (a neurally feasible algorithm employs only
local computations at the nodes of the corresponding network
based on the information obtained from their neighboring
nodes). The tasks of learning the graph representation from
∗
This work was done when the author was with the Computer
Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

267

