Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Identifying Useful Inference Paths in Large
Commonsense Knowledge Bases by Retrograde Analysis
Abhishek Sharma Keith M. Goolsbey
Cycorp, Inc.,7718 Wood Hollow Drive, Suite 250, Austin TX 78731
abhishek@cyc.com, goolsbey@cyc.com

Abstract

expected to work on large KBs [Hoder & Voronkov 2011].
Efficient reasoning in such systems is critical for developing large-scale realistic cognitive systems.
Inference algorithms of expressive KBSs (e.g., backward inference in Cyc, tableaux algorithms in description
logic (DL)) typically represent the search space as a graph,
the structure of which is determined by the axioms applicable to nodes in the graph. Generally, hundreds of rules
simultaneously apply to a node and the order of rule and
node expansion can have a significant effect on efficiency
[Tsarkov & Horrocks 2005, Sharma et al. 2016]. Therefore, ordering heuristics play an important role in the optimization of reasoning in large KBSs.
Large KBSs have a very large set of axioms Ax, and a
goal G. Since only a tiny subset, S, of Ax is sufficient for
proving G, researchers have worked to identify a small set
R, such that S  R  Ax. The relevant set of axioms, R,
can be used in a variety of ways. The inference engines of
KBSs can prune axioms not in R, or can use them in ordering algorithms by prioritizing resolution steps that use axioms in R. In this paper, we argue that retrograde analysis
can be used to identify useful parts of the search space. We
propose an algorithm that uses this analysis to identify useful proof paths by using a bottom-up level-by-level path
expansion approach. The resulting database of proof paths
helps us in identifying a small number of axioms that can
be useful in a given search state. This database is used to
order nodes during a search. Experimental results show
that this approach helps in significantly reducing inference
time.
This paper is organized as follows. We start by discussing relevant previous work. Our approach to generating a
database of useful axiom sequences is presented next. We
conclude by discussing our results and plans for future
work.

Commonsense reasoning at scale is a critical problem for
modern cognitive systems. Large theories have millions of
axioms, but only a handful are relevant for answering a given goal query. Irrelevant axioms increase the search space,
overwhelming unoptimized inference engines in large theories. Therefore, methods that help in identifying useful inference paths are an essential part of large cognitive systems. In this paper, we use retrograde analysis to build a database of proof paths that lead to at least one successful
proof. This database helps the inference engine identify
more productive parts of the search space. A heuristic based
on this approach is used to order nodes during a search.
We study the efficacy of this approach on hundreds of queries from the Cyc KB. Empirical results show that this approach leads to significant reduction in inference time.

Introduction and Motivation
Cognitive systems need large bodies of general commonsense knowledge about the external world to perform
complex, real-world tasks robustly [Lenat & Feigenbaum
1991, Forbus et al. 2007]. Therefore, domain-general
knowledge-based systems (KBSs) contain millions of
commonsense axioms and other general facts. KBSs often
draw deductively valid conclusions from known facts to
make plans and to reason about the external world. Typically, the goal query is provable from a very small subset
of millions of axioms and facts available in the knowledge
base (KB). However, due to the intractability of reasoning
in first-order logic (FOL), unoptimized inference engines
find it difficult to distinguish between a handful of relevant
axioms and the millions of other axioms/facts available in
the KB. Without search control knowledge, inference engines cannot answer even relatively simple queries within
minutes. Therefore, it is common thinking that resolutionbased theorem provers are overwhelmed when they are
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4437

