Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multidimensional Scaling on
Multiple Input Distance Matrices
Song Bai,1 Xiang Bai,1∗ Longin Jan Latecki,2 Qi Tian3
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Temple University, 3 University of Texas at San Antonio
{songbai, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, latecki@temple.edu, qitian@cs.utsa.edu
2

form (SIFT) (Lowe 2004), Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) (Dalal and Triggs 2005), Local Binary Patterns
(LBP) (Ojala, Pietikäinen, and Mäenpää 2002), etc. A web
page can be described by the document text itself and the anchor text attached to its hyperlinks. It has been extensively
demonstrated that a fusion of those multi-view representations by leveraging the interactions and complementarity between them is usually beneﬁcial to obtain more faithful and
accurate information.
In the past decades, numerous efforts have been devoted
to the formulation, optimization and application of MDS
(see (Borg and Groenen 2005; France and Carroll 2011) for
a survey). However, the problem of multidimensional scaling on multiple input distance matrices has not been addressed. Nevertheless, this new topic has gradually become
important in practical applications. Consider a toy example (also presented in experiments) where one wants to illustrate the relative positions of six cities in a planar map
but he/she receives more than one distance matrix. How to
project the six cities to P = 2 dimensional space given the
multiple input matrices? Meanwhile, MDS can also act as
a dimensionality reduction algorithm if the embedding dimension P is smaller than the input dimension. This arises
another question, that is, how to conduct multi-view dimensionality reduction (Han et al. 2012; Xia et al. 2010;
Foster, Kakade, and Zhang 2008) with the rapid growth of
high dimensional data.
In this paper, we begin to investigate this new
task, i.e., multidimensional scaling on multiple input distance matrices. Our contributions can be divided into three
folds:

Abstract
Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) is a classic technique that
seeks vectorial representations for data points, given the pairwise distances between them. In recent years, data are usually collected from diverse sources or have multiple heterogeneous representations. However, how to do multidimensional
scaling on multiple input distance matrices is still unsolved to
our best knowledge.
In this paper, we ﬁrst deﬁne this new task formally. Then,
we propose a new algorithm called Multi-View Multidimensional Scaling (MVMDS) by considering each input distance
matrix as one view. The proposed algorithm can learn the
weights of views (i.e., distance matrices) automatically by exploring the consensus information and complementary nature
of views. Experimental results on synthetic as well as real
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of MVMDS. We hope
that our work encourages a wider consideration in many domains where MDS is needed.

Introduction
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) (Borg and Groenen 2005;
Torgerson 1958) is a fundamental and important technique
with a wide range of applications to data visualization, artiﬁcial intelligence, network localization, robotics, cybernetics, social science, etc. For example, researchers in bioinformatics apply MDS to unravel relational patterns among
genes (Taguchi and Oono 2005). As another example, MDS
is also used by computer vision community (Bronstein et
al. 2008). A typical application is to approximate geodesic
distances of mesh points (Elad and Kimmel 2003) or planar
points (Ling and Jacobs 2007) in Euclidean space so that the
non-rigid intrinsic structure of shapes can be captured.
Given pairwise distances between N data points, MDS
aims at projecting these data into P dimensional space,
such that the between-object distances can be preserved
as well as possible. In recent years, data are often collected from diverse domains or have various heterogeneous
representations (Amid and Ukkonen 2015; Xu, Tao, and
Xu 2013). That is to say, each data may have multiple
views. For instance, an image can be described by multiple visual features, such as Scale Invariant Feature Trans-

1. We formally put forward the idea of performing MDS
on multi-view data, and discuss the basic difﬁculties that
need to be addressed carefully in this framework.
2. In addition to the novelty of our problem formulation, a
new algorithm called Multi-View Multidimensional Scaling (MVMDS) is proposed to solve it. Inspired by (Xia
et al. 2010) and its related works in multi-view learning (Sun 2013), a weight learning paradigm is imposed to
attach more importance to discriminative views and suppress the negative inﬂuences of noisy views. Accordingly,
an iterative solution is derived with proven convergence
so that view weights can be updated automatically con-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1281

