Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Multi-Task Deep Network for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
Weihua Chen,1 Xiaotang Chen,1 Jianguo Zhang,3 Kaiqi Huang,1,2,4
1

3

CRIPAC&NLPR, CASIA 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Computing, School of Science and Engineering, University of Dundee, United Kingdom
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Email:{weihua.chen, xtchen, kqhuang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, j.n.zhang@dundee.ac.uk

distances than all negative pairs regardless of query images.
Instead, what we want is for each query image, its positive
pairs have smaller distances than its negative ones. Therefore, in some cases1 , the application of binary classiﬁcation
loss may lead the learned model to an undesired locally optimal solution, which is elaborated as below.
The example is shown in Fig. 1 (a). Case 1 and 2 illustrate
two projected distributions of scores obtained by trained binary classiﬁers. For each pair sample, the score underneath
denotes the similarity probability between its two images.
Query:X indicates where an image from person X is used
as a query image (the left image in a pair). For example,
Query:A means an image from person A is used as a query
image. Green-coloured rectangle indicates a positive pair,
and red rectangle for the negative pair. In Case 1, it is evident
that for each query image (w.r.t one particular person), we
can get the correct rank-1 match, i. e. two images within its
positive pairs always hold larger similarity score than those
within its negative pairs. However, in this case it is very difﬁcult for a classiﬁer to determine a suitable threshold to get
a low misclassiﬁcation cost (e. g. less than two misclassiﬁed samples). On the contrary in Case 2, where the vertical
dashed line denotes the decision threshold learned by the
classiﬁer, the classiﬁer has a lower misclassiﬁcation rate. As
a result, a binary classiﬁer will favor Case 2 rather than Case
1, as the classiﬁcation loss in Case 2 will be lower than that
in Case 1. But in ReID, we prefer Case 1, which outputs
correct ranking results for all of the three persons, rather
than Case 2 that contains a false rank-1 result (highlighted
in an orange circle). Case 2 could be potentially rectiﬁed by
a ranking loss.
As person ReID commonly uses the Cumulative Matching Characteristic (CMC) curve for performance evaluation which follows rank-n criteria, some deep learning approaches (Ding et al. 2015; Chen, Guo, and Lai 2016;
Cheng et al. 2016) begin to treat the person ReID as a ranking task, similar to image retrieval, and apply a ranking loss
(e. g. a triplet loss) to address the problem. The main purpose is to keep the positive pairs maintaining shorter relative distances in the projected space. However, the person

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) focuses on identifying people
across different scenes in video surveillance, which is usually formulated as a binary classiﬁcation task or a ranking
task in current person ReID approaches. In this paper, we
take both tasks into account and propose a multi-task deep
network (MTDnet) that makes use of their own advantages
and jointly optimize the two tasks simultaneously for person
ReID. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to integrate both tasks in one network to solve the person ReID.
We show that our proposed architecture signiﬁcantly boosts
the performance. Furthermore, deep architecture in general
requires a sufﬁcient dataset for training, which is usually not
met in person ReID. To cope with this situation, we further
extend the MTDnet and propose a cross-domain architecture
that is capable of using an auxiliary set to assist training on
small target sets. In the experiments, our approach outperforms most of existing person ReID algorithms on representative datasets including CUHK03, CUHK01, VIPeR, iLIDS
and PRID2011, which clearly demonstrates the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) is an important task in wide
area video surveillance. The key challenge is the large
appearance variations, usually caused by the signiﬁcant
changes in human body poses, illumination and camera
views. It has many applications, such as inter-camera pedestrian tracking and human retrieval.
Recently, deep learning approaches (Li et al. 2014;
Ahmed, Jones, and Marks 2015; Wang et al. 2016) are successfully employed in person ReID with signiﬁcant performance, especially on large datasets, such as CUHK03. Most
deep learning methods (Li et al. 2014; Yi, Lei, and Li 2014;
Ahmed, Jones, and Marks 2015) solve the problem as a
binary classiﬁcation issue and adopt a classiﬁcation loss
(e. g. a softmax loss) to train their models. The core behind
these approaches is to learn identiﬁable features for each
pair for classiﬁcation. The binary classiﬁcation loss is usually designed to require all positive pairs should hold smaller
distances than all negative pairs. However, in person ReID,
we don’t have to require all positive pairs holding smaller

1
This situation commonly happens when a ﬁxed embedding
metric, e. g. Euclidean distance, is used for similarity measurement. In this case, it’s hard for the network to learn a suitable feature representation.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3988

