Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Market Pricing for Data Streams
Melika Abolhassani,†∗ Hossein Esfandiari,† MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi,†∗
Brendan Lucier,‡ Hadi Yami†∗
†Univeristy of Maryland, ‡Microsoft Research
brlucier@microsoft.com, {melika, hossein, hajiagha, hadiyami}@cs.umd.edu

a recent and exciting line of literature in the algorithmic game
theory community has set out to understand how the availability of data, in the form of samples from a transaction
history, can be employed to tune prices and design mechanisms (Balcan et al. 2008; Cole and Roughgarden 2014;
Dhangwatnotai, Roughgarden, and Yan 2010; Hsu et al. 2015;
Morgenstern and Roughgarden 2015). Big-data environments
are a boon for such tasks. However, as datasets grow ever
larger, data-analysis algorithms must become ever more efﬁcient. An algorithm that runs in polynomial (or even linear)
time may not have a reasonable running time in practice.
In this paper we study the development of pricing algorithms that are appropriate for use with massive datasets. We
will adopt the model of streaming algorithms, a standard
model for massive dataset analysis. In the streaming algorithm model, a stream of data arrives sequentially and must
be analyzed by an algorithm with limited memory. These
streams can only be read once (or a limited number of times),
and hence streaming algorithms must be frugal in the amount
and nature of data that they choose to store.
Streaming algorithms were ﬁrst theoretically introduced in
ﬁelds such as data mining and machine learning over 20 years
ago in order to model problems in which the data cannot be
accessed all at once. Over the past decade, there has been
a signiﬁcant demand for algorithms to process and handle
dynamic data coming from huge and growing graphs such
as social networks, webpages and their links and citations of
academic work.
These algorithmic techniques are also relevant to market
design problems. For instance, one might imagine that there
is a set of items (e.g., goods for sale) and a set of potential
buyers (e.g., individual consumers) to which they should
be matched. Such markets are essentially bipartite matching
problems, which have themselves been the subject of study in
the context of streaming algorithms. This begs the question:
to what extent can market design and pricing problems be
resolved adequately in the streaming model?
We have in mind two main applications of solving this
pricing problem on a massive collection of static data, especially on the data of previous sales. First, by computing
optimal prices on past transactions, one can subsequently
employ those prices as a guideline for setting future prices;
this is a key step in many recent pricing methodologies based
on statistical learning theory. Also, the optimal welfare or

Abstract
Internet-enabled marketplaces such as Amazon deal with huge
datasets registering transaction of merchandises between lots
of buyers and sellers. It is important that algorithms become
more time and space efﬁcient as the size of datasets increase.
An algorithm that runs in polynomial time may not have a
reasonable running time for such large datasets. Here, we study
the development of pricing algorithms that are appropriate
for use with massive datasets. We especially focus on the
streaming setting, the common model for big data analysis.
We present an envy-free mechanism for social welfare maximization problem in the streaming setting using O(k2 l) space,
where k is the number of different goods and l is the number of available items of each good. We also provide an αapproximation mechanism for revenue maximization in this
setting given an α-approximation mechanism for the corresponding ofﬂine problem exists. Moreover, we provide mechanisms to approximate the optimum social welfare (or revenue)
within 1 −  factor, in space independent of l which would be
favorable in case l is large compared to k. Finally, we present
hardness results showing approximation of optimal prices that
maximize social welfare (or revenue) in the streaming setting
needs Ω(l) space.
We achieve our results by developing a powerful sampling
technique for bipartite networks. The simplicity of our sampling technique empowers us to maintain the sample over the
input sequence. Indeed, one can construct this sample in the
distributed setting (a.k.a, MapReduce) and get the same results
in two rounds of computations, or one may simply apply this
sampling technique to provide faster ofﬂine algorithms.

1

Introduction

Modern, Internet-enabled marketplaces have the potential
to serve an extremely large volume of transactions. Giant
online markets such as eBay and Amazon work with massive
datasets that record the exchange of goods between many
different buyers and sellers. Such datasets present an opportunity: it is natural to analyze the history of transactions to
estimate demand and solve central pricing problems. Indeed,
∗
Supported in part by NSF CAREER award CCF-1053605,
NSF BIGDATA grant IIS-1546108, NSF AF:Medium grant CCF1161365, DARPA GRAPHS/AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0423, and
another DARPA SIMPLEX grant.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

291

