Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Maximizing the Probability of Arriving on Time: A Practical Q-Learning Method
Zhiguang Cao,1 Hongliang Guo,2 Jie Zhang,3 Frans Oliehoek,4,5 Ulrich Fastenrath6
2

1
Energy Research Institute @NTU, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, UK
5
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
6
Department of Trafﬁc Information Management and Routing Optimization, BMW Group, Germany
caoz0005@ntu.edu.sg, guohl1983@uestc.edu.cn, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg,
frans.oliehoek@liverpool.ac.uk, Ulrich.Fastenrath@bmw.de

Stier-Moses 2016). Although risk is alleviated by this model,
in many other cases of route planning, driver utilities are also
governed by deadlines (Fan, Kalaba, and Moore II 2005;
Samaranayake, Blandin, and Bayen 2012), such as catching
ﬂight, ﬁre rescue and organ delivery, all of which need arriving on time with the maximum chance. These critical cases
render the LET and mean-risk model based SSP impractical in real applications. Therefore, the probability tail model
is proposed to ﬁnd a path that maximizes the probability of
reaching destination before a deadline (Nie and Wu 2009;
Lim and Rus 2012; Cao et al. 2016b). This model is promising in that it integrates travel time, risk and deadline.

Abstract
The stochastic shortest path problem is of crucial importance
for the development of sustainable transportation systems.
Existing methods based on the probability tail model seek
for the path that maximizes the probability of arriving at the
destination before a deadline. However, they suffer from low
accuracy and/or high computational cost. We design a novel
Q-learning method where the converged Q-values have the
practical meaning as the actual probabilities of arriving on
time so as to improve accuracy. By further adopting dynamic
neural networks to learn the value function, our method can
scale well to large road networks with arbitrary deadlines.
Experimental results on real road networks demonstrate the
signiﬁcant advantages of our method over other counterparts.

Unfortunately, the theory and methods for the LET and
mean-risk settings cannot be directly extended to the probability tail model. In particular, the principle of optimality
breaks down, precluding dynamic programming approaches,
which is NP-hard in nature (Nikolova et al. 2006). Although
a number of algorithms to address this probability tail model
based SSP problem have been proposed (Lim and Rus 2012;
Lim et al. 2013), they are limited by strong assumptions,
such as Gaussian distribution of travel time, independence
among travel time on different road links, and relatively
large deadlines, which may not hold in real situations. A
data-driven solution was proposed (Cao et al. 2016b) by
formulating the path ﬁnding as a cardinality minimization
problem, which is in turn approximated as a mixed integer
linear programming (MILP) problem. This method circumvents the above strong assumptions, but in the meanwhile
signiﬁcantly decreases computation efﬁciency. Additionally,
its approximate solution leaves room for further improvement in terms of accuracy in ﬁnding the real optimal path.

Introduction
The sustainability of future intelligent transport systems
(ITSs) critically depends on two aspects. First, ITSs need
to be efﬁcient, in the sense that they enable as many users
as possible to minimize their expected travel time (Wu,
Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2016; Cao et al. 2016d). Second,
ITSs need to enable the users to reliably predict their travel
time in order to meet their appointments and deadlines (Cao
et al. 2016a). Due to its ability to model uncertainties in
travel time, the stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem has
emerged as the dominant theoretical framework for dealing
with these aspects (Lim et al. 2013; Anantharam et al. 2016).
The problem is well-understood and efﬁciently solved in risk
neutral settings, which corresponds to the ﬁrst aspect: a path
is considered as optimal if it guarantees the least expected
travel time (LET) (Miller-Hooks and Mahmassani 2000;
Ben-Elia et al. 2013). However, in many cases, such as
planning a route to attend a business meeting, people are
not risk neutral, and the second aspect is crucial: the LET
path may fail to meet driver’s expectation if there is a large
variance (i.e., risk) of travel time. To overcome this problem, the mean-risk model is developed for ﬁnding a path
that minimizes the sum of a linear combination of mean
and variance regarding the travel time (Lim et al. 2013;
Nikolova and Stier-Moses 2014; Lianeas, Nikolova, and

In this paper, we propose a novel method without strong
assumptions. It is based on the key insight that the problem can be reformulated in such a way that dynamic programming approaches do apply. A disadvantage of this reformulation is that it may blow up the state space by taking the cartesian product of the set of nodes (intersections
of the road network) and the set of possible amounts of
time-to-deadline (i.e., time left before deadline). This is especially problematic in the typical setting where the latter
set is continuous. To overcome this problem, we propose
to generalize over the continuous space of remaining time

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4481

