Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Learning Quadcopter Control via Risk-Aware Active Learning
Olov Andersson, Mariusz Wzorek, Patrick Doherty
{olov.a.andersson, mariusz.wzorek, patrick.doherty}@liu.se
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University, SE-58183
Linköping, Sweden

continuous problems are challenging for dynamic programming, and policy-gradient approaches popular in robotics
are typically limited to parametric policies with a moderate
number of parameters.
It was recently suggested to combine trajectory and
policy-based methods, where a particular trajectory optimizer acts as teacher for a deep neural network control policy. Guided policy search (GPS) (Levine and Koltun 2013)
alternates between stochastic trajectory optimization under
a locally Linear-Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) assumption and
ﬁtting a neural network policy via supervised learning. A
heuristic cost term or constraint is imposed to make the trajectory not stray too far from the current policy, with the aim
of making it easier to learn for the neural network. A similar but deterministic formulation was used by Mordatch and
Todorov (2014), which also empirically demonstrated that
such a training regime can yield greater sample efﬁciency.
Learning control policies from an optimizer this way has
the advantage that it reduces a difﬁcult policy search problem to supervised learning, a technique that has shown great
promise in simulation. In Mordatch et al. (2015) it was used
to animate complex movement behaviors and in Zhang et
al. (2016) it was used for collision avoidance of static obstacles with a simulated quadcopter. Reports of tests with
real hardware are so far few however, where it usually features in safe and controlled environments. In Mordatch et al.
(2016) it was combined with an adaptive low-level control
scheme for balancing and reaching tasks with a DARWINOP, a 45 cm humanoid, and in Levine, Wagener, and Abbeel
(2015) vision-based guided policy search was used for a manipulation task on a larger PR-2.
A major concern with real robots is the risk of costly failures. The aim of this paper is to provide a practical approach
to construct safe behaviors, generated via ofﬂine trajectoryoptimization software, into real-time deep policy approximations. The main contributions are that we propose a training procedure with a novel risk-aware resampling step, improving the policy where it matters. This procedure is agnostic of trajectory optimizer, which contrary to GPS is easy
to use with existing constrained solvers. We demonstrate
that policies maintain safety while being much faster than
a state-of-the-art solver for a difﬁcult collision avoidance
scenario with non-cooperative moving obstacles. The computational advantages allow us to implement the deep pol-

Abstract
Modern optimization-based approaches to control increasingly allow automatic generation of complex behavior from
only a model and an objective. Recent years has seen growing interest in fast solvers to also allow real-time operation
on robots, but the computational cost of such trajectory optimization remains prohibitive for many applications. In this
paper we examine a novel deep neural network approximation and validate it on a safe navigation problem with a real
nano-quadcopter. As the risk of costly failures is a major concern with real robots, we propose a risk-aware resampling
technique. Contrary to prior work this active learning approach is easy to use with existing solvers for trajectory optimization, as well as deep learning. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the approach on a difﬁcult collision avoidance problem with non-cooperative moving obstacles. Our ﬁndings indicate that the resulting neural network approximations are
least 50 times faster than the trajectory optimizer while still
satisfying the safety requirements. We demonstrate the potential of the approach by implementing a synthesized deep neural network policy on the nano-quadcopter microcontroller.

Introduction
Optimization-based approaches to control and behavior synthesis promise to automatically generate low-level control
commands given a model of the dynamics and an objective
function. With increasing computational power and maturity
of tools, trajectory optimization has been used for increasingly complex behavior like quadcopter ﬂight with slung
load, collision avoidance (Geisert and Mansard 2016) or humanoid motion (Tassa, Erez, and Todorov 2012), without the
need for tedious custom-tailored controller architectures.
However, in many cases the computational cost of optimization is still too high for the real-time requirements
of real robots, particularly on smaller embedded platforms
that have limited computational power. Even though there
has been a push towards fast solvers (Ferreau et al. 2013;
Domahidi et al. 2012; Houska, Ferreau, and Diehl 2011),
the domain of problems where real-time operation is practical remains limited.
Policy-based approaches on the other hand are fast to
execute but remain a challenge to train. High-dimensional
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3812

