Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Knowing What to Ask: A Bayesian Active
Learning Approach to the Surveying Problem
Yoad Lewenberg

Yoram Bachrach∗

Ulrich Paquet†

Jeffrey S. Rosenschein

The Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, Israel
yoadlew@cs.huji.ac.il

Digital Genius Ltd.,
London, UK
yorambac@gmail.com

Microsoft Research,
Cambridge, UK
ulripa@microsoft.com

The Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, Israel
jeff@cs.huji.ac.il

the remaining questions based on the responses to the asked
questions.
Asking all the participants the same set of questions may
be suboptimal. Instead, we may tailor the next question to
ask a participant based on their responses to the previous
questions. Such a design is based on the active learning
paradigm, where the learning algorithm can interactively
query users so as to best predict the responses to all questions in the bank.

Abstract
We examine the surveying problem, where we attempt to predict how a target user is likely to respond to questions by
iteratively querying that user, collaboratively based on the
responses of a sample set of users. We focus on an active
learning approach, where the next question we select to ask
the user depends on their responses to the previous questions. We propose a method for solving the problem based
on a Bayesian dimensionality reduction technique. We empirically evaluate our method, contrasting it to benchmark
approaches based on augmented linear regression, and show
that it achieves much better predictive performance, and is
much more robust when there is missing data.

The Active Surveying Problem We consider a set of d
survey questions, which can be answered by a sample of n
users. The responses form an n × d matrix. We denote the
set of possible responses to each question as L. In the case
where participants may only agree or disagree with a query
we have L = {0, 1}, but in the general case we may have L
ordinal labels: L = {0, . . . , L − 1} (representing for example, a scale for the degree of agreement ranging from completely disagreeing to completely agreeing with the item).
Our data has the form of a matrix D ∈ Ln×d . However, the
data may be partial, with some entries in D being missing
(unobserved).
Our goal in active surveying is to minimize the prediction error given a limited budget of questions we are allowed
to pose to a new survey participant. We consider the case
where the budget of questions to ask is smaller than the total
number of questions in the survey, so we need to generate
a prediction regarding multiple questions which cannot be
posed to the survey participant due to the limited question
budget. As we know the responses to the questions we actually ask the participant, we can clearly achieve zero error
on these questions, so we wish to minimize the error on the
unasked questions.
As opposed to a standard supervised learning problem,
we are allowed to decide on the next question to ask after
we have observed the participant’s response to the previous
questions. Furthermore, we are allowed to leverage knowledge regarding correlations in the responses to several questions, based on the information obtained from past survey
participants. Similarly to many dimensionality-reductionbased approaches, we represent the correlations between the
users’ responses to the various questions using a low dimensional structure. We assume that a user u and a question q
can be represented as an h-dimensional vector (where h is

Introduction
Consider the task of identifying people’s political opinions
through a poll, such as those conducted by political parties
trying to determine whether their agenda is likely to be favored by potential voters. A question in such surveys typically asks people to indicate their agreement with a certain political stance, such as: “we should improve the level
of free medical care, even at the expense of raising taxes”,
“we should have tighter gun control legislation”, “abortions
should be illegal”. Some surveys simply ask participants to
indicate whether they agree or disagree with items, whereas
others use a scale for the degree of agreement.
Asking each participant all the questions in the survey
achieves complete knowledge of the opinions of the participants. However, this is very costly, especially when the
bank of questions is large. Given a limited budget, one possibility for lowering costs is exploiting correlations between
responses to different questions. For example, if for a large
sample of participants we observe that the response to one
question is strongly correlated with the response to another
question, we can ask further survey participants only the ﬁrst
question, and use their response to predict the response to the
other question. More generally, one may choose a subset of
the questions in the bank to ask, and predict the responses to
∗
Part of the work was done while at Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
†
Now at DeepMind
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1396

