Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Ontology-Mediated Queries for Probabilistic Databases
Stefan Borgwardt, İsmail İlkan Ceylan

Thomas Lukasiewicz

Faculty of Computer Science
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
ﬁrstname.lastname@tu-dresden.de

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk

different from the closed-world assumption of PDBs, which
requires the probabilities of such facts to be zero. In the
resulting framework of OpenPDBs, query probabilities are
given in terms of upper and lower probability values, which
is more in line with an incomplete view of the world.
While forming a natural and ﬂexible basis for querying
incomplete data sources, OpenPDBs are limited in the following sense: All open tuples can take on probability values from a single ﬁxed interval [0, λ], which results in the
same upper and lower probabilities for many queries. Consider, for instance the PDB containing the probabilistic tuples ⟨Author(a) ∶ 0.8⟩, ⟨Pub(a, b) ∶ 0.6⟩, ⟨Pub(c, d) ∶ 0.9⟩,
⟨Novel(d) ∶ 1⟩. In OpenPDBs, Author(c) and Author(d)
evaluate to the same lower and upper probabilities (0 and λ,
respectively), since both tuples are open. Intuition, however,
tells us that c is more likely to be an author, as we already
know (with high conﬁdence) that c has published a novel.
On the other hand, Author(d) is unlikely to hold, since we
know (almost surely) that d is a novel. Essentially, we lack
the common-sense knowledge that

Abstract
Probabilistic databases (PDBs) are usually incomplete, e.g.,
containing only the facts that have been extracted from the
Web with high conﬁdence. However, missing facts are often
treated as being false, which leads to unintuitive results when
querying PDBs. Recently, open-world probabilistic databases
(OpenPDBs) were proposed to address this issue by allowing probabilities of unknown facts to take any value from
a ﬁxed probability interval. In this paper, we extend OpenPDBs by Datalog± ontologies, under which both upper and
lower probabilities of queries become even more informative, enabling us to distinguish queries that were indistinguishable before. We show that the dichotomy between P
and PP in (Open)PDBs can be lifted to the case of ﬁrst-order
rewritable positive programs (without negative constraints);
and that the problem can become NP PP -complete, once negative constraints are allowed. We also propose an approximating semantics that circumvents the increase in complexity
caused by negative constraints.

1

Introduction

(i) anyone who has published a novel is an author, and

The effort for building large-scale knowledge bases from
data in an automated manner has resulted in a number of
systems including NELL (Mitchell et al. 2015), Yago (Hoffart et al. 2013), DeepDive (Shin et al. 2015), Microsoft’s
Probase (Wu et al. 2012), and Google’s Knowledge Vault
(Dong et al. 2014). They combine methods from information
extraction, natural language processing, relational learning,
and databases to process large volumes of uncertain data.
The state of the art to store and process such data is founded
on probabilistic databases (PDBs) (Imieliski and Lipski
1984; Fuhr and Rölleke 1997; Suciu et al. 2011).
Each of the above systems encodes only a portion of the
real world, and this description is necessarily incomplete.
Thus, a meaningful querying semantics must provide a way
to deal with missing information. Recently, an effort in this
direction was made by introducing open-world probabilistic databases (OpenPDBs) (Ceylan, Darwiche, and Van den
Broeck 2016), which generalize PDBs to be able to deal with
incompleteness. More precisely, in OpenPDBs the probabilities of facts that are not in the database, called open tuples,
are relaxed to a default probability interval, which is very

(ii) authors and novels are disjoint entities,
which helps us to distinguish such queries. Observe that (i)
is a positive axiom and would lead to higher probabilities,
whereas (ii) is a negative (constraining) axiom and would
entail lower probabilities for some queries.
This problem has been widely studied in the context of
classical databases under the name of ontology-based data
access (OBDA) (Poggi et al. 2008), a popular paradigm that
encodes the domain knowledge through an ontology, thus
being able to deduce facts not explicitly speciﬁed in the
database. Following this, we encode the domain knowledge
using a Datalog± ontology (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz
2012), which helps to break down the symmetries between
open tuples, letting us distinguish more queries by comparing their upper and lower probability values.
We study the semantic and computational properties of
OpenPDBs under Datalog± programs. The main distinction
between a PDB and an OpenPDB is that the latter represents a set of probability distributions instead of a single one,
and introduces the difﬁculty of choosing the distribution that
will maximize (or minimize) the probability of a query. It is
known that the data complexity of probabilistic UCQ evalu-

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1063

