Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Novel Geometric Approach for Global Alignment of PPI Networks∗
Yangwei Liu,1 Hu Ding,2 Danyang Chen,1 Jinhui Xu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University

alignment. Local alignment algorithms are designed to ﬁnd
isomorphic subgraphs of two (or more) PPI networks. Popular algorithms include Mawish (Koyutürk et al. 2006) and
AlignNemo (Ciriello et al. 2012). While local alignment algorithms can ﬁnd isomorphic substructures, global alignment algorithms can better capture the global picture of how
conserved substructure motifs are organized.
A great deal of recent research has focused on global
alignment algorithms. Some algorithms are designed to handle the alignment of multiple PPI networks, such as IsoRankN (Liao et al. 2009), NetCoffee (Hu, Kehr, and Reinert 2013), ConvexAlign (Hashemifar, Huang, and Xu 2016)
and an algorithm framework in (Kalaev, Bafna, and Sharan 2008) Some alignment algorithms are designed to work
with the alignment of two PPI networks, such as IsoRank
(Singh, Xu, and Berger 2008), MI-GRAAL (Kuchaiev and
Pržulj 2011), GHOST (Patro and Kingsford 2012), MAGNA
(Saraph and Milenković 2014), Prob (Todor, Dobra, and
Kahveci 2013), NETAL (Neyshabur et al. 2013), HubAlign
(Hashemifar and Xu 2014) and an embedding algorithm
based on graphlet frequency (Przulj 2007) . IsoRank is the
ﬁrst algorithm of such kind, and is also one of the most popular ones. It deﬁnes the similarity of two nodes recursively,
meaning that two nodes are similar if their neighbors are
similar. MI-GRAAL is an algorithm that uses both topological and biological information, and produces an alignment
in a greedy way using a seed-and-extend approach. GHOST
deﬁnes the distance between two nodes as the difference of
spectral signatures of them, and then generates the alignment
in a greedy way. NETAL ﬁrst deﬁnes topological similarity
between nodes in a similar way to IsoRank, then tries to optimize the number of conserved edges, and ﬁnally builds the
alignment greedily.
In this paper we propose a novel global pairwise alignment algorithm, called GeoAlign, to align two PPI networks
based on techniques including graph embedding, geometric
algorithms and ﬂow algorithms. GeoAlign is a two-step algorithm, with a Geometric step which gives us a topological
matching score, and an MCMF step which gives us a biological matching score. The general ideas can be summarized as
follows.
Geometric Step. Since directly aligning graphs is challenging and the mostly used information in PPI network
alignment is the local topology of each node, a natural way

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel geometric method for the
problem of global pairwise alignment of protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks. A PPI network can be viewed as
a node-edge graph and its alignment often needs to solve
some generalized version of the subgraph isomorphism problem which is notoriously challenging and NP-hard. All existing research has focused on designing algorithms with good
practical performance. In this paper we propose a two-step algorithm for the global pairwise PPI network alignment which
consists of a Geometric Step and an MCMF Step. Our algorithm ﬁrst applies a graph embedding technique that preserves the topological structure of the original PPI networks
and maps the problem from graph domain to geometric domain, and computes a rigid transformation for one of the embedded PPI networks so as to minimize its Earth Mover’s
Distance (EMD) to the other PPI network. It then solves a
Min-Cost Max-Flow problem using the (scaled) inverse of
sequence similarity scores as edge weight. By using the ﬂow
values from the two steps (i.e., EMD and Min-Cost MaxFlow) as the matching scores, we are able to combine the
two matching results to obtain the desired alignment. Unlike
other popular alignment algorithms which are either greedy
or incremental, our algorithm globally optimizes the problem
to yield an alignment with better quality.

Introduction
A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network is a graph that
describes the interaction of proteins, where a node represents a protein, and an edge means that two corresponding
proteins interact with each other. The alignment of two PPI
networks is thus the alignment of two undirected graphs.
Since this is usually a generalized subgraph isomorphism
problem which is NP-hard, researches on this problem are
mostly heuristic algorithms aimed at achieving good practical efﬁciency. Current alignment algorithms can be broadly
classiﬁed into two categories: local alignment and global
∗
The research of this work was supported in part by NSF
through grants CCF-1422324, IIS-1422591, and CNS-1547167.
Ding was supported by a start-up fund from Michigan State University. Part of the work was done when Ding was in Simons Institute,
UC Berkeley. Ding also wants to thank Prof. Roded Sharan for his
helpful discussion.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

31

