Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Open-Vocabulary Semantic Parsing
with both Distributional Statistics and Formal Knowledge
Matt Gardner, Jayant Krishnamurthy
Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Seattle, Washington, USA
{mattg,jayantk}@allenai.org

To overcome this limitation, recent work has proposed
methods for open vocabulary semantic parsing, which replace a formal KB with a probabilistic database learned
from a text corpus. In these methods, language is mapped
onto queries with predicates derived directly from the
text itself (Lewis and Steedman 2013; Krishnamurthy and
Mitchell 2015). For instance, the question above might be
mapped to λ(x).president of(x, USA). This query is not executable against any KB, however, and so open vocabulary
semantic parsers must learn execution models for the predicates found in the text. They do this with a distributional
approach similar to word embedding methods, giving them
broad coverage, but lacking access to the large, curated KBs
available to traditional semantic parsers.
Prior work in semantic parsing, then, has either had direct
access to the information in a knowledge base, or broad coverage over all of natural language using the information in a
large corpus, but not both.
In this work, we show how to combine these two
approaches by incorporating KB information into open
vocabulary semantic parsing models. Our key insight
is that formal KB queries can be converted into features that can be added to the learned execution models of open vocabulary semantic parsers. This conversion allows open vocabulary models to use the KB fact
/ GOVERNMENT / PRESIDENT OF(BARACKO BAMA, USA) when
scoring president of(BARACKO BAMA, USA), without requiring the model to map the language onto a single formal statement. Crucially, this featurization also allows the model to
use these KB facts even when they only provide partial information about the language being modeled. For example,
knowing that an entity is a POLITICIAN is very helpful information for deciding whether that entity is a front-runner.
Our approach, outlined in Figure 1, effectively learns the
meaning of a word as a distributional vector plus a weighted
combination of Freebase queries, a considerably more expressive representation than those used by prior work.
While this combination is the main contribution of our
work, we also present some small improvements that allow
open vocabulary semantic parsing models to make better use
of KB information when it is available: improving the logical forms generated by the semantic parser, and employing a
simple technique from related work for generating candidate
entities from the KB.

Abstract
Traditional semantic parsers map language onto compositional, executable queries in a ﬁxed schema. This mapping allows them to effectively leverage the information contained in large, formal knowledge bases (KBs, e.g., Freebase)
to answer questions, but it is also fundamentally limiting—
these semantic parsers can only assign meaning to language
that falls within the KB’s manually-produced schema. Recently proposed methods for open vocabulary semantic parsing overcome this limitation by learning execution models
for arbitrary language, essentially using a text corpus as a
kind of knowledge base. However, all prior approaches to
open vocabulary semantic parsing replace a formal KB with
textual information, making no use of the KB in their models. We show how to combine the disparate representations
used by these two approaches, presenting for the ﬁrst time a
semantic parser that (1) produces compositional, executable
representations of language, (2) can successfully leverage the
information contained in both a formal KB and a large corpus, and (3) is not limited to the schema of the underlying KB. We demonstrate signiﬁcantly improved performance
over state-of-the-art baselines on an open-domain natural language question answering task.

1

Introduction

Semantic parsing is the task of mapping a phrase in natural language onto a formal query in some ﬁxed schema,
which can then be executed against a knowledge base
(KB) (Zelle and Mooney 1996; Zettlemoyer and Collins
2005). For example, the phrase “Who is the president
of the United States?” might be mapped onto the query
λ(x)./ GOVERNMENT / PRESIDENT OF(x, USA), which, when
executed against Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), returns
BARACK O BAMA. By mapping phrases to executable statements, semantic parsers can leverage large, curated sources
of knowledge to answer questions (Berant et al. 2013).
This beneﬁt comes with an inherent limitation, however—
semantic parsers can only produce executable statements
within their manually-produced schema. There is no query
against Freebase that can answer questions like “Who are the
Democratic front-runners in the US election?”, as Freebase
does not encode information about front-runners. Semantic
parsers trained for Freebase fail on these kinds of questions.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3195

