Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Getting More Out of the Exposed Structure in
Constraint Programming Models of Combinatorial Problems
Gilles Pesant
École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
CIRRELT, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
gilles.pesant@polymtl.ca

and of limiting the degree of vertices to be at most two.
Taken separately, each of these parts is easy. The ﬁeld
of Operations Research has exploited such structural decomposition for a long time through the concept of problem relaxation which provides bounds on the value of the
cost function. Lagrangian decomposition provides another
opportunity by working on these substructures separately
while linking them in the cost function — recent work has
adapted this approach to improve communication between
constraints in CP (Bergman, Ciré, and van Hoeve 2015;
Ha, Quimper, and Rousseau 2015).
A problem to be solved by CP is typically expressed
as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (X, D, C) where
X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } is a ﬁnite set of variables, D =
{D1 , D2 , . . . , Dn } a corresponding ﬁnite set of domains
specifying the possible values that each variable in X can
take, and C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cm } a ﬁnite set of constraints restricting the combinations of values that the variables may
take, which can be seen as relations over subsets of X. The
exposed structure in CP models, corresponding to each constraint cj , has been key to the design of powerful ﬁltering algorithms (van Hoeve and Katriel 2006) that identify
some variable-value pair (xi , d) which, given the current domains of the other variables, cannot possibly satisfy cj and
hence ﬁlter out d from Di . To a lesser degree we also exploit that structure to guide search (Boussemart et al. 2004;
Pesant, Quimper, and Zanarini 2012) and to explain failure
and ﬁltering during search (Stuckey 2010). But we could do
much more.
There is a wealth of information inside each of these constraints. In this paper I present a uniﬁed perspective that
generalizes some of the key features of CP and offers novel
powerful ways to exploit combinatorial problem structure.

Abstract
To solve combinatorial problems, Constraint Programming
builds high-level models that expose much of the structure
of the problem. The distinctive driving force of Constraint
Programming has been this direct access to problem structure. This has been key to the design of powerful ﬁltering
algorithms but we could do much more. Considering the set
of solutions to each constraint as a multivariate discrete distribution opens the door to more structure-revealing computations that may signiﬁcantly change this solving paradigm. As
a result we could improve our ability to solve combinatorial
problems and our understanding of the structure of practical
problems.

Introduction
Many efﬁcient computational methodologies have been designed to solve combinatorial problems. Among those
which proceed by building a formal model of the problem,
SAT and MIP solvers express theirs in a restricted syntax
(Boolean clauses, linear constraints) that allows them to
apply powerful algorithms and data structures specialized
for that homogeneous form. Constraint Programming (CP)
solvers followed a different route, having developed over
the years a very rich and heterogeneous modelling language
(Beldiceanu et al. 2007) with an extensive set of inference
algorithms, each dedicated to a primitive of that language.
These high-level primitives, termed global constraints, expose much of the combinatorial structure of a problem. They
have been identiﬁed over time as being complex enough to
provide structural insight yet simple enough for some desired computing tasks to remain tractable. As a result one
often ﬁnds that an otherwise challenging problem can be
modelled using just a few such constraints. The distinctive
driving force of CP has been this direct access to problem
structure.
N P-hard problems often combine a few “easy” (i.e.
polytime-solvable) problems — it is the combination that
makes them hard to solve. Consider the well-known TSP:
it can be seen as the combination of an assignment problem (minimum weight matching) and of subtour avoidance;
or alternately as the combination of the minimum spanning tree problem (strictly speaking, the minimum one-tree)

Solution Sets as Multivariate Distributions
Let’s examine the combinatorial structure of individual constraints by considering the set of solutions to a constraint
as a multivariate discrete distribution. If we wanted to design algorithms able to query the distribution of solutions
to an instance of a constraint, would that be hard? It turns
out that for several combinatorial structures we can achieve
a lot in polynomial time. What sort of query would we be
interested in? Consider the derived marginal distributions
over individual variables. Fig. 1 depicts the simple example

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4846

