Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fine-Grained Recurrent Neural Networks for
Automatic Prostate Segmentation in Ultrasound Images
Xin Yang,∗ Lequan Yu,∗ Lingyun Wu,§ Yi Wang,∗ Dong Ni,§ Jing Qin,† Pheng-Ann Heng∗,‡
∗

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
§
National-Regional Key Technology Engineering Laboratory for Medical Ultrasound,
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
†
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
‡
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{xinyang,lqyu,ywang,pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Boundary incompleteness raises great challenges to automatic prostate segmentation in ultrasound images. Shape
prior can provide strong guidance in estimating the missing boundary, but traditional shape models often suffer from
hand-crafted descriptors and local information loss in the ﬁtting procedure. In this paper, we attempt to address those issues with a novel framework. The proposed framework can
seamlessly integrate feature extraction and shape prior exploring, and estimate the complete boundary with a sequential manner. Our framework is composed of three key modules. Firstly, we serialize the static 2D prostate ultrasound images into dynamic sequences and then predict prostate shapes
by sequentially exploring shape priors. Intuitively, we propose to learn the shape prior with the biologically plausible
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). This module is corroborated to be effective in dealing with the boundary incompleteness. Secondly, to alleviate the bias caused by different serialization manners, we propose a multi-view fusion strategy to
merge shape predictions obtained from different perspectives.
Thirdly, we further implant the RNN core into a multiscale
Auto-Context scheme to successively reﬁne the details of the
shape prediction map. With extensive validation on challenging prostate ultrasound images, our framework bridges severe
boundary incompleteness and achieves the best performance
in prostate boundary delineation when compared with several advanced methods. Additionally, our approach is general and can be extended to other medical image segmentation tasks, where boundary incompleteness is one of the main
challenges.

Figure 1: Boundary incompleteness in prostate ultrasound
images. Green, yellow and blue arrows denote deﬁcient
boundary, ambiguous boundary and severe heterogeneity,
respectively. Red curve denotes the segmentation ground
truth.

Prostate cancer is the one of the most common noncutaneous cancer in men around the world. The routine clinical modality for imaging the prostate is medical ultrasound.
Segmenting prostate from ultrasound images is of essential importance for prostatic disease diagnoses and therapeutic choices, such as creating patient-speciﬁc anatomical models for surgical planning (Wang et al. 2016) and
image-guided biopsy, real-time guidance for the placement
of biopsy needles towards lesions (Hodge et al. 1989),

and volumetric measurement for prostate shape evaluation
(Terris and Stamey 1991). However, manual delineation of
prostate boundary is tedious, time-consuming and often irreproducible, even for experienced physicians.
Automatic solutions for accurate and efﬁcient prostate
segmentation in ultrasound image are highly desired. However, developing such automatic solutions remains very
challenging for several reasons, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Firstly, different ultrasound images present diverse intensity
distributions due to different imaging parameters, such as
focus depth, Time Gain Compensation (TGC) and scanning
orientation. Secondly, typical factors in ultrasound, including signal dropout, speckle noise, acoustic shadow and low
contrast against surrounding tissues, cause the ambiguity,
poor visibility and long-span occlusion in prostate boundaries (Noble and Boukerroui 2006). Thirdly, large variances
in appearance, shape and size are often observed in prostates
from different patients. Even the tissues belonging to a same
prostate often present severe heterogeneity.
In the last decade, two main methodological categories
have been studied as the solutions for automatic prostate segmentation:

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Bottom-up fashion: Methods in this stream mainly resort to classify each pixel as foreground (prostate tis-

Introduction

1633

