Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Geometry of Compositionality
Hongyu Gong, Suma Bhat, Pramod Viswanath
hgong6@illinois.edu, spbhat2@illinois.edu, pramodv@illinois.edu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, USA

target language, e.g., chemin de fer from French to English
to be way of iron in place of railway (Bouamor, Semmar,
and Zweigenbaum 2012). In information retrieval, the retrieved document matching a component word is irrelevant
given the meaning of the MWE hot dog. Hence, identifying
the compositionality of MWEs is an important subtask in a
computational system.
As another example, consider the word love in the following two contexts. In the ﬁrst: “I love going to the dentist.
Been waiting for it all week!”, the word has a non-literal
(hence non-compositional) and sarcastic interpretation to
actually mean the exact opposite of the literal (compositional) sense, which is to “like”. In the second: “I love strawberry ice cream; it’s simply my favorite”, the same word has
the compositional meaning. Again, the degree of compositionality is crucially context-dependent.
Yet another example of compositionality involves
metaphors. Consider the word angel in the following two
contexts:
(1) The girl is an angel; she is helpful to the children.
(2) The angels are sure keeping busy, what with all his distractions and mishaps.
In (1) the word has a ﬁgurative sense (i.e., noncompositional interpretation) whereas in (2), the word has
the compositional meaning of a “divine being”. Again, the
degree of compositionality is crucially context-dependent.
In this paper our focus is to decide the compositionality of a word or a phrase using its local linguistic context. Our approach only relies on the use of word embeddings, which capture the “meaning” of a word using a lowdimensional vector. Our compositionality prediction algorithm brings two key innovations: (1) It leverages the crucial
contextual information that dictates the compositionality of
a phrase or word; (2) The prediction mechanism is completely independent of external linguistic resources. Both
these are signiﬁcant improvements over recent works with
similar goals: compositionality of MWEs (Salehi, Cook, and
Baldwin 2015), works on sarcasm (Wallace et al. 2014) and
metaphor detection (Tsvetkov et al. 2014) (the latter works
rely signiﬁcantly on external linguistic resources and access
to labeled training data).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst unsupervised
study on context-dependent phrase compositionality and the
ﬁrst resource-independent study on sarcasm and metaphor

Abstract
This paper proposes a simple test for compositionality (i.e.,
literal usage) of a word or phrase in a context-speciﬁc way.
The test is computationally simple, relying on no external resources and only uses a set of trained word vectors. Experiments show that the proposed method is competitive with
state of the art and displays high accuracy in context-speciﬁc
compositionality detection of a variety of natural language
phenomena (idiomaticity, sarcasm, metaphor) for different
datasets in multiple languages. The key insight is to connect
compositionality to a curious geometric property of word embeddings, which is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Idiomatic expressions and ﬁgurative speech are key components of the creative process that embodies natural language.
One expression type is multiword expressions (MWEs) –
phrases with semantic idiosyncrasies that cross word boundaries (Sag et al. 2002). Examples of MWEs include by and
large, spill the beans and part of speech. As such, these
phrases are idiomatic, in that their meanings cannot be inferred from the meaning of their component words, and are
hence termed non-compositional phrases as opposed to being compositional phrases.
A particularly intriguing aspect of MWEs is their ability
to take on degrees of compositionality depending on the context they are in. For example, consider two contexts in which
the phrase bad egg occurs.
(1) Ensure that one bad egg doesn’t spoil good businesses
for those that care for their clientele.
(2) I don’t know which hen is laying the bad egg but when
I crack it, it explodes! It is all creamy yellowish with very
little odor.
In (1), the phrase has a non-compositional interpretation to
mean ‘an unpleasant person’, whereas in (2), the phrase has
the meaning of a noun phrase whose head is egg and modiﬁer is bad. This context-dependent degree of compositionality of an MWE poses signiﬁcant challenges to natural language processing applications. In machine translation, instead of processing the MWE as a whole, a literal translation
of its components could result in a meaningless phrase in the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3202

