Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multilinear Regression for Embedded Feature
Selection with Application to fMRI Analysis
Xiaonan Song

Haiping Lu

Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong Baptist University, China
sxnzxz@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Shefﬁeld, UK
h.lu@shefﬁeld.ac.uk

vectors, leading to severe small sample size (SSS) problem
(Kolda and Bader 2009). This motivates multilinear regression models which represent an observation as a tensor X
and learn a coefﬁcient tensor W via model ﬁtting (Suzuki
2015). They extend Problem (1) to tensor data as

Abstract
Embedded feature selection is effective when both prediction
and interpretation are needed. The Lasso and its extensions
are standard methods for selecting a subset of features while
optimizing a prediction function. In this paper, we are interested in embedded feature selection for multidimensional
data, wherein (1) there is no need to reshape the multidimensional data into vectors and (2) structural information from
multiple dimensions are taken into account. Our main contribution is a new method called Regularized multilinear regression and selection (Remurs) for automatically selecting a subset of features while optimizing prediction for multidimensional data. Both nuclear norm and the 1 -norm are carefully
incorporated to derive a multi-block optimization algorithm
with proved convergence. In particular, Remurs is motivated
by fMRI analysis where the data are multidimensional and it
is important to ﬁnd the connections of raw brain voxels with
functional activities. Experiments on synthetic and real data
show the advantages of Remurs compared to Lasso, Elastic
Net, and their multilinear extensions.

min
W

Linear regression is popular in modeling the relationship
between a scalar response y and a vector of I predictors
x ∈ RI , with two objectives: accurate prediction on future data and interpretation of the model (Hastie, Tibshirani,
and Friedman 2009). It can be ﬁtted to M training samples
(xm , ym )M
m=1 via a loss function J(·) plus a regularization
function Ω(·) formulated as follows:
w

M


J (xm , w , ym ) + Ω (w) ,

J (Xm , W , ym ) + Ω (W) .

(2)

m=1

Existing multilinear regression models for Problem (2)
impose a low-rank constraint on W to leverage the
structure information within X by ﬁxing the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) rank of W as a priori. E.g., Su et
al. (2012) assume W to be rank-one, which is too restrictive to properly ﬁt the model. Guo et al. (2012) and Zhou et
al. (2013) impose a rank-R constraint via a tensor factorization model, which have many local minima. Moreover, none
of them has feature selection embedded as Lasso. Tan et al.
(2012) also impose a rank-R constraint but they apply 1 norm regularization to factor matrices (which are multiplied
to produce W) to promote sparsity in W indirectly, which
hurts the interpretability.
For matrix (second-order tensor) data, the nuclear norm
(a.k.a., the trace norm) was used as a low-rank constraint
on coefﬁcient matrix to solve the second-order version of
Problem (2) with various regression models, such as logistic regression (Tomioka and Aihara 2007) and generalized
linear models (Zhou and Li 2014). It was also combined
with 2 -norm in the hinge-loss regression (Luo et al. 2015).
Nonetheless, these regression methods are formulated only
for matrix data, and they do not have feature selection embedded either. In addition, the combination of nuclear norm
and 1 -norm appears in other problems such as subspace
clustering (Wang, Xu, and Leng 2013).
This paper aims to solve the multilinear regression Problem (2) with feature selection embedded. Our work is motivated by the use of the tensor nuclear norm in other models,
such as multilinear multitask learning (Romera-Paredes et
al. 2013) and tensor completion (Signoretto, De Lathauwer,
and Suykens 2012; Tomioka, Hayashi, and Kashima 2010;
Gandy, Recht, and Yamada 2011; Richard, Savalle, and Vayatis 2012; Liu et al. 2013; Signoretto et al. 2014). Note that
both models solve problems different from the multilinear
regression problem (2). Furthermore, multilinear multitask

Introduction

min

M


(1)

m=1

where w ∈ RI is the coefﬁcient vector, and ·, · is the standard Euclidean inner product. A classical linear regression
method is the least square loss with 1 -norm regularization,
leading to Lasso (Tibshirani 1996). Lasso gives a sparse w,
thus having feature selection embedded.
However, many real-world data are multidimensional, i.e.,
tensor observations. They need to be vectorized ﬁrst for linear regression. This vectorization completely ignores underlying multidimensional structure, e.g., the spatial or temporal coherence. It also tends to create very high-dimensional
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2562

