Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast Online Incremental Learning on Mixture Streaming Data
Yi Wang, Xin Fan, Zhongxuan Luo

Tianzhu Wang

School of Software
Dalian University of Technology
& Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network
and Service Software of Liaoning Province
Dalian, China
{dlutwangyi, xin.fan, zxluo}@dlut.edu.cn

No. 254, Deta Leisure Town
Jinzhou New District
Dalian, China
wangtz@126.com

Maomao Min

Jiebo Luo

School of Software
Dalian University of Technology
Dalian, China
neilfvhv@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627, USA
jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Classical linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Chen et al.
2000) and its recent variants (Sharma and Paliwal 2015;
Kong and Ding 2014; Luo, Ding, and Huang 2011) can effectively extract features for classiﬁcation. Recently, incremental LDA (ILDA) methods have been emerging to address
the above challenges arisen from streaming data. Some of
these ILDA methods attempt to modify the objective function, while others use new optimization strategies to accelerate the calculation speed. The method of IDR/QR (Ye et
al. 2005) uses the QR-decomposition to update the withinclass scatter matrix (Sw ) and between-class scatter matrix
(Sb ). The methods of ICLDA (Lu, Zou, and Wang 2012),
IDR/new (Lu, Jian, and Wang 2015) and ILDA/QR (Chu et
al. 2015) also follow the idea of using QR-decomposition,
and employ various techniques to reduce the matrix size for
the decomposition. However, their updating schemes, the
key to any incremental algorithms, are not space and time
efﬁcient for online learning.
Researchers also resort to the approximation of scattering
matrices for efﬁciency improvements. Liu et al. (Liu, Jiang,
and Zhou 2009) give the least-square solution of LDA (LSILDA), but the incrementally update of the pseudo-inverse
of the data matrix is still time consuming. Kim et al. (Kim et
al. 2011) leverage the sufﬁcient spanning set approximation
to Sb and the total scatter matrix St by updating the principal eigenvectors and eigenvalues of these two matrices. The
time complexity signiﬁcantly decreases, but there exists an
evident gap between the accuracies of incremental and batch
versions.
In this paper, we devise an online incremental LDA algorithm that requires much (2 ∼ 10 times) less computation complexity and smaller space than the state-of-the-art
for mixture streaming data. The algorithm is illustrated in
Fig. 1. Speciﬁcally, our contributions are twofold:
1. We take advantage of the QR-decomposition on a lower
triangular matrix (Chu et al. 2015), and propose a new

Abstract
The explosion of streaming data poses challenges to feature learning methods including linear discriminant analysis (LDA). Many existing LDA algorithms are not efﬁcient enough to incrementally update with samples that sequentially arrive in various manners. First, we propose a
new fast batch LDA (FLDA/QR) learning algorithm that
uses the cluster centers to solve a lower triangular system
that is optimized by the Cholesky-factorization. To take advantage of the intrinsically incremental mechanism of the
matrix, we further develop an exact incremental algorithm
(IFLDA/QR). The Gram-Schmidt process with reorthogonalization in IFLDA/QR signiﬁcantly saves the space and time
expenses compared with the rank-one QR-updating of most
existing methods. IFLDA/QR is able to handle streaming data
containing 1) new labeled samples in the existing classes, 2)
samples of an entirely new (novel) class, and more signiﬁcantly, 3) a chunk of examples mixed with those in 1) and
2). Both theoretical analysis and numerical experiments have
demonstrated much lower space and time costs (2 ∼ 10 times
faster) than the state of the art, with comparable classiﬁcation
accuracy.

Introduction
Streaming data are explosive with the boom of mobile networks, social media, and video cameras in this decade.
To analyze this type of data, an efﬁcient and incremental learning strategy is necessary. Moreover, these data are
mixed with known or novel class labels, arriving one by
one or chunk by chunk. These characteristics greatly challenge the existing learning methods. We aim at developing
an extremely fast incremental learning method for mixture
streaming data.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2739

