Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Ordinal Constrained Binary Code
Learning for Nearest Neighbor Search
†

Hong Liu,†‡ Rongrong Ji,†‡∗ Yongjian Wu, Feiyue Huang
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University, 361005, China
‡
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China

BestImage Lab, Tencent Technology (Shanghai) Co.,Ltd, China
lynnliu.xmu@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, littlekenwu@tencent.com, garyhuang@tencent.com

methods learn a set of hash functions hk : Rd → {0, 1}r .
It typically maps the d-dimensional data space into an r-bit
discrete Hamming space, such that the nearest neighbors can
be approximated by using the compact binary codes learned.

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed extensive attention in binary
code learning, a.k.a. hashing, for nearest neighbor search
problems. It has been seen that high-dimensional data points
can be quantized into binary codes to give an efﬁcient similarity approximation via Hamming distance. Among existing
schemes, ranking-based hashing is recent promising that targets at preserving ordinal relations of ranking in the Hamming space to minimize retrieval loss. However, the size
of the ranking tuples, which shows the ordinal relations, is
quadratic or cubic to the size of training samples. By given
a large-scale training data set, it is very expensive to embed such ranking tuples in binary code learning. Besides,
it remains a diﬁculty to build ranking tuples efﬁciently for
most ranking-preserving hashing, which are deployed over
an ordinal graph-based setting. To handle these problems, we
propose a novel ranking-preserving hashing method, dubbed
Ordinal Constraint Hashing (OCH), which efﬁciently learns
the optimal hashing functions with a graph-based approximation to embed the ordinal relations. The core idea is to
reduce the size of ordinal graph with ordinal constraint projection, which preserves the ordinal relations through a small
data set (such as clusters or random samples). In particular,
to learn such hash functions effectively, we further relax the
discrete constraints and design a speciﬁc stochastic gradient
decent algorithm for optimization. Experimental results on
three large-scale visual search benchmark datasets, i.e. LabelMe, Tiny100K and GIST1M, show that the proposed OCH
method can achieve superior performance over the state-ofthe-arts approaches.

Recent advances in binary code learning can be categorized into either data-independent or data-dependent ones
(Wang et al. 2016). The former typically refers to random
projection/partition of feature space, such as Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) and Min-Hash (MinHash). It typically
requires long bits or multi-hash table to achieve satisﬁed
retrieval performance. Both supervised and unsupervised
hashing belong to data-dependent hashing. Unsupervised
hashing, learns hash functions by preserving the data structure, distribution, or topological information, e.g., Spectral
Hashing (SH) (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008), Anchor
Graph Hashing (AGH) (Liu et al. 2011), Isotropic Hashing
(IsoHash) (Kong and Li 2012), Iterative Quantization (ITQ)
(Gong et al. 2013), Discrete Graph Hashing (DGH) (Liu et
al. 2014), Spherical Hashing (SpH) (Heo et al. 2015), Scalable Graph Hashing (SGH) (Jiang and Li 2015), and Ordinal Embedding Hashing (OEH) (Liu et al. 2016). Differently, supervised hashing aims to learn more accurate hash
functions with label information. Representative works include, but not limited to, Binary Reconstructive Embedding (BRE) (Kulis and Darrell 2009), Minimal Loss Hashing
(MLH) (Norouzi and Fleet 2011), Kernel-based Supervised
Hashing (KSH) (Liu et al. 2012a), Semi-Supervised Hashing
(SSH) (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012), Supervised Discrete Hashing (SDH) (Shen et al. 2015).

Introduction

Although promising performance has been shown from
these methods, we argue that, the relative order among
data must be preserved in the Hamming space rather than
pairwise relations. So, many ranking-based hashing algorithms have been proposed to learn more discriminative hash
codes, e.g., Hamming Distance Metric Learning (HDML)
(Norouzi, Fleet, and Salakhutdinov 2012), Ranking-based
Supervised Hashing (RSH) (Wang et al. 2013a), Structbased Hashing (StructHash) (Lin, Shen, and Wu 2014), TopRank Supervised Binary Coding (Top-RSBC) (Song et al.
2015). However, most of these methods adopt the stochastic
gradient decreasing (SGD) optimization under triplet ordinal constraints, which needs massive iterations. On the other

Learning binary code, a.k.a. hashing, to preserve the data
similarity has recently been popular in various computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence applications, e.g., image retrieval (Liu et al. 2016), objective detection (Dean et al.
2013), multi-task learning (Weinberger et al. 2009), linear
classiﬁer training (Li et al. 2011; Lin et al. 2014), and active
learning (Liu et al. 2012b). In this setting, real-valued data
points are encoded into binary codes that are signiﬁcantly efﬁcient in storage and computation. In general, most hashing
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2238

