Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Engineering Agreement: The Naming Game
with Asymmetric and Heterogeneous Agents
Jie Gao,1 Bo Li,2 Grant Schoenebeck,2 Fang-Yi Yu2 ∗
1

Stony Brook University; 2 University of Michigan

et al. 2006; Hurford 1989; Nowak, Plotkin, and Krakauer
1999).
In order to analyze the social dynamics in multi-agent systems in depth, we focus on one stylized model, the Naming Game, in which agents negotiate conventions through
local pairwise interactions (Steels 1995; Baronchelli et al.
2006a). The Naming Game captures the generic and essential features of an agreement process in networked agentbased systems. Brieﬂy speaking, when two agents wish to
communicate, one agent, the speaker, randomly selects one
convention from her list of current conventions and uses this
convention to initiate communication with the listener. If the
listener recognizes that convention, both the speaker and listener purge their lists of current conventions to only include
that “successful” convention. If the listener does not recognize that convention, she adds it to her list of known conventions.
This simple model is able to account for the emergence of
shared conventions in a homogeneous population of agents.
Both simulations and experiments have been conducted on
various network topologies. However many key questions,
especially those related to asymmetric and heterogeneous
agents, remain open. For example: what network topologies enable the fastest convergence? Does community structure help or harm convergence? Does homogeneity or heterogeneity help or harm convergence? How robust are the
dynamics to possible manipulations by a small number of
agents? Moreover, rigorous theoretical analysis is almost entirely absent in previous work on the Naming Game. In this
paper we aim to ﬁll in the literature in the following aspects:

Abstract
Being popular in language evolution, cognitive science, and
culture dynamics, the Naming Game has been widely used
to analyze how agents reach global consensus via communications in multi-agent systems. Most prior work considered
networks that are symmetric and homogeneous (e.g., vertex
transitive). In this paper we consider asymmetric or heterogeneous settings that complement the current literature: 1)
we show that increasing asymmetry in network topology can
improve convergence rates. The star graph empirically converges faster than all previously studied graphs; 2) we consider graph topologies that are particularly challenging for
naming game such as disjoint cliques or multi-level trees and
ask how much extra homogeneity (random edges) is required
to allow convergence or fast convergence. We provided theoretical analysis which was conﬁrmed by simulations; 3) we
analyze how consensus can be manipulated when stubborn
nodes are introduced at different points of the process. Early
introduction of stubborn nodes can easily inﬂuence the outcome in certain family of networks while late introduction of
stubborn nodes has much less power.

1

Introduction

The analysis of shared conventions in multi-agent systems
and complex decentralized social networks has been the
focus of study in several diverse ﬁelds, such as linguistics, sociology, cognitive science, and computer science. The
problem of how such conventions can be established, from
among countless options, without a central coordinator has
been addressed by several disciplines (Nowak and Krakauer
1999; Brighton and Kirby 2001). Among them, the multiagent models and mathematical approaches gain the most
attention by accounting for both the network topology and
opinion change over time (Steels 2005; Nowak, Plotkin,
and Jansen 2000; Baronchelli, Loreto, and Steels 2008;
Pickering and Lim 2016; Franks, Grifﬁths, and Jhumka
2013). It has been shown that the emergence of new political, social, economic behaviors, and culture transmission are
highly dependent on such convention dynamics (Backstrom

1. We discovered that the star graph empirically converges
faster than all previously considered graphs for the Naming Game. This network differs from previously analyzed
topologies in that it is not symmetric (vertex transitive).
In some sense, it is not too surprising that the star graph,
an asymmetric graph, works so well to reach consensus,
which is a symmetry breaking problem. Though, from
ﬁrst principles, this is far from obvious, and other asymmetric graphs, for example a multi-level tree, perform extremely poorly.

∗
J. Gao would like to acknowledge support through NSF DMS1418255, CCF-1535900, CNS-1618391 and AFOSR FA9550-141-0193. The remaining authors are pleased to acknowledge the support of the NSF via AitF-1535912 and CAREER-1452915.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2. To understand network topologies that inhibit fast convergence of the Naming Game, we study two networks
with community structures: agents divided into two dis-

537

