Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Tunable Sensitivity to Large Errors in Neural Network Training
Gil Keren

Sivan Sabato

Björn Schuller

Chair of Complex and Intelligent
Systems, University of Passau
Passau, Germany
gil.keren@uni-passau.de

Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer Sheva, Israel

Chair of Complex and Intelligent
Systems, University of Passau
Passau, Germany,
Machine Learning Group
Imperial College London, U.K.

In contrast, humans sometimes employ a different approach to learning: when learning new concepts, they might
ignore the examples they feel they do not understand, and
focus more on the examples that are more useful to them.
When improving proﬁciency regarding a familiar concept,
they might focus on the harder examples, as these can contain more relevant information for the advanced learner. We
make a ﬁrst step towards incorporating this ability into neural network models, by proposing a learning algorithm with
a tunable sensitivity to easy and hard training examples.
Intuitions about human cognition have often inspired successful machine learning approaches (Bengio et al. 2009;
Cho, Courville, and Bengio 2015; Lake et al. 2016). In this
work we show that this can be the case also for tunable sensitivity.
Intuitively, the depth of the model should be positively
correlated with the optimal sensitivity to hard examples.
When the network is relatively shallow, its modeling capacity is limited. In this case, it might be better to reduce sensitivity to hard examples, since it is likely that these examples
cannot be modeled correctly by the network, and so adjusting the model according to these examples might only degrade overall prediction accuracy. On the other hand, when
the network is relatively deep, it has a high modeling capacity. In this case, it might be beneﬁcial to allow more sensitivity to hard examples, thereby possibly improving the accuracy of the ﬁnal learned model.
Our learning algorithm works by generalizing the crossentropy gradient, where the new function can be used instead
of the gradient in any gradient-based optimization method
for neural networks. Many such training methods have been
proposed, including, to name a few, Momentum (Polyak
1964), RMSProp (Tieleman and Hinton 2012), and Adam
(Kingma and Ba 2015). The proposed generalization is parameterized by a value k > 0, that controls the sensitivity
of the training process to hard examples, replacing the ﬁxed
dependence of the cross-entropy gradient. When k = 1 the
proposed update rule is exactly the cross-entropy gradient.
Smaller values of k decrease the sensitivity during training
to hard examples, and larger values of k increase it.
We report experiments on several benchmark datasets.
These experiments show, matching our expectations, that in
almost all cases prediction error is improved using large values of k for deep networks, small values of k for shallow net-

Abstract
When humans learn a new concept, they might ignore examples that they cannot make sense of at ﬁrst, and only later
focus on such examples, when they are more useful for learning. We propose incorporating this idea of tunable sensitivity
for hard examples in neural network learning, using a new
generalization of the cross-entropy gradient step, which can
be used in place of the gradient in any gradient-based training
method. The generalized gradient is parameterized by a value
that controls the sensitivity of the training process to harder
training examples. We tested our method on several benchmark datasets. We propose, and corroborate in our experiments, that the optimal level of sensitivity to hard example is
positively correlated with the depth of the network. Moreover,
the test prediction error obtained by our method is generally
lower than that of the vanilla cross-entropy gradient learner.
We therefore conclude that tunable sensitivity can be helpful
for neural network learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, neural networks have become empirically
successful in a wide range of supervised learning applications, such as computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Szegedy et al. 2015), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), natural language processing (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014) and computational paralinguistics
(Keren and Schuller 2016; Keren et al. 2016). Standard
implementations of training feed-forward neural networks
for classiﬁcation are based on gradient-based stochastic optimization, usually optimizing the empirical cross-entropy
loss (Hinton 1989).
However, the cross-entropy is only a surrogate for the
true objective of supervised network training, which is in
most cases to reduce the probability of a prediction error
(or in some case BLEU score, word-error-rate, etc). When
optimizing using the cross-entropy loss, as we show below, the effect of training examples on the gradient is linear in the prediction bias, which is the difference between
the network-predicted class probabilities and the target class
probabilities. In particular, a wrong conﬁdent prediction induces a larger gradient than a similarly wrong, but less conﬁdent, prediction.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2087

