Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Word Embedding Based Correlation Model for Question/Answer Matching
Yikang Shen,1 Wenge Rong,2 Nan Jiang,2 Baolin Peng,3 Jie Tang,4 Zhang Xiong2
1

Sino-French Engineer School, Beihang University, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
Department of System Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
{yikang.shen, w.rong, nanjiang, xiongz}@buaa.edu.cn, blpeng@se.cuhk.edu.hk, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

distance between dissimilar but potentiality related words
in questions and answers. For example, given the question “What is the fastest car in the world?”, a good answer
might be “The Jaguar XJ220 is the dearest, fastest and most
sought after car on the planet.” This Q&A pair share no more
than 4 words in common, including “the” and “is”, but they
are strongly associated by synonyms, hyponyms, or other
weaker semantic associations (Yih, He, and Meek 2014).
Due to the heterogeneity of question and answer, the lexical gap is more signiﬁcant in Q&A matching task than other
paraphrases detection task or information retrieval task.
A possible approach for the lexical gap problem is to employ translation model, which will leverage the Q&A pairs
to learn the semantically related words (Jeon, Croft, and
Lee 2005; Xue, Jeon, and Croft 2008; Zhou, Lyu, and King
2012; Guzmán, Màrquez, and Nakov 2016). The basic assumption is that Q&A pairs are “parallel text” and relationship between words (or phrases) can be established through
word-to-word (or phrase-to-phrase) translation probabilities
by representing words in a discrete space. In spite of its
wide use in many natural language processing tasks, discrete
space representation has two majors disadvantages: 1) the
curse of dimensionality (Bengio et al. 2003), for a natural
language with a vocabulary V of size N , we need to learn at
most N N word-to-word translation probabilities; 2) the generalisation structure is not obvious: it is difﬁcult to estimate
the probability of exact word if they are rare in the training
parallel text (Zou et al. 2013).
An alternative method is to use a semantic-based model.
Some work proposed to learn the latent topics aligned across
the question-answer pairs to bridge the lexical gap, with the
assumption that a question and its answer should share similar topic distribution (Cai et al. 2011; Ji et al. 2012). Recently, inspired by the success of word embedding, some
papers propose to leverage the advantage of the vector representation of words to overcome the lexical gap (Shen et
al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2015) by using similarity of word
vector to represent the word-to-word relation. In other
words, this method calculates Q&A matching probability
based on semantic similarities between words. Because local smoothness properties of continuous space word representations, generalisation can be obtain more easily (Bengio
et al. 2003). However question and answers are heterogeneous in many aspects, semantic similarities can be weak

Abstract
The large scale of Q&A archives accumulated in community
based question answering (CQA) servivces are important information and knowledge resource on the web. Question and
answer matching task has been attached much importance to
for its ability to reuse knowledge stored in these systems: it
can be useful in enhancing user experience with recurrent
questions. In this paper, a Word Embedding based Correlation (WEC) model is proposed by integrating advantages of
both the translation model and word embedding. Given a random pair of words, WEC can score their co-occurrence probability in Q&A pairs, while it can also leverage the continuity
and smoothness of continuous space word representation to
deal with new pairs of words that are rare in the training parallel text. An experimental study on Yahoo! Answers dataset
and Baidu Zhidao dataset shows this new method’s promising
potential.

Introduction
Community Question Answering (CQA) services are websites that enable users to share knowledge by asking and answering different kinds of questions. Over the last decade,
websites, such as Yahoo! Answers, Baidu Zhidao, Quora,
and Zhihu, have accumulated large scale question and answer (Q&A) archives, which are usually organised as a question with a list of candidate answers and associated with
metadata including user tagged subject categories, answer
popularity votes, and selected correct answer (Zhou et al.
2015). This user-generated content is an important information repository on the web and makes Q&A archives invaluable resources for various tasks such as question-answering
(Jeon, Croft, and Lee 2005; Xue, Jeon, and Croft 2008;
Nakov et al. 2015; 2016) and knowledge mining (Adamic
et al. 2008).
To make better use of information stored in CQA systems,
a fundamental task is to properly matching potential candidate answers to the question, since many questions recur
enough to allow for at least a few new questions to be answered by past materials (Shtok et al. 2012). There are several challenges for this task among which the lexical gap or
lexical chasm between the question and candidate answers is
a difﬁcult one (Berger et al. 2000). Lexical gap describes the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3511

