Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SenseRun: Real-Time Running Routes Recommendation
toward Providing Pleasant Running Experiences
Jiayu Long,1,2 Jia Jia,,1 * Han Xu1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology（TNList）
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
2
Academy of Art and Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this demo, we develop a mobile running application,
SenseRun, to involve landscape experiences for routes recommendation. We firstly define landscape experiences, perceived enjoyment from landscape as motivators for running,
by public natural area and traffic density. Based on landscape
experiences, we categorize locations into 3 types (natural, leisure, traffic space) and set them with different basic weight.
Real-time context factors (weather, season and hour of the day)
are involved to adjust the weight. We propose a multiattributes method to recommend routes with weight based on
MVT (The Marginal Value Theorem) k-shortest-paths algorithm. We also use a landscape-awareness sounds algorithm as
supplementary of landscape experiences. Experimental results
improve that SenseRun can enhance running experiences and
is helpful to promote regular physical activities.

Figure 1: The workflow of SenseRun

Introduction
Physical inactivity, connected with cancers, heart diseases,
diabetes, etc., has become a global threat to people’s health
(WHO, 2016). To prevent these diseases, running is wildly
recommended. Most running applications just focus on running data management while (Besenski, L. 2009) states that
motivation of physical activity depends on experiences. Increases in pleasure during running (e.g. enjoyment, relaxation and energy) may help generate positive memory for exercises (Dishman, R.K. and et al, 1985). With scenic landscape along the running routes, these enjoyable experiences,
called landscape experiences, can be further promoted. However, existing mapping services can not realize such experiences as they only provide the shortest routes.
In this demo, we develop a mobile running application,
SenseRun, to involve landscape experiences for routes reco* Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

mmendation with multi-attributes related to landscape experiences: public natural area, traffic density and real-time context factors (weather, seasons and hour of the day). They are
set weight in our method based on MVT (The Marginal
Value Theorem) k-shortest-paths algorithm. (Szeremeta, B.
and et al, 2009) shows that introduction of natural sounds
that are easily covered by traffic noise can greatly enhance
comfort. Therefore, we propose a landscape-awareness
sounds algorithm as supplementary of landscape experiences.

System Overview
Figure 1 shows the workflow of SenseRun which consists of
4 main steps: 1) User selects start and destination in the Map
page. 2) SenseRun recommends 10 routes based on our
method and provides a list of distance in Route page. 3)
SenseRun shows physical data in Run page when running
with simulated natural sounds based on our algorithm. 4) User can check physical and route data in the Result page after
running. Key method and algorithm are described as follows.
• Definition
Since landscapes with high-density traffic or lack of natural
area can prevent people to become active (WHO, 2016), the

5101

