Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast SSP Solvers Using Short-Sighted Labeling
Luis Pineda, Kyle Hollins Wray, Shlomo Zilberstein
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003, USA
{lpineda,wray,shlomo}@cs.umass.edu

Recent algorithms try to cope with this challenge by
reducing the size of the reachable state-space. Examples include determinization-based methods such as FFReplan (Yoon, Fern, and Givan 2007) and RFF (TeichteilKönigsbuch, Kuter, and Infantes 2010), and model reduction
approaches such as SSiPP (Trevizan and Veloso 2014) and
Mkl -reductions (Pineda and Zilberstein 2014). However,
these methods have some shortcomings: some are restricted
to particular problem representations (e.g., FF-Replan and
RFF use PPDDL (Younes and Littman 2004)), while others require some form of pre-processing (Mkl -reductions)
or substantial parameter tuning (SSiPP). Moreover, planning in these methods is typically constrained to states that
are within some distance measure of the start state (e.g.,
number of actions, possible outcomes, or probability of being reached), making it hard to propagate information from
states that are closer to a goal than to the start state, and potentially missing opportunities to improve planning.
Building on these earlier efforts, we introduce a new algorithm for action selection in MDPs—FLARES (Fast Labeling from Residuals using Samples)—that can ﬁnd highperforming policies orders of magnitude faster than optimal
algorithms. FLARES does not require any speciﬁc model
representations, and can efﬁciently propagate information
from states closer to the goal. Moreover, it can be tuned to
ﬁnd approximate or optimal policies, as desired. We show
that FLARES is guaranteed to terminate in a ﬁnite amount
of time, and can outperform other short-sighted state-of-theart planning algorithms, performing consistently well across
a variety of benchmark domains.

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for solving SSPs often work by limiting planning to restricted regions of the state space. The
resulting problems can then be solved quickly, and the process is repeated during execution when states outside the restricted region are encountered. Typically, these approaches
focus on states that are within some distance measure of the
start state (e.g., number of actions or probability of being
reached). However, these short-sighted approaches make it
difﬁcult to propagate information from states that are closer
to a goal than to the start state, thus missing opportunities
to improve planning. We present an alternative approach in
which short-sightedness is used only to determine whether a
state should be labeled as solved or not, but otherwise the set
of states that can be accounted for during planning is unrestricted. Based on this idea, we propose the FLARES algorithm and show that it performs consistently well on a wide
range of benchmark problems.

Introduction
Markov decision processes (MDP) offer a highly-expressive
model for probabilistic sequential decision making. One
class of MDP problems that has received signiﬁcant attention by the planning community is the Stochastic Shortest Path problem (SSP), where the objective is to minimize the expected cost of reaching a goal state from
the start state (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1991). In fact,
it has been shown that the SSP model is more general
than other MDP classes (ﬁnite-horizon and inﬁnite-horizon
discounted-reward MDPs) (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1995).
Solving large MDPs and SSPs optimally is a computationally intensive task. Although they can be solved in polynomial time in the number of states, many problems of interest have a state-space whose size is exponential in the
number of variables describing the problem (Littman 1997).
This has led to the development of a range of model reduction techniques (Dean, Givan, and Leach 1997) as well as
heuristic search algorithms, such as LAO* (Hansen and Zilberstein 2001) and LRTDP (Bonet and Geffner 2003b), that
attempt to focus on states that are relevant to an optimal policy. Unfortunately, even considering just states reachable by
an optimal policy could be computationally prohibitive.

Related Work
Determinization-based approaches saw a surge in popularity
after the success of FF-Replan on the IPPC’04 probabilistic competition (Younes et al. 2005). FF-Replan works by
creating a deterministic version of an MDP, solving this deterministic problem quickly using the FF planner, and then
re-plan if a state outside the current plan is reached during
execution. This algorithm is extremely fast but performance
may be poor for certain classes of probabilistic planning
problems (Little and Thiebaux 2007).
A variety of extensions of this idea offer performance
improvements. For instance, RFF (Teichteil-Königsbuch,
Kuter, and Infantes 2010), the winner of the IPPC’08 plan-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3629

