Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

From Shared Subspaces to Shared Landmarks:
A Robust Multi-Source Classiﬁcation Approach
Sarah M. Erfani†∗ , Mahsa Baktashmotlagh‡∗ , Masud Moshtaghi† , Vinh Nguyen† ,
Christopher Leckie† , James Bailey† , Kotagiri Ramamohanarao†
†

Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
‡
Department of Science and Engineering, Queensland University of Technology, Australia
sarah.erfani@unimelb.edu.au
With the advent of the IoT and the proliferation of smart
devices there is a need for efﬁcient algorithms that accommodate cross-platform data analysis. A common approach to
improve the generalization ability of machine learning algorithms is to provide more training examples. However, when
the examples are augmented data from multiple sources, inserting more data may only consume memory, rather than
yielding better performance (Torralba and Efros 2011). The
main reason behind the ineffectiveness of this common approach to modeling generalization is that the input space of
the training set dramatically deviates from the test set, i.e.,
the datasets are biased. Consequently, the challenge is to
build a system that is robust to the underlying distribution
bias and performs well on unseen datasets.
Domain adaptation and domain generalization address the
above problem by ﬁnding a shared subspace for related
sources. The aim of domain adaptation is to produce robust models on a speciﬁc target (test) source, by leveraging
supplementary information during training from this source,
as well as taking labeled samples from multiple training
sources. Domain adaptation produces target-speciﬁc models, indicating that the training process should be repeated
for each target. Moreover, the target samples may not always
be available. Domain generalization, in contrast, generates
a model independent of targets. It only assumes that samples from multiple sources can be accessed, and makes no
further assumption regarding the target. More speciﬁcally,
domain generalization aims to cope with the deviations in
the marginal distribution (X) and conditional distribution
(Y |X) among different sources. Blanchard et al. (2011) ﬁrst
introduced the notion of domain generalization. Muandet et
al. (2013) developed a source invariant feature representation incorporating the distributional variance across sources
to reduce the dissimilarity. However, more recently it has
been shown that in many real world applications the shift
between different source distributions may not be corrected
by projecting the data to a latent space (Aljundi et al. 2015;
Gong, Grauman, and Sha 2013), and the impact of noise and
outliers may still persist.
The goal of our work is to improve classiﬁcation accuracy across different sources. We introduce an efﬁcient
method that enhances classiﬁcation by combining subspace
projection and landmark selection. Our algorithm learns a
shift-invariant latent space that minimizes the difference be-

Abstract
Training machine leaning algorithms on augmented data from
different related sources is a challenging task. This problem
arises in several applications, such as the Internet of Things
(IoT), where data may be collected from devices with different settings. The learned model on such datasets can generalize poorly due to distribution bias. In this paper we consider
the problem of classifying unseen datasets, given several labeled training samples drawn from similar distributions. We
exploit the intrinsic structure of samples in a latent subspace
and identify landmarks, a subset of training instances from
different sources that should be similar. Incorporating subspace learning and landmark selection enhances generalization by alleviating the impact of noise and outliers, as well as
improving efﬁciency by reducing the size of the data. However, since addressing the two issues simultaneously results
in an intractable problem, we relax the objective function
by leveraging the theory of nonlinear projection and solve a
tractable convex optimisation. Through comprehensive analysis, we show that our proposed approach outperforms stateof-the-art results on several benchmark datasets, while keeping the computational complexity low.

Introduction
The primary objective of supervised learning algorithms is
to learn a function f from a training set (X, Y ) that can
generalize well on unseen test data X  . Traditional classiﬁers generalize well if X and X  are well behaved and follow the same (or very similar) distribution. However, this
common fact may not hold in many applications, especially
in the case of data collected from heterogenous sources.
For example, in sensor monitoring networks, data may be
collected from devices (i.e., domains) with different types,
placements, orientations, and sampling frequencies (Stisen
et al. 2015). In such applications, the classiﬁcation model f
may fail to generalize well due to distribution bias (or shift)
in the collected samples. Therefore, developing a classiﬁcation algorithm that generalizes well on acquired knowledge
from various related sources and can be applied to unseen
sources is an important and compelling problem.
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1854

