Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Dynamic Optimization of Landscape Connectivity
Embedding Spatial-Capture-Recapture Information
Yexiang Xue

Xiaojian Wu

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
yexiang@cs.cornell.edu

Dana Morin

Bistra Dilkina

Dept. of Computer Science NY Coop. Fish & Wildlife Res. Unit College of Computing
Cornell University
Dept. of Natural Resources Georgia Institute of Technology
xw458@cornell.edu
Cornell University
bdilkina@cc.gatech.edu
djm466@cornell.edu

Angela Fuller

J. Andrew Royle

Carla P. Gomes

U.S. Geological Survey
NY Coop. Fish & Wildlife Res. Unit
Dept. of Natural Resources
Cornell University
akf34@cornell.edu

U.S. Geological Survey
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center
aroyle@usgs.gov

Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

porate static, pre-computed parameters, derived from a separate model that estimates landscape resistance to movement,
into the optimization problem for choosing what parcels to
conserve. Further, previous approaches have not considered
local abundance or density of the species in conjunction with
landscape connectivity, even though protection of a minimum number of individuals and maintaining connectivity
are important considerations for species persistence.

Abstract
Maintaining landscape connectivity is increasingly important
in wildlife conservation, especially for species experiencing
the effects of habitat loss and fragmentation. We propose a
novel approach to dynamically optimize landscape connectivity. Our approach is based on a mixed integer program formulation, embedding a spatial capture-recapture model that
estimates the density, space usage, and landscape connectivity for a given species. Our method takes into account the
fact that local animal density and connectivity change dynamically and non-linearly with different habitat protection
plans. In order to scale up our encoding, we propose a sampling scheme via random partitioning of the search space using parity functions. We show that our method scales to realworld size problems and dramatically outperforms the solution quality of an expectation maximization approach and a
sample average approximation approach.

1

In contrast, our approach dynamically optimizes landscape connectivity weighted by local animal densities, given
constrained budgets, by simultaneously estimating animal
movement as a function of the conservation plan. This problem is challenging mainly because the spatial proximity of
landscape parcels inﬂuences parcel speciﬁc density and connectivity values for a species, such that a change to any
single parcel can result in different density and connectivity values to nearby parcels. We use a well-established ecological model, the spatial capture-recapture (SCR) ecological distance model, to estimate species abundance and landscape connectivity based on species spatial encounter history data (Royle et al. 2013; Sutherland, Fuller, and Royle
2015; Fuller et al. 2016). The SCR ecological distance
model estimates where individuals locate their home ranges
and how individuals use space within their home range based
on where individuals are detected in relation to possible trap
locations.

Introduction

Conserving our world’s declining wildlife is a central problem in computational sustainability (Gomes 2009). Maintaining landscape connectivity allows animals to move
among resource patches (Taylor et al. 1993) and is becoming
increasingly important in wildlife conservation, especially
for species experiencing effects of habitat loss and fragmentation. Conservation plans that optimize landscape connectivity for wildlife, typically with limited budgets, are important to maximize the value of scarce resources devoted to
the management and conservation of species. While there
has been work in this research area, e.g., (Williams and Snyder 2005; Conrad et al. 2012; Dilkina and Gomes 2010;
Sheldon et al. 2010; Wu, Sheldon, and Zilberstein 2014), existing approaches decouple the optimization problem of deciding what land parcels to protect from the problem of estimating what parcels provide landscape connectivity. In other
words, the standard approach in previous work is to incor-

More speciﬁcally, our contributions are: (1) A novel
approach that encapsulates a spatial capture-recapture
model, that estimates the population density, space use,
and landscape connectivity, into a mixed-integer programming formulation (MIP) for deciding what parcels to protect, under limited budgets; (2) Our approach takes into account the fact that animal density and connectivity change
dynamically and non-linearly with different protection
plans; (3) In order to scale up our encoding, we propose a
novel sampling approach via random partitioning of the
search space using parity functions; and (4) We show that
our method scales to real-world size problems and dramat-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4552

