Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Top-k Hierarchical Classiﬁcation
Sechan Oh
Moloco
165 University Avenue
Palo Alto, California 94301

into account (Cesa-bianchi et al. 2005). Other examples of
hierarchical classiﬁcation problems include music, video,
image recognition (Deng et al. 2012), patent categorization (Cai and Hofmann 2004; Eisinger et al. 2013), web
content categorization (Dumais and Chen 2000), and gene
function prediction problems (Vens et al. 2008). This literature has proposed several versions of hierarchical loss
functions, and various classiﬁcation algorithms (Ramı́rezCorona, Sucar, and Morales 2014; Bi and Kwok 2015;
Ramı́rez-Corona, Sucar, and Morales 2016).
Top-k classiﬁcation and hierarchical classiﬁcation are not
mutually exclusive problems, which implies the existence
of many application areas in their intersection. Despite this
fact, in the literature the two problems have always been
studied separately. This paper connects these two distinctly
studied areas. We ﬁrst introduce a top-k hierarchical loss
function, which extends the hierarchical loss function proposed by (Cesa-bianchi et al. 2005) to the top-k setting.
Next, we provide a Bayes-optimal solution that minimizes
the expected top-k hierarchical misclassiﬁcation cost. Via
numerical experiments, we show that simple extensions of
existing hierarchical classiﬁcation algorithms yield poor performances in the top-k setting.
This research is motivated by a real world application system in a large service enterprise. When engaging on a new
service contract, service ﬁrms ﬁrst develop a project proposal, which includes detailed information about job tasks,
schedules, dependencies, and job positions to deliver the service (Oh, Rhodes, and Strong 2016). After signing, ﬁrms assign the right experts to the project based on the information
written in the project proposal. In large service enterprises,
labor resource planning is a very complex process, and involves a central planning system (Naveh et al. 2007). One
critical requirement for such a system is the use of a standard expertise taxonomy that deﬁnes employees’ job roles
and specialties. Such expertise taxonomies are hierarchical
(Wei, Varshney, and Wagman 2015).
Stafﬁng professionals are in charge of submitting a resource request for a project based on the project proposal.
An interface system can help automate this task. The interface system receives a raw project proposal and creates a
draft resource request. The key part of this conversion would
be tagging the appropriate job role and specialty for each
job position. For example, if the plan includes a position de-

Abstract
This paper studies a top-k hierarchical classiﬁcation problem.
In top-k classiﬁcation, one is allowed to make k predictions
and no penalty is incurred if at least one of k predictions is
correct. In hierarchical classiﬁcation, classes form a structured hierarchy, and misclassiﬁcation costs depend on the relation between the correct class and the incorrect class in the
hierarchy. Despite that the fact that both top-k classiﬁcation
and hierarchical classiﬁcation have gained increasing interests, the two problems have always been studied separately.
In this paper, we deﬁne a top-k hierarchical loss function using a real world application. We provide the Bayes-optimal
solution that minimizes the expected top-k hierarchical misclassiﬁcation cost. Via numerical experiments, we show that
our solution outperforms two baseline methods that address
only one of the two issues.

Introduction
In top-k classiﬁcation, one is allowed to make k predictions
and no penalty is incurred if at least one of k predictions is
correct. Top-k classifcation problems have gained increasing interests thanks to the ImageNet Challenge. When the
number of classes is large and their distinctions are ambiguous, allowing multiple guesses is a natural remedy (Gupta,
Bengio, and Weston 2014; Lapin, Hein, and Schiele 2015).
Precision@k also frequently arises in other application areas including information retrieval and search advertising
(Broder et al. 2007; Usunier, Buffoni, and Gallinari 2009).
The users of such application systems often consider only
the ﬁrst few results shown in the user interface, and thus the
performance of the system depends on its predication accuracy at the top.
Hierarchical classiﬁcation, in which classes form a structured hierarchy, is another common form of classiﬁcation problems. For example, in news article categorization,
‘basketball’, ‘soccer’, and ‘baseball’ are the sub-classes of
‘sports’ category. In this case, misclassiﬁcation costs depend on the relation between the correct class and the incorrect class in the hierarchy. For example, the cost of classifying ‘basketball’ news to ’soccer’ may be less costly
than classifying it to ‘international politics’. Hierarchical
classiﬁcation takes such hierarchical misclassiﬁcation cost
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2450

