Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Understanding the Semantic Structures of Tables with a
Hybrid Deep Neural Network Architecture
Kyosuke Nishida, Kugatsu Sadamitsu, Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Yoshihiro Matsuo
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories, NTT Corporation
1-1 Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, 239-0847 Japan
nishida.kyosuke@lab.ntt.co.jp

Token sequence

Abstract

<th>,Name,</th>

We propose a new deep neural network architecture, TabNet,
for table type classiﬁcation. Table type is essential information for exploring the power of Web tables, and it is important to understand the semantic structures of tables in order to
classify them correctly. A table is a matrix of texts, analogous
to an image, which is a matrix of pixels, and each text consists of a sequence of tokens. Our hybrid architecture mirrors
the structure of tables: its recurrent neural network (RNN)
encodes a sequence of tokens for each cell to create a 3d table volume like image data, and its convolutional neural network (CNN) captures semantic features, e.g., the existence
of rows describing properties, to classify tables. Experiments
using Web tables with various structures and topics demonstrated that TabNet achieved considerable improvements over
state-of-the-art methods specialized for table classiﬁcation
and other deep neural network architectures.

Table
type
RNN
Encoder

Web table

CNN
Encoder

3d-table
volume

Classifier

Semantic
features

Figure 1: Concept of TabNet. An RNN ﬁrst encodes a sequence of tokens in each cell, and a CNN then extracts semantic features for table type classiﬁcation.
column, e.g., the deviation of the number of characters per
cell, the ratio of cells containing colons, and so on. However, their features do not contain ones capturing the semantic structures of tables despite that table types are deﬁned
on the basis of semantic relations among cells. The building
blocks of the structures have different semantics, shapes, and
sizes: e.g., columns listing subjects, rows describing properties, and blocks of object cells that belong to the same class.
It is difﬁcult to form such complex building blocks by using
handcrafted features.
Here, we should notice that a table is a matrix of texts,
analogous to an image, which is a matrix of pixels, and
each text consists of a sequence of tokens (html tags and
words). Recently, deep neural networks have been very successful in capturing semantic representations of sequential
and matrix data. The recurrent neural network (RNN) is a
neural sequence model that has state-of-the-art performance
on various important tasks, including machine translation
(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). On the other hand, the
convolutional neural network (CNN) can compose a local
patch of lower level features into a higher level representation and achieves state-of-the-art performance for computer
vision tasks, especially image classiﬁcation (He et al. 2015).
In this study, we try to determine whether deep neural networks can capture the semantic structures of tables in order
to classify them by type. The contributions of this study are
summarized as follows.
• We propose a new architecture, TabNet, combining an
RNN and a CNN for classifying tables by type (Figure 1).
• TabNet has considerable advantages over state-of-the-art

Introduction
The World Wide Web consists of a huge amount of structured data in the form of HTML tables. Initial studies by
(Cafarella et al. 2008a) investigated 14 billion tables and
showed that 154 million of them contained relational knowledge. More recently, (Lehmberg et al. 2016) released the
WDC Web Table Corpora consisting of 233 million tables
extracted from the July 2015 Common Crawl containing
1.78 billion pages. Recent work exploring the power of tables has yielded some interesting applications: table search
(Tam et al. 2015), table extension (Lehmberg et al. 2015),
query answering (Yin, Tan, and Liu 2011), and knowledge
base construction (Dong et al. 2014).
The most fundamental technology for such applications is
the means to examine the structures of tables, i.e., table type
classiﬁcation. (Crestan and Pantel 2010; 2011) proposed a
ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation taxonomy as to whether they contain semantic triples of the form (subject, property, object)
or whether they are used for layout purposes.
A number of studies on table type classiﬁcation have proposed various features of tables and used machine learning
for classiﬁcation. The most recent work by (Eberius et al.
2015) listed 127 handcrafted features considering global features for tables as a whole and local features per row and per
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

168

