Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

ERMMA: Expected Risk Minimization for
Matrix Approximation-based Recommender Systems
Dongsheng Li1 , Chao Chen,1 Qin Lv,2 Li Shang,2 Stephen M. Chu,1 Hongyuan Zha3
1

IBM Research – China, Shanghai, P.R. China, 201203
Univeristy of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA, 80309
3
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 30332
{ldsli, schu}@cn.ibm.com, chench.resch@gmail.com, {qin.lv, li.shang}@colorado.edu, zha@cc.gatech.edu
2

Li et al. 2016). Recently, Li et al. (2016) proposed a stable matrix approximation method to improve the generalization performance of MA methods. However, low generalization error
cannot always guarantee good model performance, because
the expected risk, which measures the true risk of a model
on both observed and unobserved examples, does not always
decrease when generalization error decreases. As pointed out
by Hardt et al. (2015), expected risk can be decomposed into
three terms: (1) minimum empirical risk, (2) optimization
error (the discrepancy between empirical risk and minimum
empirical risk), and (3) generalization error (the discrepancy
between empirical risk and expected risk). Minimum empirical risk is ﬁxed when the type of model is ﬁxed. Therefore,
the goal of expected risk minimization is to reduce the sum
of optimization error and generalization error. Generally, we
cannot simultaneously reduce optimization error and generalization error. As such, the goal of expected risk minimization
is to achieve a good tradeoff between optimization error and
generalization error. Although the critical issue of the tradeoff
between optimization error and generalization error has been
mentioned previously, no clear solution has been articulated
in MA methods. To the best of our knowledge, this work
represents a ﬁrst attempt to address this problem and we hope
it will draw the attention of researchers to further investigate
this key problem in MA-based recommender systems.

Abstract
Matrix approximation (MA) is one of the most popular techniques in today’s recommender systems. In most MA-based
recommender systems, the problem of risk minimization
should be deﬁned, and how to achieve minimum expected
risk in model learning is one of the most critical problems to
recommendation accuracy. This paper addresses the expected
risk minimization problem, in which expected risk can be
bounded by the sum of optimization error and generalization
error. Based on the uniform stability theory, we propose an
expected risk minimized matrix approximation method (ERMMA), which is designed to achieve better tradeoff between
optimization error and generalization error in order to reduce
the expected risk of the learned MA models. Theoretical analysis shows that ERMMA can achieve lower expected risk
bound than existing MA methods. Experimental results on the
MovieLens and Netﬂix datasets demonstrate that ERMMA
outperforms six state-of-the-art MA-based recommendation
methods in both rating prediction problem and item ranking
problem.

Introduction
Matrix approximation (MA) is popular among existing techniques for recommender systems mainly due to its high accuracy (Koren et al. 2009; Ekstrand, Riedl, and Konstan 2011).
In recommender systems, the observed data in user-item rating matrices are incomplete, and closed-form solutions cannot be easily obtained as in fully observed matrices (Candès
and Plan 2010). Therefore, in existing MA methods (Paterek 2007; Koren 2008; Salakhutdinov and Mnih 2008;
Yan et al. 2010; Li et al. 2010; Lee et al. 2013), risk functions,
typically empirical risks, should be ﬁrst deﬁned to measure
the goodness of MA models on training data. Then, iterative learning methods, e.g., gradient descent-based methods,
are adopted to learn MA models with local/global minimum
empirical risks. The learned models can then be adopted to
predict user interests on unrated items.
A common issue of existing MA methods using gradient descent-based learning is that the learned models
may perform well on observed examples but achieve worse
results on unobserved examples, i.e., low generalization
performance (Ng 2004; Hardt, Recht, and Singer 2015;

This paper proposes an expected risk minimized matrix
approximation method (ERMMA), which can achieve a good
tradeoff between optimization error and generalization error both theoretically and empirically. ERMMA randomly
shrinks the learning step of a fraction of training examples
in each epoch during stochastic gradient updates, which can
improve generalization performance over standard methods
due to lower bound of uniform stability. Our theoretical analysis proves that ERMMA can achieve lower expected risk
bound, i.e., a better tradeoff between optimization error and
generalization error, compared with classic MA methods.
Moreover, based on our theoretical analysis, popular techniques such as regularization and adaptive learning steps,
which have been successful in improving model performance,
can also be incorporated by ERMMA without violating its
key characteristics. Experimental studies using real-world
datasets (MovieLens and Netﬂix) demonstrate that, by introducing proper regularization term and adaptive learning
steps, ERMMA can achieve better accuracy compared with

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1403

