Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Latent Sentiment Scopes
for Entity-Level Sentiment Analysis
Hao Li, Wei Lu
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore, 487372
hao li@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, luwei@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
MVP [Kyle Lowry]positive is very popular
in [NBA]neutral this year .

In this paper, we focus on the task of extracting named entities
together with their associated sentiment information in a joint
manner. Our key observation in such an entity-level sentiment
analysis (a.k.a. targeted sentiment analysis) task is that there
exists a sentiment scope within which each named entity is
embedded, which largely decides the sentiment information
associated with the entity. However, such sentiment scopes
are typically not explicitly annotated in the data, and their
lengths can be unbounded. Motivated by this, unlike traditional approaches that cast this problem as a simple sequence
labeling task, we propose a novel approach that can explicitly model the latent sentiment scopes. Our experiments on
the standard datasets demonstrate that our approach is able to
achieve better results compared to existing approaches based
on conventional conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) and a more
recent work based on neural networks.

Figure 1: Entity-level sentiment analysis with named entities
and sentiment highlighted.

Currently, existing models tackled the entity-level sentiment analysis problem from a sequence labeling perspective, attempting to assign each word token in the text a speciﬁc tag. Such tags were used to indicate boundary and sentiment information associated with entities in the text. The
sequence labeling models can be either based on the linearchain or the factorial conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs)
(Mitchell et al. 2013), or certain neural structured prediction
models (Zhang, Zhang, and Vo 2015). Such models can typically make use of features based on information surrounding each word token within a ﬁxed window of bounded size.
Thus the basic assumption behind such approaches is the
sentiment of each entity can be fully determined based on
such local contextual information.
However, such an assumption is not always true in practice. First, the right information required for determining the
current entity’s sentiment can appear outside the window.
Second, the information appearing inside the window is not
always indicative of the true sentiment associated with the
entity. Consider the example shown in Figure 1 with two
entities Kyle Lowry and NBA. Assume we use a bounded
window of size 2 (i.e. when constructing features, previous
and next 2 word tokens are considered), the word popular
that conveys key sentiment information will appear outside
of the window used for predicting the sentiment of the entity Kyle Lowry. Thus such a model would have difﬁculty
assigning the positive sentiment to this entity. Increasing the
window size will not completely resolve this issue as the
sentiment-indicative keywords can appear far away from the
entity (e.g., consider the sentence “David Copperﬁeld is believed to be one of the most amazing magicians . . . ”. Here
the keyword “amazing” appears far away from the entity
“David Copperﬁeld”). On the other hand, since the same
word popular appears inside the window of the next entity,
it would be used to wrongly predict the sentiment associ-

Introduction
Designing effective algorithms that can automatically perform sentiment analysis, the task of inferring the underlying
sentiment-level information associated with texts, is an important yet challenging task that has applications in various
ﬁelds (Pang and Lee 2008; Liu 2010; Ortigosa, Martı́n, and
Carro 2014; Smailović et al. 2013; Li and Wu 2010). Traditional sentiment analysis algorithms largely focus on assigning sentiment information at the complete sentence and
document level. Recently, there is a growing interest in performing sentiment analysis at the target entities, where two
different types of tasks are considered: 1) to determine sentiment information for entities which are already recognized,
2) to jointly decide the named entities and their respective
sentiment information. In this paper, we focus on the latter,
which is a more challenging task than the former. Such a task
is also called entity-level sentiment analysis or targeted sentiment analysis (Mitchell et al. 2013), since the sentiment
information is assigned to speciﬁc target entities – certain
named entities in the texts. Figure 1 presents a real example,
where entities of interest are highlighted with their sentiment
information. Such an entity-level sentiment analysis task is
more challenging, but is more useful in many applications
such as product review (Hu and Liu 2004).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3482

