Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Transitive Hashing Network for
Heterogeneous Multimedia Retrieval∗
Zhangjie Cao,† Mingsheng Long,† Jianmin Wang,† Qiang Yang‡
†

KLiss, MOE; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
‡
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
caozhangjie14@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn qyang@cse.ust.hk

require that the heterogeneous relationship between query
and database is available for hash function learning. This is
a rather strong requirement for many practical applications,
where such heterogeneous relationship is not available. For
example, a user of YahooQA (Yahoo Answers) may hope
to search images relevant to his QAs from an online social
media such as ImageNet. Unfortunately, because there are
no link connections between YahooQA and ImageNet, it is
not easy to satisfy the user’s information need. Therefore,
how to support cross-modal retrieval without direct heterogeneous relationship between query and database is an interesting open problem worth investigation.
This paper proposes a novel transitive hashing network
(THN) approach to cross-modal retrieval without direct heterogeneous relationship between query and database, which
generates compact hash codes of images and texts in an endto-end deep learning architecture to construct the transitivity between query and database of different modalities. As
learning cross-modal correlation is impossible without any
heterogeneous relationship information, we leverage an auxiliary dataset readily available from a different but related
domain (such as Flickr.com), which contains related heterogeneous relationship (e.g. images and their associated texts).
We craft a hybrid deep network to enable heterogeneous relationship learning on this auxiliary dataset. As the auxiliary
dataset and the query/database are collected from different
domains and follow different data distributions, there is substantial dataset shift which poses a major difﬁculty to bridge
them. To this end, we design and integrate a homogeneous
distribution alignment module to the hybrid deep network,
which closes the gap between the auxiliary dataset and the
query/database. Based on heterogeneous relationship learning and homogeneous distribution alignment, we can construct the transitivity between query and database in an endto-end deep architecture to enable efﬁcient heterogeneous
multimedia retrieval. Extensive experiments show that THN
yields state of the art multimedia retrieval performance on
public benchmarks NUS-WIDE and ImageNet-YahooQA.

Abstract
Hashing is widely applied to large-scale multimedia retrieval due to the storage and retrieval efﬁciency. Crossmodal hashing enables efﬁcient retrieval of one modality from database relevant to a query of another modality. Existing work on cross-modal hashing assumes that
heterogeneous relationship across modalities is available for learning to hash. This paper relaxes this strict
assumption by only requiring heterogeneous relationship in some auxiliary dataset different from the query
or database domain. We design a novel hybrid deep architecture, transitive hashing network (THN), to jointly
learn cross-modal correlation from the auxiliary dataset,
and align the data distributions of the auxiliary dataset
with that of the query or database domain, which generates compact transitive hash codes for efﬁcient crossmodal retrieval. Comprehensive empirical evidence validates that the proposed THN approach yields state of
the art retrieval performance on standard multimedia
benchmarks, i.e. NUS-WIDE and ImageNet-YahooQA.

Introduction
Multimedia retrieval has attracted increasing attention in the
presence of multimedia big data emerging in search engines
and social networks. Cross-modal retrieval is an important
paradigm of multimedia retrieval, which supports similarity
retrieval across different modalities, e.g. retrieval of relevant
images in response to text queries. A promising solution to
cross-modal retrieval is hashing methods, which compress
high-dimensional data into compact binary codes and generate similar codes for similar objects (Wang et al. 2014a). To
date, however, effective and efﬁcient cross-modal hashing
remains a challenge, due to the heterogeneity across modalities (Wei et al. 2014), and the semantic gap between features
and semantics (Smeulders et al. 2000).
An overview of cross-modal retrieval problems is shown
in Figure 1. Prior cross-modal hashing methods (Bronstein
et al. 2010; Kumar and Udupa 2011; Zhen and Yeung 2012;
Song et al. 2013; Masci et al. 2014; Zhang and Li 2014;
Wu et al. 2015; Jiang and Li 2016) have achieved promising performance for multimedia retrieval. However, they all

Related Work
This work is related to hashing for multimedia retrieval,
a.k.a. cross-modal hashing, which has been an increasingly
popular research topic in the machine learning, computer
vision, and multimedia retrieval communities (Bronstein et

∗

Corresponding authors: Mingsheng Long and Jianmin Wang.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

81

