Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Axiomatic Characterization of
Game-Theoretic Network Centralities
Oskar Skibski,1 Tomasz P. Michalak,1,2 Talal Rahwan3
1
Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
3
Masdar Institute of Science and Technology, United Arab Emirates
2

However, despite the plethora of game-theoretic centralities in the literature, their theoretical foundations and properties are not yet entirely understood. Unfortunately, this problem, termed “theory gap” concerns not only novel centrality
indices but also the classic ones as well as many other concepts in social network analysis (Schoch and Brandes 2015).
A few attempts to bridge this gap include the works by
(Sabidussi 1966, Koschützki 2005, Boldi and Vigna 2014)
who provided axiomatic characterizations of some of the
classic centrality indices.
Meager axiomatic foundations are especially striking in
the case of game-theoretic indices. This is because the axiomatizations of the payoff division schemes – the schemes
based on which the game-theoretic indices are built – have
been extensively studied. Hence, at ﬁrst glance, it should be
straightforward to translate those game-theoretic axiom systems to the network context. This, however, is not the case. It
turns our that most axioms that seem desirable in the coalitional game context lose their attractiveness when applied
to networks. A notable exception is the Fairness axiom introduced by Myerson (1977) for graph-restricted coalitional
games; it says that each edge equally affects the payoff of
both adjacent nodes. Indeed, Fairness is one of the axioms
used by Skibski et al. 2016, who proposed the ﬁrst characterization of a particular game-theoretic centrality.
Nevertheless, little is known about the axiomatic underpinnings of game-theoretic indices in general. In particular,
we still do not know how general this approach is, and what
distinguishes game-theoretic centrality indices from others.
In what follows, we present the ﬁrst attempt to answer
these question. We show that every non game-theoretic centrality can be also obtained using some game-theoretic centrality; this is a testimony to the versatility of this approach
to centrality analysis. Next, we deﬁne two natural classes
of game-theoretic centrality indices: separable and induced.
We prove that the class of centralities obtained using separable game-theoretic centralities is deﬁned by Myerson’s
Fairness. In other words, any separable game-theoretic centrality satisﬁes Fairness, and any (non-game-theoretic) centrality that satisﬁes Fairness can be obtained with some separable game-theoretic centrality. Next, we extend Fairness to
a new axiom, Edge Balanced Contribution. Analogously, we
prove that the class obtained using separable game-theoretic
centralities is deﬁned by Edge Balanced Contribution.

Abstract
One of the fundamental research challenges in network science is the centrality analysis, i.e., identifying the nodes that
play the most important roles in the network. In this paper, we
focus on the game-theoretic approach to centrality analysis.
While various centrality indices have been proposed based
on this approach, it is still unknown what distinguishes this
family of indices from the more classical ones. In this paper, we answer this question by providing the ﬁrst axiomatic
characterization of game-theoretic centralities. Speciﬁcally,
we show that every centrality can be obtained following the
game-theoretic approach, and show that two natural classes
of game-theoretic centrality can be characterized by two intuitive properties pertaining to Myerson’s notion of Fairness.

Introduction
Centrality analysis is one of the fundamental research problems in graph theory and network analysis. It involves identifying the nodes that play the most important role in the
network (Brandes and Erlebach 2005). On top of the already
classic centrality indices such as degree, closeness, betweenness, eigenvector, Katz, and PageRank centralities, various
new concepts have been recently proposed in the literature.
One family of centralities that has recently attracted growing attention is based on cooperative game theory (Gomez et
al. 2003, del Pozo et al. 2011, Michalak et al. 2013). The key
idea behind this approach is to analyse the topology of the
network using the combinatorial structure of a coalitional
game. More in detail, in the ﬁrst step, one has to deﬁne a
function that evaluates the centrality of each subset of nodes.
Next, having evaluated all the subsets, one can use payoff
division schemes from cooperative game theory to measure
how individual nodes contribute to subsets’ performance.
This extends conventional centrality indices which solely focus on the performance of individual nodes. Various centralities obtained using the game-theoretic approach have been
shown to perform relatively better than classic approaches
in a number of real-life applications, including terroristnetwork analysis (Lindelauf, Hamers, and Husslage 2013;
Michalak et al. 2015), genes and brain networks (Kötter et
al. 2007; Moretti et al. 2010), and energy savings in IT networks (Bianzino et al. 2012).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

698

