Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bayesian Neural Word Embedding
Oren Barkan
Tel Aviv University, Israel
Microsoft, Israel

Abstract

step algorithm, which is straightforward to implement and
requires negligible amount of parameter tuning.
Bayesian methods for words representation are proposed
in (Vilnis and Mccallum 2015; Zhang et al. 2014). Different from these methods, we propose a Variational Bayes
(VB) (Bishop 2006) solution to the SG objective. Therefore, we name our method Bayesian Skip-Gram (BSG).
VB solutions provides a stable and robust behavior that
require negligible effort in hyperparameter tuning (Bishop
2006). This is in contrast to point estimate solutions that
are more sensitive to singularities in the objective and often require significant amount of hyperparameter tuning.
While the SG method maps words to vectors, BSG maps
words to densities in a latent space. Moreover, BSG provides for a confidence level in the embedding and opens up
for density based similarities measures.
Our contribution is twofold: first, we derive a tractable
(yet scalable) Bayesian solution to the SG objective and
provide a detailed step by step algorithm. Secondly, we
propose several density based similarity measures that can
be investigated in further research.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
overviews the SG method. In Section 3, we provide the
mathematical derivation of the BSG solution. In Section 4,
we describe the BSG algorithm in detail. In Section 5, we
present evaluations on six different datasets, where we
show that in most cases BSG outperforms SG.

Recently, several works in the domain of natural language
processing presented successful methods for word embedding. Among them, the Skip-Gram with negative sampling,
known also as word2vec, advanced the state-of-the-art of
various linguistics tasks. In this paper, we propose a scalable Bayesian neural word embedding algorithm. The algorithm relies on a Variational Bayes solution for the SkipGram objective and a detailed step by step description is
provided. We present experimental results that demonstrate
the performance of the proposed algorithm for word analogy
and similarity tasks on six different datasets and show it is
competitive with the original Skip-Gram method.

1 Introduction and Related Work
Recent progress in neural word embedding methods has
advanced the state-of-the-art in the domain of natural language processing (NLP) (Pennington, Socher, and
Manning 2014; Collobert and Weston 2008; Mnih and
Hinton 2008; Mikolov et al. 2013; Vilnis and Mccallum
2015; Zhang et al. 2014). These methods attempt to learn a
low dimensional representation for words that captures
semantic and syntactic relations. Specifically, Skip-Gram
(SG) with negative sampling, known also as word2vec
(Mikolov et al. 2013), set new records in various linguistic
tasks and its applications have been extended to other domains beyond NLP such as computer vision (Frome,
Corrado, and Shlens 2013; Lazaridou, Nghia, and Baroni
2015) and Collaborative Filtering (CF) (Barkan and
Koenigstein 2016; Barkan, Brumer, and Koenigstein
2016).
In this paper, we propose a scalable Bayesian neural
word embedding algorithm that in principle, can be applied
to any dataset that is given as sets / sequences of items.
Hence, the proposed method is not limited to the task of
word embedding and may be applicable to general item
similarity tasks as well. We provide a fully detailed step by

2 Skip-Gram with Negative Sampling
SG with negative sampling is a neural word embedding
method that was introduced in (Mikolov et al. 2013). The
method aims at estimating words representation that captures semantic and syntactic relations between a word to its
surrounding words in a sentence. Note that SG can be applied with hierarchical softmax (Mikolov et al. 2013), but
in this work we refer to SG as SG with negative sampling.
The rest of this section provides a brief overview of the SG
method.
Given a sequence of words ( wi )iL=1 from a finite vo-

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3135

