Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Finding Critical Users for Social Network Engagement:
The Collapsed k-Core Problem
Fan Zhang,† Ying Zhang,† Lu Qin,† Wenjie Zhang,§ Xuemin Lin§
†

QCIS, University of Technology Sydney, § University of New South Wales
fanzhang.cs@gmail.com, {ying.zhang, lu.qin}@uts.edu.au, {zhangw, lxue}@cse.unsw.edu.au

Abstract
In social networks, the leave of critical users may signiﬁcantly
break network engagement, i.e., lead a large number of other
users to drop out. A popular model to measure social network
engagement is k-core, the maximal induced subgraph in which
every vertex has at least k neighbors. To identify critical users
for social network engagement, we propose the collapsed kcore problem: given a graph G, a positive integer k and a
budget b, we aim to ﬁnd b vertices in G such that the deletion
of the b vertices leads to the smallest k-core. We prove the
problem is NP-hard. Then, an efﬁcient algorithm is proposed,
which signiﬁcantly reduces the number of candidate vertices
to speed up the computation. Our comprehensive experiments
on 9 real-life social networks demonstrate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of our proposed method.

Figure 1: Motivating Example

Introduction
scalable solution for this problem, we can quickly identify
critical users whose leave will collapse the network most
severely. These users are critical for the overall engagement
of social networks. For instance, we can ﬁnd most valuable
users, to sustain or destroy the engagement of the networks.
We can also evaluate the robustness of network engagement
against the vertex attack.

The user engagement on social network has attracted signiﬁcant interests over recent years (Wang et al. 2016;
Wu et al. 2013; Bhawalkar et al. 2015). k-core is a simple and
popular model based on degree constraint, which has been
widely used to measure the network engagement (Malliaros
and Vazirgiannis 2013; Chitnis, Fomin, and Golovach 2013;
2016; Abello and Queyroi 2013; Garcia, Mavrodiev, and
Schweitzer 2013). Assuming all users in a community/group
are initially engaged, each individual has two strategies, to
remain engaged or drop out. Particularly, a user will remain
engaged if and only if at least k of his/her friends are engaged
(i.e., degree constraint). A user with less than k friends engaged will drop out, and his/her leave may be contagious and
forms a cascade of the departure (i.e., collapse) in the network. When the collapse stops, the remaining engaged users
corresponds to the well-known concept k-core, the maximal
induced subgraph in which every vertex has at least k neighbors. The size of k-core can be used to measure the overall
engagement of the social network.
A natural question is that, given a limited budget b, how to
ﬁnd b vertices (i.e., users) in a network so that we can get the
smallest k-core by removing these b vertices. This problem is
named the collapsed k-core problem in this paper, which aims
to collapse the engagement of the network with the greatest
extent for a given budget b. By developing an efﬁcient and

Example 1. Suppose there is a study group, and the number
of friends in the group reﬂects the willingness of engagement
for each member (i.e., user). If one drops out, he/she will
weaken the willingness of his/her friends to remain engaged,
which may incur the collapse of the group. As illustrated in
Figure 1, we model 17 members in a study group and their
relationship as a network. According to the above engagement model with k=3, i.e., a person will drop out if there are
less than 3 friends, 15 members will remain engaged; that is,
3-core of the network is the whole network excluding u1 and
u12 . Clearly, if users in 3-core drop out regardless the number of friends, e.g., attracted by another group, the network
will further collapse. The extent of the collapse varies among
different users. For instance, although u9 has 6 friends in
3-core, the departure of u9 will not further lead to the leave
of other users because each of his/her neighbors still has 3
friends engaged. On the contrary, the leave of u11 will lead
to the leave of 7 members in the group including u2 , u5 , u6 ,
u7 , u13 , u16 , and u17 . In this sense, it is more cost-effective
to give u11 the incentive (e.g., bonus) to ensure his/her en-

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

245

