Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Growing Interpretable Part Graphs on
ConvNets via Multi-Shot Learning
Quanshi Zhang, Ruiming Cao, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles

Training
data

Abstract
This paper proposes a learning strategy that extracts objectpart concepts from a pre-trained convolutional neural network
(CNN), in an attempt to 1) explore explicit semantics hidden in CNN units and 2) gradually grow a semantically interpretable graphical model on the pre-trained CNN for hierarchical object understanding. Given part annotations on very
few (e.g. 3–12) objects, our method mines certain latent patterns from the pre-trained CNN and associates them with different semantic parts. We use a four-layer And-Or graph to
organize the mined latent patterns, so as to clarify their internal semantic hierarchy. Our method is guided by a small number of part annotations, and it achieves superior performance
(about 13%–107% improvement) in part center prediction on
the PASCAL VOC and ImageNet datasets1 .

CNN

CNN

Part 1 Part 2
(a)

... CNN
Part N

...

Limited annotations for
multi-shot learning

CNN

Part 1 Part 2 ... Part N
(b)

Graph 1

Graph 2

Graph 3

t t t 
(c)

Figure 1: Comparison of three learning strategies. (a) Individually learning/ﬁne-tuning each part without sharing patterns between parts has large information redundancy in
model representation. (b) Jointly learning/ﬁne-tuning parts
requires all parts to be simultaneously learned. (c) Given
a small number (e.g. 3–12) of part annotations based on
demands on the ﬂy, we incrementally grow new semantic
graphs on a pre-trained CNN, which associate certain CNN
units with new parts.

Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al. 1998;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016)
(CNNs) have achieved near human-level performance in object classiﬁcation on some datasets. However, in real-world
applications, we are still facing the following two important
issues.
Firstly, given a CNN that is pre-trained for object classiﬁcation, it is desirable to derive an interpretable graphical model to explain explicit semantics hidden inside the
CNN. Based on the interpretable model, we can go beyond
the detection of object bounding boxes, and discover an object’s latent structures with different part components from
the pre-trained CNN representations.
Secondly, it is also desirable to learn from very few annotations. Unlike data-rich applications (e.g. pedestrian and
vehicle detection), many visual tasks demand for modeling
certain objects or certain object parts on the ﬂy. For example, when people teach a robot to grasp the handle of a cup,
they may not have enough time to annotate sufﬁcient training samples of cup handles before the task. It is better to
mine common knowledge of cup handles from a few examples on the ﬂy.
Motivated by the above observations, in this paper, given
a pre-trained CNN, we use very few (3–12) annotations to

model a semantic part for the task of part localization. When
a CNN is pre-trained using object-level annotations, we believe that its conv-layers have contained implicit representations of the objects. We call the implicit representations latent patterns, each corresponding to a component of the semantic part (namely a sub-part) or a contextual region w.r.t.
the semantic part. For each semantic part, our goal is to
mine latent patterns from the conv-layers related to this part.
We use an And-Or graph (AOG) to organize the mined latent
patterns to represent the semantic hierarchy of the part.
Input and output: Given a pre-trained CNN and a number of images for a certain category, we only annotate the semantic parts on a few images as input. We develop a method
to grow a semantic And-or Graph (AOG) on the pre-trained
CNN, which associates certain CNN units with the semantic
part. Our method does not require massive annotations for
learning, and can work with even a single part annotation.
We can use the learned AOG to parse/localize object parts
and their sub-parts for hierarchical object parsing.
Fig. 2 shows that the AOG has four layers. In the AOG,
each OR node encodes its alternative representations as
children, and each AND node is decomposed into its constituents.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Codes here: https://sites.google.com/site/cnnsemantics/

• Layer 1: the top OR node for semantic part describes the

2898

