Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Lattice-Based Recurrent Neural Network
Encoders for Neural Machine Translation
Jinsong Su,1 Zhixing Tan,1 Deyi Xiong,2 Rongrong Ji,1 Xiaodong Shi,1 Yang Liu3∗
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China1
Soochow University, Suzhou, China2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China3
{jssu, rrji, mandel}@xmu.edu.cn, playinf@stu.xmu.edu.cn
dyxiong@suda.edu.cn, liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn

capturing long-distance dependencies. Generally, such representations and generations are learned and performed at
the word level. Very recently, we have also seen successful approaches in character-level NMT (Ling et al. 2015;
Costa-Juss‘a and Fonollosa 2016; Chung, Cho, and Bengio
2016). In these methods, each input sentence is ﬁrst segmented into a sequence of words, after which RNNs are
used to learn word representations and perform generations
at the character level. Note that all approaches so far exploit
word boundary information for learning source representations. Such a modeling philosophy works well for languages
like English. However, it is not a desirable choice for languages without natural word delimiters such as Chinese. The
underlying reasons are twofold: 1) the optimal tokenization
granularity is always a paradox for machine translation since
coarse granularity causes data sparseness while ﬁne granularity results in the loss of useful information, and 2) there
may exist some errors in 1-best tokenizations, which potentially propagate to source sentence representations. Therefore, it is necessary to offer multiple tokenizations instead of
a single tokenized sequence to NMT for better source sentence modelling.

Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) heavily relies on wordlevel modelling to learn semantic representations of input
sentences. However, for languages without natural word delimiters (e.g., Chinese) where input sentences have to be tokenized ﬁrst, conventional NMT is confronted with two issues:
1) it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd an optimal tokenization granularity for
source sentence modelling, and 2) errors in 1-best tokenizations may propagate to the encoder of NMT. To handle these
issues, we propose word-lattice based Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) encoders for NMT, which generalize the standard RNN to word lattice topology. The proposed encoders
take as input a word lattice that compactly encodes multiple
tokenizations, and learn to generate new hidden states from
arbitrarily many inputs and hidden states in preceding time
steps. As such, the word-lattice based encoders not only alleviate the negative impact of tokenization errors but also are
more expressive and ﬂexible to embed input sentences. Experiment results on Chinese-English translation demonstrate
the superiorities of the proposed encoders over the conventional encoder.

Introduction

In order to handle these tokenization issues, we propose
word-lattice based RNN encoders for NMT. Word lattice is
a packed representation of many tokenizations, which has
been successfully used in a variety of NLP tasks (Xu et al.
2005; Dyer, Muresan, and Resnik 2008; Jiang, Mi, and Liu
2008; Wang, Zong, and Xue 2013). Generalizing the standard RNN to word lattice topology, we expect to not only
eliminate the negative effect caused by 1-best tokenization
errors but also make the encoder more expressive and ﬂexible to learn semantic representations of source sentences.
In this work, we investigate and compare two word-lattice
based RNN encoders: 1) a Shallow Word-Lattice Based GRU
Encoder which builds on the combinations of inputs and hidden states derived from multiple tokenizations without any
change to the architecture of the standard GRU, and 2) a
Deep Word-Lattice Based GRU Encoder which learns and
updates tokenization-speciﬁc vectors for gates, inputs and
hidden states, and then generates hidden state vectors for
current units. In both encoders, many different tokenizations
can be simultaneously exploited for input sentence model-

In the last two years, NMT (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom
2013; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2015) has obtained state-of-the-art translation
performance on some language pairs. In contrast to conventional statistical machine translation that models latent
structures and correspondences between the source and target languages in a pipeline, NMT trains a uniﬁed encoderdecoder (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)
neural network for translation, where an encoder maps the
input sentence into a ﬁxed-length vector, and a decoder generates a translation from the encoded vector.
Most NMT systems adopt RNNs such as Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)
and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014) to learn
vector representations of source sentences and to generate
target sentences due to the strong capability of RNNs in
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3302

