Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Discriminative Activated
Simplices for Action Recognition
1

Chenxu Luo,1 Chang Ma,1 Chunyu Wang,2 Yizhou Wang,1

Nat’l Eng. Lab. for Video Technology, Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), Sch’l of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
2
Microsoft Research

over-ﬁtting to noisy/small training data when either features
or classiﬁers are too complex.
There is a recent work (Wang et al. 2016) which proposes
a novel generative representation called activated simplices
(AS). The AS model represents poses by a mixture of activated simplices where each activated simplex (structure)
consists of a few bases whose convex combinations tightly
characterize a portion of the pose manifold. The structures
are representative to cover the variations of the poses, and
also at the same time, discriminative to separate different
classes. The discriminativeness is implicitly realized by requiring the learned AS structure to be tight. In other words,
the learned AS structure for a class can and can only represent the poses of this class well. For classiﬁcation, they
learn an AS model for each action class independently, and
then classify a new pose sequence by projecting its poses to
the learned models of all classes respectively and choosing
the class with the smallest projection error. This simple classiﬁer outperforms the existing state-of-the-arts with a large
margin on three popular benchmark datasets.
However, one limitation of the method (Wang et al. 2016)
is that the AS models are independently learned for each action class without considering the data of other classes. So
if two action classes share similar poses, then the learned
models will probably have large overlap and its discriminative power can be weakened.
Our work improves over the AS model by fortifying its
discriminative power. Firstly, instead of learning the basis dictionary for each class independently, we propose to
jointly learn a large structured basis dictionary for all classes
together. By enforcing a block diagonal constraint on the
basis coefﬁcient matrix, the poses from a speciﬁc class are
encouraged to activate a speciﬁc subset of the bases (the
bases of its own class) in the dictionary and are suppressed
to activate others. This results in a distinctive representation in between different classes. Secondly, considering that
some classes may share poses (e.g. neutral poses), a small
shared basis dictionary is simultaneously constructed which
improves the compactness of the representation. With the
learned discriminative activated simplices (DAS), we perform classiﬁcation/recognition by a simple nearest neighbor
classiﬁer which will be disucssed in detail later.
We validate the discriminative power of the proposed
DAS model by performing action recognition on three pop-

Abstract
We address the task of action recognition from a sequence of
3D human poses. This is a challenging task ﬁrstly because
the poses of the same class could have large intra-class variations either caused by inaccurate 3D pose estimation or various performing styles. Also different actions, e.g., walking vs.
jogging, may share similar poses which makes the representation not discriminative to differentiate the actions. To solve
the problems, we propose a novel representation for 3D poses
by a mixture of Discriminative Activated Simplices (DAS).
Each DAS consists of a few bases and represent pose data
by their convex combinations. The discriminative power of
DAS is ﬁrstly realized by learning discriminative bases across
classes with a block diagonal constraint enforced on the basis
coefﬁcient matrix. Secondly, the DAS provides tight characterization of the pose manifolds thus reducing the chance of
generating overlapped DAS between similar classes. We justify the power of the model on benchmark datasets and witness consistent performance improvements.

Recent advances in human pose estimation from both color
(Toshev and Szegedy 2014; Chen and Yuille 2015; Cherian
et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2014) and depth images (Shotton et
al. 2013; Girshick et al. 2011) enpower pose-based action
recognition closer to practical applications.
However, there are still some challenges requiring further
study. The ﬁrst challenge is the large intra-class variations.
This is mostly because: (i) people may perform the same action in very different styles, (ii) and the estimated 3D poses
are sometimes inaccurate, e.g., due to occlusions and degraded image qualities. The second critical challenge is the
small inter-class distance, i.e., some actions share very similar poses which make them very hard to differentiate.
There have been many works aiming to improve the representation’s discriminative power. Some works, e.g., (Yao
et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2012b) attempt to solve the problem
by using more effective pose features to represent actions.
Another line of research, instead, focuses on developing or
using powerful classiﬁers, e.g., SVMs, multiple kernel learning and data mining techniques, to map pose features to a
new space where classiﬁcation is easier. However, in spite
of the promising results on some datasets, there is risk of
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4211

