Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Nurturing Group-Beneﬁcial Information-Gathering Behaviors Through
Above-Threshold Criteria Setting
Igor Rochlin

David Sarne

Maytal Bremer

igor.rochlin@gmail.com
sarned@cs.biu.ac.il
bmaytalb@gmail.com
School of Computer Science Department of Computer Science School of Computer Science
College of Management
Bar-Ilan University
College of Management
Rishon LeZion, Israel
Ramat-Gan, Israel
Rishon LeZion, Israel

Ben Grynhaus
ben.grynhaus@gmail.com
School of Computer Science
College of Management
Rishon LeZion, Israel

poses a dilemma for the agents—when being self-interested,
any agent contributes to the group effort only to the extent that it ﬁnds to be individually beneﬁcial. Such inefﬁciencies in private giving preclude the group from achieving the collective (and consequently also the individual)
performance encapsulated in the fully cooperative solution
(de Jong and Tuyls 2011; Rochlin, Sarne, and Mash 2014;
A. van Wissen et al. 2012). The phenomenon is best illustrated in social good allocation games (e.g., in the centipede game (Aumann 1998; McKelvey and Palfrey 1992;
Peled et al. 2013)) and in public goods games in general.
Common to these games is that, according to their equilibrium, each agent individually should opt out as soon as
possible or invest the minimum allowed. For example, consider the hypothetical case where the city council decides to
build a new country club and is willing to match whatever
amount of money the residents contribute for this purpose.
Assume there are N > 2 residents and the utility of each resident is the total funds raised for the country club (including
the matching) divided by the number of residents using the
country club, minus the individual contribution made. In this
case, there is a single equilibrium according to which all residents contribute zero, which is far (both in terms of social
welfare and individual utilities) from the fully cooperative
solution according to which all residents equally contribute
as much as possible.
One way of overcoming this problem is by setting criteria
for eligibility to the fruits of the cooperative effort. The idea
is to incentivize individuals to put in as much of an effort as
is needed to comply with the criteria set. Taking the above
country club example, assume that the city council decides
that only those who contribute above some threshold V will
be allowed to use the country club. With this new restriction,
the equilibrium is that each resident contributes exactly V . In
fact, the larger the value of V , the greater the social welfare
of the residents.
Intuitively, when using a criteria-based mechanism for enhancing cooperation in MAS, the system designer should
aim for a criteria that rewards those who contribute the
most (or at least sufﬁciently) for the group effort. This way
there is a greater individual beneﬁt for the agent in making the extra effort in order to beneﬁt also from the contributions of the others (who in turn will also try harder, due
to the same considerations). Indeed, in many settings (in-

Abstract
This paper studies a criteria-based mechanism for nurturing and enhancing agents’ group-beneﬁting individual efforts
whenever the agents are self-interested. The idea is that only
those agents that meet the criteria get to beneﬁt from the
group effort, giving an incentive to contribute even when it is
otherwise individually irrational. Speciﬁcally, the paper provides a comprehensive equilibrium analysis of a thresholdbased criteria mechanism for the common cooperative information gathering application, where the criteria is set such
that only those whose contribution to the group is above some
pre-speciﬁed threshold can beneﬁt from the contributions of
others. The analysis results in a closed form solution for the
strategies to be used in equilibrium and facilitates the numerical investigation of different model properties as well
as a comparison to the dual mechanism according to only
an agent whose contribution is below the speciﬁed threshold gets to beneﬁt from the contributions of others. One important contribution enabled through the analysis provided is
in showing that, counter-intuitively, for some settings the use
of the above-threshold criteria is outperformed by the use of
the below-threshold criteria as far as collective and individual
performance is concerned.

Introduction
Cooperation between agents is a highly desired goal in many
multi-agent systems (MAS). By working together and helping each other, agents can better perform and meet their
goals, both collectively and individually (Stone et al. 2010;
Dutta and Sen 2003; Kraus, Shehory, and Taase 2003;
Rochlin, Sarne, and Mash 2014). As such, group based cooperative behavior is studied in various domains and contexts such as solving complex optimization problems (Barbulescu et al. 2010), military and rescue applications (Dias
and Sandholm 2004; Conitzer 2012), cognitive radio networks (Xie et al. 2010), e-business applications (Yamamoto
and Sycara 2001) and many more.
Common to many of the above mentioned domains is
that the agents contribute to the group through their individual efforts and the collective result inﬂuences the welfare
of all of them. This situation, in which costs and resources
are basically born individually although beneﬁts are societal,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3044

