Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Sparse Dictionary Learning Framework to Discover
Discriminative Source Activations in EEG Brain Mapping
Feng Liu,1 Shouyi Wang,1 Jay Rosenberger,1 Jianzhong Su,2 Hanli Liu3
Department of Industrial, Manufacturing & Systems Engineering1 ,
Department of Mathematics2 , Department of Bioengineering3
The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
feng.liu@mavs.uta.edu,{shouyiw,jrosenb,su,hanli}@uta.edu

Mosher, and Leahy 2001). Those above currents (sources)
propagate through the conductive medium, which is approximated with the conductivity properties of different tissues
overlaying each other, to the scalp which is measured by
EEG electrodes.
To infer the brain sources from the scalp recorded EEG
signals belongs to the class of inverse problem. Precise
localization of neuronal activity inside the brain can offer an insightful understanding of how brain is functioning given certain cognitive and motion tasks. Recent years
have witnessed a shift in neuroscience community from
traditional “segregation” perspective to “integration” perspective in which the functional and effective connectivity between different regions of brains (Haufe 2011; Hipp
et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2016) are investigated using complex network characteristics measurement (Watts and Strogatz 1998; Barabási and Albert 1999; Guan et al. 2012;
Newman 2003). Connectivity between different parcellations of brain is established by measuring the similarity of
reconstructed sources. As the source reconstruction or solving the inverse problem is tenably the ﬁrst and primary step
for connectivity analysis of the brain (Sockeel et al. 2016;
Ma et al. 2016), precise localization of sources is required in
order to gain solids result using complex network measurement in the latter steps.
In this paper, we aim to calculate the discriminative
sources to facilitate the understanding of brain mechanism
under different cognitive tasks or different neurological disorders by incorporating a simple linear classiﬁer which can
be interpreted as discriminative ﬁlters for different brain patterns. The label information is leveraged to get a consistent
and robust solution to the inverse problem.

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) source analysis is one of the
most important noninvasive human brain imaging tools that
provides millisecond temporal accuracy. However, discovering essential activated brain sources associated with different
brain status is still a challenging problem. In this study, we
propose for the ﬁrst time that the ill-posed EEG inverse problem can be formulated and solved as a sparse over-complete
dictionary learning problem. In particular, a novel supervised
sparse dictionary learning framework was developed for EEG
source reconstruction. A revised version of discriminative
K-SVD (DK-SVD) algorithm is exploited to solve the formulated supervised dictionary learning problem. As the proposed learning framework incorporated the EEG label information of different brain status, it is capable of learning a
sparse representation that reveal the most discriminative brain
activity sources among different brain states. Compared to
the state-of-the-art EEG source analysis methods, proposed
sparse dictionary learning framework achieved signiﬁcant superior performance in both computing speed and accuracy for
the challenging EEG source reconstruction problem through
extensive numerical experiments. More importantly, the experimental results also validated that the proposed sparse
learning framework is effective to discover the discriminative
task-related brain activation sources, which shows the potential to advance the high resolution EEG source analysis for
real-time non-invasive brain imaging research.

Introduction
In the past few decades, numerous noninvasive measurements of brain activity have been proposed, implemented
and applied in clinical treatment and scientiﬁc research
communities. One of the most popular techniques is electroencephalography (EEG) for its advantages of low cost,
portable and high temporal resolution. EEG signals measure the electrical voltage on a variety of locations on the
scalp. The electrical potentials on the scalp are superimposition of electric activity of neurons inside the brain and several types of physiological and non-physiological artifacts
(Haufe 2011; Haufe et al. 2013). To be speciﬁc, the EEG
signal arises as a result of synchronous intracellular current ﬂows from the depolarized membranes of apical dendrite and non-excited cell soma and basal dendrites (Baillet,

Related Work
On contrary to forward problem, which consists of modeling
the contribution of each voxel to the EEG sensors by solving
Maxwell’s equation, the inverse problem is ill-posed since
the number of interior brain voxels taken into account is far
greater than the number of sensors outside the scalp. To precisely estimate the responsible sources of EEG activity from
at least several thousands of potential contributing locations
which is evenly distributed across the brain requires prior
knowledge. Given different neurophysiological assumptions
or prior beliefs on the structure of possible source conﬁgu-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1431

