Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Resource Graph Games:
A Compact Representation for Games with Structured Strategy Spaces
1

Albert Xin Jiang,1 Hau Chan,1 Kevin Leyton-Brown2

Department of Computer Science, Trinity University, San Antonio, TX 78212, USA
{xjiang, hchan}@trinity.edu
2
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca
itriou 2006) and (coarse) correlated equilibrium (Kakade et
al. 2003; Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2008) given compactly represented games.
In many real-world domains, each player needs to make a
decision that consists of multiple sub-decisions (e.g., assigning a set of resources, ranking a set of options, or ﬁnding a
path in a network), and hence can have an exponential number of pure strategies. However, this space of pure strategies
is often structured, meaning that it can be represented compactly. To compactly represent games with structured strategy spaces, we need compact ways to represent both the utility functions and the strategy spaces themselves.
Several classes of multi-player game models studied in
the recent literature have structured strategy spaces, including network congestion games (Daskalakis, Fabrikant, and
Papadimitriou 2006), simultaneous auctions and other multiitem auctions (Vorobeychik 2008; Rabinovich et al. 2009),
dueling algorithms (Immorlica et al. 2011), integer programming games (Köppe, Ryan, and Queyranne 2011), Blotto
games (Ahmadinejad et al. 2016), and security games (Korzhyk, Conitzer, and Parr 2010; Tambe 2011). These authors proposed compact game representations that are suitable for their speciﬁc domains and computation needs. However, there exists no general modeling language that captures
a wide range of commonly seen strategy and utility structure. As a result, given a new domain with structured strategy spaces that does not fall into the existing models, it is
not obvious how to represent the game and compute its equilibria. Existing general-purpose compact representations, including graphical games and action graph games, represent
each player’s set of pure strategies explicitly, which implies
that games with structured strategy spaces require exponential space in these representations.
In this paper, we propose Resource Graph Games
(RGGs), a compact representation for games with structured
strategy spaces. RGGs generalize action graph games and
congestion games; at a high level, an RGG consists of a
graphical representation of utility functions together with
a general representation of strategy spaces as convex polytopes. We show that RGGs can compactly encode a wide
range of games studied in the literature, as well as new
classes of games for which existing methods do not apply.
We also provide efﬁcient algorithms for computing solution concepts given RGGs. To this end, we make use of

Abstract
In many real-world systems, strategic agents’ decisions can
be understood as complex—i.e., consisting of multiple subdecisions—and hence can give rise to an exponential number of pure strategies. Examples include network congestion
games, simultaneous auctions, and security games. However,
agents’ sets of strategies are often structured, allowing them
to be represented compactly. There currently exists no general
modeling language that captures a wide range of commonly
seen strategy structure and utility structure.
We propose Resource Graph Games (RGGs), the ﬁrst general compact representation for games with structured strategy spaces, which is able to represent a wide range of games
studied in literature. We leverage recent results about multilinearity, a key property of games that allows us to represent
the mixed strategies compactly, and, as a result, to compute
various equilibrium concepts efﬁciently. While not all RGGs
are multilinear, we provide a general method of converting
RGGs to those that are multilinear, and identify subclasses of
RGGs whose converted version allow efﬁcient computation.

1

Introduction

There has been increasing interest in using game theory to
model real-world multiagent systems, and in the computation of game-theoretic solution concepts given such a model.
For games with large numbers of agents and actions, the
standard normal form game representation requires exponential space and is thus not a practical option as a basis
for computation. Fortunately, most large games of practical
interest have highly structured utility functions, and thus it is
possible to represent them compactly. This helps to explain
why people are able to reason about these games in the ﬁrst
place: we understand the payoffs in terms of simple relationships rather than in terms of enormous lookup tables. A line
of research thus exists to look for compact game representations that are able to succinctly describe structured games,
including work on graphical games (Kearns, Littman, and
Singh 2001), multi-agent inﬂuence diagrams (Koller and
Milch 2001) and action-graph games (Jiang, Leyton-Brown,
and Bhat 2011); as well as work on efﬁcient algorithms for
computing solution concepts such as Nash equilibrium (Ortiz and Kearns 2003; Daskalakis, Fabrikant, and Papadimc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

572

