Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Privacy-Preserving Human Activity
Recognition from Extreme Low Resolution
Michael S. Ryoo,1,2 Brandon Rothrock,3 Charles Fleming,4 Hyun Jong Yang2,5
1

Indiana University, Bloomington, IN
2
EgoVid Inc., Ulsan, South Korea
3
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
4
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
5
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, South Korea
mryoo@indiana.edu
ing objects and ongoing events for surveillance, lifelogging,
and intelligent services.
There have been previous studies corresponding to such
societal needs. Templeman et al. (2014) studied scene recognition from images captured with wearable cameras, detecting locations where the privacy needs to be protected (e.g.,
restrooms). This will allow the device to be automatically
turned off at sensitive locations. One may also argue that
limiting the device to only process/transfer feature information (e.g., HOG and CNN) instead of visual data will make
it protect privacy. However, recent studies on feature “visualizations” (Vondrick et al. 2015) showed that it actually is
possible to recover a good amount of visual information (i.e.,
images and videos) from the feature data. Furthermore, all
these methods described above rely on software-level processing of original high-resolution videos (which may already contain privacy sensitive data), and there is a possibility of these original videos being snatched by cyber attacks.
A more fundamental solution toward the construction of
a privacy-preserving vision system is the use of anonymized
videos. Typical examples of anonymized videos are videos
made to have extreme low resolution (e.g., 16x12) by using low resolution (LR) camera hardware, or based on image operations like Gaussian blurring and superpixel clustering (Butler et al. 2015). Instead of obtaining high-resolution
videos and trying to process them, this direction simply limits itself to only obtain anonymized videos. The idea is that,
if we are able to develop reliable computer vision approaches that only utilize such anonymized videos, we
will be able to do the recognition while preserving privacy. Such a concept may even allow cameras that can intelligently select their resolution; it will use high-resolution
cameras only when it is necessary (e.g., emergency), determined based on extreme low-resolution video analysis.
There were previous attempts under such paradigm: (Dai
et al. 2015). This conventional approach was to resize the
original training videos to ﬁt the target resolution, making
training videos to visually look similar to the testing videos.
However, there is an intrinsic problem: because of natural
limitations of what a pixel can capture in a LR video, features being extracted from LR videos change a lot depending on sub-pixel camera viewpoint changes even when they

Abstract
Privacy protection from surreptitious video recordings is an
important societal challenge. We desire a computer vision
system (e.g., a robot) that can recognize human activities and
assist our daily life, yet ensure that it is not recording video
that may invade our privacy. This paper presents a fundamental approach to address such contradicting objectives: human
activity recognition while only using extreme low-resolution
(e.g., 16x12) anonymized videos. We introduce the paradigm
of inverse super resolution (ISR), the concept of learning the
optimal set of image transformations to generate multiple
low-resolution (LR) training videos from a single video. Our
ISR learns different types of sub-pixel transformations optimized for the activity classiﬁcation, allowing the classiﬁer to
best take advantage of existing high-resolution videos (e.g.,
YouTube videos) by creating multiple LR training videos tailored for the problem. We experimentally conﬁrm that the
paradigm of inverse super resolution is able to beneﬁt activity
recognition from extreme low-resolution videos.

Introduction
Cameras are becoming increasingly ubiquitous and pervasive. Millions of surveillance cameras are recording people’s everyday behavior at public places, and people are using wearable cameras designed for lifelogging (e.g., GoPro
and Narrative Clips) to obtain large collections of egocentric
videos. Furthermore, robots at public places are equipped
with multiple cameras for their operation and interaction.
Simultaneously, such abundance of cameras is also causing a big societal challenge: privacy protection from unwanted video recordings. We want a camera system (e.g., a
robot) to recognize important events and assist human daily
life by understanding its videos, but we also want to ensure
that it is not intruding the user’s or others’ privacy. This leads
to two contradicting objectives. More speciﬁcally, we want
to (1) prevent the camera system from obtaining detailed visual data that may contain private information (e.g., faces),
desirably at the hardware-level. Simultaneously, we want to
(2) make the system capture as much detailed information
as possible from its video, so that it understands surroundc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4255

