Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Phragmén’s Voting Methods and Justiﬁed Representation
Markus Brill

Rupert Freeman

Svante Janson

Martin Lackner

University of Oxford
mbrill@cs.ox.ac.uk

Duke University
rupert@cs.duke.edu

Uppsala University
svante.janson@math.uu.se

University of Oxford
martin.lackner@cs.ox.ac.uk

Aziz et al. (2015a) and Sánchez-Fernández et al. (2016;
2017) have identiﬁed axiomatic properties capturing the intuitive notion that subgroups that are “large enough” and
“cohesive enough” deserve to be represented in the committee: justiﬁed representation (JR), proportional justiﬁed
representation (PJR), and extended justiﬁed representation
(EJR). While a number of standard committee voting rules
have been shown to satisfy the basic requirement of JR, it
turns out that the more demanding properties PJR and EJR
are much harder to satisfy. Essentially, the only rule that
is known to satisfy PJR and EJR is Proportional Approval
Voting (PAV), which was proposed by Danish polymath
Thorvald N. Thiele in the late 19th century (Thiele 1895;
Janson 2016). Unfortunately, PAV is NP-hard to compute.
It has therefore remained an open question whether computationally tractable rules satisfying the more demanding
representation properties exist.
In this paper, we consider committee voting rules that
are due to Swedish mathematician Lars Edvard Phragmén
(1894; 1895; 1896; 1899). Although Phragmén’s methods
were proposed in the same era as PAV, they have received
considerably less attention. Variants of both Phragmén’s
methods and PAV have been used in Swedish parliamentary elections (for distribution of seats within parties), and
a version of one of Phragmén’s methods is still part of the
election law, although in a minor role (Janson 2016).
Phragmén phrases committee elections as load balancing
problems: Adding a candidate to the committee incurs some
load, and this load should be shared among the agents approving this candidate. Phragmén suggests choosing committees in such a way that the corresponding load distributions are as balanced as possible, and different ways of
measuring balancedness result in different optimization objectives. This approach yields two optimization variants, one
minimizing the maximal load and one minimizing the variance of loads, and one sequential variant, which proceeds by
greedily selecting candidates so as to keep the maximal load
as small as possible.
After brieﬂy reviewing related work in Section 2 and introducing some basic notation in Section 3, we formally
deﬁne Phragmén’s rules in Section 4. In Section 5, we
analyze the computational complexity of Phragmén’s rules
and we provide algorithms for computing them. The algorithms for the optimization variants are based on mixed-

Abstract
In the late 19th century, Lars Edvard Phragmén proposed
a load-balancing approach for selecting committees based
on approval ballots. We consider three committee voting rules resulting from this approach: two optimization
variants—one minimizing the maximal load and one minimizing the variance of loads—and a sequential variant. We
study Phragmén’s methods from an axiomatic point of view,
focussing on justiﬁed representation and related properties
that have recently been introduced by Aziz et al. (2015a) and
Sánchez-Fernández et al. (2017). We show that the sequential
variant satisﬁes proportional justiﬁed representation, making
it the ﬁrst known polynomial-time computable method with
this property. Moreover, we show that the optimization variants satisfy perfect representation. We also analyze the computational complexity of Phragmén’s methods and provide
mixed-integer programming based algorithms for computing
them.

1

Introduction

An important part of multiagent systems research concerns the study of preference aggregation mechanisms (e.g.,
Conitzer 2010). Recent years have witnessed an increasing
interest in committee voting rules (e.g., Elkind et al. 2014;
Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2015; Aziz et al. 2015a;
Caragiannis et al. 2016). In this setting, a ﬁxed-size subset
of alternatives has to be selected based on the preferences of
a group of agents. In this paper, we assume that the preferences of individual agents are given by approval ballots,
specifying which alternatives are “approved” by the agents.
An important issue in group decision making is (proportional) representation. Informally, an outcome of a decision
making process is representative if it reﬂects the preferences
of the members of the group. In the context of approvalbased committee elections, reasoning about representation
is non-trivial. Since approval sets may overlap arbitrarily,
there are many different ways in which the set of agents can
be split into more or less “cohesive” subgroups. Whether a
given subgroup has a justiﬁed claim to be represented in the
committee depends on the size of the subgroup as well as on
its level of cohesiveness.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

406

