Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Communication Lower Bounds for Distributed
Convex Optimization: Partition Data on Features
Zihao Chen

Luo Luo

Zhihua Zhang

Zhiyuan College
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
z.h.chen@sjtu.edu.cn

Department of Computer
Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ricky@sjtu.edu.cn

School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

stores a subset of A’s columns (Richtárik and Takáč 2013;
Mareček, Richtárik, and Takáč 2015; Ma and Takáč 2016;
Necoara and Clipici 2013; Lee and Roth 2015). Compared
with algorithms under the sample partition setting, these algorithms have relatively less communication cost when d is
large. In addition, as there is often no master machine in
these algorithms, they tend to have more balanced workload
on each machine, which is also an important factor affecting
the performance of a distributed algorithm.
As communication is usually the bottleneck of distributed
optimization algorithms, it is important to understand the
fundamental limits of distributed optimization algorithms,
i.e., how much communication an algorithm must need to
reach an -approximation of the minimum value. Studying
fundamental communication complexity of the distributed
computing without any assumption is quite hard, letting
alone continuous optimization. As for optimization, one alternative way is to derive lower bounds on communication
rounds. The number of communication rounds is also an important metric as in many algorithms, faster machines often
need to pause and wait for slower ones before they communicate, which can be a huge waste of time. Recently, putting
some restrictions on communication allowed in each iteration, Arjevani and Shamir (2015) developed lower bounds
on communication rounds for a class of distributed optimization algorithms under the sample partition setting, and
these lower bounds can be matched by some existing algorithms. However, optimization problems under the feature
partition setting are still not well understood.
Considering the increasing interest and importance of designing distributed optimization algorithms under the feature partition setting, in our paper, we develop tight lower
bounds on communication rounds for a broad class of distributed optimization algorithms under this setting. Our results can provide deeper understanding and insights for designing optimization algorithms under this setting. To deﬁne the class of algorithms, we put some constraints on the
form and amount of communication in each round, while
keeping restrictions mild and applying to many distributed
algorithms. We summarize our contributions as follows:

Abstract
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in designing distributed convex optimization algorithms under the setting where the data matrix is partitioned on features. Algorithms under this setting sometimes have many advantages
over those under the setting where data is partitioned on samples, especially when the number of features is huge. Therefore, it is important to understand the inherent limitations of
these optimization problems. In this paper, with certain restrictions on the communication allowed in the procedures,
we develop tight lower bounds on communication rounds
for a broad class of non-incremental algorithms under this
setting. We also provide a lower bound on communication
rounds for a class of (randomized) incremental algorithms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following distributed convex
optimization problem over m machines:
min f (w; θ).

w∈Rd

Each machine knows the form of f but only has some partial
information of θ. In particular, we mainly consider the case
of empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems. Let A ∈
Rn×d be a matrix containing n data samples with d features
and Aj: be the j-th row of the data matrix (corresponding to
the j-th data sample). Then f has the form:
1
φ(w, Aj: ),
n j=1
n

f (w) =

(1)

where φ is some kind of convex loss.
In the past few years, many distributed optimizations algorithms have been proposed. Many of them are under the
setting where data is partitioned on samples, i.e. each machine stores a subset of the data matrix A’s rows (Zhang
and Xiao 2015; Zhang, Wainwright, and Duchi 2012; Balcan et al. 2012; Boyd et al. 2011; Yang 2013; Lee, Ma, and
Lin 2015; Jaggi et al. 2014; Ma et al. 2015). Meanwhile, as
the dimension d can be enormously large, there has been an
increasing interest in designing algorithms with the setting
where the data is partitioned on features, i.e., each machine

• For the class of smooth and λ-strongly convex functions
with condition
number κ, we
 develop a tight lower bound
√
λw∗ −w0 
κ log(
) , which can be matched by a
of Ω


c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1812

