Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Beyond IID: Learning to Combine Non-IID Metrics for Vision Tasks
Yinghuan Shi,† Wenbin Li,† Yang Gao,† Longbing Cao,‡ Dinggang Shen§
†

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
‡
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology at Sydney, Australia
§
Department of Radiology and BRIC, UNC-Chapel Hill, USA

Most of existing metric learning methods developed for
computer vision tasks take the independent and identically
distributed (IID) assumption, i.e., regarding all samples
(e.g., regions/superpixels in images/videos) as IID. Consequently, the obtained metric M (or L) learned under the IID
assumption ignores the relations between different samples.
This essentially follows the general metric learning practices, i.e., converting a speciﬁc computer vision task to a
general metric learning problem with the IID assumption,
although sometimes in previous methods the non-IID features are ﬁrst utilized to capture spatial/temporal information (Teney et al. 2015).
The IID metric learning methods are not consistent with
the underlying real-life problem nature, i.e., different samples are often spatially-connected or temporally-correlated
with their neighbours in certain ways. Accordingly, existing
IID methods cannot handle the non-IID complexities, as illustrated in Figure 1, and it is essential for us to develop new
and effective metric learning methods to learn the non-IID
samples.
In this work, we propose to learn and integrate non-IID
metrics (NIME), to automatically capture the underlying
non-IID relations for different tasks. To prevent the ad-hoc
setting, NIME ﬁrst builds non-IID representations by modeling each sample along with its corresponding neighbors with
three simple and effective graph kernels (i.e., direct product, Hausdorff distance, and max pooling) on the original
feature space, in which the respective feature vectors of different samples are regarded as nodes in the graph. With the
obtained non-IID representations, we further regard the subsequent non-IID metric learning as a kernel-based learning
problem, the optimal metric is learned by minimizing the
corresponding empirical errors w.r.t. different non-IID representations. The stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou
2010) is performed to accelerate the optimization process.
Also, previous methods normally design the ad-hoc setting
for speciﬁc tasks, to fully make the various non-IID representations adapt to different tasks, the best linear combination of multiple non-IID representations (named NIME-CK)
is automatically learned. Please note that, instead of introducing additional parameters (e.g., imposing other regularizer) or assumption (e.g., projecting onto a unique subspace)
which might cause extra parameter tuning or heavy computational burden, NIME-CK only requires to tune one param-

Abstract
Metric learning has been widely employed, especially in various computer vision tasks, with the fundamental assumption
that all samples (e.g., regions/superpixels in images/videos)
are independent and identically distributed (IID). However, since the samples are usually spatially-connected or
temporally-correlated with their physically-connected neighbours, they are not IID (non-IID for short), which cannot be
directly handled by existing methods. Thus, we propose to
learn and integrate non-IID metrics (NIME). To incorporate
the non-IID spatial/temporal relations, instead of directly using non-IID features and metric learning as previous methods,
NIME ﬁrst builds several non-IID representations on original (non-IID) features by various graph kernel functions, and
then automatically learns the metric under the best combination of various non-IID representations. NIME is applied
to solve two typical computer vision tasks: interactive image
segmentation and histology image identiﬁcation. The results
show that learning and integrating non-IID metrics improves
the performance, compared to the IID methods. Moreover,
our method achieves results comparable or better than that of
the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
In recent years, metric learning, aiming to transform the
samples from their original feature space to a more informative and discriminative one, has been widely adopted
in various computer vision tasks, e.g., face recognition
(Wang et al. 2014; Guillaumin, Verbeek, and Schmid 2009;
Huang et al. 2015), image classiﬁcation and retrieval (Wang
and Tan 2014; Gao et al. 2014; Mensink et al. 2012), object recognition and segmentation (Lajugie, Arlot, and Bach
2014; Teney et al. 2015; Verma et al. 2012), person reidentiﬁcation (Liao and Li 2015), and visual object tracking
(Li et al. 2012; Jiang, Liu, and Wu 2012).
The main goal of metric learning is to learn the optimal
metric (i.e., positive semi-deﬁnite matrix M = L L) by
minimizing the pair-wise Mahalanobis distance of training
samples. It is assumed that, by applying metric M (or L) for
feature space transformation, the performance of subsequent
classiﬁcation or clustering can be improved, compared with
only using the original features.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1524

