Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Open-Universe Weighted Model Counting∗
Vaishak Belle
University of Edinburgh
vaishak@ed.ac.uk

The advent of large-scale probabilistic knowledge bases,
such as Google’s Knowledge Vault (Dong et al. 2014) and
Microsoft’s Probase (Wu et al. 2012), often containing billions of tuples and structured data extracted from the Web
and other text corpora has generated enormous interest in
relational probabilistic representations (Getoor and Taskar
2007). In Markov logic networks (Richardson and Domingos 2006), for example, the weighted formula:

Abstract
Weighted model counting (WMC) has recently emerged as
an eﬀective and general approach to probabilistic inference,
oﬀering a computational framework for encoding a variety
of formalisms, such as factor graphs and Bayesian networks.
The advent of large-scale probabilistic knowledge bases has
generated further interest in relational probabilistic representations, obtained by according weights to ﬁrst-order formulas, whose semantics is given in terms of the ground theory,
and solved by WMC. A fundamental limitation is that the
domain of quantiﬁcation, by construction and design, is assumed to be ﬁnite, which is at odds with areas such as vision
and language understanding, where the existence of objects
must be inferred from raw data. Dropping the ﬁnite-domain
assumption has been known to improve the expressiveness of
a ﬁrst-order language for open-universe purposes, but these
languages, so far, have eluded WMC approaches. In this paper, we revisit relational probabilistic models over an inﬁnite domain, and establish a number of results that permit
eﬀective algorithms. We demonstrate this language on a number of examples, including a parameterized version of Pearl’s
Burglary-Earthquake-Alarm Bayesian network.

1.2

∀x, y Smoker(x) ∧ Friends(x, y) ⊃ Smoker(y)

is indicative of a fairly involved Markov network obtained by grounding the formula wrt all possible values
for {x, y} and assigning a potential of 1.2 to the edges of
the network. Such template models can be seen as modest
relatives of general-purpose probabilistic logics (Bacchus
1990; Halpern 1990) in succinctly characterizing large ﬁnite graphical models, making them appropriate for reasoning and learning with big uncertain data. In practice, the semantics of template models is given in terms of the ground
(propositional) theory, for which WMC and its extensions
(Gogate and Domingos 2011; Van den Broeck 2013) suﬃce.
By construction, and indeed by design, a fundamental
limitation of these template models is its ﬁnite domain closure assumption: the range of the quantiﬁers is assumed to
be ﬁnite, typically the set of constants appearing in the logical theory. As argued in (Russell 2015), such a closed-world
system is at odds with areas such as vision, language understanding, and Web mining, where the existence of objects
must be inferred from raw data. Various syntactic and semantic devices have been proposed to address this, including
probabilistic programming and inﬁnite-state Bayesian networks (Milch et al. 2005a; 2005b). While the progress has
been signiﬁcant, we lack a complete picture of the expected
properties from a logical perspective.
In this paper, we revisit open-universe (OU) template
models, and develop an account of probabilistic inference
by weighted model counting. Formally, our proposal will allow quantiﬁers to range over an inﬁnitary set of rigid designators – constants that exist in all possible worlds – a common technical device from modal logic, also used elsewhere
in OU applications (Srivastava et al. 2014). Such languages
have eluded WMC approaches so far. As an extension, it is
powerful, and can be used for features such as:
• unknown atoms: {∀x (x  john ⊃ Smoker(x))} says that in-

Introduction
Weighted model counting (WMC) has recently emerged as
an eﬀective and general approach to probabilistic inference,
oﬀering a computational framework for encoding a variety
of formalisms, including factor graphs and Bayesian networks (Choi, Kisa, and Darwiche 2013; Chavira and Darwiche 2008). WMC generalizes #SAT, where we are to
count the models of a propositional formula, in that models
can be additionally accorded numeric weights, whose sum
we are to compute. In particular, the encoding of graphical models to a propositional theory allows us to leverage
context-speciﬁc dependencies, express hard constraints, and
reason about logical equivalence. Exact solvers are based on
knowledge compilation (Chavira and Darwiche 2008) or exhaustive DPLL search (Sang, Beame, and Kautz 2005); approximate ones use local search (Wei and Selman 2005) or
sampling (Ermon et al. 2013; Chakraborty et al. 2014).
∗
This research was supported in part by the Research
Foundation-Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3701

