Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Using Discourse Signals for Robust Instructor Intervention Prediction
Muthu Kumar Chandrasekaran,1 Carrie Demmans Epp,2,3 Min-Yen Kan,1,4 Diane Litman2,5
1

Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
3
University Center for Teaching and Learning, University of Pittsburgh
4
Interactive and Digital Media Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore
5
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh
{muthu.chandra, kanmy}@comp.nus.edu.sg
{cdemmans,dlitman}@pitt.edu
(2015b) proposed an intervention taxonomy based on transactive discourse that details the situations in which certain
types of interventions would maximally beneﬁt students.
Consistent with this taxonomy, Chandrasekaran et al.
showed that intervention strategies in MOOC forums differ widely. The factors behind different instructor intervention strategies include the instructors’ pedagogical philosophy, a desire to encourage learner interaction, a desire to
ensure students understand course content, and a need to
correct misconceptions (Phirangee 2016). The intervention
strategy chosen was found to impact student learning significantly (Mazzolini and Maddison 2003; 2007).
Earlier work also shows that content-based features,
which include simple linguistic features derived from student vocabulary (e.g., word unigrams), signal common
traits that are useful for predicting instructor interventions (Chandrasekaran et al. 2015a; Chaturvedi, Goldwasser,
and Daumé III 2014). However, a key problem with surfacelevel vocabulary features is that they vary widely across
courses, as courses from different subject areas use different domain-speciﬁc vocabulary. Predictive models trained
on such word-based features do not generalize well when
applied to new unseen courses in different disciplines. In
contrast, function words such as conjunctions (e.g., “and”,
“because”) occur frequently across corpora and can be leveraged to create more robust features, such as what was done
in the related task of predicting transactivity in educational
dialogues (Joshi and Rosé 2007).
Our work focuses on a speciﬁc subclass of function words
— discourse connectives — as they serve to connect clauses
and signal the communicative intent of the writer. The Penn
Discourse Treebank (PDTB; Prasad et al. 2008) formalism
identiﬁes connectives that signal discourse relations and categorises them into senses. As can be seen in Figure 1, both
student posts contain a number of if...then, but connectives
that belong to the contingency and comparison senses of
the PDTB. It is common to ﬁnd such patterns in student
posts expressing confusion as they hedge and hypothesise
to check their understanding, which can call for instructor
intervention. In contrast, the student post in Figure 3 is conﬁdent in tone, uses the imperative form, and is devoid of
such connectives. These examples motivate us further to extract discourse-based features from student discussion forum posts. We hypothesize that student posts differ in their

Abstract
We tackle the prediction of instructor intervention in student posts from discussion forums in Massive Open Online
Courses (MOOCs). Our key ﬁnding is that using automatically obtained discourse relations improves the prediction of
when instructors intervene in student discussions, when compared with a state-of-the-art, feature-rich baseline. Our supervised classiﬁer makes use of an automatic discourse parser
which outputs Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) tags that
represent in-post discourse features. We show PDTB relationbased features increase the robustness of the classiﬁer and
complement baseline features in recalling more diverse instructor intervention patterns. In comprehensive experiments
over 14 MOOC offerings from several disciplines, the PDTB
discourse features improve performance on average. The resultant models are less dependent on domain-speciﬁc vocabulary, allowing them to better generalize to new courses.

Introduction
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) aim to scale learning by creating virtual classrooms that eliminate the need
for students to be co-located with instructional staff and
each other. To facilitate interaction, MOOC platforms have
discussion forums where students can interact with instructional staff – hereafter called instructors – and their classmates. Forums are typically the only mode of interaction between instructors and students. Forums often contain hundreds of posts from several thousand students, each post
competing with others for instructor attention. Reading and
responding to student queries in forums is an essential
teaching activity that helps instructors gauge student understanding of course content. Intervention is argued to facilitate student learning where an instructor’s presence and
intervention in student discussions improves learning outcomes in MOOCs (Chen et al. 2016) and other online learning environments (Garrison, Anderson, and Archer 1999;
Phirangee, Demmans Epp, and Hewitt 2016). However, instructors need to be selective when answering student posts
due to their limited bandwidth. One selection strategy is to
respond to posts that will maximally beneﬁt the most students in a course. Along these lines, Chandrasekaran et al.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3415

