Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Delivery Policy to Minimize User
Trafﬁc Consumption in Guaranteed Advertising

1

Jia Zhang,1,2 Zheng Wang,3 Qian Li,1,2 Jialin Zhang,1,2
Yanyan Lan,1,2 Qiang Li,1,2 Xiaoming Sun1,2
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
1
{zhangjia, liqian, zhangjialin, lanyanyan, liqiang01, sunxiaoming}@ict.ac.cn
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
3
zwang@cs.hku.hk

etc.). Generally, top tier publishers have frequently visited web pages and large amounts of ﬁrst-hand user data.
These resources are valuable, and undoubtedly, heavily attractive for advertisers, especially for those top tier advertisers. When promoting their products or brands, top tier advertisers usually prefer to sign a contract with publisher of high
quality to ensure advertising effects. This contract contains
targeted user types (what kinds of users the ads can only be
displayed to) and the amount of exposures of corresponding
ad to those targeted users. Publisher should comply with this
contract and is paid when this contract is satisﬁed.
Previous works usually focus on meeting the requirements of all contracts. Speciﬁcally, they perform study on
designing delivery policy to minimize some loss functions,
which are related to unsatisﬁed contracts and other particular requirements such as representativeness and smoothness
of delivery (Chen et al. 2012; Lefebvre, Contournet, and
Crivelli 2012). In this work we propose a novel optimization model, in which the primary target is to minimize the
user trafﬁc (or page views of users) within the constraint of
satisfying all exposure requirements. Compared to previous
model, this model has more practical value:

Abstract
In this work, we study the guaranteed delivery model which
is widely used in online advertising. In the guaranteed delivery scenario, ad exposures (which are also called impressions
in some works) to users are guaranteed by contracts signed in
advance between advertisers and publishers. A crucial problem for the advertising platform is how to fully utilize the
valuable user trafﬁc to generate as much as possible revenue.
Different from previous works which usually minimize the
penalty of unsatisﬁed contracts and some other cost (e.g. representativeness), we propose the novel consumption minimization model, in which the primary objective is to minimize the user trafﬁc consumed to satisfy all contracts. Under
this model, we develop a near optimal method to deliver ads
for users. The main advantage of our method lies in that it
consumes nearly as least as possible user trafﬁc to satisfy all
contracts, therefore more contracts can be accepted to produce more revenue. It also enables the publishers to estimate
how much user trafﬁc is redundant or short so that they can
sell or buy this part of trafﬁc in bulk in the exchange market.
Furthermore, it is robust with regard to priori knowledge of
user type distribution. Finally, the simulation shows that our
method outperforms the traditional state-of-the-art methods.

• For most publishers, the redundant user trafﬁc1 will be
sold in exchange market to avoid waste. However, compared with contract orders, selling user trafﬁc in exchange
market is usually less proﬁtable. User trafﬁc consumption for all contracts is minimized implies that more contracts can be accepted. Consequently, the proportion of
user trafﬁc sold to exchange market is decreased.

Introduction
Online advertising is now an industry which is worth tens of
billions of dollars. According to the latest report released by
Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB 2016), the annual revenue of online advertising in the US reaches $59.6 billion in
2015, which is $10.1 billion higher than that in 2014. In online advertising, ad exposures (also called impressions) are
sold in two major ways: either in spot through real-time bidding (or RTB) or in advanced by guarantee delivery (or GD)
(Chen, Yuan, and Wang 2014). Although RTB is developing rapidly, only 13% of publishers’ revenue is generated by
RTB by the year 2012 (eMarketer 2012). Large amounts of
ad exposures are still sold through GD.
GD is usually adopted by top tier advertisers (Apple,
P&G, Coca-Cola etc.) and publishers (Yahoo!, Amazon

• Under the consumption minimization model, the amount
of required user trafﬁc can be estimated with proper delivery policy. This estimation can be viewed as an important indicator to predict how much user trafﬁc is redundant or short. Then, publishers can sell or purchase user
trafﬁc in bulk, which is more proﬁtable than doing that
in scattered. This estimation is also useful for order management. When a particular contract comes, publisher can

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
The part of user trafﬁc that is not targeted by any contract or
corresponding contracts are already satisﬁed.

252

