Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

High-Resolution Mobile Fingerprint Matching
via Deep Joint KNN-Triplet Embedding
Fandong Zhang and Jufu Feng*
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education), Department of Machine Intelligence,
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science,Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R.China
zhangfandong@pku.edu.cn, fjf@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In mobile devices, the limited area of ﬁngerprint sensors
brings demand of partial ﬁngerprint matching. Existing ﬁngerprint authentication algorithms are mainly based on minutiae matching. However, their accuracy degrades signiﬁcantly
for partial-to-partial matching due to the lack of minutiae.
Optical ﬁngerprint sensor can capture very high-resolution
ﬁngerprints (2000dpi) with rich details as pores, scars, etc.
These details can cover the shortage of minutiae insufﬁciency.
In this paper, we propose a novel matching algorithm for
such ﬁngerprints, namely Deep Joint KNN-Triplet Embedding, by making good use of these subtle features. Our model
employs a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) with a
well-designed joint loss to project raw ﬁngerprint images into
an Euclidean space. Then we can use L2 -distance to measure
the similarity of two ﬁngerprints. Experiments indicate that
our model outperforms several state-of-the-art approaches.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Optical ﬁngerprint sensor, (b) Minutiae, pores
and scars on a partial high-resolution ﬁngerprint.

Figure 2: Model structure.
lenges. We have two major contributions. First, instead of
using handcrafted features, we employ a deep CNN with
triplet loss to learn features from scratch in an end-to-end
manner. It embeds ﬁngerprint images into an Euclidean
space. Moreover, we carefully design a K-Nearest-Neighbor
policy to select proper triplets for training. Second, by exploiting the advantages of triplet loss and softmax loss, we
joint both losses to make our model converge fast and stably.
Experiments on our in-house database show that the proposed model achieves true accept rate of 89.17% where false
accept rate is under 0.1%, and equal error rate of 1.94%,
which outperforms several state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Nowadays, ﬁngerprint authentication in mobile devices becomes increasingly popular. Limited by space, the ﬁngerprint sensors are miniaturized, which leads to partial ﬁngerprints. Mobile ﬁngerprint sensors are mainly capacitive, capturing images of resolution around 500dpi. Partial ﬁngerprint matching is challenging under such resolution because local features are relatively insufﬁcient. Accuracy of minutiae-based ﬁngerprint matching algorithms (Fu
et al. 2012) degrades signiﬁcantly with inadequate number of minutiae. Some other texture descriptors such as
AKAZE (Alcantarilla and Solutions 2011) can increase the
number of local matching (Mathur et al. 2016), but they are
not designed to make full use of ﬁngerprint structures.
Optical ﬁngerprint sensor can capture ﬁngerprints with
resolution as high as 2000dpi, providing very rich details
such as pores, scars and so on (Fig. 1). These features
can make up for the insufﬁciency of minutiae. Moreover,
with these details, ﬁngerprint authentication system is much
harder to crack. However, making use of these subtle features is challenging, since they are unstable and irregular. It
is tedious to detect and match these details one by one.
In this paper, we propose a novel model named Deep Joint
KNN-Triplet Embedding (Fig. 2) to address the above chal-

Deep Joint KNN-Triplet Embedding
We design a 38-layer CNN1 . Let f (x) ∈ Rd denote the
feature embedding. It embeds a ﬁngerprint image x into
a d-dimension Euclidean space. In addition, we constrain
2
f (x) = 1 suggested by (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and
Philbin 2015). The following sections describe how we employ KNN-Triplet Embedding and Joint Feature Learning.

KNN-Triplet Embedding
We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the standard triplet loss. For each
triplet of images < xai , xpi , xni >, where xai (anchor) and xpi

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Details of our network and more complementary materials are
available in https://zhangfd.github.io/fp/djkte/

5019

