Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automatic Emphatic Information Extraction from Aligned
Acoustic Data and Its Application on Sentence Compression
Yanju Chen

Rong Pan∗

Department of Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
chyanju@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China
panr@sysu.edu.cn
generated words constitute subsequences of the input sequences. Existing systems mostly rely heavily on syntactic information (McDonald 2006; Berg-Kirkpatrick, Gillick,
and Klein 2011), resulting in a vulnerability to error propagation. Thus, competitive systems without any syntactic information are proposed (Filippova et al. 2015), which beneﬁts from LSTM structures and efﬁcient heuristic search
in the scope of neural network sequence labeling, providing possible solutions to the weakness of the traditional
methods. More recent advances include using eye-tracking
recordings (Barrett, Agić, and Søgaard 2015) to improve
performance of LSTM-based sentence compression models
(Klerke, Goldberg, and Søgaard 2016).
In this paper we address the following question: can useful emphatic information be automatically extracted from
the prevailing acoustic data without any manual feature extraction and be used to help improve the performance of natural language processing tasks such as sentence compression? While sentence compression requires the models of a
good comprehension of the semantic context and the exact
intention of the input sentence, we believe the supervision
of additional emphatic data can be a boost to the later, and
the LSTM structures dealing with the former, which will be
supported by our evidence. Meanwhile, with the Speech-ToText alignment techniques, we present a faster approach to
automatically extract approximate emphatic patterns from
aligned acoustic data, thus lowering the cost of manual
feature extraction in emphatic words detection and prediction and providing weak supervision as an auxiliary task
to improve sentence compression performance using LSTM
structures.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows:

Abstract
We introduce a novel method to extract and utilize the semantic information from acoustic data. By automatic Speech-ToText alignment techniques, we are able to detect word-based
acoustic durations that can prosodically emphasize speciﬁc
words in an utterance. We model and analyze the sentencebased emphatic patterns by predicting the emphatic levels using only the lexical features, and demonstrate the potential
ability of emphatic information produced by such an unsupervised method to improve the performance of NLP tasks, such
as sentence compression, by providing weak supervision on
multi-task learning based on LSTMs.

Introduction
Speciﬁc words can be prosodically emphasized in an utterance by a speaker in order to draw attentions on them,
which can be modeled by pitch accents of words (Bolinger
1958). Also referred as prosodic prominence, pitch accent
is found to emphasize several semantic information in an utterance such as uncertainty, contrast, turn-taking cues and so
on, whose changes in an utterance can be perceived by listeners and thus convey certain kinds of emphasis (Terken
1991). The detection of prosodic prominence shows improvements on different tasks, such as Text-to-Speech synthesis and spoken language summarization. With most of
the detections of prosodic prominence are done by using
acoustic features (acoustic durations and intensities, extremity of fundamental frequency minima and maxima), there
are also works investigating predictions of emphatic words
using only lexical features (Brenier, Cer, and Jurafsky 2005;
Brenier 2008), which shows promising results and potential
improvements on more NLP tasks but are partly restricted
by the cost of high-quality manual feature extraction.
As one of the standard NLP tasks, the target of sentence
compression is to generate shorter paraphrases of sentences,
which can be further used both to assist other tasks such
as automatic summarization (Berg-Kirkpatrick, Gillick, and
Klein 2011) and to provide assistive applications for poor
readers (Canning et al. 2000), as well as to generate readable news headlines (Filippova 2010). In sentence compression systems that deal with deletion-based compression,

• We propose a faster approach to automatically extract
the emphatic information from prevailing aligned acoustic data.
• We model and analyse the extracted emphatic patterns
and demonstrate how the disjoint emphatic data can be
added to improve the performances of sentence compression tasks using LSTM structures.
• We observe competitive improvements on our multi-task
sentence compression models with the disjoint emphatic
data, compared with the baselines.

∗

Corresponding Author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3422

