Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Attributes from
the Crowdsourced Relative Labels
Tian Tian,† Ning Chen,‡ Jun Zhu†

†

‡

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., CBICR Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Systems
MOE Key lab of Bioinformatics, Bioinformatics Division and Center for Synthetic & Systems Biology
TNList, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{tiant16@mails, ningchen@, dcszj@}tsinghua.edu.cn
practice since ﬁnding attributes to describe related concepts is
typically a very hard task. Although humans use attributes to
make decisions in every minute, it is usually a subconscious
process and hard to be characterized. Moreover, due to human
perception variations, different people may extract different
attributes from a same task, so the responses are inherently
diverse. As a result of these difﬁculties, the commonly used
attributes in most ﬁelds are designed by experts, which is an
expensive and time-consuming process.
Fortunately, the rise of crowdsourcing provides a new way
to collect information from a group of people fast and cheaply.
Systems like Amazon Mechanical Turk and CrowdFlower
have been widely used by machine learning researchers to
label large-scale datasets (Deng et al. 2009; Welinder et al.
2010; Kovashka et al. 2016), cluster items (Gomes et al. 2011)
and even build classiﬁers (Cheng and Bernstein 2015). To
learn attributes by crowdsourcing, we ﬁrst design an analogical interface to collect human opinions, which is efﬁcient,
and can lead people to give expected results. Then the human
responses are represented by a collection of relative labels.
Next we build a hierarchical Bayesian aggregating model to
ensemble the results collected from different people and tasks,
which is robust to the crowdsourcing noise. After the above
process, we test the efﬁcacy of our method, and the results
demonstrate promise on discovering diverse and convincing
attributes, whose qualities are further proved by signiﬁcantly
improving zero-shot learning performances compared with
the expert-designed attributes.

Abstract
Finding semantic attributes to describe related concepts is typically a hard problem. The commonly used attributes in most
ﬁelds are designed by domain experts, which is expensive
and time-consuming. In this paper we propose an efﬁcient
method to learn human comprehensible attributes with crowdsourcing. We ﬁrst design an analogical interface to collect
relative labels from the crowds. Then we propose a hierarchical Bayesian model, as well as an efﬁcient initialization
strategy, to aggregate labels and extract concise attributes. Our
experimental results demonstrate promise on discovering diverse and convincing attributes, which signiﬁcantly improve
the performance of the challenging zero-shot learning tasks.

Introduction
Extracting concise attributes and then drawing a conclusion
is a usual pattern when humans make decisions (Hwang
and Yoon 1981). For example, when we judge whether a
research paper is good or not, instead of making a decision
directly, we usually ask whether this paper is novel, possesses good technique quality or has a potential impact to
the literature, and then reach a decision based on the answers
of these sub-questions. Here novelty, technique quality and
potential impact are three attributes extracted from the raw
textual data to judge the quality of a paper. They can help
us to solve the comprehensive judgment. In the machine
learning literature, compared with raw features such as pixel
representation of images, attributes are usually more concise and easily interpretable (Farhadi et al. 2009). Moreover,
due to the extensive knowledge background of humans, attributes naturally contain cross domain information, some of
which cannot be deduced directly from the data themselves.
For example, humans can extract behavior attributes of an
animal only from static pictures of it. Thus attributes are
suitable for transferring knowledge between tasks and classifying objects. The beneﬁts have been shown by works in the
zero-shot learning literature (Jayaraman and Grauman 2014;
Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009; Norouzi et al. 2014;
Palatucci et al. 2009; Parikh and Grauman 2011b; RomeraParedes and Torr 2015).
In this paper, we ask a new question: can we learn high
quality attributes from the crowds? This question arises from

Analogical Encoding of Attributes
The ﬁrst step is to collect information from humans. Suppose
we want to collect main visual attributes1 of animals, a naive
approach is to directly show pictures of each animal, then ask
humans to answer some straightforward questions, such as:
"what is the main visual characteristic of this animal?"
However, in practice we found this approach often results in
a poor response due to several reasons: (1) the question is
not well deﬁned, thus it can be interpreted in many different
ways and has too many possible answers. Moreover, usually
people tend to give apparent attributes. For example, when we
show annotators ﬂower pictures, 94% responses focus on the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In this work, we deﬁne the attributes at the category level, which
means items in a same category should share same attribute values.

1562

