Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Radon — Rapid Discovery of Topological Relations
Mohamed Ahmed Sherif,a Kevin Dreßler,a Panayiotis Smeros,b Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomoa
a

Department of Computer Science, University of Leipzig, 04109 Leipzig, Germany
{sherif|dressler|ngonga}@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
b
EPFL, BC 142, Station 14, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
panayiotis.smeros@epﬂ.ch

We go beyond the state of the art by providing a novel indexing method combined with space tiling that allows for the
eﬃcient computation of topological relations between geospatial resources. In particular, we present a novel sparse
index for geo-spatial resources. We then develop a strategy
to discard unnecessary computations for DE-9IM relations
based on bounding boxes. Our extensive experiments show
that our approach scales well and outperforms the state of
the art by up to 3 orders of magnitude w.r.t. to its runtime.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: (1) We present a novel indexing algorithm for geospatial resources based on an optimized sparse space tiling.
(2) We provide a novel ﬁltering approach for the rapid discovery of topological relations (Radon), which uses minimum bounding box (MBB) approximation. (3) We show that
Radon is able to discover any of the DE-9IM relations that
involve intersection of at least one point. (4) We evaluate
Radon on real datasets and show that it clearly outperforms
the state of the art.

Abstract
Geospatial data is at the core of the Semantic Web, of which
the largest knowledge base contains more than 30 billions
facts. Reasoning on these large amounts of geospatial data requires eﬃcient methods for the computation of links between
the resources contained in these knowledge bases. In this paper, we present Radon – eﬃcient solution for the discovery of
topological relations between geospatial resources according
to the DE9-IM standard. Our evaluation shows that we outperform the state of the art signiﬁcantly and by several orders
of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Geo-spatial datasets belong to the largest sources of Linked
Data. For example, LinkedGeoData1 contains more than 20
billion triples which describe millions of geo-spatial entities. Datasets such as NUTS2 use polygons of up to 1500
points to describe resources such as countries. As pointed
out in previous works (Ngonga Ngomo 2013), only 7.1%
of the links between resources connect geo-spatial entities.
This is due to two main factors. First, the large number
of geo-spatial resources available on the Linked Data Web
requires scalable algorithms for computing links between
geo-spatial resources. In addition, the description of geospatial resources being commonly based on polygons demands the computation of particular relations, i.e., topological relations, between geo-spatial resources. According to
the Linked Data principles3 and for the sake of real-time
application such as structured machine learning (e.g., DLLearner (Lehmann 2009)) and question Answering (e.g.,
DEQA platform (Lehmann et al. 2012)), the provision of
explicit topological relations between resources is of central
importance to achieve scalability. However, only a few approaches have been developed to deal with geo-spatial data
represented in RDF. For example, (Ngonga Ngomo 2013)
uses the Hausdorﬀ distance to compute a topological distance between geo-spatial entities. (Smeros and Koubarakis
2016) builds upon MultiBlock to compute topological relations according to the DE-9IM standard.

2

Preliminaries

Let K be a ﬁnite RDF knowledge base. K can be regarded
as a set of triples (s, p, o) ∈ (R ∪ B) × P × (R ∪ L ∪ B),
where R is the set of all resources, B is the set of all blank
nodes, P the set of all predicates and L the set of all literals. Given a set of source resources S and target resources T
from two (not necessarily distinct) knowledge bases K1 and
K2 as well as a relation R, the goal of Link Discovery (LD)
is to ﬁnd the set of mapping M = {(s, t) ∈ S × T : R(s, t)}.
Naive computation of M requires quadratic time complexity to compare every s ∈ S with every t ∈ T , which is
clearly impracticable for large datasets such as geo-spatial
datasets, which are the focus of this work. Here, we present
an algorithm for eﬃcient computations of topological relations between resources with geo-spatial descriptions (i.e.,
described by means of vector geometry).4 We assume that
each of the resources in S and T considered in the subsequent portion of this paper as being described by a geometry, where each geometry is modelled as sequence of points.
An example of such resources is shown in Figure 1(a).
The Dimensionally Extended nine-Intersection Model

Copyright c
 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://linkedgeodata.org
2
http://nuts.geovocab.org/
3
https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html

4
Most commonly encoded in the WKT format, see http://www.
opengeospatial.org/standards/sfa.

175

