Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Context-Enriched Neural Network Method for
Recognizing Lexical Entailment
†

Kun Zhang,† Enhong Chen,†∗ Qi Liu,† Chuanren Liu,‡ Guangyi Lv†
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
zhkun@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn, gylv@mail.ustc.edu.cn
‡
Drexel University
chuanren.liu@drexel.edu
The state-of-the-art methods for RLE rely on representing each word x with a “prototype” vector x of contextual
features, i.e., distribution of other words that tends to appear in its vicinity. Based on the vector representations of the
words, most works can be grouped into two parts: unsupervised methods and supervised methods. The unsupervised
RLE methods mainly use asymmetric similarity functions
to measure the existence of the entailment relations in word
pairs (Santus et al. 2014; Kotlerman et al. 2010). Supervised
methods learn the asymmetric operator from a training set,
which thus can perform better. Those supervised methods
differ by the way they represent each candidate pair of words
(x, y), such as concatenation x ⊕ y (Baroni et al. 2012) and
difference y − x (Fu et al. 2014). Recently, more sophisticated representations have also been tested (Turney and Mohammad 2015).
However, due to the homonymy and polysemy of words,
capturing the semantics of a word with a single vector can
be an unattainable goal (Reisinger and Mooney 2010; Hua
et al. ). For instance, the word club is similar to both bat and
association, but these two words are not similar to each other
in general contexts. Thus only a single “prototype” vector
cannot reveal multifaceted aspects of a word.
To overcome the shortcomings of single representation
of a word, in this paper, we propose a supervised ContextEnriched Neural Network (CENN) method for RLE. Specifically, we use multiple word embeddings with different contexts to represent words and word pairs, which can capture
much more aspects of the language. Then we use different combination methods to integrate the multiple semantic information and neural network structure with attention
mechanism to determine the importance of the information
from different contexts for learning the entailment relations.
Our design makes CENN ﬂexible and adaptable to different entailment perspectives in the text corpus. The extensive
evaluations show that our method signiﬁcantly improves the
performance of automatic RLE in comparison with several
state-of-the-art methods. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst work using neural network to integrate multiple
language embeddings for the task of automatic RLE.

Abstract
Recognizing lexical entailment (RLE) always plays an important role in inference of natural language, i.e., identifying whether one word entails another, for example, fox entails animal. In the literature, automatically recognizing lexical entailment for word pairs deeply relies on words’ contextual representations. However, as a “prototype” vector, a
single representation cannot reveal multifaceted aspects of
the words due to their homonymy and polysemy. In this paper, we propose a supervised Context-Enriched Neural Network (CENN) method for recognizing lexical entailment. To
be speciﬁc, we ﬁrst utilize multiple embedding vectors from
different contexts to represent the input word pairs. Then,
through different combination methods and attention mechanism, we integrate different embedding vectors and optimize
their weights to predict whether there are entailment relations
in word pairs. Moreover, our proposed framework is ﬂexible
and open to handle different word contexts and entailment
perspectives in the text corpus. Extensive experiments on ﬁve
datasets show that our approach signiﬁcantly improves the
performance of automatic RLE in comparison with several
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) is an important task
in natural language processing, particularly for applications
such as text summarization, information retrieval, question
answering, paraphrasing and others (Androutsopoulos and
Malakasiotis 2010). RTE involves pairs of sentences, such
as the following (Turney and Mohammad 2015):
Text: George was bitten by a dog.
Hypothesis: George was attacked by an animal.
The objective of RTE is to develop algorithms that can determine whether the text sentence entails the hypothesis sentence. In many cases, to recognize the entailment between
sentences, we must ﬁrst be able to recognize the entailment between words (Geffet and Dagan 2005), which is
called Recognizing Lexical Entailment (RLE). In the example above, if we are able to recognize that bitten entails attacked and dog entails animal, we can conclude that the text
entails the hypothesis.

2

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author.

Preliminary and Problem Statement

In this section, we formulate the RLE task with multiple contextual information as a supervised classiﬁcation problem.

3127

