Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Online Active Linear Regression via Thresholding
Carlos Riquelme and Ramesh Johari

Baosen Zhang

Stanford University,
{rikel, rjohari}@stanford.edu.

Washington University,
zhangbao@uw.edu.

ﬂexibility, and simplicity. As a consequence, in practice, people tend to add a large number of features and interactions to
the model, hoping to capture the right signal at the expense
of introducing some noise. Moreover, the input space can
be updated and extended iteratively after data collection if
the decision maker feels predictions on a held-out set are
not good enough. As a consequence, often times the number
of covariates becomes higher than the number of available
observations. In those cases, selecting the subsequent most
informative data is even more critical. Accordingly, our focus
is on actively choosing observations for optimal prediction
of the resulting high-dimensional linear models.
Our main contributions are as follows. We initially focus
on standard linear models, and build the theory that we later
extend to high dimensional settings. First, we develop an
algorithm that sequentially selects observations if they have
sufﬁciently large norm, in an appropriate space (dependent
on the data-generating distribution). Second, we provide a
comprehensive theoretical analysis of our algorithm, including upper and lower bounds. We focus on minimizing mean
squared prediction error (MSE), and show a high probability
upper bound on the MSE of our approach (cf. Theorem 3.1).
In addition, we provide a lower bound on the best possible
achievable performance in high probability and expectation
(cf. Section 4). In some distributional settings of interest we
show that this lower bound structurally matches our upper
bound, suggesting our algorithm is near-optimal.
The results above show that the improvement of active
learning progressively weakens as the dimension of the data
grows, and a new approach is needed. To tackle our original
goal and address this degradation, under standard sparsity assumptions, we design an adaptive extension of the thresholding algorithm that initially devotes some budget to learn the
sparsity pattern of the model, in order to subsequently apply
active learning to the relevant lower dimensional subspace.
We ﬁnd that in this setting, the active learning algorithm
provides signiﬁcant beneﬁt over passive random sampling.
Theoretical guarantees are given in Theorem 3.3.
Finally, we empirically evaluate our algorithm’s performance. Our tests on real world data show our approach is
remarkably robust: the gain of active learning remains significant even in settings that fall outside our theory. Our results
suggest that the threshold-based rule may be a valuable tool
to leverage in observation-limited environments, even when

Abstract
We consider the problem of online active learning to collect
data for regression modeling. Speciﬁcally, we consider a decision maker with a limited experimentation budget who must
efﬁciently learn an underlying linear population model. Our
main contribution is a novel threshold-based algorithm for
selection of most informative observations; we characterize
its performance and fundamental lower bounds. We extend
the algorithm and its guarantees to sparse linear regression in
high-dimensional settings. Simulations suggest the algorithm
is remarkably robust: it provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts over passive random sampling in real-world datasets that exhibit high
nonlinearity and high dimensionality — signiﬁcantly reducing
both the mean and variance of the squared error.

1

Introduction

This paper studies online active learning for estimation of
linear models. Active learning is motivated by the premise
that in many sequential data collection scenarios, labeling
or obtaining output from observations is costly. Thus ongoing decisions must be made about whether to collect data
on a particular unit of observation. Active learning has a
rich history; see, e.g., (Cohn, Ghahramani, and Jordan 1996;
Cohn, Atlas, and Ladner 1994; Castro and Nowak 2007;
Koltchinskii 2010; Balcan, Hanneke, and Vaughan 2010).
As a motivating example, suppose that an online marketing
organization plans to send display advertising promotions
to a new target market. Their goal is to estimate the revenue that can be expected for an individual with a given
covariate vector. Unfortunately, providing the promotion and
collecting data on each individual is costly. Thus the goal
of the marketing organization is to acquire ﬁrst the most
“informative” observations. They must do this in an online
fashion: opportunities to display the promotion to individuals
arrive sequentially over time. In online active learning, this is
achieved by selecting those observational units (target individuals in this case) that provide the most information to the
model ﬁtting procedure.
Linear models are ubiquitous in both theory and practice—
often used even in settings where the data may exhibit strong
nonlinearity—in large part because of their interpretability,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2506

