Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Regularized Diffusion Process for Visual Retrieval
Song Bai,1 Xiang Bai,1∗ Qi Tian,2 Longin Jan Latecki3
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
University of Texas at San Antonio, 3 Temple University
{songbai, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, qitian@cs.utsa.edu, latecki@temple.edu
2

Torres 2013; Chen et al. 2014; Pedronette, Almeida, and
da Silva Torres 2014). Nevertheless, most of them model
the relationships between objects on graph-based manifolds, where the vertices in the graph represent objects
and the edge connecting two adjacent vertices is weighted
by their similarity value. Then, similarity values are diffused on the graph in an iterative manner (e.g., random
walk (Page et al. 1999)). This procedure is usually called
diffusion process (Yang, Koknar-Tezel, and Latecki 2009;
Luo et al. 2013) in the retrieval domain.
A recent survey paper (Donoser and Bischof 2013) summarizes most common variants of diffusion process in a uniﬁed framework, and experimentally benchmarks the difference of these variants in retrieval performances. The experimental results suggest that diffusion process on tensor product graph (Yang, Koknar-Tezel, and Latecki 2009), built by
computing the tensor product of the original afﬁnity graph
with itself, exhibits its superiority over other kinds of diffusion process. Tensor product graph naturally takes into account high order information, which is stated to be helpful
for retrieval on manifold. However, the mechanism behind
this kind of diffusion process still remains unclear. Some
critical questions are: 1) what kind of manifold structure is
captured and how it is reﬂected; 2) why high order information is useful; 3) what is the role of iteration and how many
iterations are needed.
In this paper, we propose a new variant of diffusion process. The proposed method has three equivalent formulations as regularization framework, iterative framework and
limit framework, respectively. Based on our study, insightful conclusions are drawn which theoretically explain why
diffusion process on tensor product graph can better reveal
the intrinsic relationship between objects, as:

Abstract
Diffusion process has advanced visual retrieval greatly owing to its capacity in capturing the geometry structure of the
underlying manifold. Recent studies (Donoser and Bischof
2013) have experimentally demonstrated that diffusion process on the tensor product graph yields better retrieval performances than that on the original afﬁnity graph. However,
the principle behind this kind of diffusion process remains
unclear, i.e., what kind of manifold structure is captured and
how it is reﬂected. In this paper, we propose a new variant
of diffusion process, which also operates on a tensor product graph. It is deﬁned in three equivalent formulations (regularization framework, iterative framework and limit framework, respectively). Based on our study, three insightful conclusions are drawn which theoretically explain how this kind
of diffusion process can better reveal the intrinsic relationship between objects. Besides, extensive experimental results
on various retrieval tasks testify the validity of the proposed
method.

Introduction
Given a query object, the goal of retrieval task is to ﬁnd similar objects in the database according to pre-deﬁned similarity measures. Conventionally, it is accomplished by computing pairwise dissimilarity between features in the Euclidean
space. Then, similar objects are expected to be distributed
with larger similarities to the query, thus they can be ranked
in higher positions of the ranking list. However, it has been
demonstrated (Zhou et al. 2004b) that the pairwise formulation is insufﬁcient to reveal the intrinsic relationship between objects. Instead, similarities can be estimated more
accurately along the geodesic path of the underlying data
manifold, i.e., in the context of other objects.
To capture the local geometry structure of the manifold,
many algorithms have been developed in literature. Those
algorithms share a very diverse nomenclature, including but
not limited to context sensitive similarity (Jegou et al. 2010;
Bai et al. 2010), afﬁnity learning (Wang and Tu 2012; Jiang,
Wang, and Tu 2011; Kontschieder, Donoser, and Bischof
2009), re-ranking (Zhang et al. 2012; Qin et al. 2011;
Shen et al. 2012), ranking list comparison (Pedronette and

• In the regularization framework, the proposed method can
be taken as an improved version of manifold ranking with
a relaxed smoothness term. Moreover, it imposes a highorder (tensor) graph Laplacian to smooth the pairwise relationship between each two nodes in the original graph.
• In the iterative framework, it can be taken as a special
case of label propagation with only one category label.
Then the retrieval task is converted to a classiﬁcation task
applied to a pair of objects, and the only category label is
called “correct”.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3967

