Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Misspeciﬁed Linear Bandits
Avishek Ghosh

Sayak Ray Chowdhury

Aditya Gopalan

University of California, Berkeley
California 94720 USA
avishek ghosh@berkeley.edu

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru 560012 India
srchowdhury@ece.iisc.ernet.in

Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru 560012 India
aditya@ece.iisc.ernet.in

brated Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) algorithm of (Auer,
Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002).
The (polynomial) dependence of the regret in a standard stochastic bandit on the number of actions N can
be rather prohibitive in settings with a very large number
(and potentially inﬁnite) of actions. Under the assumption
that the rewards from playing arms are linear functions of
known features or context vectors, linear bandit algorithms
such as LinUCB (Li et al. 2010), Optimism in the Face
of Uncertainty Linear bandit (OFUL) (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál,
and Szepesvári 2011)√and Thompson sampling (Thompson
1933) give regret Õ(d T ) where d is the feature dimension.
This is particularly attractive in practice where the feature
dimension d  N (for instance, news article recommendation data typically has d of the order of hundreds while N
is 2 or 3 orders higher). The framework also extends to the
more general contextual linear bandit model, where the features for arms are allowed to vary with time (Chu et al. 2011;
Agrawal and Goyal 2013).
The design, and attractiveness, of linear bandit algorithms
hinges on the assumption that the expected reward from
playing arms are linear in their features, i.e., under a ﬁxed
ordering of the arms, the vector of expected rewards from
all arms belongs to a known linear subspace, spanned by the
arms’ features. However, real-world environments may not
necessarily conform perfectly to this linear reward model
and in fact in most cases, have large deviation (Section 7
presents a case study using a real-world dataset to this effect). One possible reason for this is that features are often designed with careful domain expertise without explicit
regard for linearity with respect to the utilities of actions.
Another situation where linearity ma be violated is when
there is feature noise or uncertainty (Hainmueller and Hazlett 2014) – even a small amount of noise in the assumed
features shifts the expected reward vector out of the linear
subspace. When the rewards need not be perfectly linear in
terms of the features in hand, it becomes important to study
how robust or fragile strategies for linear bandits can be to
such misspeciﬁcation.
The speciﬁc questions we address are: (a) With features
available for arms with respect to which the arms’ rewards
need not necessarily be linear, how do deviations from linearity impact the performance of state-of-the-art linear bandit algorithms? (b) Is it possible to design bandit algorithms

Abstract
We consider the problem of online learning in misspeciﬁed
linear stochastic multi-armed bandit problems. Regret guarantees for state-of-the-art linear bandit algorithms such as
Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty Linear bandit (OFUL)
hold under the assumption that the arms expected rewards
are perfectly linear in their features. It is, however, of interest to investigate the impact of potential misspeciﬁcation
in linear bandit models, where the expected rewards are perturbed away from the linear subspace determined by the arms
features. Although OFUL has recently been shown to be robust to relatively small deviations from linearity, we show that
any linear bandit algorithm that enjoys optimal regret performance in the perfectly linear setting (e.g., OFUL) must suffer linear regret under a sparse additive perturbation of the
linear model. In an attempt to overcome this negative result,
we deﬁne a natural class of bandit models characterized by a
non-sparse deviation from linearity. We argue that the OFUL
algorithm can fail to achieve sublinear regret even under models that have non-sparse deviation. We ﬁnally develop a novel
bandit algorithm, comprising a hypothesis test for linearity
followed by a decision to use either the OFUL or Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) algorithm. For perfectly linear bandit
models, the algorithm provably exhibits OFULs favorable regret performance, while for misspeciﬁed models satisfying
the non-sparse deviation property, the algorithm avoids the
linear regret phenomenon and falls back on UCBs sublinear
regret scaling. Numerical experiments on synthetic data, and
on recommendation data from the public Yahoo! Learning to
Rank Challenge dataset, empirically support our ﬁndings.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandits have been used with significant success to model sequential decision making and optimization problems under uncertainty, due to their succinct
expression of the exploration-exploitation tradeoff. Regret
is one of the most widely studied performance measures for
bandit problems, and it is well-known that the optimal regret that can be achieved in an iid stochastic bandit instance
with N actions, [0, 1]-bounded rewards and T rounds, without any√additional information about the reward distribution,
is1 Õ( N T ). This is achieved, for instance, by the celec 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The notation Õ hides polylogarithmic factors.

3761

