Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SSP: Semantic Space Projection
for Knowledge Graph Embedding with Text Descriptions
Han Xiao,∗ Minlie Huang,∗ Lian Meng, Xiaoyan Zhu
State Key Lab. of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab. for Information Science and Technology,
Dept. of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China
bookman@vip.163.com; {aihuang,zxy-dcs}@tsinghua.edu.cn; mengl15@foxmail.com;
∗
Correspondence Authors: http://www.ibookman.net, http://www.aihuang.org
Abstract
Knowledge graph embedding represents entities and relations
in knowledge graph as low-dimensional, continuous vectors,
and thus enables knowledge graph compatible with machine
learning models. Though there have been a variety of models for knowledge graph embedding, most methods merely
concentrate on the fact triples, while supplementary textual
descriptions of entities and relations have not been fully employed. To this end, this paper proposes the semantic space
projection (SSP) model which jointly learns from the symbolic triples and textual descriptions. Our model builds interaction between the two information sources, and employs
textual descriptions to discover semantic relevance and offer
precise semantic embedding. Extensive experiments show
that our method achieves substantial improvements against
baselines on the tasks of knowledge graph completion and
entity classiﬁcation. Papers, Posters, Slides, Datasets and
Codes: http://www.ibookman.net/conference.html

Figure 1: Textual descriptions for entities in a fact triple.
Despite the success of conventional knowledge graph embedding models, there are still two reasons why textual descriptions would be necessary in this task: discovering semantic relevance and offering precise semantic expression.
Firstly, the semantic relevance between entities is capable to recognize the true triples, which are difﬁcult to be
inferred only with fact triples. For example, the triple (Anna
Roosevelt, Parents, Franklin Roosevelt), indicates “Franklin
Roosevelt” is the parent of “Anna Roosevelt”. However,
it’s quite difﬁcult to infer this fact merely from other symbolic triples. In contrast, in the textual description of the
head entity, there are many keywords such as “Roosevelt”
and “Daughter of the President”, which may infer the fact
triple easily. Speciﬁcally, we measure the possibility of a
triple by projecting the loss onto a hyperplane that represents the semantic relevance between entities. Thus, it is
always possible to accept a fact triple so long as the l2 -norm
of the projected loss vector onto the semantic hyperplane is
sufﬁciently small.
Secondly, precise semantic expression could promote
the discriminative ability between two triples. For instance, when we query about the profession of “Daniel
Sturgeon”, there are two possible candidates: “politician”
and “lawyer”. It’s hard to distinguish if only focusing on
the symbolic triples. However, the textual description of
“Daniel Sturgeon” is full of politics-related keywords such
as “Democratic Party”, “State Legislature” etc. and even
“Politician”. The textual descriptions help to reﬁne the
topic of “Daniel Sturgeon” in a more precise way from the
social celebrities to the government ofﬁcers, which makes
the true answer “politician” more preferable. Formally,
even though the loss vectors of the two facts are almost
of equal norm, after respectively projected onto the “politician” and “lawyer” related semantic hyperplanes, the losses

Introduction
Knowledge graph provides an effective basis for NLP in
many tasks such as question answering, web search and semantic analysis. In order to provide a numerical computation framework for knowledge graph, knowledge graph embedding projects the entities and relations to a continuous
low-dimensional vector space. More speciﬁcally, a fact in
knowledge graph is usually represented as a symbolic triple
(h, r, t), while knowledge graph embedding attempts to represent the symbols with vectors, say h, r, t. To this end,
a number of embedding methods have been proposed, such
as TransE (Bordes et al. 2013), PTransE (Lin, Liu, and Sun
2015), KG2E (He et al. 2015), etc.
As a key branch of embedding models, the translationbased methods adopt the principle of translating the head
entity to the tail one by a relation-speciﬁc vector, or formally
as h + r = t. As Fig.1 shows, in the knowledge graph, the
entities such as h, t have textual descriptions, which contain
much supplementary semantic information about knowledge
triples.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3104

