Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast Electrical Demand Optimization Under Real-Time Pricing
Shan He,∗1,2 Mark Wallace,1 Campbell Wilson,1 and Ariel Liebman1
1

1

Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Victoria, 3145, Australia
2
Data61, CSIRO, Australia
{shan.he, mark.wallace, campbell.wilson, ariel.liebman}@monash.edu

Introduction

prices until a stopping condition is met. We call it central
pricing. However, naturally if the price is lowest at time T ,
then all households will tend to run tasks at time T which
causes a spike in the demand at that time, resulting in a
high cost. This paper proposes an innovative scalable approach which delegates task scheduling to household smart
meters, but avoids the limitations of central pricing. We term
it mixed initiative. This approach, like (Li, Chen, and Low
2011) uses an iterative process, but the end result is not a
set of prices. Instead it is a globally optimal consumption
level (maximum demand for all households) for each period
of the day.

The introduction of smart meters for measuring and controlling electrical demand at home has motivated the electricity
industry to seek scalable mechanisms for matching electrical demand to supply. Electrical demand can be managed if
households allow some ﬂexibility in the scheduling of certain tasks such as washing clothes. If smart meters in an area
connected to a given power transformer are all coordinated,
this ﬂexibility allows peak demand to be ﬂattened, thus obviating the need to upgrade transformer capacity or deploy
costly electricity generation capacity when the peak demand
grows. Real-time pricing (RTP) is an effective scheme to
reduce peak demand (Albadi and El-Saadany 2007). Under RTP, the electricity price varies at different times of the
day, reﬂecting the real-time supply and demand conditions
in the market. Consumers can reduce their costs by shifting the demand outside the peak times, therefore reduce the
peak demand. The overall aim of demand management is to
minimize electricity generation and distribution costs while
meeting the demands and preferences of consumers. This research aims at investigating a new approach that elicits globally optimal demand schedule to achieve this overall aim under RTP, and easily scales to large groups of households.
An autonomous system that rapidly schedules demand
for a large number of households is a challenge. This has
given rise to research on electrical demand management under RTP (Samadi et al. 2010; Van Den Briel, Scott, and
Thiébaux 2013; He et al. 2014). One approach described
in (Barbato et al. 2011) is to gather data on planned tasks for
a single day from all households within an area, in an electrical demand coordination centre (EDCC). All tasks are then
scheduled centrally, and the schedules are communicated to
smart meters in all households. It is not possible to optimally schedule tasks for thousands of households in realistic
timescale. A second approach delegates the task scheduling
in each household to its smart meter. In (Samadi et al. 2010;
Li, Chen, and Low 2011), smart meters schedule tasks
against an initial set of prices across the day, and communicate only their resulting demands to the EDCC, from which
new prices are computed. The smart meters iteratively compute new schedules from which the EDCC computes new

2

Demand Optimization Problem

We investigate a non-linear multi-objective optimization
problem that minimizes the total electricity cost and inconvenience cost of households. An electricity cost is speciﬁed
at each period of the day that increases non-linearly with the
total demand. An inconvenience cost is incurred for starting a task at its non-preferred start time. The inconvenience
cost is designed to balance inconvenience against the cost of
electricity provision. The optimal solution to this problem
is a set of consumption levels that minimizes the total costs.
We ﬁnd this solution by computing a probability for each
task to start at each feasible time, such that the expected
total demand per period of all tasks incurs the lowest total
costs, and the optimal expected total demands are the optimal consumption levels we seek for this problem. These
probabilities of start times for tasks are then used by smart
meters to schedule tasks in practice. As in (Van Den Briel,
Scott, and Thiébaux 2013), we assume that the number of
tasks is large enough that the total demands are highly likely
to be close to the optimal consumption levels.

3

The mixed initiative approach

We propose a mixed initiative approach to ﬁnd the optimal consumption levels in an iterative manner, illustrated
in the complementary material. At each iteration, each
household optimally schedules its own tasks, given a set
of prices. Then a demand coordinator computes a probability for these new start times and a new price per period,
with a convex optimization method, also known as FrankWolfe (FW) algorithm. In our implementation of FW, ﬁrstly,

∗

student
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4935

