Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Dependency-Based Neural Reordering Model for
Statistical Machine Translation
Christian Hadiwinoto, Hwee Tou Ng
Department of Computer Science
National University of Singapore
{chrhad, nght}@comp.nus.edu.sg

has found application in MT reordering, applied in the reranking of translation output candidates (Li et al. 2014;
Cui, Wang, and Li 2016) and in the pre-ordering approach
(reordering the source sentence before translation) (de Gispert, Iglesias, and Byrne 2015; Miceli-Barone and Attardi
2015). Nevertheless, reordering integrated with translation
has not beneﬁted from the neural approach.
In this paper, we propose applying a neural network (NN)
model in reordering integrated within translation. We apply
our neural classiﬁer on two words linked by a dependency
relation link, either a head-child or sibling link, in order to
predict if two words need to be swapped in the translation.
The prediction is used to guide the decoding process of stateof-the-art phrase-based SMT.

Abstract
In machine translation (MT) that involves translating between
two languages with signiﬁcant differences in word order, determining the correct word order of translated words is a major challenge. The dependency parse tree of a source sentence
can help to determine the correct word order of the translated
words. In this paper, we present a novel reordering approach
utilizing a neural network and dependency-based embeddings
to predict whether the translations of two source words linked
by a dependency relation should remain in the same order or
should be swapped in the translated sentence. Experiments on
Chinese-to-English translation show that our approach yields
a statistically signiﬁcant improvement of 0.57 BLEU point on
benchmark NIST test sets, compared to our prior state-of-theart statistical MT system that uses sparse dependency-based
reordering features.

A Neural Classiﬁer for Dependency-Based
Reordering

Introduction

We propose two neural classiﬁers, one to predict the correct
order of the translated target words of two source words with
a head-child relation, and the other for two source words
with a sibling relation. Each binary classiﬁer takes a set of
features related to the two source words as its input and predicts if the translated words should be swapped (positive) or
remain in order (negative).

In a machine translation (MT) system, determining the correct word order of translated words is crucial as word order reﬂects meaning. As different languages have different
ordering of words, reordering of words is required to produce the correct translation output. Reordering in MT remains a major challenge for language pairs with a signiﬁcant
word order difference. Phrase-based MT systems (Koehn,
Och, and Marcu 2003), which achieve state-of-the-art performance, generally adopt a reordering model based on the
span of a phrase and the span of its adjacent phrase (Tillmann 2004; Koehn et al. 2005; Galley and Manning 2008).
Incorporating the dependency parse tree of an input
(source) sentence is beneﬁcial for reordering, as the dependency tree captures the relationships between words in
a sentence, through the dependency relation label between
two words. The dependency parse tree of a source sentence can be utilized in reordering integrated within phrasebased statistical MT (SMT), by deﬁning dependency-based
features in the SMT log-linear model (Chang et al. 2009;
Hadiwinoto, Liu, and Ng 2016).
Recently, neural networks have been applied to natural language processing (NLP) to minimize feature engineering and to utilize continuous word representation. It

Input Representation
The head-child classiﬁer predicts the order of the translated
words of a source word xc and its head word xh (where xg
is the head word of xh ) using the following input features:
• The head word xh , its part-of-speech (POS) tag T (xh ),
and the dependency label L(xh ) linking xh to xg
• The child word xc , its POS tag T (xc ), and the dependency
label L(xc ) linking xc to xh
• The signed distance d(xh , xc ) between the head and the
child in the original source sentence, with the following
possible values:
– −2 if xc is on the left of xh and there is at least one
other child between them
– −1 if xc is on the left of xh and there is no other child
between them
– +1 if xc is on the right of xh and there is no other child
between them

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

109

