Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Dude, Where’s My Robot?
A Localization Challenge for Undergraduate Robotics
Paul Ruvolo
Paul.Ruvolo@olin.edu
Olin College of Engineering

challenge around a particular family of algorithms based on
the particle ﬁlter (Ristic, Arulampalam, and Gordon 2004).
This high degree of scaffolding is important due to the challenge’s position in the early part of the semester, and the
structure allows for a rich set of cohesive in-class activities
built around explaining and successfully implementing the
particle ﬁlter.

Abstract
I present a robotics localization challenge based on the inexpensive Neato XV robotic vacuum cleaner platform. The
challenge teaches skills such as computational modeling,
probabilistic inference, efﬁciency vs. accuracy tradeoffs, debugging, parameter tuning, and benchmarking of algorithmic
performance. Rather than allowing students to pursue any
localization algorithm of their choosing, here, I propose a
challenge structured around the particle ﬁlter family of algorithms. This additional scaffolding allows students at all
levels to successfully implement one approach to the challenge, while providing enough ﬂexibility and richness to enable students to pursue their own creative ideas. Additionally,
I provide infrastructure for automatic evaluation of systems
through the collection of ground truth robot location data via
ceiling-mounted location tags that are automatically scanned
using an upward facing camera attached to the robot. The
robot and supporting hardware can be purchased for under
$400 dollars, and the challenge can even be run without any
robots at all using a set of recorded sensor traces.

Student Audience
The challenge is designed for undergraduates who have
achieved proﬁciency, though not necessarily ﬂuency, with
basic programming. In its current formulation, the challenge
requires knowledge of Python, although the challenge could
be restructured around C++ without too much effort. At Olin
College, all enrolled students are required to have taken at
least one full semester course in computer science (ours is
roughly equivalent to CS1.5). This assignment sits in the
beginning of a full-semester introduction to robotics class.
Some basic knowledge of probability (e.g., distributions and
conditional probability) is helpful, but not assumed.

The Challenge

Problem Formulation

Robot localization is one of the most fundamental tasks in
robotics, and accurately determining the location of a robot
is a necessary ﬁrst step for other robotics tasks such as mapping and path planning. While this topic is often part of
undergraduate robotics curricula, here, I bring two important contributions. First, I provide a scaffolded assignment
whereby students are guided through the process of implementing a robot localization algorithm on a real robot using
the popular Robot Operating System (ROS) (Quigley et al.
2009). Second, I provide an infrastructure whereby students’
algorithms can be tested quantitatively. This infrastructure
enables one to structure the assignment as a challenge in
which students attempt to infer, as accurately as possible,
the robot’s position from sensor data and motor commands.
The challenge emphasizes a rich set of AI skills, including
probabilistic reasoning, approximate inference, sensor modeling, and parameter tuning. Further, the challenge places
a strong emphasis on iterative design, testing, and debugging. Rather than allowing students to pursue any approach
to the challenge they desire, I structure the robot localization

Students are challenged to determine the current pose of a
ground vehicle (location and orientation) given its approximate starting pose, a static map of the environment (represented as an occupancy grid), and a time series of sensor measurements and motor commands. Following (Thrun,
Burgard, and Fox 2005), I frame robot localization as a
Bayesian inference problem. First, I deﬁne the following notation.
xt  robot pose, i.e. location and orientation, at time t
ut  motor command, i.e. intended (or measured)
linear and angular velocity, at time t
zt  sensory data at time t
Additionally, I use the shorthand u1:t , for example, to indicate the sequence of variables u1 , . . . , ut . The variables u1:t
and z1:t are assumed to be observable (i.e. they can be directly measured). Formally, the challenge for the students
can be stated as inferring the variables x1:t (the time series
of robot poses) given these observed variables. That is, we
seek to compute the following probability distribution.
(1)
p(xt |u1:t , z1:t )

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4798

