Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Integrating the Cognitive with the Physical:
Musical Path Planning for an Improvising Robot
Mason Bretan

Gil Weinberg

pbretan3@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

gilw@gatech.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

These beneﬁts, however, do not come without the additional constraints that are coupled to the natural world in
which we live. An artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) controlling a
mechanical body that is bound to the physical laws of nature must address its own presence in 3-dimensional space
in order to function properly. This includes not only knowing the location of each of its degrees-of-freedom (Dofs),
but also understanding how multiple DoFs need to behave
and work together in order to complete a task. Perhaps most
importantly, the AI must also understand when a task is impossible (given its physicality) and anticipate failure before
it causes damage to itself or corrupts certain aspects of the
task making success completely unattainable even with additional help.
In the musical domain these constraints are often (if not
always) compounded by issues of timing. It is not enough to
simply arrange the DoFs in a desired order; the timing and
sequencing of the movements must also be considered. Often, depending on the time constraint and robot’s physical
design, the path in which each DoF moves and relocates itself must be optimized in order to reach speciﬁed locations
in a timely manner. This constraint satisfaction process of
developing coordinated movements is referred to as ‘path
planning’.
Here, we explore path planning and its relationship to the
notion of embodied musical cognition, which states that an
individuals’s body largely inﬂuences his or her understanding, experience, and decision processes pertaining to music
(Godøy and Leman 2010; Leman 2008). In particular, we
examine how propioception and embodiment can (and we
argue should) inﬂuence the musical decision process of an
improvising robot musician. The hypothesis is that a robot
that utilizes a music generation method that jointly optimizes for its physical constraints as well as its general musical knowledge will increase performative expressivity by
providing increased coherence among higher level musical
ideas, sound generating motions, and sound accompanying
motions. Additionally, such an integrated musical decision
process will result in music that is deﬁned by the robot’s
physical identity, hopefully leading to interesting music and
even entirely new genres.
Traditionally, machine musicianship has focused on software applications that respond to and generate music (Lewis
2000; Drummond 2009; Whalley 2010). Robotic musician-

Abstract
Embodied cognition is a theory stating that the processes and
functions comprising the human mind are inﬂuenced by a person’s physical body. Embodied musical cognition is a theory
of the musical mind stating that the person’s body largely
inﬂuences his or her musical experiences and actions (such
as performing, learning, or listening to music). In this work,
a proof of concept demonstrating the utility of an embodied musical cognition for robotic musicianship is described.
Though alternative theories attempting to explain human musical cognition exist (such as cognitivism and connectionism),
this work contends that the integration of physical constraints
and musical knowledge is vital for a robot in order to optimize note generating decisions based on limitations of sound
generating motion and enable more engaging performance
through increased coherence between the generated music
and sound accompanying motion. Moreover, such a system
allows for efﬁcient and autonomous exploration of the relationship between music and physicality and the resulting music that is contingent on such a connection.

Introduction
Several advantages and opportunities emerge as a result of
the physical embodiment of machine musicians compared to
that of their pure software counterparts. These “robotic musicians” assume additional abilities to entertain, engage, socialize, and produce sound. Such desirable capacities are intrinsic to most social robotic platforms in general, as a result
of physical presence and embodiment, and beneﬁt both those
directly immersed in the interaction as well as those simply witnessing it (Kidd and Breazeal 2004). Though many
of these interactive assets must be explicitly designed to
address human perceptual and social tendencies, in music
some advantageous characteristics arise entirely as a result
of the inherent coupling between the robot’s spatial movements and sound generation. The byproduct of sound generating movements is increased levels of rhythmic coordination and synchronization within ensembles because interacting musicians are able to anticipate the robot’s musical
onsets or behaviors through visual cues (Hoffman and Weinberg 2010; Lim et al. 2010).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4371

