Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Online Multi-Target Tracking Using Recurrent Neural Networks
Anton Milan,1 S. Hamid Rezatoﬁghi,1 Anthony Dick,1 Ian Reid,1 Konrad Schindler2
1

School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
2
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zürich
1
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@adelaide.edu.au, 2 schindler@geod.baug.ethz.ch

update, birth/death

Abstract

da
ta

as
so
ci
at
io
n

We present a novel approach to online multi-target tracking
based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Tracking multiple objects in real-world scenes involves many challenges,
including a) an a-priori unknown and time-varying number of
targets, b) a continuous state estimation of all present targets,
and c) a discrete combinatorial problem of data association.
Most previous methods involve complex models that require
tedious tuning of parameters. Here, we propose for the ﬁrst
time, an end-to-end learning approach for online multi-target
tracking. Existing deep learning methods are not designed for
the above challenges and cannot be trivially applied to the
task. Our solution addresses all of the above points in a principled way. Experiments on both synthetic and real data show
promising results obtained at ≈300 Hz on a standard CPU,
and pave the way towards future research in this direction.

prediction

...

t-1

prediction

t

time
t+1

...

Figure 1: A schematic illustration of our architecture. We use
RNNs for temporal prediction and update as well as track
management. The combinatorial problem of data association
is solved via LSTMs for each frame.
ing with a large number of parameters, deep models require huge amounts of training data, which is not yet available in the case of multi-target tracking. Second, both the
data and the desired solution can be quite variable. One
is faced with both discrete and continuous variables, unknown cardinality for input and output, and variable lengths
of video sequences. One interesting exception in this direction is the recent work of Ondrúška and Posner (2016)
that introduces deep recurrent neural networks to the task
of state estimation. Although this work shows promising results, it only demonstrates its efﬁcacy on simulated data with
near-perfect sensor measurements, a known number of targets, and smooth, linear motion. Their follow-up work introduces real-world measurements and multi-class scenarios (Ondruska et al. 2016), however, in both cases, tracking
is formulated as estimating the world occupancy, without explicit data association.
With this paper, we make an important step towards endto-end model learning for online tracking of multiple targets
in realistic scenarios. Our main contributions are as follows:

Introduction
Tracking multiple targets in unconstrained environments is
extremely challenging. Even after several decades of research, it is still far from reaching the accuracy of human
labelling. (cf . MOTChallenge (Leal-Taixé et al. 2015)). The
task itself constitutes locating all targets of interest in a video
sequence and maintaining their identity over time. One of
the obvious questions that arises immediately is how to
model the vast variety of data present in arbitrary videos that
may include different view points or camera motion, various
lighting conditions or levels of occlusion, a varying number
of targets, etc. Tracking-by-detection has emerged as one of
the most successful strategies to tackle this challenge. Here,
all “unused” data that is available in a video sequence is discarded and reduced to just a few single measurements per
frame, typically by running an object detector. The task is
then to associate each measurement to a corresponding target, i.e. to address the problem of data association. Moreover, due to clutter and an unknown number of targets, the
option to discard a measurement as a false alarm and a strategy to initiate new targets as well as terminate exiting ones
must be addressed.
With the recent rise of deep learning, there has been surprisingly little work related to multi-target tracking. We presume that this is due to several reasons. First, when deal-

1. Inspired by the well-studied Bayesian ﬁltering idea, we
present a recurrent neural network capable of performing
all multi-target tracking tasks including prediction, data
association, state update as well as initiation and termination of targets within a uniﬁed network structure (Fig. 1).
One of the main advantages of this approach is that it is
completely model-free, i.e. it does not require any prior
knowledge about target dynamics, clutter distributions,
etc. It can therefore capture linear (cf . Kalman ﬁlter), non-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4225

