Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Towards a Brain Inspired Model of Self-Awareness for Sociable Agents
Budhitama Subagdja

Ah-Hwee Tan

Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence
in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY)
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
e-mail: budhitama@ntu.edu.sg

School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
e-mail: asahtan@ntu.edu.sg

of self-awareness mostly focus on modeling speciﬁc selfembodiment at the physical aspect (Bongard, Zykov, and
Lipson 2006; Hart and Scasselati 2012; Stoytchev 2011) to
recognize and map one’s self in the mirror (Hart and Scasselati 2012; Stoytchev 2011) or to robustly control one’s movement regardless physical damages or impairments (Bongard,
Zykov, and Lipson 2006). A higher level model of selfawareness has also been proposed that covers the social aspect of the robot, but it is made only to deal with a speciﬁc
task of epistemic logical reasoning (Bringsjord et al. 2015).
Despite the above progresses, making a comprehensive but
practical model of self-awareness remains a great challenge.
Few, if any, have realized self-awareness in a robot or an
agent to interact ﬂuently with people and learn from one’s
own experiences in order to understand one’s self in the social context.
In this paper, we propose a model of self-awareness that
covers ﬁve aspects of individual including identity, physical, mental, experiential, and social. With a holistic representation, the awareness is not just limited to the ﬁrstperson impressions but also from a third-person perspective. This paper also presents a hybrid neural architecture of
self-awareness that can dynamically hold multiple possible
selves together in a hierarchical manner. This model facilitates not just the integration of different components in the
system but also their combination and arrangement to create
possible selves.
The model is embedded into a NAO robotic platform
that can roam the environment while encountering and making conversations with people. It has some basic prior selfknowledge and concepts at the start that can be reﬁned and
added incrementally through dialog and observation. The capacity of self-awareness is demonstrated to incorporate dialogs with knowledge and memory of past experiences.

Abstract
Self-awareness is a crucial feature for a sociable agent or
robot to better interact with humans. In a futuristic scenario,
a conversational agent may occasionally be asked for its own
opinion or suggestion based on its own thought, feelings, or
experiences as if it is an individual with identity, personality,
and social life. In moving towards that direction, in this paper, a brain inspired model of self-awareness is presented that
allows an agent to learn to attend to different aspects of self
as an individual with identity, physical embodiment, mental
states, experiences, and reﬂections on how others may think
about oneself. The model is built and realized on a NAO humanoid robotic platform to investigate the role of this capacity of self-awareness on the robot’s learning and interactivity.

Introduction
Intelligent systems have become popular and applied as
daily companions that interact closely with humans. Beyond
user-initiated modes of interactions like menu selection or
direct manipulation, emerging applications and systems are
becoming more human-like to interact naturally with the
user. Some of them have the capacity to converse in natural language and learn the user preferences (e.g. virtual assistants like Siri, Cortana, or Now!). However, they do not
capture what they have been doing, their experiences so far
from the beginning of their uses, nor their relationships with
the users. Thus, they do not really reﬂect on what they learn
about the users in order to improve their own interactivity.
In an imaginary futuristic scenario, a robotic companion
can be viewed as a unique individual that has its own identity, personality, and social life beyond simply an application or a toy that performs routine tasks. People may ask
for the robot’s opinion based on its actual reﬂection on its
own thought, feelings, and experiences beyond answering
speciﬁc questions or advising prescribed recommendations.
The objective of this paper is a start to move towards that direction in realizing self-awareness for a computational agent
as in the above scenario.
Known in psychology as the capacity to put oneself as
the focus of attention (Duval and Wicklund 1972), selfawareness is crucial for an intelligent agent to handle the natural interaction with people. Existing computational models

Related Work
Self-awareness is known in social psychology as the capacity to pay attention to oneself including the attention to what
one is thinking, doing, and experiencing (Duval and Wicklund 1972). In Neisser (1997), self-awareness can be characterized in different levels, including ecological, interpersonal, and conceptual levels.
Self-awareness for computational agents has been realized mostly in robotics or virtual agents as the capacity to

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4452

