Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On the Computation of Paracoherent Answer Sets
Giovanni Amendola,1 Carmine Dodaro,1 Wolfgang Faber,2 Nicola Leone,1 Francesco Ricca1
1 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Calabria, Italy

{amendola,dodaro,leone,ricca}@mat.unical.it

2 School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersﬁeld, United Kingdom

w.faber@hud.ac.uk

tion, called paraconsistent reasoning, it has been referred to
it as paracoherent reasoning (Amendola et al. 2016a).
In order to deal with this, (Sakama and Inoue 1995) introduced the semi-stable model semantics that coincides with
answer set semantics whenever a program has some answer
set, but admits paracoherent models for each classically consistent program. Recently, (Amendola et al. 2016a) have improved this kind of semantics avoiding some anomalies with
respect to basic modal logic properties, resorting to the equilibrium logic (Pearce 2006). Thus, this paracoherent semantics is called semi-equilibrium model semantics.1
Different possible applications of these paracoherent semantics have been identiﬁed, such as debugging, model
building, inconsistency-tolerant query answering, diagnosis, planning and reasoning about actions; and computational complexity aspects have been studied (Amendola et
al. 2016a). However, to the best of our knowledge, there are
no efﬁcient algorithms to compute paracoherent answer sets,
obstructing the concrete use of these reasoning approaches.
The goal of the paper is to ﬁll this gap, by developing efﬁcient algorithms and their implementation.
In the paper, we consider different algorithms to compute semi-stable and semi-equilibrium models, implementing and integrating them into an answer set building framework. Finally, we report the results of an experimental activity conducted on benchmarks from ASP competitions (Calimeri et al. 2016), identifying the more efﬁcient algorithm.

Abstract
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a well-established formalism for nonmonotonic reasoning. An ASP program can have
no answer set due to cyclic default negation. In this case, it
is not possible to draw any conclusion, even if this is not intended. Recently, several paracoherent semantics have been
proposed that address this issue, and several potential applications for these semantics have been identiﬁed. However,
paracoherent semantics have essentially been inapplicable in
practice, due to the lack of efﬁcient algorithms and implementations. In this paper, this lack is addressed, and several different algorithms to compute semi-stable and semi-equilibrium
models are proposed and implemented into an answer set
solving framework. An empirical performance comparison
among the new algorithms on benchmarks from ASP competitions is given as well.

Introduction
In the past decades, many advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence research has been done thanks to studies in the
ﬁeld of knowledge representation and reasoning. Answer
Set Programming (ASP) is a premier formalism for nonmonotonic reasoning (see, (Brewka, Eiter, and Truszczynski 2011; Gebser et al. 2012)). It is a declarative programming paradigm oriented towards difﬁcult, primarily NPhard, search problems, which are encoded into a logic program, whose models (answer sets) encode solutions. ASP
is based on the stable model (or answer set) semantics introduced by (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991) and is used to
solve complex problems in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Gaggl
et al. 2015), Bioinformatics (Campeotto, Dovier, and Pontelli 2015), Databases (Manna, Ricca, and Terracina 2015);
Game Theory (Amendola et al. 2016b); more recently ASP
has been applied to solve industrial applications (Dodaro et
al. 2015; Grasso et al. 2011; Dodaro et al. 2016).
However, a logic program could have no answer set due
to cyclic default negation. In this case, it is not possible to
draw any conclusion, even if this is not intended. For this
reason, theoretical studies have been developed to extend
answer set semantics to keep a system responsive in these
exceptional cases. To distinguish this situation from reasoning under classical logical contradiction due to strong nega-

where all ai and b j are atoms (from Σ) and l ≥ 0, n ≥
m ≥ 0 and l + n > 0; not represents negation-as-failure.
The set H(r) = {a1 , ..., al } is the head of r, while B+ (r) =

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1 The relationship with other semantics is discussed in the Related Work section.

Preliminaries
We start with recalling answer set semantics, and then
present the paracoherent semantics of semi-stable and semiequilibrium models.

Answer Set Programming
We concentrate on programs over a propositional signature
Σ. A disjunctive rule r is of the form
a1 ∨ · · · ∨ al ← b1 , ..., bm , not bm+1 , ..., not bn ,

1034

(1)

