Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Decentralized Planning in Stochastic
Environments with Submodular Rewards
Rajiv Ranjan Kumar, Pradeep Varakantham, Akshat Kumar
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{rajivk,pradeepv,akshatkumar}@smu.edu.sg

With the emphasis on quality guarantees, we focus specifically on multi-agent sequential planning models with joint
submodular reward functions. Previous work has considered
submodularity in the context of sequential decision making
for multi-agent problems. Kumar et al. (2009) considered
submodularity in rewards across time steps in the context
of Multi-agent MDPs (MMDPs) in weather tracking satellites. Detecting storms early is of key interest and this reward function for detecting storms is submodular over time
steps. Satsangi et al. (2015) considered submodularity in
multi-agent sensor selection problem modelled as a POMDP
with submodular belief based reward function. Our contributions differ from this line of work due to the focus on decentralized planning models (and not on centralized planning models) and our algorithms rely on showing submodularity of the value function.
Speciﬁcally we consider Transition Independent DecMDPs (TI-Dec-MDPs), Transition Independent DecPOMDPs (TI-Dec-POMDPs) and Transition Independent
Stochastic Games (TI-SGs). There has been existing work
in solving some of these models (Dibangoye, Amato, and
Doniec 2012; Mostafa and Lesser 2009), and in some instances providing posteriori guarantees (using lower and upper bounds). In this paper, we speciﬁcally focus on submodular joint rewards and hence are able to provide strong a
priori and posteriori guarantees.
The main contributions of this paper are:

Abstract
Decentralized Markov Decision Process (Dec-MDP) provides a rich framework to represent cooperative decentralized and stochastic planning problems under transition uncertainty. However, solving a Dec-MDP to generate coordinated yet decentralized policies is NEXP-Hard. Researchers
have made signiﬁcant progress in providing approximate approaches to improve scalability with respect to number of
agents. However, there has been little or no research devoted to ﬁnding guarantees on solution quality for approximate approaches considering multiple (more than 2 agents)
agents. We have a similar situation with respect to the competitive decentralized planning problem and the Stochastic
Game (SG) model. To address this, we identify models in the
cooperative and competitive case that rely on submodular rewards, where we show that existing approximate approaches
can provide strong quality guarantees (a priori, and for cooperative case also posteriori guarantees). We then provide
solution approaches and demonstrate improved online guarantees on benchmark problems from the literature for the cooperative case.

1

Introduction

Decentralized stochastic planning for a team of agents is required in a wide variety of problems such as target tracking
by a team of sensors (Nair et al. 2005; Kumar and Zilberstein
2011; Chapman and Varakantham 2014), securing targets
from unknown attackers using a team of defenders (Shieh et
al. 2014), rescuing of victims by a team of robots during disaster (Melo and Veloso 2011; Varakantham et al. 2009) and
analysing underwater samples using a team of underwater
vehicles (Yin and Tambe 2011). Existing literature has focussed on Decentralized Markov Decision Processes (DecMDPs) or Stochastic Games to represent such problems of
interest. Unfortunately, solving Dec-MDPs and Stochastic Games is computationally challenging, which precludes
solving problems with many (>> 2) agents. While approximate approaches have been proposed to solve multiple agent
problems (Velagapudi et al. 2011; Varakantham et al. 2009;
Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2015), there is little or no
research in approximation methods that provide strong guarantees on solution quality in such decentralized settings.

• In the cooperative case, for Transition Independent DecMDPs and Transition, Observation Independent DecPOMDPs with monotone submodular reward functions,
we show that greedy solution provides an a priori guarantee of at least 50% from optimal. We also provide a
method to compute posteriori guarantees which are much
tighter than the worst case of bound of 50%.
• We provide a lazy version of the well-known greedy algorithm and enhance a recent approach for exploiting
anonymity and homogeneity to solve the problem models identiﬁed above.
• In the competitive case, we show that for TI-SGs with
submodular social rewards and private rewards that are
greater than Vickrey rewards, any Nash Equilibrium solution is at least 50% from the social welfare optimal. That
is to say, price of anarchy is 2.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3021

