Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Partially-Compressed Least-Squares
Stephen Becker

Ban Kawas

Marek Petrik

University of Colorado Boulder
stephen.becker@colorado.edu

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
bkawas@us.ibm.com

University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

1

Randomized matrix compression techniques, such as the
Johnson-Lindenstrauss transform, have emerged as an effective and practical way for solving large-scale problems efﬁciently. With a focus on computational efﬁciency, however,
forsaking solutions quality and accuracy becomes the tradeoff. In this paper, we investigate compressed least-squares
problems and propose new models and algorithms that address the issue of error and noise introduced by compression.
While maintaining computational efﬁciency, our models provide robust solutions that are more accurate than those of classical compressed variants. We introduce tools from robust optimization together with a form of partial compression to improve the error-time trade-offs of compressed least-squares
solvers. We develop an efﬁcient solution algorithm for our
Robust Partially-Compressed (RPC) model based on a reduction to a one-dimensional search.

0.9

(Empirical) Probability that residual of the
method is with factor "t" of the best method

Abstract

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Full LS
Compressed LS
Compressed LS, reg.
Compressed LS, robust .
PartialCompressed LS
PartialComp. LS, reg.
PartialComp. LS, robust

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.1

t

Figure 1: Cumulative probability distribution of residuals of
various compressed least-squares methods. The horizontal
axis represents the normalized residual compared to solving
the full least squares problem.

Introduction
Random projection is a simple and effective dimensionality reduction technique that enables signiﬁcant speedups in
solving large-scale machine learning problems (Dasgupta
2000; Mahoney 2011; Woodruff 2014). It has been successfully used, for example, in classiﬁcation (Pilanci and
Wainwright 2014; Zhang et al. 2013), clustering (Boutsidis,
Zouzias, and Drineas 2010; Fern and Brodley 2003; Urruty,
Djeraba, and Simovici 2007), and least-squares problems
(Drineas et al. 2011; Pilanci and Wainwright 2014). The focus of this paper will be on the latter. We consider the following canonical least-squares estimator, with A ∈ RM ×N :
1
def
xLS = argmin Ax − b2 = (AT A)−1 AT b (1)
2
x
where ·, for vectors, denotes the Euclidean norm throughout the paper, and A has the full column rank. We assume
that M  N and refer to xLS as the solution to the uncompressed problem.
When M is very large, solving the least-squares problem
in (1) can be time-consuming and computationally expensive. To gain the necessary speedups, random projections
are used. The standard approach to doing so proceeds as follows (Drineas et al. 2011). First, we construct a compression matrix Φ ∈ Rm×M from a random distribution such



that E ΦT Φ = I and m  M . Then, we solve the fully
compressed problem:
def

xCLS = argmin
x

1
Φ (Ax − b)2
2

(2)

Numerous efﬁcient methods for constructing the compression matrix Φ have been developed; surveys are provided in
(Boutsidis, Drineas, and Magdon-Ismail 2013; Drineas et al.
2011; Mahoney 2011). We describe and use several common
methods for constructing Φ in the empirical results section
below.
When m in Φ is small, the fully compressed least-squares
problem in (2) is much easier to solve than the uncompressed
least-squares in (1). However, compression can introduce
signiﬁcant errors to the solution xCLS when compared to the
uncompressed solution, xLS and one is forced to consider
the trade-off between accuracy and efﬁciency. As our main
contribution, we propose and analyze two new models that
address this issue and provide a desirable trade-off; enabling
robust solutions while preserving small computational complexity.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1742

