Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Neural Models for Sequence Chunking
Feifei Zhai, Saloni Potdar, Bing Xiang, Bowen Zhou
IBM Watson
1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
{fzhai,potdars,bingxia,zhou}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Many natural language understanding (NLU) tasks, such as
shallow parsing (i.e., text chunking) and semantic slot ﬁlling, require the assignment of representative labels to the
meaningful chunks in a sentence. Most of the current deep
neural network (DNN) based methods consider these tasks
as a sequence labeling problem, in which a word, rather
than a chunk, is treated as the basic unit for labeling. These
chunks are then inferred by the standard IOB (Inside-OutsideBeginning) labels. In this paper, we propose an alternative approach by investigating the use of DNN for sequence chunking, and propose three neural models so that each chunk can
be treated as a complete unit for labeling. Experimental results show that the proposed neural sequence chunking models can achieve start-of-the-art performance on both the text
chunking and slot ﬁlling tasks.

O

B-NP

B-VP

I-VP

B-ADJP

I-ADJP

But

it

could

be

much

worse

Figure 1: An example of text chunking where each word is
labeled using the IOB scheme. The chunk “could be” is a
verb phrase (VP) and “it” is a single-word chunk with NP
label.

Most of the current DNN based approaches use the IOB
scheme to label chunks. However, this approach of these
labels has a few drawbacks. First, we don’t have an explicit model to learn and identify the scope of chunks in a
sentence, instead we infer them implicitly (by IOB labels).
Hence the learned model might not be able to fully utilize
the training data which could result in poor performance.
Second, some neural networks like RNN or LSTM have the
ability to encode context information but don’t treat each
chunk as a complete unit. If we can eliminate this drawback, it could result in more accurate labeling, especially
for multi-word chunks.

Introduction
Semantic slot ﬁlling and shallow parsing which are standard NLU tasks fall under the umbrella of natural language
understanding (NLU), which are usually solved by labeling meaningful chunks in a sentence. This kind of task is
usually treated as a sequence labeling problem, where every word in a sentence is assigned an IOB-based (InsideOutside-Beginning) label. For example, in Figure 1, in the
sentence “But it could be much worse” we label “could” as
B-VP, “be” as I-VP, and “it” as B-NP, while “But” belongs
to an artiﬁcial class O. This labeling indicates that a chunk
“could be” is a verb phrase (VP) where the label preﬁx B
means the beginning word of the chunk, while I refers to the
other words within the same semantic chunk; and “it” is a
single-word chunk with NP label.
Such sequence labeling forms the basis for many recent
deep network based approaches, e.g., convolutional neural
networks (CNN), recurrent neural networks (RNN) or its
variation, long short-term memory networks (LSTM). RNN
and LSTM are good at capturing sequential information
(Yao et al. 2013; Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015; Mesnil et al.
2015; Peng and Yao 2015; Yang, Salakhutdinov, and Cohen 2016; Kurata et al. 2016; Zhu and Yu 2016), whereas
CNN can extract effective features for classiﬁcation (Xu and
Sarikaya 2013; Vu 2016).

Sequence chunking is a natural solution to overcome the
two drawbacks mentioned before. In sequence chunking, the
original sequence labeling task is divided into two sub-tasks:
(1) Segmentation, to identify scope of the chunks explicitly;
(2) Labeling, to label each chunk as a single unit based on
the segmentation results.
Lample et al. (2016) used a stack-LSTM (Dyer et al.
2015) and a transition-based algorithm for sequence chunking. In their paper, the segmentation step is based on shiftreduce parser based actions. In this paper, we propose an
alternative approach by relying only on the neural architectures for NLU. We investigate two different ways for segmentation: (1) using IOB labels; and (2) using pointer networks (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015) and propose
three neural sequence chunking models. Pointer network
performs better than the model using IOB. In addition, it also
achieves state-of-the-art performance on both text chunking
and slot ﬁlling tasks.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3365

