Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Stochastic Optimization
for Low-Rank Distance Metric Learning
Jie Zhang, Lijun Zhang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
zhangj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Although DML has achieved great success in practice, learning a distance metric from large-scale and highdimensional data remains a big challenge, due to the high
computational complexity. Generally speaking, the optimization problem of DML is formulated as a convex optimization problem over the positive semi-deﬁnite (PSD)
cone, which can be solved by gradient-based methods (Nesterov 2004). The computational challenge is mainly caused
by two factors: (i) the evaluation of the gradient is expensive when there is a large number of training examples, and
(ii) the projection onto the PSD cone is also costly when the
dimensionality is high. While the ﬁrst issue can be easily addressed by stochastic methods (Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2009),
such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) which only samples a subset of training examples to calculate the gradient,
the second one is much more tricky. Let d be the dimensionality of the data. The projection onto the PSD cone needs to
eigen decompose a matrix of size d × d, and thus has O(d3 )
time complexity.
To reduce the computational cost of projections, the most
straightforward way is to learn the distance metric after
performing dimensionality reduction (Weinberger and Saul
2009; Tsagkatakis and Savakis 2010; Qian et al. 2015b).
However, due to the subspace removed by dimension reduction methods, this kind of methods always lead to suboptimal solutions. Another way to reduce the computational
cost is to utilize more advanced optimization techniques that
avoid the projection step, such as the Frank-Wolfe technique
(Hazan and Kale 2012), and the convex-concave formulation
(Mahdavi et al. 2012). Although the computational cost per
iteration can be reduced from O(d3 ) to O(d2 ), it is still prohibitive for high dimensional problems. A recent work has
shown that by constructing a low-rank stochastic gradient, it
is also possible to reduce the computational cost of SGD per
iteration to O(d2 ) (Chen, Yang, and Zhu 2014).
In this paper, we focus on the problem of low-rank distance metric learning (Davis and Dhillon 2008; Liu et al.
2015), in which a nuclear norm regularizer is introduced to
promote low-rankness of the distance metric. The advantage
of low-rank DML is that it can reduce effects of noise and
prevent model overﬁtting as well. Similar to previous studies (Chen, Yang, and Zhu 2014), we construct a low-rank
stochastic gradient in each round and apply SGD to update
the intermediate solution. However, our algorithm goes one

Abstract
Although distance metric learning has been successfully applied to many real-world applications, learning a distance
metric from large-scale and high-dimensional data remains
a challenging problem. Due to the PSD constraint, the computational complexity of previous algorithms per iteration is
at least O(d2 ) where d is the dimensionality of the data. In
this paper, we develop an efﬁcient stochastic algorithm for a
class of distance metric learning problems with nuclear norm
regularization, referred to as low-rank DML. By utilizing the
low-rank structure of the intermediate solutions and stochastic gradients, the complexity of our algorithm has a linear dependence on the dimensionality d. The key idea is to maintain all the iterates in factorized representations and construct
stochastic gradients that are low-rank. In this way, the projection onto the PSD cone can be implemented efﬁciently by
incremental SVD. Experimental results on several data sets
validate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of our method.

Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) aims to learn a distance
metric for the input space of data from a given set of training examples (Yang and Jin 2006). A well-learned distance metric can reﬂect domain-speciﬁc connections and relationships, and signiﬁcantly improve the performance of
distance-based learning algorithms such as K-means clustering (Xing et al. 2002) and nearest neighbor classiﬁcation (Weinberger and Saul 2009). In the past decades, a
large number of DML methods have been proposed like
Pseudo-metric Online Learning Algorithm (POLA) (ShalevShwartz, Singer, and Ng 2004), Maximally Collapsing
Metric Learning (MCML) (Globerson and Roweis 2005),
Information-Theoretic Metric Learning (ITML) (Davis et
al. 2007), Large Margin Nearest Neighbor (LMNN) (Weinberger and Saul 2009) and Riemannian Similarity Learning
(RSL) (Cheng 2013). These methods have been successfully
applied to many real-world applications, such as image retrieval and classiﬁcation (Kulis 2013; Frome et al. 2007),
bioinformatics (Kato and Nagano 2010), text analysis (Davis
and Dhillon 2008), and Automated Program Debugging (Ha
et al. 2007).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

933

