Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A BTP-Based Family of Variable
Elimination Rules for Binary CSPs
Achref El Mouelhi
Aix Marseille Univ, Université de Toulon
CNRS, ENSAM, LSIS
Marseille, France
achref.elmouelhi@lsis.org
1991; Likitvivatanavong and Yap 2013; Cooper et al. 2014;
2016). The last eliminates variables (Cohen et al. 2013;
2015) or constraints (Dechter and Dechter 1987) while preserving the satisﬁability of the instance.
In a somewhat orthogonal direction, much research has
been devoted to identifying tractable classes. In the litterature, several tractable classes have been deﬁned but the
broken-triangle property (BTP (Cooper, Jeavons, and Salamon 2008; 2010)) still remains at the heart of this research
area. This property has some interesting characteristics from
a solving viewpoint as well as reduction operations viewpoint. Indeed, BTP is not only deﬁned for solving CSP in
polytime, but also for reducing the size of CSP instances
while preserving satisﬁability. Speciﬁcally, the absence of
broken-triangles has led, under some conditions, to variable
elimination or domain reduction by merging domain values
while preserving satisﬁability. More recently, it has been
proved that the presence of certain broken-triangles does
not necessarily preclude deﬁning tractable classes (Naanaa
2013; 2016; El Mouelhi, Jégou, and Terrioux 2014; 2015;
Jégou and Terrioux 2015; Cooper, Jégou, and Terrioux 2015;
Cooper, El Mouelhi, and Terrioux 2016) and/or merging
values (Cooper, El Mouelhi, and Terrioux 2016). For example, k-BTP authorizes some broken-triangles and deﬁnes
larger tractable classes than BTP but does not permit value
merging. Likewise, m-wBTP does not forbid all brokentriangles and deﬁnes a maximal value-merging condition.
Unfortunately, none of them allow variable elimination (see
(Cooper, El Mouelhi, and Terrioux 2016)) although the initial deﬁnition of BTP permits it (Cohen et al. 2015). Moreover, k-BTP seems to be unusable beyond k = 3 and mwBTP appears to be inexploitable when m > 2.
The main contribution of this work is providing a new
weaker-form of BTP, called m-fBTP, which allows variable
elimination and deﬁnes a new tractable class for which arc
consistency is a decision procedure. The results proven in
this paper also provide theoretical insight into the relationship between m-fBTP and some others previous extension
of BTP such as k-BTP, m-wBTP, WBTP (Naanaa 2016).
So, our paper will be organised as follows: Section 2 recalls some deﬁnitions and notations. In section 3, we introduce the ﬂexible broken-triangle property. Next, we show
that m-fBTP is a maximal variable elimination condition.
Section 4 deﬁnes a family of tractable classes based on m-

Abstract
The study of broken-triangles is becoming increasingly ambitious, by both solving constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs)
in polynomial time and reducing search space size through
value merging or variable elimination. Considerable progress
has been made in extending this important concept, such as
dual broken-triangle and weakly broken-triangle, in order to
maximize the number of captured tractable CSP instances
and/or the number of merged values. Speciﬁcally, m-wBTP
allows to merge more values than BTP. k-BTP, WBTP and
m-BTP permit to capture more tractable instances than BTP.
Here, we introduce a new weaker form of BTP, which will be
called m-fBTP for ﬂexible broken-triangle property. m-fBTP
allows on the one hand to eliminate more variables than BTP
while preserving satisﬁability and on the other to deﬁne new
bigger tractable class for which arc consistency is a decision
procedure. Likewise, m-fBTP permits to merge more values
than BTP but less than m-wBTP.

1

Introduction

A wide range of real-life problems issue from Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Operational Research (OR) can be expressed as Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs (Montanari 1974)). A constraint network consists of a set of variables X, each one has a ﬁnite set of values called domain
D, and a ﬁnite set of constraints C. Each constraint is deﬁned over a set of variables and represents a set of valid
(or invalid) assignment of values to variables involved by
the constraint. A solution to a CSP is an assignment of
values to each variable which satisﬁes all the constraints.
Checking whether a given CSP instance has a solution is
known to be NP-complete. In general, the main techniques
to achieve this task are based on backtracking algorithms,
whose worst-case time complexity is O(edn ) where e, n and
d are the number of constraints, the number of variables and
the maximum domain size, respectively. In order to reduce
this exponential time complexity, many different approaches
have been proposed. The ﬁrst one, called ﬁltering by consistency, consists in removing inconsistent values (Mackworth
1977). This approach leaves the set of solutions unchanged.
The second relies on merging values, satisfying some conditions, without affecting the existence of a solution (Freuder
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3871

