Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Why Teaching Ethics to AI Practitioners Is Important
Judy Goldsmith, Emanuelle Burton

able to support students because they accept military funding; as such, concern about funding cannot be dismissed as
purely selﬁsh (though they still reﬂect a preference for their
own community of AI researchers.)

Abstract
We argue that it is crucial to the future of AI that our students
be trained in multiple complementary modes of ethical reasoning, so that they may make ethical design and implementation choices, ethical career decisions, and that their software
will be programmed to take into account the complexities of
acting ethically in the world.

In fact, many people made their decision based on moral
concerns, and yet arrived at different answers. It wasn’t just
that people were coming to different conclusions; in many
cases, they were beginning with different ideas about how to
make an ethical decision. In this paper, we show how knowledge of different ethical frameworks can illuminate the different approaches to decision-making that different AI practitioners took, and re-examine the question of whether or not
to sign from within each of these frameworks.

Introduction
Consider the decision many of us made last year about
whether to sign the open letter petitioning the UN to ban the
development of weaponized AI. The authors (one of whom
is an AI practitioner who also had to make this decision) use
this case study to demonstrate that a knowledge of ethical
frameworks is a crucially important tool in an AI student,
AI practitioner, and AI theorist’s toolbox.
For some AI practitioners, the decision to sign this open
letter was a no-brainer, either because those individuals were
already committed to non-violence in some form, or because
they had thought at length about the dangers of weaponized
AI. Some no doubt signed because the leaders of the community did so, and they wanted to be seen as one of the
“cool kids.” Many others, however, chose not to sign the letter, and even strongly opposed it, because they believe that
weaponized AI is inevitable, or desirable; because they believe that any AI can be used as a weapon;1 because they
were reluctant to associate their name with a petition when
they could not predict the ramiﬁcations, or for many other
reasons arising from their understanding of research, politics, or their personal moral imperatives.
It was not entirely clear where a greedy agent would land
on this question. The letter was linked to an organization
that was offering grants for AI, more particularly for ethicsand-AI projects. On the other hand, one might reasonably
conclude that signing such a letter could have a negative effect on possible support through military-funded research. In
some countries, there is signiﬁcant military funding for AI,
albeit often for work couched in terms of defense and security, rather than offense and weapons. Some research labs are

We demonstrate that most AI practitioners operate within
the ethical framework called utilitarianism, which has been
the dominant mode of ethical thought in the west for the past
150 years, and which is the ethical theory that is by far the
most compatible with decision-theoretic analysis (Burton et
al. ). After describing utilitarian theory, we brieﬂy introduce
deontology and virtue ethics, the other two major modes of
ethical analysis, and show how these two modes can offer
new perspectives on the decision of whether to add one’s
name to such a letter. We readily acknowledge that there is
much more to AI than war bots, and more to practitioners’
decisions about public declarations than this initial summary
indicates. We could apply similar framing and analysis to the
use of AI in medicine, management, computer games, or any
other area. However, this case exempliﬁes one of the two
broad types of decisions that call for ethical analysis: personal decisions by AI practitioners and programmers, and
decisions made by AI systems.
What appears to be a simple binary decision — sign the
letter, or not? — is only the ﬁnal stage in assessing one’s
(probably non-binary) views on several complicated questions. Should robots be used to kill people? Under what conditions could such robots be developed responsibly, and are
those conditions in place? But also: what other valuable or
positive purposes could this same technology serve? Could
our work in other areas of AI continue without the ﬁnancial support of the military? For many AI practitioners, the
answers to these questions are not black and white.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In the words of Ani DiFranco, “’Cause every tool’s a weapon
— if you hold it right.” (From the song My I.Q.)

4836

