Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Convex Co-Embedding for Matrix
Completion with Predictive Side Information
Yuhong Guo
School of Computer Science
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Candès and Recht 2012; Lin et al. 2009; Keshavan, Montanari, and Oh 2010; Koltchinskii, Lounici, and Tsybakov
2011; Mazumder, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2010; Recht 2011;
Richard, Savalle, and Vayatis 2012), without considering
side information about the row or column objects.
Recently, it has been observed that in a number of applications of matrix completion, in addition to the observed
entries of the target matrix, auxiliary information that describes the row or column objects of the matrix usually exist and can beneﬁt the matrix completion process. For example, in collaborative ﬁltering, besides the user-item recommendation matrix, side information such as product reviews, which comment on the product items, are often available and can be used to improve recommendation performance (Adams, Dahl, and Murray 2010; Fang and Si 2011;
Menon et al. 2011; Porteous, Asuncion, and Welling 2010).
In (Natarajan and Dhillon 2014), matrix completion with
side information has been used to predict gene-disease associations. These works however mostly use non-convex learning techniques without exploiting the structure of the side
information. Convex methods for matrix completion have
been explored for multi-label learning problems with incomplete labels (Cabral et al. 2011; Goldberg et al. 2010;
Xu, Jin, and Zhou 2013), where the partially observed label matrix is the target matrix to be completed and the features of the instances can be used as side information. These
works however exploit either the low-rank property of the
label matrix or the prediction models, but not both.
In this paper, we propose a novel matrix completion approach to exploit side information within a principled coembedding framework. The proposed framework not only
takes the low-rank property of the target matrix into account, but also simultaneously exploits a label embedding
idea to enforce a consistent low-rank structure for the prediction model on the side information. Label embeddings
have been exploited in the literature to capture label semantic structures and consequently prediction model structures to improve prediction performance (Akata et al. 2013;
Bengio, Weston, and Grangier 2010; Mirzazadeh, Guo, and
Schuurmans 2014). The idea of our co-embedding framework is to enforce the consistency of the label embeddings
induced from the prediction model and that induced from
the low-rank target matrix. We formulate this framework as a
convex minimization problem with nuclear norm regulariza-

Abstract
Matrix completion as a common problem in many application domains has received increasing attention in the machine
learning community. Previous matrix completion methods
have mostly focused on exploiting the matrix low-rank property to recover missing entries. Recently, it has been noticed
that side information that describes the matrix items can help
to improve the matrix completion performance. In this paper,
we propose a novel matrix completion approach that exploits
side information within a principled co-embedding framework. This framework integrates a low-rank matrix factorization model and a label embedding based prediction model
together to derive a convex co-embedding formulation with
nuclear norm regularization. We develop a fast proximal gradient descent algorithm to solve this co-embedding problem.
The effectiveness of the proposed approach is demonstrated
on two types of real world application problems.

Introduction
In many data analysis problems, the relevant information
often lies in a low-dimensional subspace of the ambient
space and the data matrix exhibits low-rank properties. Matrix completion exploits this observation to recover a lowrank matrix from sparsely observed entries, by implicitly
or explicitly identifying low-dimensional vector representations of the row and column objects and decomposing the
matrix into the product two low-dimensional matrices (typically in an implicit manner through nuclear norm); e.g.,
X = AB for X ∈ Rn×t , A ∈ Rn×m , B ∈ Rm×t with
m < min(n, t). The underlying principle is that the distributed low-dimensional representations of the row and column objects can be learned from the sparsely observed entries in a statistical manner, which can then be used to recover the missing entries with their inner products. Matrix completion has broad applications including collaborative ﬁltering (Abernethy et al. 2009; Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008), clustering (Yi et al. 2012), and feature learning (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008). Many algorithms
and theoretical results have been developed in the standard
setting of matrix completion based on the low-rank property (Cai, Candès, and Shen 2010; Candès and Tao 2010;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1955

