Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Spectral Clustering with Brainstorming
Process for Multi-View Data
Jeong-Woo Son, Junkey Jeon, Alex Lee, Sun-Joong Kim

{jwson, jkjeon, lhjalex, kimsj}@etri.re.kr
Smart Platform Research Department, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
218 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Deajeon, Korea

multiple aspects; for example, videos have images as well
as audio features, while text documents can have several
multi-lingual translations. Those multi-view representations
reﬂect various characteristics of cluster boundaries. Several
approaches have been proposed (Bickel and Scheffer 2004;
Chaudhuri et al. 2009) to utilize complementary information in different views. Min-disagreement (Wang, Weng, and
Yuan 2014) is a typical method that constructs a common vector for which all views agree, while information propagation
(Kumar and Daumé III 2011) suggests a way to explicitly
share complementary information in each view.
Clusters appeared in a real world often represented with
multiple aspects, and to ﬁnd them correctly, a human should
use diverse viewpoints to check information from each viewpoint. multi-view data clustering aims to realize this situation.
When multiple representations are constructed for data, multiple views have to be independent each other. Since they
need to reﬂect different aspects of cluster boundaries. However, it is hard to avoid dependencies among views in real
world problems, and in that case, multiple views often delude
correct estimations. Thus, dependencies among views should
be carefully considered in multi-view clustering.
This paper proposes a novel extension of spectral clustering for multi-view data; especially the proposed method is designed to handle data with three or more views. The proposed
method forces the information of each view to be shared
by using the brainstorming process. In the brainstorming
process, views are regarded as brainstormers with different
perspectives, while an instance is considered as an agenda.
When an agenda and brainstormers are given, the brainstorming process starts to discuss about the agenda. Through the
discussion on the agenda, a brainstormer iteratively suggests
their opinions and accepts others’ different opinions. The
biases caused by information sharing between brainstormers with dependent opinions is compensated by encouraging
to discuss brainstormers with independent opinions. While
brainstormers with dependent opinions are prevented from
discussions for opinion sharing. By encouraging information
sharing between less dependent views, dilution of valuable
information is prevented. After the discussion, we suggest
two ways to draw a conclusion: merging and concatenation.
Merging tries to make a compromise that maximally satisﬁes
the all brainstormers, while concatenation just collect all the
opinions.

Abstract
Clustering tasks often requires multiple views rather than a single view to correctly reﬂect diverse characteristics of the cluster boundaries. The cluster boundaries estimated using a single
view are incorrect in general, and those incorrect estimation
should be compensated by helps of other views. If each view
is independent to other views, incorrect estimations will be
mostly revised as the number of views grow. However, on the
contrary, as the number of views grow it is almost impossible
to avoid dependencies among views, and such dependencies
often delude correct estimations. Thus, dependencies among
views should be carefully considered in multi-view clustering.
This paper proposes a new spectral clustering method to deal
with multi-view data and dependencies among views. The
proposed method is motivated by the brainstorming process.
In the brainstorming process, an instance is regarded as an
agenda to be discussed, while each view is considered as a
brainstormer. Through the discussion step in the brainstorming
process, a brainstormer iteratively suggests their opinions and
accepts others’ different opinions. To compensate the biases
caused by information sharing between brainstormers with
dependent opinions, those having independent opinions are
more encouraged to discuss together than those with dependent opinions. The conclusion step makes a compromise by
merging or concatenating all opinions. The clustering is ﬁnally
done after the conclusion. Experimental results in three tasks
show the effectiveness of the proposed method comparing
with ordinary single and multi-view spectral clusterings.

Introduction
The spectral clustering is derived from a non-linear data
embedding scheme, called the spectral embedding (Luxburg
2007). In the spectral embedding, instances are mapped onto
the space spanned by eigenvectors obtained from the graph
Laplacian of the data. The spectral embedding has an ability
to distinguish instances sampled from non-convex clusters.
This advantage makes the spectral clustering to be one of the
most widely-used techniques among unsupervised machine
learning techniques (Verma and Meila 2003).
The original spectral clustering has been modiﬁed and
expanded to handle multi-view data (Feng et al. 2016;
Xia et al. 2014). In various tasks such as video processing
and text clustering, an instance is often represented with
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2548

