Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Chaotic Time Series Prediction Using a Photonic
Reservoir Computer with Output Feedback
Piotr Antonik,1† Michiel Hermans,1 Marc Haelterman,2 Serge Massar1
1

Laboratoire d’Information Quantique, Université libre de Bruxelles,
Avenue F. D. Roosevelt 50, CP 224, Brussels, Belgium
2
Service OPERA-Photonique, Université libre de Bruxelles,
Avenue F. D. Roosevelt 50, CP 194/5, Brussels, Belgium
†
Email: pantonik@ulb.ac.be, Phone: +32 (0)2 650 4486

Reservoir Computing is a bio-inspired computing
paradigm for processing time dependent signals (Jaeger and
Haas 2004; Maass, Natschläger, and Markram 2002). It can
be easily implemented in hardware. The performance of
these analogue devices matches digital algorithms on a series of benchmark tasks (see e.g. (Soriano et al. 2015) for
a review). Their capacities could be extended by feeding
the output signal back into the reservoir, which would allow them to be applied to various signal generation tasks
(Antonik et al. 2016b). In practice, this requires a highspeed readout layer for real-time output computation. Here
we achieve this by means of a ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA), and demonstrate the ﬁrst photonic reservoir
computer with output feedback. We test our setup on the
Mackey-Glass chaotic time series generation task and obtain interesting prediction horizons, comparable to numerical simulations, with ample room for further improvement.
Our work thus demonstrates the potential offered by the output feedback and opens a new area of novel applications for
photonic reservoir computing.

the reservoir input is switched from the teacher sequence to
the reservoir output signal, and the system is left running autonomously. To evaluate the system performance, we compute the number of correctly predicted steps.

Experimental setup
Our experimental setup, schematised in ﬁgure 1, consists of
two main components: the opto-electronic reservoir and the
FPGA board. The former is based on previously published
works (Paquot et al. 2012). The reservoir size N depends on
the delay created by the ﬁbre spool (Spool). We performed
experiments with two spools of approximately 1.6 km and
10 km and, correspondingly, reservoirs of 100 and 600 neurons.
The FPGA board is used to interface the opto-electronic
setup with a personal computer, running Matlab, and implements the input and readout layers of the reservoir computer
(Antonik et al. 2016a). As the neurons are processed sequentially, due to propagation delay within the setup, the output
signal can only be computed in time to update the 24-th neuron. For this reason, we set the ﬁrst 23 elements of the input
mask to zero. That way, all neurons contribute to solving the
task, but the ﬁrst 23 do not “see” the input signal.

Theory and methods
Reservoir computing. A general reservoir computer is
described in (Lukoševičius and Jaeger 2009). In our implementation we use a sine transfer function and a ring topology to simplify the interconnection matrix, so that only the
ﬁrst neighbour nodes are connected (Paquot et al. 2012). The
system is trained ofﬂine, using ridge regression algorithm.

Results
Numerical simulations. While this work focuses on experimental results, we also developed three numerical models of the setup in order to have several points of comparison: (a) the idealised model incorporates the core characteristics of our reservoir computer, disregarding experimental considerations, and is used to deﬁne maximal achievable
performance, (b) the noiseless experimental model emulates
the most inﬂuential features of the experimental setup, but
neglects the noise, that is taken into account by (c) the noisy
experimental model.

Mackey-Glass chaotic series generation task. The
Mackey-Glass delay differential equation is given by
(Mackey and Glass 1977)
dx
x(t − τ )
=β
− γx
dt
1 + xn (t − τ )

(1)

with τ , γ, β, n > 0. To obtain chaotic dynamics, we set the
parameters as in (Jaeger and Haas 2004): β = 0.2, γ = 0.1,
τ = 17 and n = 10. The equation was solved using the RK4
method with a stepsize of 1.0.
During the training phase, the reservoir computer receives
the Mackey-Glass time series as input and is trained to predict the next value of the series from the current one. Then,

Experimental results. The system was trained over 1000
input samples and was running autonomously for 600
timesteps. We discovered that the noise inside the optoelectronic reservoir makes the outcome of an experiment inconsistent. That is, several repetitions of the experiment with
same parameters may result in signiﬁcantly different prediction lengths. While the system produced several very good

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4901

