Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Disarmament Games
Yuan Deng, Vincent Conitzer
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{ericdy,conitzer}@cs.duke.edu

Example 1 (Extended Prisoner’s Dilemma). Consider the
following modiﬁed version of the prisoner’s dilemma.

Abstract
Much recent work in the AI community concerns algorithms
for computing optimal mixed strategies to commit to, as well
as the deployment of such algorithms in real security applications. Another possibility is to commit not to play certain
actions. If only one player makes such a commitment, then
this is generally less powerful than completely committing to
a single mixed strategy. However, if players can alternatingly
commit not to play certain actions and thereby iteratively reduce their strategy spaces, then desirable outcomes can be
obtained that would not have been possible with just a single player committing to a mixed strategy. We refer to such
a setting as a disarmament game. In this paper, we study disarmament for two-player normal-form games. We show that
deciding whether an outcome can be obtained with disarmament is NP-complete (even for a ﬁxed number of rounds), if
only pure strategies can be removed. On the other hand, for
the case where mixed strategies can be removed, we provide
a folk theorem that shows that all desirable utility proﬁles
can be obtained, and give an efﬁcient algorithm for (approximately) obtaining them.

Cooperate
Defect
Painful

Cooperate
3,3
4,0
0,0.1

Defect
0,4
1,1
0.5,0.5

Painful
0.1,0
0.5,0.5
0,0

Table 1: Payoff matrix of Extended Prisoner’s Dilemma
Strategy Defect strictly dominates strategies Cooperate
and Painful for both players. Thus, the only Nash (or even
correlated, or coarse correlated) equilibrium of this game is
(Defect, Defect), with utilities (1, 1). If a single player can
commit, this does not help, because the other player would
still play Defect. On the other hand, suppose both players
can alternatingly remove their strategies and act according
to the following protocol. In the ﬁrst round, Row removes
Defect. Since Defect is still Column’s dominant strategy, the
only Nash equilibrium of the reduced game is (Painful, Defect) with utilities (0.5, 0.5). Next, Column removes his strategy Defect. In the remaining game, Cooperate has become a
dominant strategy, resulting in utilities (3, 3). At each step in
this protocol of removing strategies, deviating from the protocol and playing the game remaining at that point is dominated by (3, 3). Thus, both players are best off following the
disarmament protocol.

Introduction
Disarmament is often a desired objective in international relations, but it is not always easy to reach the end goal. A key
problem is that by removing military assets, a country may
leave itself vulnerable to attack if the other country does not
disarm. Therefore, disarmament typically happens in a sequence of carefully designed stages, so that neither country
is ever too exposed at any stage. Besides reductions in military assets, we can also take disarmament as a metaphor for
other strategic situations. For example, two companies may
each hold a portfolio of patents that could be used to inﬂict
signiﬁcant damage on the other company, and the companies
may wish to make a sequence of legal agreements to reduce
the risk on both sides. In these situations, once one of the
players deviates from the disarmament protocol, the possible actions each side has remaining can strategically interact
in complex ways to determine the ﬁnal payoffs realized.
In order to achieve a high level of generality, in this paper, we consider disarmament in general two-player normalform games, as illustrated by the following example.

In this paper, we ﬁrst formalize the idea of a disarmament
game, as played on top of a game represented in normal
form (as illustrated in Example 1). We introduce the computational problem DISARM, which asks whether there is
an equilibrium of the disarmament game leading to some
desired speciﬁed outcome, and a variant K-DISARM in
which there are only K rounds of disarmament. We show
both problems to be NP-complete. We then introduce a
mixed disarmament variant that allows the removal of mixed
strategies, by upper-bounding the probabilities on individual pure strategies. Here our results are positive: we show a
type of folk theorem holds (without repetition of the game!),
namely that for any feasible utilities that exceed players’ security levels, there is an equilibrium achieving at least those
utilities. Our proof is constructive, and in fact shows that we
can approximately obtain the desired result in approximate
equilibrium using only few rounds of disarmament.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

473

