Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Position-Biased PageRank Algorithm for Keyphrase Extraction
Corina Florescu, Cornelia Caragea
Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas
CorinaFlorescu@my.unt.edu, ccaragea@unt.edu

models to decompose the topics in order to select keyphrases
from all major topics. We posit that other information exists
that can be leveraged to improve keyphrase extraction.
Intuitively, keyphrases occur on positions very close to
the beginning of a document and they occur frequently. Consider this paper as an example. One representative phrase is
“keyphrase extraction.” Notice that the phrase occurs very
early (even in the paper’s title) and occurs frequently. Based
on these observations, we propose an unsupervised graphbased model, called PositionRank, that incorporates information from all positions of a word’s occurrences into a
biased PageRank to score keywords that are later used to
score keyphrases. We experimentally evaluate PositionRank
on two datasets of research papers and show statistically signiﬁcant improvements over strong baselines.

Abstract
Given the large amounts of online textual documents available these days, e.g., news articles and scientiﬁc papers, effective methods for extracting keyphrases, which provide a highlevel topic description of a document, are greatly needed.
We propose PositionRank, an unsupervised graph-based approach to keyphrase extraction that incorporates information from all positions of a word’s occurrences into a biased
PageRank to extract keyphrases. Our model obtains remarkable improvements in performance over strong baselines.

Introduction
Keyphrase extraction (KE) is the task of automatically extracting descriptive phrases or concepts that represent the
main topics of a document. Keyphrases provide a concise
summary of a document and are shown to be rich sources
of information in many natural language processing and information retrieval tasks. Due to their importance, many approaches to keyphrase extraction have been proposed in the
literature along two lines of research: supervised and unsupervised (Hasan and Ng 2014).
Although supervised approaches typically perform better
than unsupervised approaches (Kim et al. 2012; Caragea et
al. 2014), the requirement for large human-annotated corpora for each domain of study, has led to signiﬁcant attention
towards the design of unsupervised approaches. Unsupervised keyphrase extraction is formulated as a ranking problem with graph-based ranking techniques being considered
state-of-the-art (Mihalcea and Tarau 2004; Wan and Xiao
2008; Liu et al. 2010; Gollapalli and Caragea 2014). These
techniques construct a word graph from each target document, in which nodes correspond to words and edges correspond to word association patterns. Nodes are then ranked
using graph centrality measures such as PageRank or HITS
and the top ranked phrases are returned as keyphrases.
Since the introduction of these techniques, many graphbased extensions have been proposed, which are aimed at
modeling various types of information. For example, Wan
and Xiao (2008) proposed a model that incorporates a local neighborhood of the target document. Liu et al. (2010)
assumed a mixture of topics over documents and used topic

Proposed Model
PositionRank involves three essential steps, detailed below.
Graph Construction. Let d be a target document for extracting keyphrases. We build an undirected word graph
G = (V, E), where each unique word that passes the part-ofspeech ﬁlters corresponds to a vertex vi ∈ V . Two vertices
vi and vj are linked by an edge (vi , vj ) ∈ E if the words
corresponding to these vertices co-occur within a window
of w contiguous tokens in d. The weight of an edge (denote
wij ) is computed based on the co-occurrence count of the
two words within a window of w successive tokens in d.
Position-Biased PageRank. Let G be an undirected graph
constructed as above. We score the vertices in G using a position biased-PageRank algorithm. That is, the score s for
vertex vi is obtained by recursively computing the equation:
s(vi ) = α · p(vi ) + (1 − α)



vj ∈Adj(vi )

w
 ji
vk ∈Adj(vj )

wjk

s(vj ),

where α is a dumping factor, usually set to 0.15, and p(vi ) is
a weight assigned to vertex vi . The term α · p(vi ) is added to
ensure that the PageRank algorithm does not get stuck into
cycles and can jump to another vertex in the graph with probability p(vi ). In unbiased PageRank, each vertex has equal
probability, whereas in biased PageRank, some vertices have
higher probability than others (Haveliwala 2003).
The idea of PositionRank is to assign larger weights (or
probabilities) to those words that occur very early in a doc-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4923

