Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Compressed K-Means for Large-Scale Clustering
Xiaobo Shen,†‡ Weiwei Liu,‡ Ivor Tsang,‡ Fumin Shen, Quan-Sen Sun†∗
†

School of Computer and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
‡
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{njust.shenxiaobo, liuweiwei863, fumin.shen}@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au, sunquansen@njust.edu.cn

Gong et al. 2015; Zhang and Lu 2016), which aims to develop clustering methods with high scalability. For example,
several variants, e.g., Nyström (Chen et al. 2011), large-scale
clustering (LSC) (Chen and Cai 2011), large-scale multiview spectral clustering (Li et al. 2015) have been proposed
to reduce the high computation of spectral clustering.
In contrast, k-means clustering has been more often applied to large-scale clustering because of its simplicity and
general applicability. Two steps are employed in each iteration: updating the cluster centers, and updating the assignments of each point. The computation cost of k-means
in each iteration is O(nkd), where n, k, d are the size of
the dataset, the number of clusters, and the dimensionality, respectively. For such large values, even a single iteration is very slow. For example, we show in the experiment on MINIST8M dataset where n = 8.1M, d = 784,
k = 1000, k-means takes around 6500s to update in
each iteration. In addition, 50.80G is needed to store this
dataset. Basically, it is very challenging to directly apply kmeans over this scale of dataset in a single machine. Several variants (Elkan 2003; Arthur and Vassilvitskii 2007;
Hamerly 2010; Drake and Hamerly 2012; Ding et al. 2015;
Bachem et al. 2016) of k-means have been proposed to improve the clustering efﬁciency. They can decrease the number of iterations, but the running time of each iteration and
memory usage are unchanged. Therefore, two main challenges remain to be solved in large-scale clustering: 1) how
to reduce the storage of huge data, and 2) how to reduce the
computational cost of the clustering methods.
Binary code learning (Wang et al. 2016) has gained increased interests in many large-scale applications. The basic idea of binary code learning is to encode the original high-dimensional data into a set of short binary codes
with similarity preservation. The advantage of binary coding is that it can perform an effective search in Hamming
space at very low cost of both storage and computation.
Many binary code learning methods (Gionis et al. 1999;
Gong and Lazebnik 2011; Norouzi, Fleet, and Salakhutdinov 2012; Zhou et al. 2016; Song, Liu, and Meyer 2016;
Shen et al. 2017) have been developed, all of which are proposed to facilitate large-scale retrieval and classiﬁcation, instead of clustering. A pioneering work (Gong et al. 2015)
to perform clustering over binary codes was recently proposed. This is a naive two-step approach, which generates

Abstract
Large-scale clustering has been widely used in many applications, and has received much attention. Most existing
clustering methods suffer from both expensive computation
and memory costs when applied to large-scale datasets. In
this paper, we propose a novel clustering method, dubbed
compressed k-means (CKM), for fast large-scale clustering.
Speciﬁcally, high-dimensional data are compressed into short
binary codes, which are well suited for fast clustering. CKM
enjoys two key beneﬁts: 1) storage can be signiﬁcantly reduced by representing data points as binary codes; 2) distance
computation is very efﬁcient using Hamming metric between
binary codes. We propose to jointly learn binary codes and
clusters within one framework. Extensive experimental results on four large-scale datasets, including two million-scale
datasets demonstrate that CKM outperforms the state-of-theart large-scale clustering methods in terms of both computation and memory cost, while achieving comparable clustering
accuracy.

Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental technique in machine learning
and pattern recognition. The aim of clustering is to partition a data set into different groups with similar data points
being assigned into one group. Until now many clustering algorithms (Hartigan and Wong 1979; Ng et al. 2001;
Li et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2011b; Ding et al. 2015) have been
proposed, including the widely used k-means clustering
(Hartigan and Wong 1979; Arthur and Vassilvitskii 2007;
Ding et al. 2015) and spectral clustering (Shi and Malik
2000; Ng et al. 2001).
There has been a dramatic growth in the volume of
data with the advent of Internet in the recent decades.
For instance, Flickr has more than 5 billion images available, YouTube receives more than 100 hours of videos uploaded per minute. Conventional clustering methods such
as spectral clustering cannot be directly applied to largescale datasets due to their high computation cost. Recently,
increased attention has been paid to large-scale clustering
(Chen and Cai 2011; Chen et al. 2011; Li et al. 2015;
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2527

