Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Higher-Dimensional Potential Heuristics for Optimal Classical Planning
Florian Pommerening, Malte Helmert

Blai Bonet

University of Basel, Switzerland
{ﬂorian.pommerening, malte.helmert}@unibas.ch

Universidad Simón Bolívar, Venezuela
bonet@ldc.usb.ve

and Geffner 2012; Seipp et al. 2016) suggest that potential
heuristics for binary features (that consider the joint assignment of two state variables rather than valuations over single
state variables as in the atomic case) could already lead to a
signiﬁcant increase in accuracy in many planning domains.
In this paper we generalize known results about potential heuristics with atomic features to those with larger features. After introducing some notation, we show that admissible and consistent potential heuristics for binary features
are also characterized by a compact set of linear constraints.
We then prove that such a compact characterization is not
possible in the general case of features mentioning three or
more variables. However, we show that compact representations are still possible for “sparse” features, as measured
by the treewidth (Dechter 2003) of a new graphical structure
we call the context-dependency graph. Finally, we generalize a known relation between atomic potential heuristics and
optimal cost partitioning and show that potential heuristics
correspond to optimal transition cost partitionings (Keller et
al. 2016), i. e., cost partitionings that distribute the cost of
each transition instead of each operator.

Abstract
Potential heuristics for state-space search are deﬁned as
weighted sums over simple state features. Atomic features
consider the value of a single state variable in a factored state
representation, while binary features consider joint assignments to two state variables. Previous work showed that the
set of all admissible and consistent potential heuristics using atomic features can be characterized by a compact set of
linear constraints. We generalize this result to binary features and prove a hardness result for features of higher dimension. Furthermore, we prove a tractability result based on
the treewidth of a new graphical structure we call the contextdependency graph. Finally, we study the relationship of potential heuristics to transition cost partitioning. Experimental
results show that binary potential heuristics are signiﬁcantly
more informative than the previously considered atomic ones.

Introduction
Potential heuristics (Pommerening et al. 2015) are a family of declarative heuristic functions for state-space search.
They ﬁx the form of the heuristic to be a weighted sum over a
set of features. Conditions on heuristic values such as admissibility and consistency can then be expressed as constraints
on feature weights.
Previous work on admissible potential heuristics is limited to atomic features, which consider the value of a single
state variable in a factored state representation. Pommerening et al. (2015) show that admissible and consistent potential heuristics over atomic features can be characterized
by a compact set of linear constraints. Seipp, Pommerening, and Helmert (2015) introduce several objective functions to select the best potential heuristic according to different criteria. They showed that a small collection of diverse
potential heuristics closely approximates the state equation
heuristic (SEQ) (van den Briel et al. 2007; Bonet 2013;
Bonet and van den Briel 2014). Since the quality of the SEQ
heuristic is an upper limit on the quality of any combination
of potential heuristics over atomic features (Pommerening et
al. 2015), more complex features are needed to signiﬁcantly
improve heuristic quality of potential heuristics.
Additionally, theoretical analyses of common planning
benchmarks (Chen and Giménez 2007; 2009; Lipovetzky

Background
+

We consider SAS planning tasks (Bäckström and Nebel
1995) in transition normal form (TNF) (Pommerening and
Helmert 2015). A planning task is a tuple Π = V, O, sI , s 
with the following components. V is a ﬁnite set of variables
where each V ∈ V has a ﬁnite domain dom(V ). A pair
V, v of a variable V ∈ V and one of its values v ∈ dom(V )
is called a fact. Partial variable assignments p map a subset
of variables vars(p) ⊆ V to values in their domain. Where
convenient, we also treat them as sets of facts. A partial
variable assignment s with vars(s) = V is called a state
and S is the set of all states. The state sI is the initial state
of Π and the state s is the goal state. (Note that in TNF,
there is a single goal state.) We call a partial variable assignment p consistent with a state s if s and p agree on
all variables in vars(p). The set O is a ﬁnite set of operators o, each with a precondition pre(o), an effect eﬀ (o),
and a cost cost(o), where pre(o) and eﬀ (o) are both partial
variable assignments and cost(o) is a non-negative integer.
The restriction to tasks in TNF means that we can assume
that vars(pre(o)) = vars(eﬀ (o)). We denote this set of
variables by vars(o). Considering only tasks in TNF does

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3636

