Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sparse Boltzmann Machines
with Structure Learning as Applied to Text Analysis
Zhourong Chen,∗ Nevin L. Zhang,∗ Dit-Yan Yeung, Peixian Chen
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zchenbb,lzhang,dyyeung,pchenac}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
We are interested in exploring the possibility and beneﬁts of
structure learning for deep models. As the ﬁrst step, this paper
investigates the matter for Restricted Boltzmann Machines
(RBMs). We conduct the study with Replicated Softmax, a
variant of RBMs for unsupervised text analysis. We present
a method for learning what we call Sparse Boltzmann Machines, where each hidden unit is connected to a subset of the
visible units instead of all of them. Empirical results show
that the method yields models with signiﬁcantly improved
model ﬁt and interpretability as compared with RBMs where
each hidden unit is connected to all visible units.

v1

h1

h2

h3

h4

v2

v3

v4

v5

v6

Figure 1: An example RBM with K = 6 and F = 4.

(Wan et al. 2013). Sparseness offers an interesting alternative. It amounts to deterministically dropping out connections.
How can one learn sparse deep models? One method is
to ﬁrst learn a fully connected model and then prune weak
connections (Han et al. 2015). The drawbacks of this method
are that it is computationally wasteful and does not provide a
way to determine the number of hidden units. We would like
to develop a method that determines the number of hidden
units and the connections between units automatically. The
key intuition is that a hidden unit should be connected to a
group of strongly correlated units at the level below. This
idea is used in the convolutional layers of CNNs, where a
unit is connected to pixels in a small patch of an image. In
image analysis, spatial proximity implies strong correlation.
To apply the intuition to applications other than image
analysis, we need to identify groups of strongly correlated
variables for which latent variables should be introduced.
Hierarchical Latent Tree Analysis (HLTA) (Liu et al 2014,
Chen et al 2016) offers a plausible solution. HLTA ﬁrst partitions all the variables into groups such that the variables
in each group are strongly correlated and the correlations
can be properly modelled using a single latent variable. It
then introduces a latent variable for each group. After that it
converts the latent variables into observed variables via data
completion and repeats the process to produce a hierarchy.
The output of HLTA is a hierarchical latent tree model where
the observed variables are at the bottom and there are multiple layers of latent variables on top. To obtain a non-tree
sparse deep model, we propose to use the tree model as a
skeleton and introduce additional connections to model the
residual correlations not captured by the tree.
In this paper, we fully develop and test the idea in the
context of RBMs, which have a single layer of hidden units
and are the building blocks of Deep Belief Networks (Hin-

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great successes in recent years.
It has produced superior results in a range of applications, including image classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012;
Mikolov et al. 2011), language translation (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014) and so on. It is now time to ask
whether it is possible and beneﬁcial to learn structures for
deep models.
To learn the structure of a deep model, we need to determine the number of hidden layers and the number of hidden
units at each layer. More importantly, we need to determine
the connections between neighboring layers. This implies
that we need to talk about sparse models where neighboring layers are not fully connected.
Sparseness is desirable and full connectivity is unnecessary. In fact, (Han et al. 2015) have shown that many weak
connections in the fully connected layers of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) (Lecun et al. 1998) can be pruned
without incurring any accuracy loss. The convolutional layers of CNNs are sparse, and the fact is considered one of the
key factors that have led to the success of CNNs. Moreover,
it is well known that overﬁtting is a serious problem in deep
models. One method to address the problem is dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), which randomly drops out units (while
keeping full connectivity) during training. The possibility of
randomly dropping connections has also been explored in
∗

Corresponding authors.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1805

