Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Selecting Sequences of Items via Submodular Maximization
Sebastian Tschiatschek

Adish Singla

Andreas Krause

ETH Zurich
sebastian.tschiatschek@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
adish.singla@inf.ethz.ch

ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

of submodular set functions (Krause and Golovin 2014;
Bilmes 2015). On the one hand, not considering the order of
sequences has the advantages that the search space is exponentially smaller (in the length of the selected sequences) and
that many algorithms enjoying strong theoretical guarantees
exist, e.g. the greedy algorithm for submodular maximization under cardinality constraints (Nemhauser, Wolsey, and
Fisher 1978). On the other hand, however, considering sets
instead of sequences results in less expressive models and
the inability to exploit the sequential dependencies.
Most existing algorithms cannot be readily applied to select sequences of items. Furthermore, certain tractable approaches for subset selection do not enjoy any theoretical
guarantees if extended naively to select sequences, even in
restricted scenarios (cf. Algorithms section).
Overview of our approach. We close this important gap
by considering an expressive class of utility functions over
sequences. This function class strictly generalizes the class
of submodular utility functions and enables one to capture
ordered preferences among items over arbitrarily long ranges.
These ordered preferences are encoded by a directed acyclic
graph over the items, where a directed edge between two
items encodes that there is an additional utility when selecting the “tail" item before picking the “head" item. Furthermore, our model can capture diminishing returns between
edges, i.e. the fore-mentioned additional utility can vary in
the context of other edges. For the introduced function class,
we propose a provably effective greedy algorithm for selecting sequences of items under sequence length constraints. In
contrast to a naive item-based greedy algorithm, the proposed
algorithm greedily selects edges in the graph and exploits
graph-theoretic properties to determine an optimal sequence
of items from a given set of edges.
Our main contributions include:

Abstract
Motivated by many real world applications such as recommendations in online shopping or entertainment, we consider the
problem of selecting sequences of items. In this paper we introduce a novel class of utility functions over sequences of items,
strictly generalizing the commonly used class of submodular
set functions. We encode the sequential dependencies between
items by a directed graph underlying the utility function. Classical algorithms fail to achieve any constant factor approximation guarantees on the problem of selecting sequences of
bounded length with maximum utility. We propose an efﬁcient
algorithm for this problem that comes with strong theoretical
guarantees characterized by the structural properties of the
underlying graph. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
algorithm in synthetic and real world experiments on a movie
recommendation dataset.

Introduction
A huge variety of applications involve the selection of sequences of items. Common to many of these applications
is that the order of the selected items is not random but
that items selected early, inﬂuence which items are selected
later (Shani, Heckerman, and Brafman 2005). This is illustrated by the following three application scenarios: When online shopping for a new smartphone, users usually select the
desired smartphone ﬁrst and subsequently add corresponding
accessories such as cases or headphones (McAuley, Pandey,
and Leskovec 2015). When assembling (academic) reading
lists, researchers very often work backwards in time, i.e. starting from recent relevant papers they trace back relevant lines
of research to their origin (Shahaf, Guestrin, and Horvitz
2012). In entertainment, when watching videos, users typically consume all episodes of a series or if they watch a
movie they particularly like, they may watch other movies by
the same director produced in the future (Sarwar et al. 2001;
Devooght and Bersini 2016).
Very often these sequential dependencies among items
are neglected and the utility of a sequence of items is
erroneously assumed to not depend on the order of the
items, i.e. sequences of items are actually treated as sets
of items. A class of widely applicable utility functions for
sets of items that has gained much attention is the class

• We introduce a novel class of functions over sequences
of items, strictly generalizing the commonly used class of
submodular functions.
• We propose efﬁcient algorithms for maximizing functions
from that class and prove approximation guarantees for
maximization under sequence length constraints.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in synthetic and real world experiments.

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2667

