Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Complexity of Manipulating Sequential Allocation
Haris Aziz

Sylvain Bouveret

Data61, CSIRO and UNSW
Sydney, Australia
haris.aziz@data61.csiro.au

LIG - Grenoble INP
France
sylvain.bouveret@imag.fr

Jérôme Lang

Simon Mackenzie

Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL Research University
CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
lang@lamsade.dauphine.fr

Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburg, USA
simonm@andrew.cmu.edu

in the literature that agents have underlying additive utilities for the items.1 It has long been known that sequential
allocation is not strategyproof in particular when agents do
not have consecutive turns. This motivates the natural problem of computing best responses (also referred to as manipulations). Kohler and Chandrasekaran (1971) presented a
polynomial-time algorithm to compute the optimal manipulation of an agent when there are two agents and the sequence is alternating (121212..). Bouveret and Lang (2011)
initiated further work on manipulation of sequential allocation and showed that (1) it can be checked in polynomial
time whether an agent can be allocated a given subset of
items; then, they show in a later work (Bouveret and Lang
2014) that (2) an optimal manipulation for two agents (one
manipulator and one non-manipulator) can be found in polynomial time for any sequence. Now, they also claim (page
142, left column, lines 5-7) that by putting together (1) and
(2), a best response can be computed in polynomial time for
one manipulator against several non-manipulators, and that
each best response results in the same allocation for the manipulator. As we will show, this conclusion is wrong.

Abstract
Sequential allocation is a simple allocation mechanism in
which agents are given pre-speciﬁed turns in which they take
one item among those that are still available. It has long been
known that sequential allocation is not strategyproof. This
raises the question of the complexity of computing a preference report that yields a higher utility than the truthful preference. We show that the problem is NP-complete for one
manipulating agent with additive utilities and several nonmanipulating agents. In doing so, we correct a wrong claim
made in a previous paper. We then give two additional results. First, we present a polynomial-time algorithm for optimal manipulation when the manipulator has additive binary
utilities. Second, we consider a stronger notion of manipulation whereby the untruthful outcome yields more utility than
the truthful outcome for all utilities consistent with the ordinal preferences; for this notion, we show that a manipulation,
if any, can be computed in polynomial time.

Introduction
A simple but popular mechanism to allocate indivisible
items is sequential allocation (Aziz, Walsh, and Xia 2015;
Bouveret and Lang 2011; Brams and Strafﬁn 1979; Brams
and Taylor 1996; Kalinowski, Narodytska, and Walsh 2013;
Kalinowski et al. 2013; Kohler and Chandrasekaran 1971;
Levine and Stange 2012; Tominaga, Todo, and Yokoo 2016).
In sequential allocation, a sequence speciﬁes the turns of the
agents. For example, for sequence 1212, agents 1 and 2 alternate with agent 1 taking the ﬁrst turn. Agents report their
preferences by expressing a linear order over items, and are
allocated items based on their reported preferences as follows. They get turns according to the sequence, and when
their turn comes, they are given the most preferred item (according to their reported order) that has not yet been allocated. Sequential allocation is an ordinal mechanism since
the outcome only depends on the ordinal preferences of
agents over items. Nevertheless, it is a standard assumption

Results We focus on computing best responses (or manipulations) under sequential allocation. We ﬁrst show that the
algorithm given by Bouveret and Lang (2014) for computing
a best response against one non-manipulator does not extend
to several non-manipulators. We then show that the problem
of computing a best response is in fact NP-complete. The
result has some interesting consequences since many allocation rules are based on sequential allocation. We also give
two additional results. We ﬁrst present a polynomial-time algorithm for optimal manipulation when the manipulator has
binary utilities. We then consider a stronger notion of manip1

We view here sequential allocation as a centralized mechanism; it can also be seen as a decentralized mechanism, where instead of reporting their preference, agents pick a remaining item
each time their turn come. Our results hold for both views but are
easier to state for the centralized view.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

328

