Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Dual-Clustering Maximum Entropy with
Application to Classiﬁcation and Word Embedding
Xiaolong Wang, Jingjing Wang, Chengxiang Zhai
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801
{xwang95, jwang112, czhai}@illinois.edu

et al. 2013; Mikolov and Dean 2013) and log-bilinear models (Mnih and Hinton 2007), among others.
ME establishes a distribution of the exponential form over
items (classes/words) (See Equation (1) ). Scalability becomes a crucial challenge when the number of items is large,
which occurs nowadays in many real-world problems. For
example, in a text classiﬁcation problem of predicting the
publishing venue for research papers, the number of classes
can easily exceed thousands on datasets such as ACM digital
library1 ; for word embedding, commonly used training corpora, with the English Gigaword2 as an example, typically
have a vocabulary of hundreds of thousands, if not millions
of words.
The main computational difﬁculty in ME comes from the
fact that one has to enumerate all items in order to obtain
either the probability of a single item or the corresponding gradient (Mnih and Teh 2012). Consequently conventional ME optimization techniques such as iterative scaling (Berger, Pietra, and Pietra 1996; Darroch and Ratcliff
1972) and gradient-based algorithms (Tsuruoka, Tsujii, and
Ananiadou 2009; Gao et al. 2007) are very slow to train with
large numbers of items. In practice, sampling-based methods (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2010; Mnih and Teh 2012;
Bengio and Senécal 2008) are often adopted since the complexity does not hinge on the number of items. However, one
drawback they possess is the inevitable sampling variance.
Furthermore, only the model parameters associated with the
sampled items get updated at each training instance, while
the majority of the model is left unchanged, which leads to
inefﬁcient learning.
To achieve learning efﬁciency with affordable computational cost, we propose a Dual-Clustering Maximum Entropy (DCME) approach. It optimizes ME in a primal-dual
fashion, where the multinomial dual distribution for each
instance is exploited. The key step of DCME is to cluster
the dual distributions and to approximate each of them by
the corresponding cluster center. The dual clustering proceeds by alternating between an online update of each instance’s cluster assignment and an ofﬂine calculation3 of

Abstract
Maximum Entropy (ME), as a general-purpose machine
learning model, has been successfully applied to various
ﬁelds such as text mining and natural language processing.
It has been used as a classiﬁcation technique and recently
also applied to learn word embedding. ME establishes a distribution of the exponential form over items (classes/words).
When training such a model, learning efﬁciency is guaranteed by globally updating the entire set of model parameters associated with all items at each training instance. This
creates a signiﬁcant computational challenge when the number of items is large. To achieve learning efﬁciency with affordable computational cost, we propose an approach named
Dual-Clustering Maximum Entropy (DCME). Exploiting the
primal-dual form of ME, it conducts clustering in the dual
space and approximates each dual distribution by the corresponding cluster center. This naturally enables a hybrid
online-ofﬂine optimization algorithm whose time complexity per instance only scales as the product of the feature/word
vector dimensionality and the cluster number. Experimental
studies on text classiﬁcation and word embedding learning
demonstrate that DCME effectively strikes a balance between
training speed and model quality, substantially outperforming
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Maximum Entropy (ME), also known by a variety of other
names, including log-linear, Gibbs, exponential, softmax
and multinomial logistic regression models, is one of the
most widely applied machine learning techniques in various
ﬁelds. As a classiﬁcation method, ME has seen wide-scale
applications in text mining and natural language processing, such as text classiﬁcation (Nigam, Lafferty, and McCallum 1999), part-of-speech tagging (Ratnaparkhi 1996)
and machine translation (Berger, Pietra, and Pietra 1996).
In neural networks, ME (softmax) is the building block of
network architectures to transform a vector of signals into
probabilities (Collobert and Weston 2008), and has been explored to learn neural probabilistic language models (Bengio
et al. 2003). In recent literature, a number of word embedding algorithms have been proposed based on ME, including skip-gram, continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) (Mikolov

1

http://dl.acm.org/
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2011T07
3
In this paper, the term “ofﬂine” is equivalent to “batch computation”.
2

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3323

