Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Computational Assessment Model for the Adaptive
Level of Rehabilitation Exergames for the Elderly
1

Hao Zhang,1,2 Chunyan Miao,2 Han Yu,2 Cyril Leung2,3

Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly, NTU, Singapore
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
i150001@e.ntu.edu.sg, {ascymiao, han.yu}@ntu.edu.sg, cleung@ece.ubc.ca
2

individual’s functional limitations. The third step is to apply
the computational framework to quantify the adaptive level.

Abstract
Rehabilitation exergames can engage the elderly in physical
activities and help them recover part of their deteriorating capabilities. However, most existing exergames lack measures
of how suitable they are to speciﬁc individuals. In this paper, we propose the Computational Person-Environment Fit
model to evaluate the adaptability of the exergames to each
individual elderly user.

Step 1. Assessment of barriers in exergames
This assessment quantiﬁes the barriers in a give exergame
hindering the elderly from playing effectively. It corresponds to the environment stimuli in the conventional P-E
model. We identiﬁed 31 barriers which may prevent the elderly from playing the exergames. The 31 barriers can be
categorized into ﬁve groups: 1) external environment, 2)
cognition, 3) hearing, 4) vision, and 5) motion.
The detailed information of the exergames can be provided by the game developers. We quantify the severity of
the barriers in a particular exergame by assigning scores
from zero to three. If we denote the score of the ith barrier as SBi , then we have SBi ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, where i =
1, 2, . . . , 31. A higher score denotes a more serious barrier,
while zero indicating the absence of this barrier.

Introduction
Rehabilitation exercises aim to help the elderly recover lost
capabilities and live independently. As an alternative mechanism for delivering rehabilitation exercises to the elderly,
exergames can motivate them to follow the rehabilitation
routines through the appealing and easy-to-follow interfaces and interesting tasks, which decreases the monotony
of repetitive exercises. Moreover, the elderly may play the
rehabilitation exergames at home without having to travel
to the clinics. However, prior studies on exergames seldom
consider the adaptive level of an exergame to an individual
elderly. It is not easy to suggest suitable exergames to a speciﬁc individual, taking into account his/her personal situations.
In this paper, we propose the Computational PersonEnvironment Fit (CoPEF) model. It jointly considers the personal and environmental situations facing an elderly user to
determine the adaptive level of the rehabilitation exergames
to the elderly. The original Person-Environment (P-E) ﬁt
model has been proven to be useful in assessing home environment adaptive levels (Iwarsson and Slaug 2010). However, prior studies on P-E ﬁt model mainly focused on
the physical environment and the majority of them only
conducted qualitative analysis. Therefore, we aim to adapt
the CoPEF model to obtain quantitative results for virtual
exergame environments, which are becoming increasingly
ubiquitous today.

Step 2. Assessment of functional limitations
Motor and cognitive impairments exist among many seniors.
However, the degree of impairments varies across individual. We identiﬁed 13 major functional limitations for the elderly. These limitations can be categorized into two groups:
1) physical functional limitations and 2) perception and cognition limitations.
Based on the each individual elderly’s conditions, we
score the severity of their functional limitations ranging
from zero to six. If we denote the score of the jth limitation of an elderly individual as SLj , then we have SLj ∈
{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, where j = 1, 2, . . . , 13. If an individual
does not suffer from the jth functional limitation, SLj = 0.
On the other hand, a higher score represents a more serious
condition.

Step 3. Computation of the adaptive level
Based on the requirements of each exergame, the interactions between the 31 barriers in Step 1 and the 13 functional
limitations in Step 2 can be classiﬁed into three groups according to how much they may hinder the elderly: 1) FullRestriction (FR), 2) Partial-Restriction (PR), and 3) NonRestriction (NR). FR suggests that the elderly who suffer
from these functional limitations are unable to play an exergame with the corresponding barriers. PR suggests the

The CoPEF Methodology
CoPEF consists of three steps. The ﬁrst two steps require
us to identify the barriers involved in the exergames and the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5021

