Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Finding Cut from the Same Cloth: Cross Network Link
Recommendation via Joint Matrix Factorization
Arun Reddy Nelakurthi, Jingrui He
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
{anelakur,jingrui.he}@asu.edu

from the other social networks. Motivated by this application, in this paper, we focus on cross network link recommendation, which aims to identify similar actors across multiple heterogeneous social networks. In this way, we will be
able to form support groups consisting of patients from multiple disease-speciﬁc networks, all sharing the same questions and concerns.
The problem setting studied in this paper is similar and
yet signiﬁcantly different from existing work on cross network link prediction. In particular, existing work either links
different accounts belonging to the same user across multiple social networks (Zhang et al. 2015), or links users with
complementary expertise or interest (Tang et al. 2012). In
contrast, we aim to ﬁnd similar users using different social
networks, which enables them to exchange important information regarding their shared questions or concerns.
Based on the observation that different disease-speciﬁc
social networks tend to share the same topics as well as
the interests of user groups in certain topics, we propose to
jointly decompose the user-keyword matrices from these social networks, while requiring them to share the same topics
and user group-topic association matrices. To be speciﬁc,
we form a generic optimization framework, and instantiate
it with variations of the constraints. Then we propose an iterative optimization algorithm and analyze its performance
from multiple perspectives. Finally, we test the performance
of this algorithm on various real-world data sets, which outperforms state-of-the-art techniques.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows, Section 2
discusses the related work in the ﬁeld of link prediction and
non-negative matrix factorization. Section 3 formalizes the
problem of cross network link prediction and describes the
proposed approach as well as the optimization algorithm. In
Section 4, we evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm and discuss the results on different data sets. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5.

Abstract
With the emergence of online forums associated with major
diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, many patients are increasingly dependent on such disease-speciﬁc social networks to
gain access to additional resources. Among these patients, it
is common for them to stick to one disease-speciﬁc social network, although their desired resources might be spread over
multiple social networks, such as patients with similar questions and concerns. Motivated by this application, in this paper, we focus on cross network link recommendation, which
aims to identify similar users across multiple heterogeneous
social networks. The problem setting is different from existing work on cross network link prediction, which either tries
to link accounts of the same user from different social networks, or aims to match users with complementary expertise
or interest.
To approach the problem of cross network link recommendation, we propose to jointly decompose the user-keyword matrices from multiple social networks, while requiring them to
share the same topics and user group-topic association matrices. This constraint comes from the fact that social networks
dedicated to the same disease tend to share the same topics as
well as the interests of users groups in certain topics. Based
on this intuition, we construct a generic optimization framework, provide four instantiations and an iterative optimization
algorithm with performance analysis. In the experiments, we
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algorithm over
state-of-the-art techniques on various real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, online social networks has become an important portal for patients with major diseases, such as diabetes
mellitus, to connect with physicians as well as other patients. Compared with the generic social networks such as
Twitter and Facebook, the disease-speciﬁc social networks
(e.g., TuDiabetes (2016) and DiabetesSisters (2016)) have a
greater concentration of patients with similar conditions, and
the patients expect to obtain additional resources from these
social networks. However, when it comes to using these social networks, it is often the case that a patient would stick
to a single social network, and rarely look at the other social
networks, thus limiting their access to the online resources,
especially the patients with similar questions and concerns

2

Related Work

In this section, we brieﬂy review the related work on link
prediction and non-negative matrix factorization.
Link prediction is a widely studied problem in the ﬁeld
of Social Network Analysis (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg
2007; Al Hasan and Zaki 2011; Wang et al. 2014). Link
prediction can be broadly classiﬁed into two types: (1)

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1467

