Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Problems in Large-Scale Image Classiﬁcation
Yuchen Guo
School of Software, Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com

Introduction

the similarity structure, i.e., hashing, the efﬁciency can be
signiﬁcantly improved based on the extremely fast bit operation in modern computer. For example, in the same database,
if we transform the each vector into 128-bit binary codes, we
only need about 160MB memory and searching kNN using
the bit operations in the database takes only tens of milliseconds. Because of its efﬁciency in space and speed, hashing
has received considerable attention in recent years.
Iterative Quantization (ITQ) (Gong et al. 2013) is one of
the state-of-the-art hashing approaches. However, it suffers
from two problems. First, its 2,2 -norm loss is very sensitive to noise in data. Second, it only focuses on preserving
2 -norm (Euclidean) distance while ignoring other distance
measures. To address these issues, we extended ITQ into a
more robust and general formulation using a p,q -norm loss
(0 < q ≤ p ≤ 2). It is robust to noise by using q ≤ 1 and
supports general p -norm similarity search. Minimizing the
p,q -norm loss with orthogonality constraint is a challenging
non-convex and non-smooth problem. As an important theoretical contribution, we proposed a novel iterative optimization algorithm which could efﬁciently solve this problem,
and we rigorously proved the correctness of the algorithm.
Extensive experiments on benchmarks showed the proposed
approach achieved state-of-the-art performance and was superior to the original ITQ, which validated its effectiveness.
This work was published in IJCAI 2016 (Guo et al. 2016b).
In real-world applications, the images can be represented
as multiple modalities, like SIFT, GIST, CNN features. And
because of the difference of capturing devices, images can
be represented by different features. How to combine multimodality features to improve the retrieval performance, and
how to connect different modalities such that cross-modality
search is feasible, i.e., using a SIFT represented query image to retrieve GIST represented image database, are two
important problems in cross/multi-modality hashing community (Song et al. 2013). To address these problems, we
proposed a novel Collective Matrix Factorization Hashing
framework, which could effectively build connections across
modalities and combine information from multiple modalities. We conducted comprehensive experiments and the results demonstrated the superiority of the proposed framework
to the state-of-the-arts. This work was published in CVPR
2014 (Ding, Guo, and Zhou 2014) and the extended version
has been accepted by IEEE TIP (Ding et al. 2016).

The number of images is growing rapidly in recent years
because of development of Internet, especially the social
networks like Facebook, and the popularization of portable
image capture devices like smart phone. Annotating them
with semantically meaningful words to describe them, i.e.,
classiﬁcation, is a useful way to manage these images. However, the huge number of images and classes brings several
challenges to classiﬁcation, of which two are 1) how to measure the similarity efﬁciently between large-scale images, for
example, measuring similarity between samples is the building block for SVM and kNN classiﬁers, and 2) how to train
supervised classiﬁcation models for newly emerging classes
with only a few or even no labeled samples because new
concepts appear every day in the Web, like Tesla’s Model S.
The research of my Ph. D. thesis focuses on the two problems in large-scale image classiﬁcation mentioned above. Formally, these two problems are termed as large-scale similarity
search (Gong et al. 2013) which focuses on the large scale
of samples/images and zero-shot/few-shots learning (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014) which focuses on the
large scale of classes. Speciﬁcally, my research considers the
following three aspects: 1) hashing based large-scale similarity search which adopts hashing to improve the efﬁciency;
2) cross-class transfer active learning which simultaneously
transfers knowledge from the abundant labeled samples in
the Web and selects the most informative samples for expert
labeling such that we can construct effective classiﬁers for
novel classes with only a few labeled samples; and 3) zeroshot learning which utilizes no labeled samples for novel
classes at all to build supervised classiﬁers for them by transferring knowledge from the related classes.

Hashing Based Large-scale Similarity Search
Given a large-scale database, storing the feature vectors and
performing similarity search in it are both quite expensive.
For example, suppose we have 10 million 128-dimensional
SIFT points with ﬂoat representation. We need about 5GB
memory as storage and searching kNN in the database requires at least several minutes. However, if we can transform
the ﬂoat representation into binary codes while preserving
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5038

