Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

When to Reset Your Keys: Optimal Timing of Security Updates via Learning
Zizhan Zheng

Ness B. Shroff

Prasant Mohapatra

Department of Computer Science
Tulane University

Dept. of ECE and CSE
The Ohio State University

Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis

ion (Bowers et al. 2014), to avoid immediate detection and
obtain long-term advantages.
From the defender’s perspective, an effective way to
thwart continuous and stealthy attacks is to update its security measures periodically to strike a balance between
the risk of being compromised and the cost of updates.
The primary challenge, however, is that such decisions
must often be made with limited and delayed feedback because of the covert nature of the attacker. In addition to
thwarting targeted attacks, such an optimal timing problem with incomplete information is crucial in various cybersecurity scenarios, e.g., key rotation (van Dijk et al.
2013), password changes (Tan and Xia 2016), application
of patches (Beattie et al. 2002), and virtual machine refreshing (Juels et al. 2016). For example, Facebook receives approximately 600,000 “compromised logins” from impostors
every day (Barnett 2011). An efﬁcient approach to stop these
attacks is to ask users to update their passwords when the
risk of attack is high.
Although time-related tactical security choices have been
studied since the cold war era (Blackwell 1949), rigorous
study of timing decisions in the face of continuous and
stealthy attacks is relatively new. In 2012, in response to
an APT attack on it, the RSA lab proposed the FlitIt game,
which was one of the ﬁrst models to study timing decisions
under stealthy takeovers. The FlipIt game model abstracts
out details about concrete attack and defense operations by
focusing on the stealthy and persistent nature of players. The
basic model considers two players, each of whom can “ﬂip”
the state of a system periodically at any time with a cost. A
player only learns the system state when she moves herself.
The payoff of a player is deﬁned as the fraction of time when
the resource is under its control less the total cost incurred.
The FlipIt game captures the stealthy behavior of players in an elegant way by allowing various types of feedback
structures. In the basic model where neither player gets any
feedback during the game and each move ﬂips the state of
the resource instantaneously, it is known that periodic strategies with random starting phases form a pair of best response
strategies (van Dijk et al. 2013). As a variant of the basic
model, an asymmetric setting is studied in (Laszka, Johnson,
and Grossklags 2013) where the defender gets no feedback
during the game while the attacker obtains immediate feedback after each defense but incurs a random attack time to

Abstract
Cybersecurity is increasingly threatened by advanced and
persistent attacks. As these attacks are often designed to disable a system (or a critical resource, e.g., a user account) repeatedly, it is crucial for the defender to keep updating its
security measures to strike a balance between the risk of being compromised and the cost of security updates. Moreover,
these decisions often need to be made with limited and delayed feedback due to the stealthy nature of advanced attacks.
In addition to targeted attacks, such an optimal timing policy
under incomplete information has broad applications in cybersecurity. Examples include key rotation, password change,
application of patches, and virtual machine refreshing. However, rigorous studies of optimal timing are rare. Further, existing solutions typically rely on a pre-deﬁned attack model
that is known to the defender, which is often not the case
in practice. In this work, we make an initial effort towards
achieving optimal timing of security updates in the face of
unknown stealthy attacks. We consider a variant of the inﬂuential FlipIt game model with asymmetric feedback and
unknown attack time distribution, which provides a general
model to consecutive security updates. The defender’s problem is then modeled as a time associative bandit problem with
dependent arms. We derive upper conﬁdence bound based
learning policies that achieve low regret compared with optimal periodic defense strategies that can only be derived when
attack time distributions are known.

Introduction
Malicious attacks are constantly evolving to inﬂict increasing levels of damage on the nation’s infrastructure systems,
cooperate IT systems, and our digital lives. For example, the
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) has become a major concern to cybersecurity in the past few years. APT attacks exhibit two distinguishing behavior patterns (van Dijk et al.
2013) that make them extremely difﬁcult to defend using
traditional techniques. First, these attacks are often funded
well and persistent. They attack a target system (or a critical resource) periodically with the goal to compromise it
completely e.g., by stealing full cryptography keys. Second,
the attacks can be highly adaptive. In particular, they often
act covertly, e.g., by operating in a “low-and-slow” fashCopyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3679

