Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Policy Search with High-Dimensional Context Variables
Voot Tangkaratt

Herke van Hoof

Simone Parisi

The University of Tokyo,
113-0033 Tokyo, Japan
voot@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

McGill University,
3480 Rue University, Montreal, Canada
Technical University of Darmstadt,
64289 Darmstadt, Germany

Technical University of Darmstadt,
64289 Darmstadt, Germany
simone@robot-learning.de

Gerhard Neumann

Jan Peters

Masashi Sugiyama

University of Lincoln,
LN6 7TS Lincoln, United Kingdom
Technical University of Darmstadt,
64289 Darmstadt, Germany
geri@robot-learning.de

MPI for Intelligent Systems,
72076 Tuebingen, Germany
Technical University of Darmstadt,
64289 Darmstadt, Germany
mail@jan-peters.net

The University of Tokyo,
277-8561 Chiba, Japan
RIKEN AIP Center,
351-0198 Saitama, Japan
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yet, direct policy search methods (both contextual and
plain) usually require a lot of evaluations of the objective and
may converge prematurely. To alleviate these issues, Abdolmaleki et al. (2015) recently proposed a stochastic search
framework called model-based relative entropy stochastic
search (MORE). In this framework, the new search distribution can be computed efﬁciently in a closed form using
a learned model of the objective function. MORE outperformed state-of-the-art methods in stochastic optimization
problems and single-context policy search problems, but its
application to contextual policy search has not been explored
yet. One of the contributions in this paper is a novel contextual policy search method in the MORE framework.

Abstract
Direct contextual policy search methods learn to improve policy parameters and simultaneously generalize these parameters to different context or task variables. However, learning
from high-dimensional context variables, such as camera images, is still a prominent problem in many real-world tasks.
A naive application of unsupervised dimensionality reduction
methods to the context variables, such as principal component
analysis, is insufﬁcient as task-relevant input may be ignored.
In this paper, we propose a contextual policy search method in
the model-based relative entropy stochastic search framework
with integrated dimensionality reduction. We learn a model of
the reward that is locally quadratic in both the policy parameters and the context variables. Furthermore, we perform supervised linear dimensionality reduction on the context variables by nuclear norm regularization. The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms naive dimensionality reduction via principal component analysis and
a state-of-the-art contextual policy search method.

However, a naive extension of the original MORE would
still suffer from high-dimensional contexts. Learning from
high-dimensional variables, in fact, is still an important
problem in statistics and machine learning (Bishop 2006).
Nowadays, high-dimensional data (e.g., camera images) can
often be obtained quite easily, but obtaining informative
low-dimensional variables (e.g., objects positions) is nontrivial and requires prior knowledge and/or human guidance.

Introduction
An autonomous agent often requires different policies for
solving tasks with different contexts. For instance, in a ball
hitting task the robot has to adapt his controller according to
the ball position, i.e., the context. Direct policy search approaches (Baxter and Bartlett 2000; Rosenstein and Barto
2001; Deisenroth, Neumann, and Peters 2013) allow the
agent to learn a separate policy for each context through trial
and error. However, learning optimal policies for many large
contexts, such as in the presence of continuous context variables, is impracticable. On the other hand, direct contextual
policy search approaches (Kober, Oztop, and Peters 2011;
Neumann 2011; da Silva, Konidaris, and Barto 2012) represent the contexts by real-valued vectors and are able to learn
a context-dependent distribution over the policy parameters.
Such a distribution can generalize across context values and
therefore the agent is able to adapt to unseen contexts.

In this paper, we propose a method to handle highdimensional context variables by learning a low-rank representation of the objective function. We show that learning
a low-rank representation corresponds to performing linear
dimensionality reduction on the context variables. Since optimization with a rank constraint is generally NP-hard, we
minimize the nuclear norm (also called trace norm), which
is a convex surrogate of the rank function (Recht, Fazel,
and Parrilo 2010). This minimization allows us to learn a
low-rank representation in a fully supervised manner by just
solving a convex optimization problem. We evaluate the proposed method on a synthetic task with known ground truth
and on robotic ball hitting tasks based on camera images.
The evaluation shows that the proposed method with nuclear
norm minimization outperforms the methods that naively
perform principal component analysis to reduce the dimensionality of context variables.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2632

