Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Low-Rank Tensor Completion with
Total Variation for Visual Data Inpainting
Xutao Li, Yunming Ye, Xiaofei Xu
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Internet Information Collaboration,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 518055, China
Emails: lixutao@hitsz.edu.cn; yym@hitsz.edu.cn;xiaofei@hit.edu.cn

2014; Li et al. 2015), hyperspectral or MRI data recovery (Li
and Li 2010; Ji et al. 2016; Shang, Liu, and Cheng 2014),
context-aware recommendation (Karatzoglou et al. 2010;
Rettinger et al. 2012), among others.
Matrix completion, namely the second-order tensor completion problem, has been intensively studied in the past
decades (Candès and Recht 2009; Fazel 2002; Recht 2011;
Candès and Tao 2010). Since the problem is ill-posed without any constraints, i.e., there are inﬁnite solutions, a great
number of studies assume the matrix to complete is low-rank
and try to minimize its rank when ﬁlling in missing entries.
However, the rank minimization is unfortunately discrete,
non-convex and NP-hard. To address the challenge, nuclear
norm (trace norm) is often utilized as a surrogate of the rank
function, which is continuous, convex and easy to optimize.
In fact, it has been shown theoretically to be the tightest convex approximation of a matrix’s rank (Fazel 2002). Excellent performances in various domains demonstrate that lowrank regularization with nuclear norm is very effective for
matrix completion.
Recently, low-rank constraint has also been imposed to
recover higher-order tensors from partial observations. Different from matrix, the rank of a tensor is not well-deﬁned.
Theoretically, it is deﬁned as the minimum number of rank1 CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition components. However, the deﬁnition is rarely used, as it is hard
to determine, or even estimate, the rank of a tensor when
adopting the deﬁnition in practice. Hence, many approaches
extend and leverage the deﬁnition of matrix’s rank for lowrank tensor completion (LRTC). Roughly speaking, they can
be broken down into two directions. One line of methods
utilizes linear combinations of the rank of unfolded matrix
along each mode as low-rank regularization (Gandy, Recht,
and Yamada 2011; Liu et al. 2013; Signoretto et al. 2011;
Tomioka, Hayashi, and Kashima 2010; Signoretto et al.
2014), while the other line performs CP or Tucker decomposition and try to make the decomposition factors be
low-rank (Chen, Hsu, and Liao 2014; Liu et al. 2014a;
Filipović and Jukić 2015; Zhao, Zhang, and Cichocki 2015;
Liu et al. 2014b). Previous studies have shown that the two
types of methods yield impressive performances.
In this paper, we argue that low-rank constraint, albeit
useful, is not effective enough to exploit some underlying local structures of tensors for completion. The point is in par-

Abstract
With the advance of acquisition techniques, plentiful higherorder tensor data sets are built up in a great variety of
ﬁelds such as computer vision, neuroscience, remote sensing and recommender systems. The real-world tensors often contain missing values, which makes tensor completion become a prerequisite to utilize them. Previous studies have shown that imposing a low-rank constraint on tensor completion produces impressive performances. In this
paper, we argue that low-rank constraint, albeit useful, is
not effective enough to exploit the local smooth and piecewise priors of visual data. We propose integrating total variation into low-rank tensor completion (LRTC) to address
the drawback. As LRTC can be formulated by both tensor unfolding and tensor decomposition, we develop correspondingly two methods, namely LRTC-TV-I and LRTCTV-II, and their iterative solvers. Extensive experimental results on color image and medical image inpainting tasks
show the effectiveness and superiority of the two methods
against state-of-the-art competitors. Our codes are available
at https://sites.google.com/site/xutaoli2014

Introduction
As a generalization of matrices and vectors, tensors refer
to multiway arrays, which are powerful to represent multidimensional data or interactions related to multiple factors (Kolda and Bader 2009). For example, a color image
(a video sequence) can be represented as a third-order tensor, where the three dimensions are height, width and color
channel (time channel); similarly, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data recording pictures of a patient under different frequencies can be also denoted as a tensor; E-commerce
data measuring the interactions among users, items and contexts is another example.
Due to loss of information or unacceptable cost to acquire complete data, tensors built up in real-world applications may contain missing values in their entries. Completing the values for missing entries, known as tensor completion problem, thus becomes an important research topic,
which can serve plentiful applications, for instance, image
or video inpainting (Liu et al. 2013; Yao and Kwok 2015;
Romera-Paredes and Pontil 2013; Wang, Nie, and Huang
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2210

