Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Flexible Model Induction through Heuristic Process Discovery
Pat Langley

Adam Arvay

Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise
2164 Staunton Court, Palo Alto, CA 94306

Department of Computer Science
University of Auckland, Auckland 1142 NZ

At ﬁrst glance, these two tasks appear closely related, as
they both generate equations, but the latter also produces a
deeper account that moves beyond empirical descriptions.
Nevertheless, process model induction relies heavily on
background knowledge that must currently be entered manually. A more ﬂexible approach would attempt to introduce
new processes when an initial set is inadequate to explain
observations, partially bridging the gap between knowledgelean and knowledge-rich scientiﬁc discovery.
In the following sections, we review prior work on inductive process modeling, including its reliance on background
knowledge about domain processes. In response, we deﬁne
the more challenging task of model induction when process
knowledge is incomplete. We describe an approach to generating candidate processes, an exhaustive method for using them in model construction, and a heuristic alternative
that holds apparent advantages. We report experiments with
these techniques on ecological time series that demonstrate
basic functionality and examine their relative efﬁciency and
reliability. In closing, we examine relations to prior research
and outline priorities for future work.
Research on process model induction is atypical for the
cognitive systems community due to its focus on numeric
data and use of statistical analysis. However, work in this
area addresses a high-level task that humans ﬁnd challenging, uses structured representations of background knowledge and models, engages in multi-step reasoning over these
structures, and draws on heuristics to guide search. All of
these are features of cognitive systems research (Langley
2012), making it highly relevant to the paradigm.

Abstract
Inductive process modeling involves the construction of explanatory accounts for multivariate time series. As typically
speciﬁed, background knowledge is available in the form of
generic processes that serve as the building blocks for candidate model structures. In this paper, we present a more
ﬂexible approach that, when available processes are insufﬁcient to construct an acceptable model, automatically produces new generic processes that let it complete the task. We
describe FPM, a system that implements this idea by composing knowledge about algebraic rate expressions and about
conceptual processes like predation and remineralization in
ecology. We demonstrate empirically FPM’s ability to construct new generic processes when necessary and to transfer
them later to new modeling tasks. We also compare its failuredriven approach with a naive scheme that generates all possible processes at the outset. We conclude by discussing prior
work on equation discovery and model construction, along
with plans for additional research.

1

Background and Motivation

Research on computational scientiﬁc discovery (Shrager and
Langley 1990; Džeroski and Todorovski 2007) attempts to
reproduce the human ability to infer scientiﬁc laws and models, but there is considerable variety in this arena. Initial
work on the topic focused on induction of descriptive laws,
which typically occurs early in a scientiﬁc ﬁeld’s history and
appears to involve knowledge-lean mechanisms. More recent research has addressed the construction of explanatory
models, which usually occurs at more advanced stages and
draws on domain knowledge. Both efforts differ from mainstream work in machine learning by using established scientiﬁc formalisms, but their concerns can differ considerably.
An important class of problems in the knowledge-lean
tradition is equation discovery (e.g., Langley et al. 1987),
where the aim is to induce numerical relations among
observed variables. An equally important subarea in the
knowledge-rich paradigm is inductive process modeling
(Bridewell et al. 2008), which attempts to construct explanations of multivariate time-series data in terms of interactions among unobserved but plausible processes that produce quantitative changes in measured variables.

2

Recent Work on Inductive Process
Modeling

As noted, process model induction involves constructing an
explanation of multivariate time series in terms of background knowledge. The input is a set of typed variables, observations for each variable over time, and a set of generic
processes that might be responsible. The output is a set of
linked differential equations, each composed of one or more
processes, that reproduce and explain the data.
Table 1 presents a model for a four-variable predator-prey
system, with (a) displaying the ﬁve component processes
and (b) showing four differential equations. Note that some

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4415

