Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Low-Rank Linear Cold-Start Recommendation from Social Data
Suvash Sedhain,†∗ Aditya Krishna Menon,∗† Scott Sanner,‡† Lexing Xie,†∗ Darius BraziunasS
{† Australian National University, ∗ Data61}, Canberra, ACT, Australia
‡
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
S
Rakuten Kobo Inc., Toronto, Canada
suvash.sedhain@anu.edu.au, aditya.menon@data61.csiro.au,
ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca, lexing.xie@anu.edu.au, dbraziunas@kobo.com

approaches, and has thus been addressed both by vanilla
content-based ﬁltering recommenders (Billsus and Pazzani
1999; Mooney and Roy 2000) as well as hybrid collaborative and content-based ﬁltering recommenders (Schein et al.
2002; Gunawardana and Meek 2009).
The precise form of side-information available has an impact on the accuracy of cold-start predictions (Gantner et al.
2010; Sedhain et al. 2014). Recent work has shown that social information, such as users’ friend groups and page likes,
is sufﬁciently rich to strongly mitigate the cold-start problem. Various means of incorporating this information into
neighbourhood (Zhang et al. 2010; Sahebi and Cohen 2011;
Sedhain et al. 2014; Rosli et al. 2014; Rohani et al. 2014)
and matrix factorisation (or latent feature) approaches (Ma
et al. 2008; Cao, Liu, and Yang 2010; Jamali and Ester 2010;
Noel et al. 2012; Krohn-Grimberghe et al. 2012) have been
studied, with encouraging results. However, both strands of
work have limitations. Neighbourhood methods lack an interpretation as minimising some principled objective, potentially resulting in sub-optimal solutions. Matrix factorisation
methods, on the other hand, involve time-consuming iterative optimisation of a non-convex objective and require tuning of a potentially large number of hyperparameters.
This paper proposes an efﬁcient, accurate, learning-based
approach for the cold-start problem that leverages social
data. Our ﬁrst contribution is to show how three popular
cold-start models (Sedhain et al. 2014; Gantner et al. 2010;
Krohn-Grimberghe et al. 2012) can be seen as a special case
of a linear content-based model, which explains some of
their drawbacks. Leveraging this insight, our second contribution is a new model, LoCo, that overcomes these limitations by employing three ingredients:
(a) multivariate linear regression to learn an optimal
weighting of social signals for preferences,
(b) a low-rank parametrisation of the regression weights to
address the high dimensionality common in social data,
(c) highly scalable learning of such low-rank weights via
randomised SVD (Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp 2011).
While each of these ideas is simple, using them in conjunction is powerful: experiments on four real-world datasets
demonstrate that LoCo yields substantial improvements over
state-of-the-art cold-start recommenders leveraging highdimensional side-information from a social network.

Abstract
The cold-start problem involves recommendation of content
to new users of a system, for whom there is no historical preference information available. This proves a challenge for collaborative ﬁltering algorithms that inherently rely on such information. Recent work has shown that social metadata, such
as users’ friend groups and page likes, can strongly mitigate
the problem. However, such approaches either lack an interpretation as optimising some principled objective, involve iterative non-convex optimisation with limited scalability, or
require tuning several hyperparameters. In this paper, we ﬁrst
show how three popular cold-start models are special cases
of a linear content-based model, with implicit constraints on
the weights. Leveraging this insight, we propose LoCo, a new
model for cold-start recommendation based on three ingredients: (a) linear regression to learn an optimal weighting of
social signals for preferences, (b) a low-rank parametrisation of the weights to overcome the high dimensionality common in social data, and (c) scalable learning of such low-rank
weights using randomised SVD. Experiments on four realworld datasets show that LoCo yields signiﬁcant improvements over state-of-the-art cold-start recommenders that exploit high-dimensional social network metadata.

Introduction
Collaborative ﬁltering has emerged as the gold-standard approach to personalised recommendation of content to users
(Leavitt 2013). The central idea of collaborative ﬁltering
is to infer a user’s preferences based on their past interactions with a system, as well as the preferences of other likeminded users (Goldberg et al. 1992; Resnick et al. 1994).
While this approach has seen considerable success, it has an
obvious failure mode: how do we recommend content to new
users without any historical preference information? This is
known as the user cold-start problem (Schein et al. 2002),
and is pervasive in real-world recommendation applications.
Cold-start problems may be addressed by exploiting exogenous side-information about users, such as demographic
attributes. This can be done using content-based rather than
collaborative ﬁltering, where the central idea of the former
is to infer a user’s preferences by explaining their past interactions based on the side-information (Pazzani and Billsus 2007). The cold-start problem does not plague such
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1502

