Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Machine Learning for Entity Coreference Resolution:
A Retrospective Look at Two Decades of Research
Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75083-0688
vince@.hlt.utdallas.edu
sister. To resolve the second occurrence of her, if a resolver
employs the commonly-used heuristic that selects the closest
grammatically compatible mention in the subject position as
its antecedent, it will wrongly posit Nancy Logue as its antecedent. Even if the sentence did not mention that Nancy
Logue was a speech therapist, a human would have no problem with correctly resolving the pronoun (to Princess Margaret), because he could easily rule out Nancy Logue as the
correct antecedent by employing the commonsense knowledge that it does not make sense for Person A to summon
Person B to treat Person B’s problem.
From this example, we can see that background knowledge, which is typically difﬁcult for a machine to acquire,
plays an important role in coreference resolution. In general,
however, the difﬁculty of coreference resolution stems from
its reliance on sophisticated knowledge sources and inference mechanisms (Mitkov et al. 2001). Despite its difﬁculty,
coreference resolution is a core task in information extraction: it is the fundamental technology for consolidating the
textual information about an entity, which is crucial for essentially all high-level NLP applications, such as question
answering, text summarization, and machine translation.
Our goal in this paper is to provide the AI audience with
an overview of the major milestones made in learning-based
entity coreference research since its inception 20 years ago.
For a detailed treatment of this topic, we refer the reader
to a recent book edited by Poesio et al. (2016). We believe
that the entity coreference task will be of interest to the general AI audience. As Levesque (2011) argued, the pronoun
resolution task deﬁned in the Winograd Schema Challenge
(WSC), which has recently become popular in the AI community, is an appealing alternative to the Turing Test.

Abstract
Though extensively investigated since the 1960s, entity coreference resolution, a core task in natural language understanding, is far from being solved. Nevertheless, signiﬁcant
progress has been made on learning-based coreference research since its inception two decades ago. This paper provides an overview of the major milestones made in learningbased coreference research and discusses a hard entity coreference task, the Winograd Schema Challenge, which has recently received a lot of attention in the AI community.

1

Introduction

Entity coreference resolution is the task of determining
which entity mentions in a text or dialogue refer to the same
real-world entity. Despite being actively investigated for 50
years in the natural language processing (NLP) community,
it is still far from being solved. To better understand the difﬁculty of the task, consider the following sentence:
The Queen Mother asked Queen Elizabeth II to transform her sister, Princess Margaret, into a viable
princess by summoning a renowned speech therapist,
Nancy Logue, to treat her speech impediment.
A coreference system should partition the entity mentions
in this sentence into three coreference chains — QE (Queen
Elizabeth II and the ﬁrst occurrence of her), PM (sister,
Princess Margaret and the second occurrence of her), and
NL (a renowned speech therapist and Nancy Logue) — and
three singletons, The Queen Mother, a viable princess, and
speech impediment.
While human audiences have few problems with identifying these co-referring mentions, the same is not true for
automatic coreference resolvers. For instance, resolving the
two occurrences of her in this example is challenging for
a coreference resolver. To resolve the ﬁrst occurrence of
her, a resolver would determine whether it is coreferent with
The Queen Mother or Queen Elizabeth II, but the portion of
the sentence preceding the pronoun does not contain sufﬁcient information for correctly resolving it. The only way to
correctly resolve the pronoun is to employ the background
knowledge that Princess Margaret is Queen Elizabeth II’s

2

Brief History and Some Perspectives

Research on coreference resolution exhibited a gradual
shift from heuristic approaches to machine learning approaches in the 1990s. Learning-based coreference research
was to a large extent stimulated by the public availability of
coreference-annotated corpora that were produced as a result of three large-scale evaluations of coreference systems:
The MUC evaluations. The coreference evaluations conducted as part of the DARPA-sponsored MUC-6 (1995) and
MUC-7 (1998) conferences provided the ﬁrst two publicly

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4877

