Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust and Efﬁcient Transfer Learning with
Hidden Parameter Markov Decision Processes
Taylor W. Killian

George Konidaris

Finale Doshi-Velez

Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02148
taylorkillian@g.harvard.edu

Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
gdk@cs.brown.edu

Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02148
ﬁnale@seas.harvard.edu

utility of taking action a in state s. Thereby, the HiP-MDP
describes a class of tasks; where particular instances of that
class are obtained by independently sampling some θb at the
initiation of each task instance b.
The original HiP-MDP had a transition model of the form:

Abstract
An intriguing application of transfer learning emerges when
tasks arise with similar, but not identical, dynamics. Hidden Parameter Markov Decision Processes (HiP-MDP) embed these tasks into a low-dimensional space; given the embedding parameters one can identify the MDP for a particular
task. However, the original formulation of HiP-MDP had a
critical ﬂaw: the embedding uncertainty was modeled independently of the agent’s state uncertainty, requiring an arduous training procedure. In this work, we apply a Gaussian
Process latent variable model to jointly model the dynamics
and the embedding, leading to a more elegant formulation,
one that allows for better uncertainty quantiﬁcation and thus
more robust transfer.

(sd − sd ) ∼

K


zkad wkb fkad (s) + 

k
2
 ∼ N (0, σnad
)

which sought to learn weights wkb based on the kth latent factor corresponding to task instance b, ﬁlter parameters zkad ∈ {0, 1} denoting whether the kth latent parameter
is relevant in predicting dimension d when taking action a
as well as task speciﬁc basis functions fkad drawn from a
Gaussian Process (GP).
Doshi-Velez and Konidaris show that the HiP-MDP is able
to rapidly identify the dynamics T of a new task instance
and adapt to the variations therein. However, that formulation had a critical ﬂaw: the embedding uncertainty of the
latent parameter space was modeled independently from the
agent’s state uncertainty. This requires all tasks to have the
ability to visit every part of the state space, which is not
guaranteed to be feasible in most systems.

Motivation
With the prevalence of systems with similar, but not identical, processes (e.g. healthcare, sensing networks, robotics)
there is a compelling need to develop learning frameworks
that account for system variations in an efﬁcient and robust
manner. These variations in both unobserved and observed
representations of the system can contribute to inefﬁciencies or, in some dramatic cases, failure of an agent’s ability to learn an optimal control policy. In order to develop
optimal control policies, it is undesirable and ineffectual to
start afresh each time a new instance is encountered. Ideally,
an agent will leverage the similarities across separate, but
related, instances. This paradigm of learning introduces an
intriguing use case for transfer learning.
The Hidden Parameter Markov Decision Process (HiPMDP) (Doshi-Velez and Konidaris 2013), was introduced as a
formalization of these domains with two primary features.
First, that a bounded number of latent parameters, w, for a
single task instance can fully specify the system dynamics
θ ∈ Θ, the set of all parameter variations with prior PΘ , if
learned. That is, the dynamics dictating the transition between states can be expressed as T (s |s, a, θb ) for instance
b. Second, that the system dynamics will not change during
a task and an agent would be capable of determining when
a change occurs. The HiP-MDP is described by the tuple:
{S, A, Θ, T, R, γ, PΘ }, where S and A are the sets of states
and actions respectively, R(s, a) is the function mapping the

A HiP-MDP with Joint Uncertainty
We present an alternative formulation to the original HiPMDP that embeds the latent parametrization in the observed data via a Gaussian Process latent variable model
(GPLVM) (Lawrence 2004).This approach creates a uniﬁed GP
model, with the augmented state s̃ =: [s , a, wb ] as input, for both inferring the transition dynamics (Wang, Fleet,
and Hertzmann 2005) within a task instance but also in the
transfer between task instances (Cao et al. 2010). The approximated transition model then takes the form of:
sd ∼ fd (s̃) + 
fd ∼ GP (ψ)
wb ∼ N (μb , Σb )
 ∼ N (0, σbd )

This approach enables the HiP-MDP to ﬂexibly infer the dynamics T of a new instance by virtue of the statistical similarities found in the learned covariance function between
observed states of the new instance and those from prior instances. Another feature of formulating the HiP-MDP after

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4949

