Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Tractable Algorithms for Approximate Nash Equilibria
in Generalized Graphical Games with Tree Structure
Luis E. Ortiz

Mohammad T. Irfan

Computer and Information Science
University of Michigan - Dearborn
Dearborn, MI 48128

Digital & Comp. Studies and Computer Science
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011

We consider the problem of computing approximate
MSNE in GMhGs (see Table 1 for a list of acronyms used
throughout this paper). Roughly speaking, in a GMhG,
each player’s payoff is the summation of several local payoff hypermatrices deﬁned with respect to each individual
player’s local hypergraph. GMhGs generalize normal-form
games, graphical games (Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2001;
Kearns 2007), graphical polymatrix games, and hypergraphical games (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2008). For approximate MSNE, we adopt the standard notion of -MSNE
(also known as -approximate MSNE), an additive (as opposed to relative) approximation scheme widely used in algorithmic game theory (Lipton, Markakis, and Mehta 2003;
Daskalakis, Mehta, and Papadimitriou 2007; Deligkas et al.
2014; Barman, Ligett, and Piliouras 2015).
In this paper, we provide FPTAS and quasi-PTAS for
GMhGs in which the individual player’s number of actions
m and the hypertree-width w of the underlying game hypergraph are bounded. The key to our solution is the formulation of a CSP such that any solution to this CSP is an
-MSNE of the game. This raises two challenging questions:
Will the CSP have any solution at all? In case it has a solution, how can we compute it efﬁciently? Regarding the ﬁrst
question, we discretize both the probability space and the
payoff space of the game to guarantee that for any MSNE of
the game (which always exists), the nearest grid point is a
solution to the CSP. For the second question, we give a DP
algorithm that is an FPTAS when m and w are bounded by a
constant. Most remarkably, this algorithm eliminates the exponential dependency on the largest neighborhood size of a
node, which has plagued previous research on this problem.

Abstract
We provide the ﬁrst fully polynomial time approximation
scheme (FPTAS) for computing an approximate mixedstrategy Nash equilibrium in graphical multi-hypermatrix
games (GMhGs), which are generalizations of normal-form
games, graphical games, graphical polymatrix games, and
hypergraphical games. Computing an exact mixed-strategy
Nash equilibria in graphical polymatrix games is PPADcomplete and thus generally believed to be intractable. In
contrast, to the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to establish an FPTAS for tree polymatrix games as well as tree
graphical games when the number of actions is bounded by
a constant. As a corollary, we give a quasi-polynomial time
approximation scheme (quasi-PTAS) when the number of actions is bounded by a logarithm of the number of players.

Introduction
For over a decade, graphical games have been at the forefront of computational game theory. In a graphical game, a
player’s payoff is directly affected by her own action and
those of her neighbors. This large class of games has played
a critical role in establishing the hardness of computing a
Nash equilibrium in general games (Daskalakis, Goldberg,
and Papadimitriou 2009a). It has also generated a great deal
of interest in the AI community since Kearns, Littman, and
Singh (2001) drew a parallel with probabilistic graphical
models in terms of succinct representation by exploiting the
network structure. As a result, this is one of the select topics
in computer science that has triggered a conﬂuence of ideas
from the theoretical computer science and AI communities.
This paper contributes to this development by providing
the ﬁrst fully polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for approximate Nash equilibrium computation in a
generalized class of tree graphical games. Tree-structured
interactions are natural in hierarchical settings, such as organizational management, supply chains, and even power
grids (Dvijotham et al. 2016); see Ortiz and Irfan 2016 for
discussion. Our algorithm also eliminates the exponential
dependency on the maximum degree of a node, a problem
that has plagued research for 15 years since the inception of
graphical games (Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2001).

Related Work
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the previous computational complexity and algorithmic results for
the problem of -MSNE computation (additive approximation scheme as most commonly deﬁned in game theory) in
general. A full account of all speciﬁc sub-classes of GMhGs
such as normal-form games and (standard) graphical games
is beyond the scope of this paper, just as is the discussion
on (a) other types of approximations such as the less common relative approximation; (b) other popular equilibriumsolution concepts such as pure-strategy Nash equilibria and
correlated equilibria (Aumann 1974; 1987); and (c) other

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

635

