Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Exact Algorithm for the Maximum Weight Clique Problem in Large Graphs
Hua Jiang

Chu-Min Li∗

Felip Manyà

Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, China
email: jh hgt@163.com

MIS, Université de Picardie
Jules Verne, France
email: chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
Institute (IIIA), CSIC, Spain
email: felip@iiia.csic.es

and common statistical properties such as small-world property, power-law degree distributions, and clustering (Newman 2003). Finding cliques is very relevant in this context.
For example, a clique might be a functional group in biological networks, and identify a community in social networks.
There exist a few exact MC algorithms for large graphs.
The best performing ones are PMC (Rossi et al. 2013),
BBMCSP (San Segundo, Alvaro, and Pardalos 2016) and
LMC (Jiang, Li, and Manyà 2016), based on the branchand-bound (BnB) scheme. Nevertheless, their graph preprocessing, upper bound (UB) computation and branching strategy are not suitable for MWC. Very few exact and heuristic
MWC algorithms have been proposed, compared with the
number of available MC algorithms. This is partially due to
the fact that MWC is more complicated than MC and some
successful MC techniques are not applicable or ineffective
for MWC because of the vertex weights (Cai and Lin 2016).
To our knowledge, the two most efﬁcient heuristic MWC
algorithms for large graphs are based on local search:
LSCC+BMS (Wang, Cai, and Yin 2016), and FastWClq (Cai and Lin 2016). Most exact MWC algorithms implement the BnB scheme and differ in their UB computation and branching strategy. The most relevant ones are Cliquer (Ostergard 2001; 2002), Kumlander’s algorithm (Kumlander 2004; 2008), VCTable (Shimizu et al. 2012), OTClique (Shimizu et al. 2013), and MWCLQ (Fang, Li, and
Xu 2016). MWC can also be solved exactly via its reduction
to MinSAT (Li et al. 2012).
Unfortunately, all exact MWC algorithms in our knowledge exhibit poor performance on large graphs, and because
of this we have developed an exact BnB MWC algorithm for
large graphs, called WLMC (short for Weighted Large Maximum Clique), that incorporates two important contributions
of the paper: a preprocessing to derive an initial vertex ordering and to reduce the size of the graph by removing vertices not belonging to any optimal solution, and incremental
vertex-weight splitting to reduce the number of branches in
the search space.
We have also conducted experiments using real-world
graphs that show that WLMC greatly outperforms relevant
exact and heuristic algorithms on large graphs. This is another important contribution of the paper: the performance
of WLMC refutes the prevailing hypothesis that exact MWC
algorithms, despite proving optimality, are less adequate for

Abstract
We describe an exact branch-and-bound algorithm for the
maximum weight clique problem (MWC), called WLMC,
that is especially suited for large vertex-weighted graphs.
WLMC incorporates two original contributions: a preprocessing to derive an initial vertex ordering and to reduce the
size of the graph, and incremental vertex-weight splitting to
reduce the number of branches in the search space. Experiments on representative large graphs from real-world applications show that WLMC greatly outperforms relevant exact and heuristic MWC algorithms, and refute the prevailing
hypothesis that exact MWC algorithms are less adequate for
large graphs than heuristic algorithms.

Introduction
A clique C in an undirected graph G = (V, E), where V
is the set of vertices and E is the set of edges, is a subset of V such that all its vertices are connected. The size of
C is its cardinality. The Maximum Clique Problem (MC) is
to ﬁnd a clique of maximum size in G, denoted by ω(G).
An important generalization of MC is the Maximum Weight
Clique Problem (MWC), in which the graph has a weight
function w that assigns a positive integer called weight to
each vertex, and the weight of a clique C, denoted by w(C),
is deﬁned to be the total weight of the vertices in C. MWC
is to ﬁnd a clique of maximum weight in G = (V, E, w),
denoted by ωv (G).
MWC is NP-Hard and has practical applications in different domains such as protein structure prediction (Mascia et
al. 2010), coding theory (Zhian et al. 2013), combinatorial
auctions (Wu and Hao 2015; Fang, Li, and Xu 2016) and
computer vision (Ma and Latecki 2012; Zhang, Javed, and
Shah 2014).
The main objective of this paper is to develop an exact
and highly competitive MWC algorithm for large graphs.
The focus on large graphs is motivated by the fact that they
are ubiquitous: computer networks, social networks, mobile
call networks, biological networks, citation networks, and
the World Wide Web, to name a few. These networks typically have very low density, a huge number of vertices,
∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

830

