Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Coalition Structure Generation Utilizing Graphical
Representation of Partition Function Games
Kazuki Nomoto, Yuko Sakurai, Makoto Yokoo
Graduate School and Faculty of Information Science and Electrical Engineering
Kyushu University
744 Motooka Nishi-ku Fukuoka, 819-0395, Japan
{nomoto@agent., ysakurai@, yokoo@} inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
a3

Introduction
Forming effective coalitions is a central research challenge
in AI and multi-agent systems. The coalition structure generation (CSG) problem, which is a well-known major research
topics in coalitional games (Sandholm et al. 1999), is to partition a set of agents into coalitions to maximize the sum of
utilities.
We study the CSG problem for partition function games
(PFGs), where the value of a coalition differs depending on
the formation of other coalitions generated by non-member
agents. For example, consider restructuring and the consolidation of multiple companies in a market. If several competitors are merged into a single entity, the competitor of
this new large company might lose sales. The market must
consider the best way of restructuring the merged companies
to maximize the expected sales. Such a problem is represented as a PFG. In PFGs, the input of a coalitional game is
a black-box function called a partition function that maps an
embedded coalition (a coalition and the coalition structure)
to its value. Representing an arbitrary partition function explicitly requires Θ(nn ) numbers, which are prohibitive for
large n.
Recently, several concise representation schemes for a
partition function have been proposed (Skibski et al. 2015;
Rahwan et al. 2015). Among them, a partition decision tree
(PDTs) is a graphical representation based on multiple rules.
In this paper, we propose new algorithms that can solve
CSG problems by PDTs representation. More speciﬁcally,
we modify PDTs representation to effectively handle negative rules and apply the depth-ﬁrst branch-and-bound algorithm. We experimentally show that our algorithm can solve
CSG problems reasonably well1 .

1
[2]

a4

a1

1 Tree 1

2
a1
2
[3, 4]

1
1

a3

[4]

a2

1

Tree 2
2

a4
1
[-2, -1]

3
[1, 1, 1]

Figure 1: Partition Decision Trees

generates a positive/negative value w(C, CS).
The value of coalition structure
 CS, denoted as W (CS),
is given by: W (CS) =
Ci ∈CS w(Ci , CS). Optimal
coalition structure CS ∗ satisﬁes the following condition:
∀CS, W (CS ∗ ) ≥ W (CS).

Partition Decision Trees
We utilize a graphical representation of PFGs called partition decision trees (PDTs) (Skibski et al. 2015). Intuitively,
multiple rules are graphically represented by using rooted
directed trees. Each rule consists of a condition for the partitioning agents and their positive/negative values. We separate a set of rules into several groups and concisely represent
a group of rules using a tree. PDTs are based on rooted directed trees, where non-leaf nodes are labeled with agents’
identities, leaf nodes are labeled with payoff vectors, and
the edges indicate the membership of the agents in the coalitions. Each path indicates a single rule. For example, we assume that there exit 4 agents. Consider the following 2 rules.
The ﬁrst rule is that when agents a3 and a4 belong to an identical coalition, 2 is added to the value of the coalition that includes a3 and a4 . The second rule is that when a3 and a4 are
in different coalitions, but a4 and a1 are in an identical coalition, 3 is added to the value of the coalition that includes a3
and 4 is added to the value of the coalition including a4 and
a1 . Fig. 1 shows an example of PDTs. Tree 1 represents the
rules shown in this example. The value of coalition structure
W (CS) is calculated as the sum of the values of the compatible rules to CS. When CS is {{a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 }}, W (CS)
becomes 2 + 4 = 6 by applying the rules indicated by the
right-hand path in Tree 1 and the left-hand path in Tree 2.

CSG Problem
Let A = {a1 , a2 , . . . , an } be the set of agents and let
C ⊆ A be a coalition. Coalition structure CS is a partition of A into disjoint and exhaustive coalitions. To be more
precise, CS = {C1 , C2 , . . .} satisﬁes
 the following conditions: ∀i, j (i = j), Ci ∩ Cj = ∅, Ci ∈CS Ci = A. A PFG
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/ckg88smxuglgyd1/
AADie7Xy6cDE70IbLMCzq5CZa?dl=0w

4977

