Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Non-Negative Inductive Matrix
Completion for Discrete Dyadic Data
Piyush Rai
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
IIT Kanpur, India
piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in

data (e.g., binary or counts). Moreover, often we want interpretability in the learned latent factors and real-valued
latent factors may not be useful. Although some recent methods (Wang and Blei 2011; Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014)
have proposed methods to incorporate meta-data in speciﬁc
types of discrete data, e.g., ratings with text information
about products in recommender systems, a framework for
incorporating general types of side information for matrix
factorization of data is currently lacking.
We present a fully Bayesian framework for non-negative
matrix factorization of discrete data, where we also have
additional side information, in form of arbitrary types of
features, along the rows and/or the columns of the data matrix.
Our model is based on conditioning the row/column latent
factors on these observed features via a ﬂexible regression
model. In addition to leveraging the side information, our
model has the following properties that distinguish it from
other existing methods for matrix factorization with side
information: (1) both count as well as binary matrices can
be handled under a uniﬁed approach which models count
data via a Poisson latent factor model and binary data via a
truncated Poisson latent factor model; (2) our model learns
non-negative latent factors which are easily interpretable (e.g.,
can be thought of as corresponding to genres or topics, when
modeling ratings or text data); (3) our model enjoys full local
conjugacy which allows designing an efﬁcient Gibbs sampler
as well as Expectation Maximization algorithm for doing
inference; and (4) computational cost for both count as well
as binary data case scales in the number of nonzeros in the
data matrix, which makes it very efﬁcient for sparse matrices.
Our framework is also sufﬁciently general and can be easily adapted to solve a number of other specialized problems,
such as link prediction with node features (Kim, Hughes,
and Sudderth 2012), topic modeling with document metadata (Mimno and McCallum 2008), or a generalized setting of the well-studied multi-label learning problem (Yu
et al. 2014) where in addition to the example features, we
may also have label features. At the same time, our model
also generalizes recent line on work on Bayesian models for
count and binary matrices (Gopalan, Hofman, and Blei 2013;
Zhou 2015), which either cannot leverage side information, or can do so only for very speciﬁc settings, e.g.,
count-valued matrix with text based meta-data along the
rows/columns (Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014).

Abstract
We present a non-negative inductive latent factor model for
binary- and count-valued matrices containing dyadic data, with
side information along the rows and/or the columns of the matrix. The side information is incorporated by conditioning the
row and column latent factors on the available side information via a regression model. Our model can not only perform
matrix factorization and completion with side-information, but
also infers interpretable latent topics that explain/summarize
the data. An appealing aspect of our model is in the full local
conjugacy of all parts of the model, including the main latent
factor model, as well as for the regression model that leverages the side information. This enables us to design scalable
and simple to implement Gibbs sampling and Expectation
Maximization algorithms for doing inference in the model.
Inference cost in our model scales in the number of nonzeros
in the data matrix, which makes it particularly attractive for
massive, sparse matrices. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our model on several real-world data sets, comparing it with
state-of-the-art baselines.

Introduction
Matrix factorization of partially observed matrices having
binary- or count-valued observations is ubiquitous in many
applications involving dyadic data, such as recommender
systems (Gopalan, Hofman, and Blei 2013), text analysis (Wang and Blei 2011; Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014),
social/biological network analysis (Zhu 2012; Zhou 2015),
and so on. Often, in these applications, additional side information may be available along the rows and/or the columns
of the data matrix (Wang and Blei 2011; Kim, Hughes, and
Sudderth 2012; Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014). Leveraging this information can be especially useful in cases when
the data matrix is highly sparse, and in handling the coldstart problem where the data matrix may not have any observations along some of the rows/columns, a critical problem in modern recommender systems (Wang and Blei 2011;
Gopalan, Charlin, and Blei 2014).
Most of the existing methods assume the data and/or the
latent factors to be real-valued (Agarwal and Chen 2009;
Park, Kim, and Choi 2013; Kim and Choi 2014). Many matrix factorization problems, however, involve discrete-valued
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2499

