Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Closing the Loop for Edge
Detection and Object Proposals
Yao Lu, Linda Shapiro
University of Washington
{luyao, shapiro}@cs.washington.edu

routines discussed in this paper: the boundary-to-proposal
routine, and the proposal-to-boundary routine.

Abstract
Edge grouping and object perception are uniﬁed procedures
in perceptual organization. However the computer vision literature classiﬁes them as independent tasks. In this paper, we
argue that edge detection and object proposals should beneﬁt
one another. To achieve this, we go beyond bounding boxes
and extract closed contours that represent potential objects
within. A novel objectness metric is proposed to score and
rank the proposal boxes by considering the sizes and edge intensities of the closed contours. To improve the edge detector
given the top-down object proposals, we group local closed
contours and construct global object hierarchies and segmentations. The edge detector is retrained and enhanced using these
hierarchical segmentations as additional feature channels. In
the experiments we show that by closing the loop for edge
detection and object proposals, we observe improvements for
both tasks. Unifying edges and object proposals is valid and
useful.

To improve object proposals using boundaries, EdgeBox
(Zitnick and Dollár 2014) claims that a good proposal box
should contain more boundaries inside, and less boundaries
on the border. This direct translation is sub-optimal due to
the gap between the bounding boxes and objects of interest,
as shown in Figure 1. Instead, we extract closed contours
that are atomic representation of objects. A novel objectness
metric is proposed that measures the sizes and intensities of
the closed contours, instead of the entire bounding boxes. We
show that object proposals rely on observation scales. Closed
contours that contribute to good proposal boxes should have
the following characteristics: (1) they should dominate the
proposal boxes in area, and (2) they should have strong intensities on, and weak intensities inside, their outline. Closed
contours enable us to generate region proposals without extra
effort; region proposals can be extracted directly from the
proposal boxes.

Introduction

To improve boundaries using object proposals, our strategy is to enhance the edge detector using the object hierarchies in the scene. This top-down pipeline is in contrast to
most state-of-the-art edge detectors that depend on bottomup cues (Dollár and Zitnick 2013; Arbelaez et al. 2011;
Bertasius, Shi, and Torresani 2015). However it remains an
open problem to construct object hierarchies using local classagnostic object proposals. We provide a novel solution in this
paper by again leveraging the closed contours, obtained from
different local proposal boxes, that already possess hierarchical structures. Based on these local contour hierarchies,
global object hierarchies and segmentations for the entire image can be constructed using a grouping algorithm described
later in this paper. Finally we consider global hierarchical
segmentations as additional feature channels to enhance the
edge detector.

Edge grouping and object perception are uniﬁed procedures
in human perceptual organization (Palmer 1999) but are classiﬁed as independent tasks by the current computer vision
literature. Take object proposal algorithms for instance. They
are designed to generate very few object candidates so as to
accelerate the overall object detection pipeline. Image segmentation and edge detection results are often used as their
input (Arbelaez et al. 2014; Krähenbühl and Koltun 2014;
Uijlings et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2015; Wang and Zhao 2015;
Xiao et al. 2015; Zitnick and Dollár 2014). To improve object
proposals, many of them rely on better segmentation or edges.
This dependency enables and simpliﬁes the object perception
but blocks any feedback or backward signal, from object
proposals to edges, that can be useful.
In this paper, we argue that edge detection and object proposals should beneﬁt one another. To link these two major
computer vision tasks, we leverage the hierarchical structure
between boundaries and regions to enhance the edge detector.
To achieve this, for given bounding boxes, we extract closed
contours that represent potential objects within, using a simple search algorithm. The closed contours are the key to both

Given the above context, we are able to close the loop
for edge detection and object proposals. We demonstrate
experiments on RGB and RGB-D images to show that, by
reﬁning edges and object proposals in an iterative manner,
our uniﬁed framework provides improvements on both tasks.
This indicates that unifying edges and object proposals is
valid and useful; these two computer vision tasks should be
treated as a whole.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4204

