Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An End-to-End Spatio-Temporal Attention Model for
Human Action Recognition from Skeleton Data
Sijie Song,1 Cuiling Lan,2∗ Junliang Xing,3 Wenjun Zeng,2 Jiaying Liu1∗
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{ssj940920, liujiaying}@pku.edu.cn, {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com, jlxing@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Human action recognition is an important task in computer
vision. Extracting discriminative spatial and temporal features to model the spatial and temporal evolutions of different actions plays a key role in accomplishing this task.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end spatial and temporal attention model for human action recognition from skeleton data. We build our model on top of the Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) with Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM),
which learns to selectively focus on discriminative joints of
skeleton within each frame of the inputs and pays different
levels of attention to the outputs of different frames. Furthermore, to ensure effective training of the network, we propose
a regularized cross-entropy loss to drive the model learning
process and develop a joint training strategy accordingly. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model, both on the small human action recognition
dataset of SBU and the currently largest NTU dataset.

Figure 1: Illustration of the procedure for an action “punching”. An action may experience different stages, and involve
different discriminative subsets of joints (as the red circles).

viewpoints. Without combining RGB information, there is a
lack of appearance information. Fortunately, biological observations from the early seminal work of Johansson suggest
that the positions of a small number of joints can effectively
represent human behavior even without appearance information (Johansson 1973). Skeleton-based human representation has attracted increasing attention for recognizing human
actions thanks to its high level representation and robustness
to variations of locations and appearances (Han et al. 2016).
The prevalence of cost-effective depth cameras such as Microsoft Kinect (Zhang 2012) and the advance of a powerful
human pose estimation technique from depth (Shotton et al.
2011) make 3D skeleton data easily accessible. This boosts
research on skeleton-based human action recognition. In this
work, we focus on recognition from skeleton data.
Fig. 1 shows an example of a series of skeleton frames
(and RGB images) for the action “punching”. Each human
body is represented by several key joints in terms of the coordinate positions in the 3D space. The articulated conﬁgurations of joints constitute various postures and a series of
postures in a certain time order identiﬁes an action. With
the skeleton as an explicit high level representation of human pose, many works design algorithms taking the positions of joints as inputs. There are two basic components.
One is the design and mining of discriminative features from
the skeleton, such as the histograms of 3D joint locations
(HOJ3D) (Xia, Chen, and Aggarwal 2012), pairwise relative position features (Wang, Liu, and Yuan 2012), relative
3D geometry features (Vemulapalli, Arrate, and Chellappa
2016). The other is the modeling of temporal dynamics, such

1 Introduction
Recognition of human action is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision. It facilitates many applications
such as intelligent video surveillance, human-computer interaction, video summary and understanding (Poppe 2010;
Weinland, Ronfard, and Boyerc 2011). The key to the success of this task is how to extract discriminative spatial temporal features to effectively model the spatial and temporal
evolutions of different actions.
One general approach focuses on the recognition from
RGB videos (Weinland, Ronfard, and Boyerc 2011). Since
each frame is a capture of the highly articulated human in
a two-dimensional space, it loses some information of the
three-dimensional (3D) space and then loses the ﬂexibility of achieving human location and scale invariance. The
other general approach leverages the high level information
of skeleton data, which represents a person by the 3D coordinate positions of key joints (i.e., head, neck,· · · , foot).
Such representation is robust to variations of locations and
∗
Corresponding author. This work was done at Microsoft Research Asia. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61472011 and No.
61303178.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4263

