Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SnapNETS: Automatic Segmentation of
Network Sequences with Node Labels
Sorour E. Amiri, Liangzhe Chen, B. Aditya Prakash
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech
Email: {esorour, liangzhe, badityap}@cs.vt.edu

Network Seq.

Abstract

1

Summarized Seq.

Given a sequence of snapshots of ﬂu propagating over a population network, can we ﬁnd a segmentation when the patterns
of the disease spread change, possibly due to interventions?
In this paper, we study the problem of segmenting graph sequences with labeled nodes. Memes on the Twitter network,
diseases over a contact network, movie-cascades over a social
network, etc. are all graph sequences with labeled nodes.
Most related work is on plain graphs (and hence ignore the
label dynamics) or ﬁx parameters or require much feature engineering. Instead, we propose S NAP NETS, to automatically
ﬁnd segmentations of such graph sequences, with different
characteristics of nodes of each label in adjacent segments. It
satisﬁes all the desired properties (being parameter-free, comprehensive and scalable) by leveraging a principled, multilevel, ﬂexible framework which maps the problem to a path
optimization problem over a weighted DAG.
Extensive experiments on several diverse real datasets show
that it ﬁnds cut points matching ground-truth or meaningful
external signals outperforming non-trivial baselines. We also
show that S NAP NETS scales near-linearly with the size of
the input.

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 1: T OY E XAMPLE: S NAP NETS automatically identiﬁes four signiﬁcant steps of the network sequence. The
extracted time series (e.g. #active nodes) can not capture a
proper segmentation. Gray nodes are inactive (i.e. label 0),
and black nodes are active (i.e. label 1).
networks like Twitter), anomaly detection and cyber security
(malware on computer networks). In this paper, we study
the problem of segmenting a graph sequence with varying
node-label distributions. We assume binary labels and can
handle dynamic graphs with varying nodes and edges. For
diseases/memes, the labels can be ‘infected’/’active’ (1) &
‘healthy’/’inactive’ (0), and the network can be the underlying contact-network. Our problem is:
P ROBLEM 1: S EGMENTATION

Introduction

Suppose we have a sequence of Ebola infections and the associated contact network of who-can-infect-whom. Can we
quickly tell a public health expert when the infection patterns change possibly due to a virus mutation? By itself, it is
crucial for public health to understand the virus propagation
and to design a good immunization strategy. One possible
approach is to segment the sequence based on some manually selected features, such as the rate of infections. However by directly analyzing the underlying social network,
and using both the infected and uninfected nodes, we can
improve the segmentation as well as its interpretability (e.g.
‘disease spread in a tree like fashion among elderly till Monday, and changed to clique-like fashion among the young’
and so on).
Segmenting a graph sequences is an important problem
which can help us in better understanding the evolution of
the dataset. It has numerous applications from epidemiology/public health to social media (rumors/memes on social

Given: a sequence G of networks G1 , G2 , . . . , GT with labeled nodes,
Find: best segmentation c∗ , which captures different patterns of node labels in G such that adjacent segments have
different characteristics of nodes with the same label.
T OY E XAMPLE. Suppose G = {G1 , G2 , G3 , G4 , G5 } with
0, 1 labeled nodes (Fig. 1 top row). There are four main
steps in G: First a central node in a star and some of its
spokes have the label 1; next, low degree nodes in a chainshaped manner get label 1 (structural change). In the third
segment, the label moves to another community of the graph
(community change). Finally, the whole graph gets label 1
which indicates an activation rate increase in the network
(rate changes). Hence c∗ = {1, 2, 3, 5}. Note that even
though the ‘active’ sub-graphs in time-step 2 and 3 are both

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3

