Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Imagined Visual Representations as Multimodal Embeddings
Guillem Collell, Ted Zhang, and Marie-Francine Moens
Computer Science Department
KU Leuven
3001 Heverlee, Belgium
gcollell@kuleuven.be; tedz.cs@gmail.com; sien.moens@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Language and vision provide complementary information. Integrating both modalities in a single multimodal representation is an unsolved problem with wide-reaching applications
to both natural language processing and computer vision. In
this paper, we present a simple and effective method that
learns a language-to-vision mapping and uses its output visual predictions to build multimodal representations. In this
sense, our method provides a cognitively plausible way of
building representations, consistent with the inherently reconstructive and associative nature of human memory. Using seven benchmark concept similarity tests we show that
the mapped (or imagined) vectors not only help to fuse multimodal information, but also outperform strong unimodal
baselines and state-of-the-art multimodal methods, thus exhibiting more human-like judgments. Ultimately, the present
work sheds light on fundamental questions of natural language understanding concerning the fusion of vision and language such as the plausibility of more associative and reconstructive approaches.

1

Figure 1: Overview of our model. The imagined representations are the outputs of a text-to-vision mapping.

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) and distributionalsemantic models have provided breakthrough advances in
representation learning in computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) respectively (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Lately, a large body of research has
shown that using rich, multimodal representations created
from combining textual and visual features instead of unimodal representations (a.k.a. embeddings) can improve the
performance of semantic tasks. Building multimodal representations has become a popular problem in NLP that
has yielded a wide variety of methods (Lazaridou, Pham,
and Baroni 2015; Kiela and Bottou 2014; Silberer and Lapata 2014)—a general classiﬁcation of strategies is proposed in the next section. Additionally, the use of a mapping (e.g., a continuous function) to bridge vision and language has also been explored, typically with the goal of
generating missing information from one of the modalities
(Lazaridou, Bruni, and Baroni 2014; Socher et al. 2013;
Johns and Jones 2012).

Here, we propose a language-to-vision mapping that provides both a way to “imagine” missing visual information
and a method to build multimodal representations. We leverage the fact that by learning to predict the output, the mapping necessarily encodes information from both modalities.
Thus, given a word embedding as input, the mapped output
is not purely a visual representation but is implicitly associated with the linguistic modality of this word. To the best
of our knowledge, the use of mapped vectors to build multimodal representations has not been considered before.
Additionally, our method introduces a cognitively plausible approach to concept representation. By re-constructing
visual knowledge from textual input, our method behaves
similarly as human memory, namely in an associative and
re-constructive manner (Anderson and Bower 2014; Vernon
2014; Hawkins and Blakeslee 2007). Concretely, the goal
of our method is not the perfect recall of visual representations but rather its re-construction and association with textual knowledge.
In contrast to other multimodal approaches such as skipgram methods (Lazaridou, Pham, and Baroni 2015; Hill and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4378

