Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Efﬁciency of the HyperPlay Technique Over Random Sampling
Michael Schoﬁeld and Michael Thielscher
School of Computer Science and Engineering
UNSW Australia
{mschoﬁeld, mit}@cse.unsw.edu.au

calls this “incomplete”, and in the past we have done the
same. However, there is enough awareness of this difference
for us to use the GGP terminology.
The GDL-II speciﬁcation (Thielscher 2010) augments the
original GDL with the addition of percepts to give signals
to agents, and a role for the random player1 . If the percepts
are limited then the agent may not be able to distinguish
between several move histories in the game, giving rise to
an information set (Schiffel and Thielscher 2014). Size and
time constraints may force the agent to use all of its resources in an attempt to sample an information set in a very
large search space,2 resulting in little time for reasoning.
HyperPlay (Schoﬁeld, Cerexhe, and Thielscher 2012)
overcomes this sampling difﬁculty by maintaining a continuously updatable bag of models of the game and uses this
to provide a sample of an information set. As each move is
made and percepts received, the models are updated by randomly adding to the history and so providing a new sample.
When histories become invalid they are backtracked to a previously valid point and moved forward until a new sample is
found.
Our motivation for this paper is proving the efﬁciency
and effectiveness of the HyperPlay technique. Can it provide a sample of an information set more efﬁciently that a
random sampling approach? Are there games where random
sampling is impossible? Will the sample be uniformly distributed across an information set thereby providing an unbiased starting point for evaluation? If the sample is biased,
can this be rectiﬁed?
In this paper we explore all of these questions using a basket of games that represent all aspect of “imperfect” information. We design experiments to expose the worst aspect
of HyperPlay and look at the impact on competitive gameplay as well as remedies for any shortcomings. Additionally we supplement the games available in the GGP community by introducing GDL-II versions of two popular security
games, the Transit game and the Border Protection game.
Each game is reproduced in the GDL-II as part of the basket
of games used to test out queries. Details of the conversion
are presented later in the paper and a sample of the Transit
game code is shown in Figure 1.

Abstract
We show that the HyperPlay technique, which maintains a bag of updatable models for sampling an
imperfect-information game, is more efﬁcient than
taking random samples of play sequences. Also, we
demonstrate that random sampling may become impossible under the practical constraints of a game. We show
the HyperPlay sample can become biased and not uniformly distributed across an information set and present
a remedy for this bias, showing the impact on game results for biased and unbiased samples. We extrapolate
the use of the technique beyond General Game Playing
and in particular for enhanced security games with ingame percepts to facilitate a ﬂexible defense response.

Introduction
General Game Playing agents are expected to be able to play
any game well with no prior knowledge or experience of the
game. The game rules are declared in a Game Description
Language (GDL) (Love et al. 2006), giving the roles in the
game, the initial state of the game, the legal moves in any
state of the game, the successor function for state transition,
the terminal conditions and the reward structure for all roles.
In this ﬁeld of research, games with imperfect information present a special challenge to the artiﬁcially intelligent agents. Such games provide limited information about
the moves made by other roles leading to some uncertainty
about the true state of the game. Therefore, the agent must
reason across an information set in order to evaluate its move
choices. This expands the search signiﬁcantly over perfectinformation games where all of the moves are known. In
fact, an information set may be so large and the time constraints so tight that the agent may only be able to take a
sample of an information set.
Perfect-information games are more popular among researchers as evidenced by the proliferation of GDL ﬁles
(Tiltyard, Dresden) and competitions (Genesereth, Love,
and Pell 2005) for perfect-information games. Imperfectinformation research has been slow, with few games being
converted to GDL-II and even fewer competitions.
The General Game Playing (GGP) community use the
term “imperfect” to mean that some moves in the game may
be hidden while the initial state of the game and the reward
structure are known to all roles. The general AI community

1
2

282

The random role is “nature” in traditional game theory.
In some game this is impossible within the constraints.

