Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Non-Rigid Point Set Registration with Robust
Transformation Estimation under Manifold Regularization
Jiayi Ma,1 Ji Zhao,1 Junjun Jiang,2 Huabing Zhou3
1

Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
3
Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robot, Wuhan Institute of Technology, Wuhan 430073, China
{jyma2010, zhaoji84, zhouhuabing}@gmail.com, junjun0595@163.com
2

robust transformation estimation from putative correspondences. First, the putative correspondences are usually established based on only local feature descriptors, where the
unavoidable noise, repeated structures and occlusions often
lead to a high number of false correspondences. Therefore,
a robust procedure of outlier removal is required. Second,
to establish reliable correspondence, the putative set usually
removes a large part of the original point sets whose feature
descriptors are not similar enough. However, the point sets
are typically extracted from the contour or surface of a speciﬁc object, and hence can provide intrinsic structure information of the input data which is beneﬁcial to the transformation estimation. Therefore, it is desirable to incorporate
the whole point sets into the objective function formulation
during transformation estimation. Third, for large scale point
cloud data, the number of points can reach tens of thousands.
This poses a signiﬁcant burden on typical point registration
methods, particularly in the non-rigid case. Therefore, it is of
particular advantage to develop a more efﬁcient technique.
To address these issues, we formulate the registration
problem by a mixture model with a set of latent variables
introduced to identify outliers. We also assume a prior on
the geometry involving manifold regularization to impose a
non-parametric smoothness constraint on the spatial transformation (Ma et al. 2014; Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani
2006). The manifold regularization deﬁned on the whole
input point sets controls the complexity of the transformation and is able to capture the underlying intrinsic geometry of the input data. This leads to a maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimation problem which can be solved by using
the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster,
Laird, and Rubin 1977) to estimate the variance of the prior,
while simultaneously estimating the outliers, with the variance given a large initial value. Moreover, a sparse approximation based on a similar idea as the subset of regressors
method (Poggio and Girosi 1990) is introduced to improve
the computational efﬁciency.
Our contribution in this paper includes the following three
aspects. Firstly, we introduce the manifold regularization to
the point set registration problem, which can capture the intrinsic geometry of the input point sets and hence helps to
estimate the transformation. Secondly, we propose a new
formulation for robust transformation estimation based on
manifold regularization, which could estimate transforma-

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a robust transformation estimation
method based on manifold regularization for non-rigid point
set registration. The method iteratively recovers the point correspondence and estimates the spatial transformation between
two point sets. The correspondence is established based on
existing local feature descriptors which typically results in a
number of outliers. To achieve an accurate estimate of the
transformation from such putative point correspondence, we
formulate the registration problem by a mixture model with
a set of latent variables introduced to identify outliers, and
a prior involving manifold regularization is imposed on the
transformation to capture the underlying intrinsic geometry
of the input data. The non-rigid transformation is speciﬁed in
a reproducing kernel Hilbert space and a sparse approximation is adopted to achieve a fast implementation. Extensive
experiments on both 2D and 3D data demonstrate that our
method can yield superior results compared to other state-ofthe-arts, especially in case of badly degraded data.

Introduction
Point set registration is a fundamental problem and frequently encountered in computer vision, pattern recognition,
medical imaging and remote sensing (Brown 1992). Many
tasks in these ﬁelds including 3D reconstruction, shape
recognition, panoramic stitching, feature-based image registration and content-based image retrieval can be solved by
algorithms operating on the point sets (e.g., salient point features) extracted from the input data (Ma et al. 2015a; 2015c;
Bai et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2016). The goal of point set
registration is then to determine the right correspondence
and/or to recover the spatial transformation between the two
point sets (Jian and Vemuri 2011). In this paper, we focus on
non-rigid registration where the transformation is characterized by a nonlinear or non-parameterized model (Zhao et al.
2011; Ma et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2015).
The registration problem is typically solved by using
an iterative framework, where a set of putative correspondences is established and used to reﬁne the estimate of
transformation, and vice versa (Besl and McKay 1992;
Chui and Rangarajan 2003). In this process, the most challenging and critical task is to develop an efﬁcient strategy for
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4218

