Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

What's Hot in Case-Based Reasoning
Ashok K. Goel1 and Belen Diaz-Agudo2
1

School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, US
2
Computer Science Faculty, Complutense University, Madrid, Spain
goel@cc.gatech.edu; belen@ucm.es

Abstract

and acquisition of expertise rather than exhaustive
extraction of domain knowledge.

Case-based reasoning addresses new problems by
remembering and adapting solutions previously used to
solve similar problems. Pulled by the increasing number of
applications and pushed by a growing interest in memory
intensive techniques, research on case-based reasoning
appears to be gaining momentum. In this article, we briefly
summarize recent developments in research on case-based
reasoning based partly on the recent Twenty Fourth
International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning.

CBR also differs from traditional approaches to machine
learning. For example, it differs from the k-nearest
neighbors family of methods for classification because it
encompasses adaptation and reasoning in addition to
reminding and retrieval. It also differs from so-called
“transfer learning” in that CBR seeks to learn from a small
set of examples and favors lazy learning that takes into
account the target problem into the process of learning.

Introduction
Case-based reasoning (CBR) addresses new problems by
remembering and adapting solutions previously used to
solve similar problems (Kolodner 1993; Riesbeck &
Schank 1989). CBR is an approach to understanding
intelligence that is based on two tenets about the nature of
the world: problems tend to recur, and similar problems
have similar solutions. When the two tenets hold, CBR is
an effective reasoning strategy (Leake 1996).

CBR is much closer to analogical reasoning. However,
CBR typically assumes that memory is massively
populated so that, given a new problem, memory can
supply a very similar past case containing an almost
correct answer to the new problem. In contrast, analogy
encompasses cross-domain transfer of knowledge
abstractions between semantically distant domains.
CBR is a general methodology for building AI agents, not
a specific technology (Watson 1999). According to this
methodology (Aamodt & Plaza 1994; de Mántaras et al.
2015) to address a new situation, the intelligent agent first
retrieves similar experiences about similar situations from
the memory, then reuses a past experience in the context of
the new situation, next reviews the new solution, and
finally retains the new experience in memory.

Much of the original inspiration for the CBR approach to
understanding intelligence came from the role of memory
and remindings in human cognition (Schank 1983). CBR is
both a theory for modeling how people use memory to
solve problems and a theory of we can design machines
that use past experiences to address new situations
(Kolodner 1993).
CBR is also a theory of skill and knowledge acquisition
(Sussman 1975) that overcomes some of the traditional
bottlenecks of expert systems. In CBR, the solution to each
new problem becomes the basis for a new case, available
to be learned and stored in memory for potential reuse in
future despite the utility problem (Smyth & Keane 1995).
Thus, CBR favors incremental learning from experience

Research on CBR over the years has led to a large number
of applications (Lenz et al. 1998) in a variety of domains
ranging from recommender systems (Bridge et al. 2005), to
design (Goel & Craw 2005), education (Kolodner et al.
2005), and law (Rissland & Ashley 2005). According to
(Smith 2016), CBR has led to more practical applications
than any other AI family of techniques with the exception
of expert systems and machine learning. IBM’s Watson
system (Ferruci et al. 2010) is a famous example of the
power of memory-based reasoning.

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial

5067

