Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Deep Hierarchical Approach to Lifelong Learning in Minecraft
Chen Tessler,∗ Shahar Givony,∗ Tom Zahavy,∗ Daniel J. Mankowitz,∗ Shie Mannor
Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
chen.tessler, shahargiv, tomzahavy {@campus.technion.ac.il },
danielm@tx.technion.ac.il, shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We propose a lifelong learning system that has the ability
to reuse and transfer knowledge from one task to another
while efﬁciently retaining the previously learned knowledgebase. Knowledge is transferred by learning reusable skills
to solve tasks in Minecraft, a popular video game which is
an unsolved and high-dimensional lifelong learning problem.
These reusable skills, which we refer to as Deep Skill Networks, are then incorporated into our novel Hierarchical Deep
Reinforcement Learning Network (H-DRLN) architecture using two techniques: (1) a deep skill array and (2) skill distillation, our novel variation of policy distillation (Rusu et
al. 2015) for learning skills. Skill distillation enables the HDRLN to efﬁciently retain knowledge and therefore scale in
lifelong learning, by accumulating knowledge and encapsulating multiple reusable skills into a single distilled network.
The H-DRLN exhibits superior performance and lower learning sample complexity compared to the regular Deep Q Network (Mnih et al. 2015) in sub-domains of Minecraft.

Figure 1: A screenshot from Minecraft, a popular video
game which poses a challenging lifelong learning problem.
addition, it should also be computationally efﬁcient when
storing knowledge in long-term memory. (2) Selective
transfer: A lifelong learning system needs the ability to
choose relevant prior knowledge for solving new tasks,
while casting aside irrelevant or obsolete information. (3)
System approach: Ensures the effective and efﬁcient
interaction of the retention and transfer elements.

Introduction
Lifelong learning considers systems that continually learn
new tasks, from one or more domains, over the course of a
lifetime. Lifelong learning is a large, open problem and is
of great importance to the development of general purpose
Artiﬁcially Intelligent (AI) agents. A formal deﬁnition of
lifelong learning follows.

Lifelong learning systems in real-world domains suffer
from the curse of dimensionality. That is, as the state and
action spaces increase, it becomes more and more difﬁcult
to model and solve new tasks as they are encountered. In
addition, planning over potentially inﬁnite time-horizons
as well as efﬁciently retaining and reusing knowledge pose
non-trivial challenges. A challenging, high-dimensional
domain that incorporates many of the elements found
in lifelong learning is Minecraft. Minecraft is a popular
video game whose goal is to build structures, travel on
adventures, hunt for food and avoid zombies. An example
screenshot from the game is seen in Figure 1. Minecraft is
an open research problem as it is impossible to solve the
entire game using a single AI technique (Smith and Aha ;
Oh et al. 2016). Instead, the solution to Minecraft may
lie in solving sub-problems, using a divide-and-conquer
approach, and then providing a synergy between the various
solutions. Once an agent learns to solve a sub-problem, it
has acquired a skill that can then be reused when a similar
sub-problem is subsequently encountered.

Deﬁnition 1. Lifelong Learning is the continued learning
of tasks, from one or more domains, over the course of a
lifetime, by a lifelong learning system. A lifelong learning
system efﬁciently and effectively (1) retains the knowledge
it has learned; (2) selectively transfers knowledge to
learn new tasks; and (3) ensures the effective and efﬁcient
interaction between (1) and (2)(Silver, Yang, and Li 2013).
A truly general lifelong learning system, shown in Figure
2, therefore has the following attributes: (1) Efﬁcient retention of learned task knowledge A lifelong learning system
should minimize the retention of erroneous knowledge. In
∗

Equally contributed
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1553

