Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Combining Logical Abduction and Statistical Induction:
Discovering Written Primitives with Human Knowledge∗
Wang-Zhou Dai and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{daiwz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Most approaches for unifying statistical and symbolic
learning were designed for applications in symbolic domains (Russell 2015). In many real tasks, however, human
knowledge expressed in ﬁrst-order logic (FOL) and data
samples described by raw features exist simultaneously. For
example, if we want to discover written primitives from images of handwritten characters, human knowledge about pen
strokes is worth being exploited (see Figure 1). On one hand,
this kind of background knowledge, which can be easily expressed with symbolic language like FOL, are difﬁcult to
inject into common statistical learning (Getoor and Taskar
2007). On the other hand, typical approaches for unifying
statistics and logic are capable of exploiting the FOL expressed human knowledge, yet they are seldom designed for
raw data inputs (Russell 2015).
In this paper, we deﬁne the concept extraction problem. Similar to traditional representation learning (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013), the goal of concept extraction
is to learn a set of features from the raw input space. The difference lies in the fact is that concept extraction is facilitated
with an FOL knowledge base.
To address concept extraction, we draw inspiration from
human cognition. Perception, a human cognitive process
in charging of the organization, identiﬁcation and interpretation of raw sensory information (Schacter, Gilbert, and
Wegner 2011), faces this kind of problem at almost every
second in our life. According to Charles S. Peirce (1955),
human perception is a kind of abduction, i.e., a form of logical inference going from an observation to a theory which
may account for the observation. As psychologists admitted,
Peirce’s theory provides “a midway between a seeing and a
thinking” (Tiercelin 2005; Magnani 2009).
Inspired by Peirce’s abductive perception theory, we propose the LASIN approach that combines Logical Abduction
and Statistical INduction for concept extraction. Firstly, we
exploit abductive logic theory (Kakas, Kowalski, and Toni
1992) to generate ground hypotheses from the raw inputs.
These hypotheses are then exploited as constraints for statistical induction to obtain a concept dictionary. Finally, the
concepts are tested on the raw data and get accepted or revised for improvements. Experimental results show that the
proposed approach is able to exploit FOL knowledge base
and extract written primitives that are reasonable for human
perception, where a primitive is a basic component in hu-

Abstract
In many real tasks there are human knowledge expressed in
logic formulae as well as data samples described by raw features (e.g., pixels, strings). It is popular to apply SRL or PILP
techniques to exploit human knowledge through learning of
symbolic data, or statistical learning techniques to learn from
the raw data samples; however, it is often desired to directly
exploit these logic formulae on raw data processing, like human beings utilizing knowledge to guide perception. In this
paper, we propose an approach, LASIN, which combines Logical Abduction and Statistical INduction. The LASIN approach generates candidate hypotheses based on the abduction of ﬁrst-order formulae, and then, the hypotheses are exploited as constraints for statistical induction. We apply the
LASIN approach to the learning of representation of written
primitives, where a primitive is a basic component in human writing. Our results show that the discovered primitives
are reasonable for human perception, and these primitives,
if used in learning tasks such as classiﬁcation and domain
adaptation, lead to better performances than simply applying
feature learning based on raw data only.

1

Introduction

Unifying statistical and symbolic machine learning has
been mentioned more and more frequently (Russell 2015;
Tenenbaum et al. 2011). In fact, almost 30 years ago, Donald Michie (1988) had already pointed out that the development of machine learning should be able to manipulate symbolic representation. Many approaches have been proposed
to fulﬁll this goal, which can be roughly categorized into two
types: Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) (Getoor and
Taskar 2007) and Probabilistic Inductive Logic Programming (PILP) (De Raedt and Kersting 2008). Owing to the
ability to combine the syntactic and semantic expressiveness of ﬁrst-order logic with the compositional semantics
of probabilistic model (Koller and Friedman 2009), these
approaches have achieved great success in many areas including natural language processing (Wang, Mazaitis, and
Cohen 2013), robotics (Nitti, De Laet, and De Raedt 2014),
bioinformatics (De Maeyer et al. 2013), etc.
∗
This research was supported by the 973 Program (2014CB
340501) and NSFC (61333014).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4392

