Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Learning with
Truncated Gaussian Graphical Models
Qinliang Su, Xuejun Liao,
Chunyuan Li, Zhe Gan, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0291
not work for GGMs since the marginal distribution of visible variables always remains Gaussian no matter how many
hidden variables are added.
Many efforts have been devoted to enhancing the representational versatility of GGMs. In (Frey 1997; Frey and
Hinton 1999), nonlinear Gaussian belief networks were
proposed, with explicit nonlinear transformations applied
on random variables to obtain nonlinearity. More recently,
(Su et al. 2016) proposed to employ truncated Gaussian
hidden variables to implicitly introduce nonlinearity. An
important advantage of truncation over transformation is
that many nice properties of GGMs are preserved, which
can be exploited to facilitate inference of the model. However, the models all have a directed graphical structure, for
which it is difﬁcult to estimate the posteriors of hidden
variables due to the “explaining away” effect inherent in
directed graphical models. As a result, mean-ﬁeld variational Bayesian (VB) analysis was used. It is well known
that, apart from the scalability issue, the independence assumption in mean-ﬁeld VB is often too restrictive to capture
the actual statistical relations. Moreover, (Su et al. 2016)
is primarily targeted at supervised learning. We notice that
there are also other means of introducing nonlinearities
into GGM (Radosavljevic, Vucetic, and Obradovic 2014;
Elidan 2010), but they are out of the scope of this paper.
We consider an undirected GGM with truncated hidden
variables. This serves as a counterpart of the directed model
in (Su et al. 2016), and it is particularly useful for unsupervised learning. Conditional dependencies are encoded in the
graph structure of undirected graphical models. We impose
a bipartite structure on the graph, such that it contains two
layers (one hidden and one visible) and only has inter-layer
connections, leading to a model termed a restricted truncated
GGM (RTGGM). In RTGGM, visible variables are conditionally independent given the hidden variables, and vice versa.
By exploiting the conditional independencies as well as the
appealing properties of truncated normals, we show that the
model can be trained efﬁciently using contrastive divergence
(CD) (Hinton 2002). This makes a striking contrast to the
directed model in (Su et al. 2016), where the conditionallyindependent properties do not exist and inference is done
based on mean-ﬁeld VB approximation.
Although the variables in an RTGGM are conditionally
independent, their marginal distributions are ﬂexible enough

Abstract
Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) are widely used for statistical modeling, because of ease of inference and the ubiquitous use of the normal distribution in practical approximations.
However, they are also known for their limited modeling abilities, due to the Gaussian assumption. In this paper, we introduce a novel variant of GGMs, which relaxes the Gaussian
restriction and yet admits efﬁcient inference. Speciﬁcally, we
impose a bipartite structure on the GGM and govern the hidden
variables by truncated normal distributions. The nonlinearity
of the model is revealed by its connection to rectiﬁed linear
unit (ReLU) neural networks. Meanwhile, thanks to the bipartite structure and appealing properties of truncated normals,
we are able to train the models efﬁciently using contrastive
divergence. We consider three output constructs, accounting
for real-valued, binary and count data. We further extend the
model to deep constructions and show that deep models can
be used for unsupervised pre-training of rectiﬁer neural networks. Extensive experimental results are provided to validate
the proposed models and demonstrate their superiority over
competing models.

Introduction
Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) have been widely used in
practical applications (Honorio et al. 2009; Liu and Willsky
2013; Meng, Eriksson, and Hero 2014; Oh and Deasy 2014;
Su and Wu 2015a; 2015b) to discover statistical relations
of random variables from empirical data. The popularity of
GGMs is largely attributed to the ubiquitous use of normaldistribution approximations in practice, as well as the ease
of inference due to the appealing properties of multivariate
normal distributions. On the downside, however, the Gaussian assumption prevents GGMs from being applied to more
complex tasks, for which the underlying statistical relations
are inherently non-Gaussian and nonlinear. It is true for many
models that, by adding hidden variables and integrating them
out, a more expressive distribution can be obtained about the
visible variables; such models include Boltzmann machines
(BMs) (Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski 1985), restricted BMs
(RBMs) (Hinton 2002; Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006;
Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009), and sigmoid belief networks (SBNs) (Neal 1992). Unfortunately, this approach does
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2583

