Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Don’t Forget the Quantiﬁable Relationship between Words: Using Recurrent
Neural Network for Short Text Topic Discovery
Heng-Yang Lu, Lu-Yao Xie, Ning Kang, Chong-Jun Wang and Jun-Yuan Xie
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{hylu,xly}@smail.nju.edu.cn, nkangnju@gmail.com, {chjwang, jyxie}@nju.edu.cn

designed for regular text and are really effective to documents with many words. However, posting short text data
like tweets or online questions on the Internet is becoming
popular, we have to deal with short text more often. Different from regular text data, the sparsity of short text content
brings challenge to traditional topic models because words
are too few to learn and analyze from original corpus.
One intuitive solution for the sparsity problem is extending the original short texts into longer ones by aggregating
similar texts. For example, Weng et al. (Weng et al. 2010)
aggregated texts which were posted by the same author before using LDA. There are also some methods utilizing additional knowledge from the Internet, like Jin et al. (Jin et al.
2011) extended short texts by bringing in related texts from
online search results. The shortcoming is obvious because
these methods need extra data for discovering topics. For
example, if we get a data set without author information or
we can ﬁnd little suitable knowledge from the Internet, the
effectiveness of this kind of methods will be greatly reduced.
Another creative idea alleviates the problem by constructing word pairs or word groups to represent the original
texts. One representative work is biterm topic model (BTM)
which uses word co-occurrence relationship from original
corpus to learn topics (Yan et al. 2013). While word network
topic model (WNTM) constructs pseudo documents with
word groups learned from the word network (Zuo, Zhao,
and Xu 2014). These models indeed have a superior performance than traditional methods. However, it’s worth noting
that they both lack quantiﬁable relationship between words.
For instance, given a document with words (iPhone, iPad,
house), BTM models biterms (iPhone, iPad) and (iPhone,
house) equally for learning topics. But according to our
knowledge, iPad may have a higher probability appearing
in the same topic with iPhone than house. This means we
can not ignore the prior knowledge of relationship between
words. What’s more, we can ﬁnd another defect caused by
high-frequency words. Although most work will delete some
stop words before modeling, we may still have some highfrequency words which are worthless for topics. Modeling
word pairs or groups is highly likely to bring these topicirrelevant words into ﬁnal results.
In this paper, we focus on topic model in short text scenario and aim to solve the existing problems mentioned
above. There are various evaluation metrics for relation-

Abstract
In our daily life, short texts have been everywhere especially
since the emergence of social network. There are countless
short texts in online media like twitter, online Q&A sites
and so on. Discovering topics is quite valuable in various
application domains such as content recommendation and
text characterization. Traditional topic models like LDA are
widely applied for sorts of tasks, but when it comes to short
text scenario, these models may get stuck due to the lack of
words. Recently, a popular model named BTM uses word cooccurrence relationship to solve the sparsity problem and is
proved effectively. However, both BTM and extended models ignore the inside relationship between words. From our
perspectives, more related words should appear in the same
topic. Based on this idea, we propose a model named RIBSTM which makes use of RNN for relationship learning and
IDF for ﬁltering high-frequency words.Experiments on two
real-world short text datasets show great utility of our model.

Introduction
Here comes a digital era. We are surrounded with large quantities of data like texts, pictures and so on. There are countless data emerging everyday which contain valuable information to be mined. Particularly in recent years, the Internet
has totally changed our life. For example, more and more
people express their opinions through social network, and
journalists are used to post their news on the Internet. We
can hardly analyse these massive data directly, that’s why
we need a tool like topic model to help us organize and summarize digital data automatically. By detecting topic information from these data, we could use these results for some
interesting applications such as sentiment analysis (Lin and
He 2009), question retrieval in Q&A sites (Ji et al. 2012) and
personalized recommendation (Jiang et al. 2015).
Lots of work has been done in the research ﬁeld of topic
model. Early studies like probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) (Hofmann 1999) and latent dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) are two classic topic
models widely used for discovering hidden topics from text
corpus. They are both based on the assumption that each
document is a mixture of topics and each topic is a probability distribution over words. These two topic models are
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1192

