Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sampling Beats Fixed Estimate Predictors for
Cloning Stochastic Behavior in Multiagent Systems
Brian Hrolenok, Byron Boots, Tucker Hybinette Balch
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
{bhroleno,bboots,tucker}@cc.gatech.edu

of simulations run with different ABMs (Hemelrijk 2000;
Hemelrijk, Wantia, and Gygax 2005).
The ABMs in each of these examples have varying degrees of complexity, in terms of number of parameters and
the interactions between those parameters. Increasingly
complex models allow researchers to study more complex
individual behaviors, but at the same time require more tuning, which in turn requires more observational data.
With improvements in computational capacity, the ability to execute more and more complex simulations to explore the ramiﬁcations of particular theories of behavior has
become part of the standard toolkit, and demands a corresponding increase in the ability of researchers to automate
the process of ﬁtting behavior models to observational data.
However, as we discuss throughout the rest of this work, applying standard techniques from machine learning directly
can lead to poor performance. In the remainder of this paper
we present two novel contributions. First we show that some
stochastic behaviors cannot be reproduced well by ﬁxedestimate predictors, and in the experiments section we introduce K-L divergence as a measure of similarity between
observed and generated behavior. In the next section we discuss some previous work in this area.

Abstract
Modeling stochastic multiagent behavior such as ﬁsh schooling is challenging for ﬁxed-estimate prediction techniques because they fail to reliably reproduce the stochastic aspects of
the agents behavior. We show how standard ﬁxed-estimate
predictors ﬁt within a probabilistic framework, and suggest
the reason they work for certain classes of behaviors and not
others. We quantify the degree of mismatch and offer alternative sampling-based modeling techniques. We are speciﬁcally
interested in building executable models (as opposed to statistical or descriptive models) because we want to reproduce
and study multiagent behavior in simulation. Such models
can be used by biologists, sociologists, and economists to
explain and predict individual and group behavior in novel
scenarios, and to test hypotheses regarding group behavior.
Developing models from observation of real systems is an
obvious application of machine learning. Learning directly
from data eliminates expensive hand processing and tuning,
but introduces unique challenges that violate certain assumptions common in standard machine learning approaches. Our
framework suggests a new class of sampling-based methods,
which we implement and apply to simulated deterministic
and stochastic schooling behaviors, as well as the observed
schooling behavior of real ﬁsh. Experimental results show
that our implementation performs comparably with standard
learning techniques for deterministic behaviors, and better on
stochastic behaviors.

Related Work
While the automatic construction of executable models of
behavior is relatively new, it has precedents within the machine learning community under categories such as behavior
or activity recognition. Ethograms, a concept from ethology,
are one way of categorizing, describing, and understanding
the relationships between various behaviors. Recent work
on automating the process of collating observational data
into these ethograms in the case of fruit ﬂies illustrates the
utility of machine learning approaches (Branson et al. 2009;
Dankert et al. 2009), though the ethograms produced in this
way are descriptive, rather than executable.
Egerstedt et al. present a technique for automatically constructing minimal control sequences from tracking data, and
use this to build models of ant foraging behavior using tracks
of ants (2005). These are executable models, however this
approach does not address how the recovered control sequence should handle unexpected sensor values, and the authors note that this is an open question that needs to be answered if the learned controllers are to be used in a simula-

Introduction
Executable models of agent behavior are increasingly common in the work of biologists, ethologists, and sociologists as part of the growing trend in Agent Based Modeling
(ABM) within these sciences. In the study of collective decision making by social insects, ABMs are commonly used,
such as in the work of Pratt et al. on the ability of Temnothorax rugatulus to collectively choose nest sites (2005), or the
work of List, Elsholtz, and Seeley on forage site selection
by honeybees (2009). Tunstrøm et al. examine the schooling
behavior of Notemigonus crysoleucas and classify emergent
properties of the school using an ABM in simulation (2013).
Hemelrijk has studied the social interactions and group
dynamics of monkeys, and compared competing theories
of behavior in simulation by examining the characteristics
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2022

