Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Progressive Prediction of Student
Performance in College Programs
Jie Xu,∗ Yuli Han,† Daniel Marcu,∗∗ Mihaela van der Schaar†
∗

University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095
∗∗
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Marina del Ray, CA 90292
†

of students’ academic performance and accurately predict
their future performance, such as when they will graduate
and their potential ﬁnal GPAs, given the current progress.
Although predicting student performance has been extensively studied in the literature, it was primarily studied in the
contexts of solving problems in Intelligent Tutoring Systems
(ITSs) (Cen, Koedinger, and Junker 2006)(Feng, Heffernan,
and Koedinger 2009)(Yu et al. 2010)(Pardos and Heffernan
2010) , or completing courses in traditional classroom settings or in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC) platforms (Meier et al. 2015)(Brinton and Chiang 2015). However, predicting student performance at the college program
level is signiﬁcantly different and faces new challenges.
First, students can differ tremendously in terms of precollege traits as well as selected courses and the sequence in
which they take the selected courses, especially since more
and more institutions offer open curricula where students
can take courses without concern for any requirements except those in their chosen concentrations (majors). In contrast, solving problems in ITSs often follow routine steps
which are the same for all students (KDD Cup 2010). Similarly, predicting student performance in courses are often
based on in-course assessments which are designed to be
the same for all students (Meier et al. 2015).
Second, predicting student performance in a college program is not a one-time task; rather, it requires continuous
tracking and updating as the student ﬁnishes new courses
over time. An important consideration in this regard is that
the prediction needs to be made based on not only the most
recent snapshot of the student accomplishments but also the
evolution of the student progress, which may contain valuable information of the student’s learning style, habits and
goals for making accurate predictions. However, the complexity can easily explode, which grows exponentially in the
number of academic terms (quarters, semesters).
Third, whereas problems and courses often remain the
same over a relatively long period of time, changes in college programs can be much more frequent due to the addition and removal of courses, and the adjustment of course
requirement and availability in different quarters. As a result, prediction algorithms developed ofﬂine solely relying
on a logged dataset can be outdated and ineffective in making accurate predictions. It is much desired that the predictions algorithm can be easily updated using new student data

Abstract
Accurately predicting students’ future performance based on
their tracked academic records in college programs is crucial for effectively carrying out necessary pedagogical interventions to ensure students’ on-time graduation. Although
there is a rich literature on predicting student performance in
solving problems and studying courses using data-driven approaches, predicting student performance in completing college programs is much less studied and faces new challenges,
mainly due to the diversity of courses selected by students
and the requirement of continuous tracking and incorporation of students’ evolving progresses. In this paper, we develop a novel algorithm that enables progressive prediction of
students’ performance by adapting ensemble learning techniques and utilizing education-speciﬁc domain knowledge.
We prove its prediction performance guarantee and show its
performance improvement against benchmark algorithms on
a real-world student dataset from UCLA .

Introduction
Making college affordable has a signiﬁcant impact on ensuring the nation’s economic prosperity and is a central focus of
the government when making education policies (The White
House 2016). Yet student loan debt in the United States has
blown past the trillion-dollar mark, exceeding American’s
combined credit card and auto load debts (Complete College America 2014). As the cost in college education (tuition, fees and living expenses) has skyrocketed over the
past few decades, prolonged graduation time has become a
crucial contributing factor to the ever-growing student loan
debt. In fact, recent studies show that only 50 of the more
than 580 public four-year institutions in the United States
have on-time graduation rates at or above 50 percent for their
full-time students (Complete College America 2014).
To make college more affordable, it is thus crucial to
ensure that many more students graduate on time through
early interventions on students whose performance will be
unlikely to meet the graduation criteria of the college program on time. A critical step towards the effective intervention is to build a system that can continuously keep track
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Y. Han and M. van der Schaar’s research is supported by NSF
ECCS 1407712. This research was done when Y. Han was a visiting summer student at UCLA.

1604

