Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Zero-Shot Recognition via Direct Classiﬁer Learning
with Transferred Samples and Pseudo Labels∗
†

Yuchen Guo,† Guiguang Ding,† Jungong Han,‡ Yue Gao†

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
‡
Northumbria University, Newcastle, NE1 8ST, UK
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com, {dinggg,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn,jungong.han@northumbria.ac.uk
Abstract

7UXFN

&DU

As an interesting and emerging topic, zero-shot recognition
(ZSR) makes it possible to train a recognition model by specifying the category’s attributes when there are no labeled exemplars available. The fundamental idea for ZSR is to transfer knowledge from the abundant labeled data in different but
related source classes via the class attributes. Conventional
ZSR approaches adopt a two-step strategy in test stage, where
the samples are projected into the attribute space in the ﬁrst
step, and then the recognition is carried out based on considering the relationship between samples and classes in the attribute space. Due to this intermediate transformation, information loss is unavoidable, thus degrading the performance
of the overall system. Rather than following this two-step
strategy, in this paper, we propose a novel one-step approach
that is able to perform ZSR in the original feature space by
using directly trained classiﬁers. To tackle the problem that
no labeled samples of target classes are available, we propose
to assign pseudo labels to samples based on the reliability
and diversity, which in turn will be used to train the classiﬁers. Moreover, we adopt a robust SVM that accounts for the
unreliability of pseudo labels. Extensive experiments on four
datasets demonstrate consistent performance gains of our approach over the state-of-the-art two-step ZSR approaches.

'RJ &DW
7DUJHW&ODVV

3URMHFWLRQ

6RXUFH &ODVV

&DU
'RJ

6DPSOH
6HOHFWLRQ 
3VHXGR/DEHO

&DW
7UXFN
&ODVV$WWULEXWHV

&DU


'RJ

'RJ


&DW

7UXFN

3UHGLFWLRQ

$WWULEXWH6SDFH

&DU
&ODVVLILHU
2ULJLQDO6SDFH

&DU

Figure 1: Frameworks of the previous two-step strategy and
the proposed one-step approach. Ours does not require the
intermediate space in the test stage while the previous do.

Introduction
In the recent years, we have witnessed the emerging of zeroshot recognition (ZSR) in computer vision and related communities. Basically, the objective of ZSR is to build classiﬁcation models for target classes with no labeled samples
(Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2014). To construct supervised models without supervision information for target
classes, existing approaches make use of knowledge from
related but different source classes which are well labeled,
and transfer the knowledge to target classes via the classes’
attributes (Farhadi et al. 2009; Socher et al. 2013). Generally,
a two-step strategy in the test stage is adopted. Firstly, based
on the supervision information in source classes, a projection function that projects the original features into the at-

tribute space is learned, such as linear projection (Akata et
al. 2013) and n-way classiﬁer (Norouzi et al. 2013). Secondly, after projecting a test sample from the target classes
into the attribute space, the classiﬁcation is performed by
considering the relationship between the test sample and all
target classes in the attribute space. Typically, the relationship can be measured by Euclidean distance (Socher et al.
2013), inner-product similarity (Guo et al. 2016), and manifold distance (Fu et al. 2015). The basic framework of the
two-step strategy is illustrated in Figure 1 on the left side.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach that adopts
one-step strategy in the test stage where classiﬁers trained
in the original feature space are used to enable a sample-toclass prediction, which is brieﬂy illustrated, as opposed to
the two-step approach, in Figure 1 on the right side. As our
approach does not need an intermediary space during the

∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61571269 and 61671267) and the
Royal Society Newton Mobility Grant (IE150997). Corresponding
author: Yue Gao.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4061

