Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scalable Nonparametric Tensor Analysis
Shandian Zhe

Computer Science Department
Purdue University
szhe@purdue.edu

the whole tensor into many, many small subtensors
where each subtensor is modeled by a local InfTucker;
all the local InfTuckers share the same set of global
latent facotors via a hierarchical Bayesian model. Then
I developed a distributed stochastic inference algorithm
in MAPREDUCE framework, where a set of subtensors
are allocated to each MAPPER and a stochastic gradient
descent algorithm is used to learn the local latent factors,
and the REDUCER aggregates all the local latent factors to
update the global latent factors. Experiments demonstrate
that the proposed DinTucker algorithm has a similar
predictive performance to InfTucker on small data, and is
able to process large real tensors will billions of elements.
In addition, I ﬁnished a few theoretical analysis and found
out a close connection between InfTucker and DinTucker
in terms of model evidence. The conclusions apply to
general global GP and local GP models. The details of
this work are in (Zhe et al. 2016b).

Multiway data, described by tensors, are common in realworld applications. For example, online advertising click
logs can be represented by a three-mode tensor (user, advertisement, context). The analysis of tensors is closely related to many important applications, such as click-throughrate (CTR) prediction, anomaly detection and product recommendation. Despite the success of existing tensor analysis approaches, such as Tucker (Tucker 1966), CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) (Harshman 1970) and inﬁnite
Tucker decompositions (Xu, Yan, and Qi 2012), they are
either not enough powerful to capture complex hidden relationships in data, or not scalable to handle real-world large
data. In addition, they may suffer from the extreme sparsity
in real data, i.e., when the portion of nonzero entries is extremely low; they lack of principled ways to discover other
patterns—such as an unknown number of latent clusters—
which are critical for data mining tasks such as anomaly detection and market targeting .
To address these challenges, I used nonparametric
Bayesian techniques, such as Gaussian processes (GP) and
Dirichlet processes (DP), to model highly nonlinear interactions and to extract hidden patterns in tensors; I derived
tractable variational evidence lower bounds, based on which
I developed scalable, distributed or online approximate inference algorithms. The works are summarized as follows.

• Simultaneously online factorization and latent cluster discovery. Continuing with the local GP idea, I further placed Dirchlet process mixture (DPM) (Antoniak
1974) prior over the latent factors in order to discover
latent cluster structures in each tensor mode. Therefore,
for a (user, movie, time) tensor, my second work aims
not only to capture the (possible) complex interactions
between users, movies and times, but also to discover
clusters of users who might have a preference for particular movies types, clusters of movies similar in topics
and types, and clusters of watching times. The DPM prior
is a nonparametric prior which assumes an unbounded
number of clusters. Thereby the posterior inference can
automatically infer the appropriate cluster numbers as
well as the memberships, given the observed data. For
model estimation, I developed an online variational Bayes
Expectation-Maximization (VB-EM) algorithm. The algorithm sequentially processes each subtensor (similar to
DinTucker, the algorithm ﬁrst splits the whole tensor into
smaller subtensors): In the E step, it updates the variational posteriors for latent cluster memberships. This is
efﬁciently done by caching the global statistics and updating only with local statistics. In the M-step, it uses
stochastic gradient descent to optimize the latent factors.
Evaluations on real large tensors with billions of elements
have shown that the DPM prior not only helps discover la-

• Distributed inﬁnite Tucker decomposition (DinTucker). Inﬁnite Tucker decomposition (InfTucker)(Xu,
Yan, and Qi 2012) is the ﬁrst tensor factorization approach that can capture complex, nonlinear relationship
between the latent factors: It generalizes the Tucker
decomposition into an inﬁnite latent feature space via
a Gaussian process model on tensors, namely Tensorvariate Gaussian process (TGP). However, InfTucker
has a very limited scalability because of its global GP
assumption: It treats the entire vectorized tensor as one
single TGP projection and hence leads to huge covariance
matrices even for very small tensors. For example, a
100 × 100 × 100 tensor has a 106 × 106 covariance
matrix in the InfTucker modeling. To address this issue,
I used local GP strategies and proposed a distributed
Inﬁnite tucker decomposition model. Speciﬁcally, I broke
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5058

