Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Plan Reordering and Parallel Execution
— A Parameterized Complexity View
Meysam Aghighi, Christer Bäckström
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University
Linköping, Sweden
{meysam.aghighi, christer.backstrom} at liu.se
plan is still valid, and reordering of a plan, any partial order
such that the plan is still valid. The optimization problems of
ﬁnding a minimum size deordering or reordering of a plan
were both found NP-complete. Hence, neither of the previous greedy deordering algorithms could produce a minimum
deordering. However, one of the greedy algorithms has later
been found to often produce optimal solutions in practice
(Muise, McIlraith, and Beck 2011). Also other methods to
solve these problems in practice have been proposed, e.g. using MaxSAT encodings and solvers (Muise, McIlraith, and
Beck 2012).
The method of ﬁrst generating a t.o. plan and then deordering this into a p.o. plan, usually by a non-optimal
greedy algorithm, has since been applied to a number of
diverse planning domains, including workﬂow planning in
business process reengineering (Rodrı́guez-Moreno et al.
2007), automatic generation of narratives (Haslum 2012),
composition of web services (Madhusudan and Uttamsingh
2006), ﬂexible plan execution and monitoring (Muise, McIlraith, and Beck 2011) and plan repair (Scala and Torasso
2015) of numeric plans. The deordering concept can also
be found in distributed control systems (Pannek 2013). Furthermore, Cimatti, Micheli, and Roveri (2015) presented a
strong temporal planner for actions with uncontrollable durations, based on constructing a t.o. plan and then consider
the reorederings of it.
One may also consider other optimality criteria for p.o.
plans than minimum order size. One alternative is to maximize the number of linearizations. Since this is also a difﬁcult problem, one often considers various proxy functions
in practice, cf. Say, Ciré, and Beck (2016). Siddiqui and
Haslum (2015) take a slightly different approach, considering blocks of actions that can be unordered with respect to
each other, and use this to construct an anytime algorithm
for deordering plans.
While ﬁnding a (usually non-optimal) de- or reordering
of a t.o. plan has proven sufﬁcient in practice in many applications, this is not always the case. For instance, Kvarnström (2011) considers multi-agent UAV planning and generate p.o. plans directly, claiming that post-relaxation of a
t.o. plan is not sufﬁcient for achieving optimality in this domain. Another case where the method seems to be problematic is planning for multiple agents that have both private
and public actions (Maliah, Shani, and Stern 2016). Fur-

Abstract
Bäckström has previously studied a number of optimization
problems for partial-order plans, like ﬁnding a minimum deordering (M CD) or reordering (M CR), and ﬁnding the minimum parallel execution length (P PL), which are all NPcomplete. We revisit these problems, but applying parameterized complexity analysis rather than standard complexity
analysis. We consider various parameters, including both the
original and desired size of the plan order, as well as its width
and height. Our ﬁndings include that M CD and M CR are
W[2]-hard and in W[P] when parameterized with the desired
order size, and M CD is ﬁxed-parameter tractable (fpt) when
parameterized with the original order size. Problem P PL is fpt
if parameterized with the size of the non-concurrency relation, but para-NP-hard in most other cases. We also consider
this problem when the number (k) of agents, or processors, is
restricted, ﬁnding that this number is a crucial parameter; this
problem is ﬁxed-parameter tractable with the order size, the
parallel execution length and k as parameter, but para-NPhard without k as parameter.

1

Introduction

A total-order (t.o.) plan speciﬁes one single total order for
executing its actions, while a partial-order (p.o.) plan speciﬁes a partial order on its actions and allows for executing
them in any order that is a linearization of the partial order. A p.o. plan is more ﬂexible than a t.o. plan, since the
decision on an exact action order can be postponed until
runtime, possibly subject to constraints not known at planning time. A p.o. plan may also be interpreted as a parallel
plan, where mutually unordered actions can be executed simultaneously, possibly subject to further concurrency constraints. Planners may also be divided into total-order planners and partial-order planners, depending on whether they
work on and produce a t.o. plan or a p.o. plan. Furthermore,
one may use a p.o. planner and then linearize the result into
a t.o. plan, or one may use a t.o. planner and then convert
the result into a p.o. plan. A number of greedy algorithms
for the latter appeared in the literature in the early 1990’s
(Régnier and Fade 1991; Veloso, Pérez, and Carbonell 1990;
Kambhampati and Kedar 1994). Bäckström (1998) considered this from a computational point of view, deﬁning deordering of a plan, a subset of the plan order such that the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3540

