Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unimodal Thompson Sampling for Graph–Structured Arms
Stefano Paladino, Francesco Trovò, Marcello Restelli, Nicola Gatti
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria
Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy
{stefano.paladino, francesco1.trovo, marcello.restelli, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it

monotonically increasing. While the graph structure may be
(not necessarily) known a priori by the UMAB algorithm,
the relationship deﬁned over the edges is discovered during the learning. In the present paper, we propose a novel
algorithm relying on the Bayesian learning approach for a
generic UMAB setting.
Models presenting a graph structure have become more
and more interesting in last years due to the spread of
social networks. Indeed, the relationships among the entities of a social network have a natural graph structure.
A practical problem in this scenario is the targeted advertisement problem, whose goal is to discover the part of
the network that is interested in a given product. This task
is heavily inﬂuenced by the graph structure, since in social networks people tend to have similar characteristics to
those of their friends (i.e., neighbor nodes in the graph),
therefore interests of people in a social network change
smoothly and neighboring nodes in the graph look similar
to each other (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001;
Crandall et al. 2008). More speciﬁcally, an advertiser aims
at ﬁnding those users that maximize the ad expected revenue (i.e., the product between click probability and value
per click), while at the same time reducing the amount of
times the advertisement is presented to people not interested
in its content.
Under the assumption of unimodal expected reward, the
learner can move from low expected rewards to high ones
just by climbing them in the graph, preventing from the need
for an exploration over all the graph nodes. This assumption
reduces the complexity in the search for the optimal arm,
since the learning algorithm can avoid to pull the arms corresponding to some subset of non–optimal nodes, reducing
thus the regret. Other applications might beneﬁt from this
structure, e.g., recommender systems which aims at coupling
items with those users are likely to enjoy them. Similarly,
the use of the unimodal graph structure might provide more
meaningful recommendations without testing all the users
in the social network. Finally, notice that unimodal problems with a single variable, e.g., in sequential pricing (Jia
and Mannor 2011), bidding in online sponsored search auctions (Edelman and Ostrovsky 2007) and single–peak preferences economics and voting settings (Mas-Collel, Whinston, and Green 1995), are graph–structured problems in
which the graph is a line.

Abstract
We study, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst Bayesian algorithm for unimodal Multi–Armed Bandit (MAB) problems
with graph structure. In this setting, each arm corresponds to
a node of a graph and each edge provides a relationship, unknown to the learner, between two nodes in terms of expected
reward. Furthermore, for any node of the graph there is a path
leading to the unique node providing the maximum expected
reward, along which the expected reward is monotonically
increasing. Previous results on this setting describe the behavior of frequentist MAB algorithms. In our paper, we design a Thompson Sampling–based algorithm whose asymptotic pseudo–regret matches the lower bound for the considered setting. We show that—as it happens in a wide number
of scenarios—Bayesian MAB algorithms dramatically outperform frequentist ones. In particular, we provide a thorough
experimental evaluation of the performance of our and state–
of–the–art algorithms as the properties of the graph vary.

Introduction
Multi–Armed Bandit (MAB) algorithms (Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002) have been proven to provide effective solutions for a wide range of applications ﬁtting the
sequential decisions making scenario. In this framework, at
each round over a ﬁnite horizon T , the learner selects an action (usually called arm) from a ﬁnite set and observes only
the reward corresponding to the choice she made. The goal
of a MAB algorithm is to converge to the optimal arm, i.e.,
the one with the highest expected reward, while minimizing the loss incurred in the learning process and, therefore,
its performance is measured through its expected pseudo–
regret, deﬁned as the difference between the expected reward achieved by an oracle algorithm always selecting the
optimal arm and the one achieved by the considered algorithm. We focus on the so–called Unimodal MAB (UMAB),
introduced in (Combes and Proutiere 2014a), in which each
arm corresponds to a node of a graph and each edge is associated with a relationship specifying which node of the edge
gives the largest expected reward (providing thus a partial
ordering over the arm space). Furthermore, from any node
there is a path leading to the unique node with the maximum expected reward along which the expected reward is
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2457

