Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Centralized versus Personalized Commitments and Their
Inﬂuence on Cooperation in Group Interactions
The Anh Han,1 Luı́s Moniz Pereira,2 Luis A. Martinez-Vaquero,3 Tom Lenaerts4,5

1
School of Computing and Digital Futures Institute, Teesside University, UK
NOVALINCS, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal
3
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council of Italy (ISTC-CNR), Italy
4
MLG, Département d’Informatique, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
5
AI lab, Computer Science Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
Corresponding: T.Han@tees.ac.uk
2

agents (Wooldridge and Jennings 1999; Castelfranchi and
Falcone 2010; Winikoff 2007). They have also been utilized
for ensuring good behaviors in various computerised applications such as electric vehicle charging (Stein et al. 2012)
and peer-to-peer sharing networks (Rzadca et al. 2015).

Abstract
Before engaging in a group venture agents may seek
commitments from other members in the group and,
based on the level of participation (i.e. the number
of actually committed participants), decide whether it
is worth joining the venture. Alternatively, agents can
delegate this costly process to a (beneﬁcent or noncostly) third-party, who helps seek commitments from
the agents. Using methods from Evolutionary Game
Theory, this paper shows that, in the context of Public Goods Game, much higher levels of cooperation
can be achieved through such centralized commitment
management. It provides a more efﬁcient mechanism
for dealing with commitment free-riders, those who are
not willing to bear the cost of arranging commitments
whilst enjoying the beneﬁts provided by the paying
commitment proposers. We show also that the participation level plays a crucial role in the decision of whether
an agreement should be formed; namely, it needs to
be more strict in the centralized system for the agreement to be formed; however, once it is done right, it is
much more beneﬁcial in terms of the level of cooperation as well as the attainable social welfare. In short, our
analysis provides important insights for the design of
multi-agent systems that rely on commitments to monitor agents’ cooperative behavior.

Using methods from Evolutionary Game Theory (EGT)
(Hofbauer and Sigmund 1998), this paper compares two
different approaches to arranging commitment: personalized vs. centralized commitments. Existing game theoretical
models of prior commitments have focused on the ﬁrst approach, in which the agents themselves, prior to an interaction, pay the cost to arrange a reliable commitment with their
peers (Han, Pereira, and Santos 2012b; Han et al. 2013a;
Hasan and Raja 2013; Han et al. 2015a; Han 2016; Han,
Pereira, and Lenaerts 2016). Yet, instead of having (some)
agents taking the initiative of arranging the commitments,
one could assume that a central authority or institution is responsible for facilitating this costly process. The presence of
this institution may be to improve the level of cooperation in
the population or the social welfare (e.g. public transportation arranged by government, international agreements supported by the UN, crowdsourcing systems) (Ostrom 1990;
Nesse 2001; Cherry and McEvoy 2013). The institution may
actually proﬁt directly from this joint activity by requesting
a fee from all committed players in order to provide the service. It is at this point unclear which behaviors beneﬁt (or
not) or how cooperation-levels change when moving from a
personal to a centralized commitment model. Yet the answer
to this question could be fundamental in the design of highly
distributed multi-agent systems.

Introduction
Before embarking on a group venture agents may seek commitments from others in the group and estimate how interested they are in contributing to the group effort, as that
allows them to judge whether it is worthwhile to start the
initiative or whether it is beneﬁcial to join. Arranging such
prior commitments, for instance in the form of enforceable
contracts or pledges (Nesse 2001), deposit-refund schemes
(Cherry and McEvoy 2013; Sasaki et al. 2015), or even emotional or reputation-based commitment devices (Frank 1988;
Nesse 2001), enforces others to cooperate, as it requires
them to reveal their preferences or intentions (Sterelny 2012;
Han, Pereira, and Santos 2012a). Commitments have been
widely studied in multi-agent and autonomous agent systems, in order to ensure high levels of cooperation among

Our analysis is carried out in the context of the Public
Goods Game (PGG), which allows us to directly compare
evolutionary outcomes of our centralized approach with the
personalized one described in (Han, Pereira, and Lenaerts
2016) for the PGG. The PGG can be described as follows: all
players can decide whether or not to contribute an amount c
to the public good (Sigmund 2010; Hauert et al. 2007) where
their accumulated contribution is multiplied by a constant
factor r > 1 before being equally distributed among all players. With r smaller than the group size (denoted by N ), noncontributing free-riders gain more than contributors. Evolutionary Game Theory models (Hofbauer and Sigmund 1998;

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2999

