Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Translation Prediction with Source
Dependency-Based Context Representation
1

Kehai Chen,1 Tiejun Zhao,1∗ Muyun Yang,1 Lemao Liu2
Machine Intelligence and Translation Laboratory, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
ASTREC, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, Japan
{khchen, tjzhao, yangmuyun}@hit.edu.cn, lmliu@nict.go.jp

of translation decoding, because of the recurrence on the target side. Most notably neural network joint model (NNJM)
described in (Devlin et al. 2014), which encodes n-gram
words in target side and “relevant” words in the source side
using a feed-forward neural network (FFNN), breaks down
the recurrence on the target side and thus can be integrated
into translation decoding. However, these models can not
capture long-distance dependencies among the source-side
words, due to the nature of window-based FFNN1 .
More recently, Meng et al. and Zhang, Zhang, and Hao
modeled long-distance dependencies by encoding the entire
source sentence with neural networks. Meng et al. achieved
this by using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to
summarize informative features from source sentences, but
their method only used the sentences shorter than 40 words
for faster training, due to the variant length of sentences.
Zhang, Zhang, and Hao proposed a chunk-based counterpart for this issue, in which the number of chunks without
linguistic guarantee needs be predeﬁned and tuned as an additional hyperparameter. Furthermore, these methods represent the entire source sentence as a ﬁxed vector for translations at different time steps rather than a dynamic vector
as the attention mechanism in (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2015; Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015; Liu et al. 2016).
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach to capturing long-distance dependencies with clues from a sourceside dependency tree, inspired by the success of work on encode sentences non-sequentially (Levy and Goldberg 2014;
Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015; Eriguchi, Hashimoto, and
Tsuruoka 2016). The proposed model is able to be integrated into decoding; also, it makes use of the source-side
long-distance dependencies, and learns the dynamical context representation for translation prediction at different time
steps. In particular, instead of encoding the source words
sequentially, it encodes the context structurally depending
on source-side dependency tree. This can not only encode
the long-distance dependencies for better ambiguous words
translation (Chan, Ng, and Chiang 2007; Carpuat and Wu
2007), but also capture the functional similarities for better
word forms translation (Levy and Goldberg 2014), which

Abstract
Learning context representations is very promising to improve translation results, particularly through neural networks. Previous efforts process the context words sequentially and neglect their internal syntactic structure.
In this paper, we propose a novel neural network based
on bi-convolutional architecture to represent the source
dependency-based context for translation prediction. The proposed model is able to not only encode the long-distance
dependencies but also capture the functional similarities for
better translation prediction (i.e., ambiguous words translation and word forms translation). Examined by a largescale Chinese-English translation task, the proposed approach achieves a signiﬁcant improvement (of up to +1.9
BLEU points) over the baseline system, and meanwhile outperforms a number of context-enhanced comparison system.

1

Introduction

Learning context representation for translation prediction
has attracted much attention in statistical machine translation (SMT). Many research works model the target context
as monolingual language models for SMT (Shen, Xu, and
Weischedel 2008; Mikolov 2012; Vaswani et al. 2013). Recently, the main focus is shifting from a monolingual context
to a bilingual context, for example, the bilingual language
model (BiLM) (Crego and Yvon 2010; Niehues et al. 2011;
Garmash and Monz 2014) and operation sequence model
(OSM) based on Minimum Translation Units (MTU) (Durrani, Schmid, and Fraser 2011; Durrani et al. 2013). However, their works relied on the traditional n-gram method,
which is limited to relatively small windows and lacks generalization abilities in semantics (Mikolov et al. 2013) due
to data sparsity (Guta et al. 2015). On the other hand,
many efforts have been made on learning representations
of bilingual context with neural networks (Auli et al. 2013;
Liu et al. 2013; Hu et al. 2014; Devlin et al. 2014).
Auli et al. and Hu et al. employed recurrent neural networks to represent the bilingual context either in word level
or in phrase (i.e., MTU) level for SMT. However, their models are used for post-processing via n-best rescoring instead
∗

1

It is possible to enlarge the window to cover the entire source
sentence, but this does not lead to further improvements as shown
in (Devlin et al. 2014).

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3166

