Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Beyond RPCA: Flattening Complex Noise in the Frequency Domain
1

Yunhe Wang,1,3 Chang Xu,2 Chao Xu,1,3 Dacheng Tao2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, China
2
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University, China
wangyunhe@pku.edu.cn, Chang.Xu@uts.edu.au,
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, Dacheng.Tao@uts.edu.au

The robust principal component analysis algorithm
(RPCA (Wright et al. 2009; Nie, Yuan, and Huang 2014)) is
a representative robust improvement of the traditional PCA.
Besides the low-rank component of the original data matrix,
RPCA additionally employs an 1 -norm to distill a sparse
matrix that characterizes large error corruptions, especially
Laplacian noise. Since Laplacian noise is common in natural data, RPCA performs well in many real-world problems, e.g., video background subtraction (Xin et al. 2015;
Babacan et al. 2012), face modeling (Li et al. 2014; Zhao et
al. 2014), and subspace learning (Ding and Fu 2016).

Abstract
Discovering robust low-rank data representations is important
in many real-world problems. Traditional robust principal
component analysis (RPCA) assumes that the observed data
are corrupted by some sparse noise (e.g., Laplacian noise)
and utilizes the 1 -norm to separate out the noisy component. Nevertheless, as well as simple Gaussian or Laplacian
noise, noise in real-world data is often more complex, and
thus the 1 and 2 -norms are insufﬁcient for noise characterization. This paper presents a more ﬂexible approach to
modeling complex noise by investigating their properties in
the frequency domain. Although elements of a noise matrix
are chaotic in the spatial domain, the absolute values of its
alternative coefﬁcients in the frequency domain are constant
w.r.t. their variance. Based on this observation, a new robust
PCA algorithm is formulated by simultaneously discovering
the low-rank and noisy components. Extensive experiments
on synthetic data and video background subtraction demonstrate that FRPCA is effective for handles complex noise.

However, the noise seen in practical applications can be
more complex than simple Laplacian or Gaussian noise and,
furthermore, there might be a mixture of different types of
noise with distinct distributions, e.g., a video sequence corrupted by two kinds of Gaussian noise and one Laplacian
noise (Zhao et al. 2014). In these challenging cases, traditional PCA and RPCA are ineffective due to their limited
capacity to model complex noise.

Introduction
Natural data such as that derived from video, documents,
images, and social networks are often low rank. For example, in a recommendation system, the similarities between
movies and between users result in a low rank rating matrix (Babacan et al. 2012; Pan et al. 2010). In another example, a video sequence can be compressed by a representation
of much smaller dimensionality than the number of its pixels because of the strong correlation between consecutive
video frames (Xin et al. 2015; Nie, Huang, and Ding 2012;
Zhao et al. 2014).
In machine learning and data mining (Wold, Esbensen,
and Geladi 1987), principal component analysis (PCA) is
one of the most popular techniques for exploring the lowrank representation of data. Based on singular value decomposition (SVD), PCA seeks the best low-rank approximation of the data matrix under the 2 -norm, which is exclusive to Gaussian noise and inapplicable to gross noise or
outliers (Zhao et al. 2014). Therefore, a number of methods have emerged to enhance PCA’s robustness over the
last decade (Wright et al. 2009; Ding, He, and Carin 2011;
Babacan et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012; Zhao et al. 2014).

Recently, efforts have been made to broaden the RPCA algorithm to tackle complex noise (Zhao et al. 2014; Ding, He,
and Carin 2011; Babacan et al. 2012). However, these methods tend to be inefﬁcient due to the introduction of more
hyper-parameters such as the number of noise distributions,
variations of noise and noise level, which largely increase
model complexity and redundancy.
Instead of trying to characterize each individual possible noise distribution, we aim to develop a more ﬂexible
approach to simultaneously modeling different noise distributions. Based on the observation that the frequency coefﬁcients of i.i.d. noise signals in the frequency domain are
constant values w.r.t. their variance regardless of the type
of noise, we propose a new robust PCA algorithm in the
frequency domain. The original data matrix can be transformed into the frequency domain and then decomposed into
a low-rank component constrained by the trace norm and a
noise component that is encouraged to approach some preestimated constants. The resulting objective function can be
efﬁciently optimized by the augmented Lagrange multiplier
technique. Experimental results demonstrate the power of
the proposed algorithm to handle complex noise.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2761

