Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multiwinner Approval Rules as Apportionment Methods
Markus Brill

Jean-François Laslier

Piotr Skowron

University of Oxford
mbrill@cs.ox.ac.uk

CNRS and Paris School of Economics
jean-francois.laslier@ens.fr

University of Oxford
piotr.skowron@cs.ox.ac.uk

and only one party.1 In a sense, this forces the voter to approve all candidates from one party and no candidates from
any other party. Counting such ballots, and deciding how
many candidates are elected from each list, is an apportionment problem. Any apportionment problem can thus be seen
as a very simple approval voting instance: all voters approve
all the candidates from their chosen party, and only those.
The present paper formally establishes and explores this
analogy between multiwinner elections and apportionment
problems. We show how an apportionment problem can
be phrased as an instance of an approval-based multiwinner
election, thereby rendering multiwinner rules applicable to
the apportionment setting. As a result, every approval-based
multiwinner rule induces a method of apportionment. Exploring this link between multiwinner rules and apportionment methods is interesting for at least two reasons. First,
observing what kind of apportionment method a given multiwinner rule induces yields new insights into the nature of
the rule. Second, every multiwinner rule inducing a given
apportionment method can be seen as an extension of the
apportionment method to a more general setting where candidates have no party afﬁliations (or party afﬁliations are ignored in the election process).
After formally establishing the link between approvalbased multiwinner rules and apportionment methods, we
consider several multiwinner rules and observe that they
induce (and extend) apportionment methods that are wellestablished in the apportionment literature. For instance,
Proportional Approval Voting induces the D’Hondt method
(aka Jefferson method) and Monroe’s rule induces the
largest remainder method (aka Hamilton method). We
also consider properties of apportionment methods (such as
lower quota or the Penrose condition) and exhibit multiwinner rules that induce apportionment methods satisfying these
properties.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
both the apportionment problem and the multiwinner election setting. Section 3 shows how approval-based multiwin-

Abstract
We establish a link between multiwinner elections and apportionment problems by showing how approval-based multiwinner election rules can be interpreted as methods of apportionment. We consider several multi-winner rules and
observe that some, but not all, of them induce apportionment methods that are well established in the literature and
in the actual practice of proportional representation. For instance, we show that Proportional Approval Voting induces
the D’Hondt method and that Monroe’s rule induces the
largest remainder method. We also consider properties of apportionment methods and exhibit multiwinner rules that induce apportionment methods satisfying these properties.

1

Introduction

The study of preference aggregation mechanisms—in particular, voting rules—is an important part of multiagent systems research (e.g., Conitzer 2010). Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in multiwinner elections. In
this setting, there is a set of agents who entertain preferences over a set of alternatives. Based on these preferences, the goal is to select a committee, i.e., a (ﬁxed-size)
subset of the alternatives. Preferences are usually speciﬁed
either as rankings, i.e., complete linear orders over the set
of all alternatives (e.g., Elkind et al. 2014), or as approval
votes, i.e., yes/no assessments of all the alternatives (e.g.,
Kilgour 2010). We are particularly interested in the latter
variant, in which each agent can be thought of as specifying
a subset of alternatives that are “acceptable” for that agent.
The decision scenario modeled by multiwinner
elections—selecting a subset of objects from a potentially much larger pool of available objects—is ubiquitous:
consider, e.g., picking players to form a sports team,
selecting items to display in an online shop, choosing
the board of directors of a company, etc. Many of these
scenarios are reminiscent of parliamentary elections, a topic
that has been studied in great detail by political scientists.
In a parliamentary election, the candidates are traditionally
organized in political parties and the election determines
how many parliamentary seats a party is allocated.
Under so-called proportional representation systems with
“closed party lists,” a voter is allowed to give her vote to one

1
Some countries use “open-list” systems, leaving some ﬂexibility to the voters by allowing them to vote for speciﬁc candidates
inside the chosen party list. In some (rare) cases, voters are given
even more freedom. Under so-called “panachage” systems, sometimes used in Luxembourg and in France, voters can vote for candidates from different parties.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

414

