Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Network, Popularity and Social Cohesion:
A Game-Theoretic Approach
Jiamou Liu, Ziheng Wei
The University of Auckland
Department of Computer Science
Auckland, New Zealand
jiamou.liu@auckland.ac.nz z.wei@auckland.ac.nz
relations. The theory of self-categorization asserts that individuals mentally associate themselves into groups based on
relations such as friendship and trust (Hogg 1992).
Cohesion denotes a tendency for a social group to stay
in unity, which traditionally consists of two views. Firstly,
cohesion refers to a “pulling force” that draws members together (Festinger 1950); Secondly, cohesion also means a
type of “resistance” of the group to disruption (Gross and
Martin 1952). In (2001), White and Harary propose a notion
of structural cohesion, which uniﬁes these two views.
However, we identify insufﬁciencies in the existing models for social cohesion: 1) Cooperative game theory often
misses the crucial social network dimension. 2) The structural cohesion of a network refers to the minimum number
of nodes whose removal results in network disintegration
(White and Harary 2001); this is a property of the network
on the whole, and does not embody individual needs. Since
cohesion embodies both the micro-focus of psychology (fulﬁllment of personal objectives and needs) and the macrofocus of sociology (emergence of social classes) (Carron and
Brawley 2000), the main challenge is to build a general but
rigorous model to bridge the micro- and the macro-foci.
In this paper, we deﬁne a type of cooperative games
on networked agents. Outcomes of the game not only rely
on the network topology but also reﬂect individuals’ social needs. Our model is consistent with existing theories:
Firstly, we follow the network approach to study social phenomena, which is initiated by early pioneers such as Simmel
and Durkheim. Secondly, our game-theoretic formulation is
in line with group dynamics theories that focus on the interdependence among members (Lewin 1943). Thirdly, we
verify that networks with high structural cohesion also tend
to be socially cohesive according to our deﬁnition.
People prefer to be in a group where they are seen as valuable and popular members. Hence the payoff should reﬂect
in some sense players’ social positions. Popularity – an important indicator of social position – arises from interpersonal ties such as liking or attraction (Lansu and Cillessen
2011). In particular, (Conti et al. 2013) uses the degrees of
nodes as a measure of popularity and identify the economic
beneﬁts behind gaining popularity. Therefore, payoffs in our
games are deﬁned based on degrees of players.
We summarize our main contributions: (1) We propose
popularity games on a social network and deﬁne social co-

Abstract
In studies of social dynamics, cohesion refers to a group’s
tendency to stay in unity, which – as argued in sociometry
– arises from the network topology of interpersonal ties. We
follow this idea and propose a game-based model of cohesion that not only relies on the social network, but also reﬂects individuals’ social needs. In particular, our model is a
type of cooperative games where players may gain popularity
by strategically forming groups. A group is socially cohesive
if the grand coalition is core stable. We study social cohesion in some special types of graphs and draw a link between
social cohesion and the classical notion of structural cohesion (White and Harary 2001). We then focus on the problem
of deciding whether a given social network is socially cohesive and show that this problem is CoNP-complete. Nevertheless, we give two efﬁcient heuristics for coalition structures where players enjoy high popularity and experimentally
evaluate their performances.

1

Introduction

Human has a natural desire to bind with others and needs
to belong to groups. By understanding the basic instruments
that generate coherent social groups, one can explain important phenomena such as the emergence of norms, group
conformity, self-identity and social classes (Festinger 1950;
Huisman and Bruggeman 2012; Hogg 1992). For example,
studies reveal that on arrival to Western countries, immigrants tend to form cohesive groups within their ethnic communities, which may hamper their acculturation into the new
society (Nee and Sanders 2001). Another study identiﬁes cohesive groups of inhabitants in an Austrian village that correspond to stratiﬁed classes deﬁned by succession to farmland ownership (Brudner and White 1997).
Most theories of group dynamics rely on two fundamental drives: cooperation and social needs. Indeed, every group
exists to accomplish certain tasks. Cooperation is desirable
because combining skills and resources leads to better outcomes. The theory of cooperative games studies distribution of collective gains among rational agents (Peleg and
Sudhölter 2010). Social need is another important drive of
group dynamics. A society contains complex interpersonal
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

600

