Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Optimizing Expectation with Guarantees in POMDPs
Krishnendu Chatterjee, Petr Novotný
IST Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria
krishnendu.chatterjee@ist.ac.at, pnovotny@ist.ac.at

Guillermo A. Pérez,* Jean-François Raskin

Dorde Žikelić

Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
jraskin@ulb.ac.be, gperezme@ulb.ac.be

University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
dz277@cam.ac.uk

The de facto model for decision making under uncertainty are partially-observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs) (Littman 1996; Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis
1987), and they have been applied in diverse applications ranging from planning (Russell and Norvig 2010),
to reinforcement learning (Kaelbling, Littman, and Moore
1996), to robotics (Kress-Gazit, Fainekos, and Pappas 2009;
Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998). One of the classical and fundamental payoff function for POMDPs is the
discounted-sum payoff that aggregates the rewards of the
transitions as a discounted sum. The traditional objective
in POMDPs has been to obtain policies that maximize the
expected discounted-sum payoff.
One crucial drawback of the traditional objective (that asks
for expectation maximization) is that it allows for undesirable
events that can happen with low probability. For example,
consider a policy σ1 that with probability 1/2 achieves payoff 100 and with probability 1/2 achieves payoff 0, and a
different policy σ2 that achieves payoff 20 with probability 1.

If payoff values below 10 are undesirable, then the ﬁrst policy, though better for expected payoff, allows undesirable
events with signiﬁcant probability, and hence the second policy is preferable. Hence, there has been a recent interest to
study objectives where, instead of maximizing the expected
payoff (Hou, Yeoh, and Varakantham 2016), the goal is to
maximize the probability that the payoff is above a threshold.
A drawback of the approach to maximize the probability
that the payoff exceeds a threshold is that it ignores the optimization aspect of maximizing the expectation. In this work
we consider an objective for POMDPs where both aspects are
present. More precisely, we consider a “guaranteed payoff
optimization (GPO)” problem for POMDPs, where given a
threshold t, the goal is to maximize the expectation while
ensuring that the payoff is at least t.
As a concrete motivation for the GPO problem, consider
planning under uncertainty (e.g., self-driving cars) where certain events are catastrophic (e.g., crashes), and in the model
they are assigned low payoffs. Such catastrophic events must
be avoided even at the expense of expected payoff. That
is, policies must maximize the expected payoff, ensuring
the avoidance of catastrophic events. Hence, for planning in
safety-critical applications the GPO problem is natural.
In this work, our main contributions are as follows:
1. We study the GPO problem for POMDPs, and present
a practical solution approach for the problem. In particular, given a POMDP with the GPO problem, we present
a transformation to a different POMDP where it sufﬁces
to solve the traditional expectation objective. Our solution approach ﬁrst constructs a representation of all strategies that satisﬁes item a) of the GPO problem, and then
we extend the partially-observable Monte Carlo planning
(POMCP) approach to obtain optimal policies w.r.t. expectation among the above strategies.
2. We present experimental results on several classical
POMDP examples from the literature to show how our
approach can efﬁciently solve the GPO problem for
POMDPs.
Due to lack of space, we omit formal proofs for some of our
claims in this article. We refer the interested reader to the full
technical report (Chatterjee et al. 2016).

* Author supported by an F.R.S.-FNRS Aspirant fellowship.
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Related Works. Works studying POMDPs with discounted sum range from theoretical results (see, e.g., (Pa-

Abstract
A standard objective in partially-observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs) is to ﬁnd a policy that maximizes the
expected discounted-sum payoff. However, such policies may
still permit unlikely but highly undesirable outcomes, which is
problematic especially in safety-critical applications. Recently,
there has been a surge of interest in POMDPs where the goal is
to maximize the probability to ensure that the payoff is at least
a given threshold, but these approaches do not consider any
optimization beyond satisfying this threshold constraint. In
this work we go beyond both the “expectation” and “threshold”
approaches and consider a “guaranteed payoff optimization
(GPO)” problem for POMDPs, where we are given a threshold
t and the objective is to ﬁnd a policy σ such that a) each
possible outcome of σ yields a discounted-sum payoff of at
least t, and b) the expected discounted-sum payoff of σ is
optimal (or near-optimal) among all policies satisfying a). We
present a practical approach to tackle the GPO problem and
evaluate it on standard POMDP benchmarks.

1

Introduction

3725

