Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Nearly-Black-Box Online Algorithm for
Joint Parameter and State Estimation in Temporal Models
Yusuf B. Erol∗

Yi Wu*

Lei Li

Stuart Russell

EECS, UC Berkeley
yberol@eecs.berkeley.edu

EECS, UC Berkeley
jxwuyi@eecs.berkeley.edu

Toutiao Lab
lileicc@gmail.com

EECS, UC Berkeley
russell@eecs.berkeley.edu

Doucet, and Holenstein 2010), which utilizes an expensive
MCMC kernel over the parameter space and typically requires a very large number of MCMC iterations to converge.
In this paper, we propose a practical algorithm for the
general combined parameter and state estimation problem in
SSMs. Our algorithm, called the Assumed Parameter Filter
(APF), is a hybrid of particle ﬁltering for state variables and
assumed density ﬁltering for parameter variables. It projects
the posterior distribution for parameters, p(θ | x0:t , y0:t ),
into an approximation distribution and generates samples
of parameters in constant-time per update. APF streams
data and is a nearly-black-box algorithm: when an appropriate approximate distribution for the parameter is chosen,
APF can be applied to any SSM that one can sample from
and compute evidence likelihood. We emphasize the nearlyblack-box property of APF by developing it as an automatic
inference engine for a probabilistic programming language.
Experiment results show that APF converges much faster
than existing algorithms on a variety of models.

Abstract
Online joint parameter and state estimation is a core problem for temporal models. Most existing methods are either
restricted to a particular class of models (e.g., the Storvik ﬁlter) or computationally expensive (e.g., particle MCMC). We
propose a novel nearly-black-box algorithm, the Assumed Parameter Filter (APF), a hybrid of particle ﬁltering for state
variables and assumed density ﬁltering for parameter variables. It has the following advantages: (a) it is online and
computationally efﬁcient; (b) it is applicable to both discrete
and continuous parameter spaces with arbitrary transition dynamics. On a variety of toy and real models, APF generates
more accurate results within a ﬁxed computation budget compared to several standard algorithms from the literature.

Introduction
Many problems in scientiﬁc studies and real-world applications involve modeling of dynamic processes, which are
often modeled by temporal models, namely state space
models (SSMs) (Elmohamed, Kozen, and Sheldon 2007;
Arora et al. 2010). Online parameter and state estimation
–computing the posterior probability for both (static) parameters and (dynamic) states, incrementally over time– is crucial for many applications such as simultaneous localization
and mapping (Montemerlo et al. 2002), object tracking (Ristic, Arulampalam, and Gordon 2004) and 3D design suggestion (Ritchie et al. 2015).
Sequential Monte-Carlo (particle ﬁlter) based algorithms
have been introduced for real-world applications (Gordon,
Salmond, and Smith 1993; Arulampalam et al. 2002; Cappé,
Godsill, and Moulines 2007). However, classical particle ﬁlter algorithms suffer from the path degeneracy problem, especially for parameters, and leave it a challenge to jointly
estimate parameters and states for SSMs with complex dependencies and nonlinear dynamics. Real-world models can
involve both discrete and continuous variables, arbitrary dependencies and a rich collection of nonlinearities and distributions. Existing algorithms are either restricted to a particular class of models, such as the Storvik ﬁlter (Storvik 2002)
and the Liu-West ﬁlter (Liu and West 2001), or very expensive in time complexity, such as particle MCMC (Andrieu,

Background
State space models: A state space model (SSM) consists
of the parameters Θ ∈ Rp , latent states {Xt }0≤t≤T ∈ Rd
and the observations {Yt }0≤t≤T ∈ Rn deﬁned by
Θ ∼ f1 (θ)
Xt | xt−1 , θ ∼ g(xt | xt−1 , θ)

X0 ∼ f2 (x0 )
Yt | xt , θ ∼ h(yt | xt , θ)

where fi , g, h denote some arbitrary probability distributions (the model). Given an SSM, the goal of the joint parameter and state estimation is to compute the posterior distribution of both the states (i.e., {Xt }) and the parameters
(i.e., Θ) given the observations. In the ﬁltering setting, we
aim to compute the posterior of Θ and Xt for every time t
based on evidence until time t, namely p(xt , θ | y0...t ).
Inference Algorithms: Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) is
a widely adopted class of methods for inference on SSMs.
Given the observed values Y0:T = y0:T , the posterior distribution p(x0:t , θ|y0:t ) is approximated by a set of K particles, with each particle k denoted by Xtk for 1 ≤ k ≤ K.
Xtk consists of a particular assignment of the states and the
parameter denoted by xk0:t and θk . Particles are propagated
forward through the transition model g(xkt |xkt−1 , θk ) and re-

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1861

