Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Optimal Personalized Defense Strategy Against Man-In-The-Middle Attack
Xiaohong Li and Shuxin Li Jianye Hao∗ and Zhiyong Feng

Bo An

School of Computer Science and Technology School of Computer Software
School of Computer Engineering
Tianjin University, China
Tianjin University, China
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{xiaohongli,lishuxin}@tju.edu.cn
{jianye.hao,zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn
boan@ntu.edu.sg

Things (IoT). There have been reported cases where hackers attacked connected intelligent devices within smart cars
(Simko 2016). MITM attacks usually exhibit two major
characteristics: 1) invisibility: very difﬁcult to detect if it
only sniffs information and does not take other obvious actions (Kapil M, Manoj V, and Jay L 2016); 2) targeted attack:
an MITM attack usually only targets at a carefully selected
set of users due to resource limitations (Gangan 2015).
At present, there are many technologies to launch MITM
attacks, such as DNS poisoning, denial of service (DoS),
and https snifﬁng through fake SSL certiﬁcate (Nayak and
Samaddar 2010). The current defense technologies against
MITM attacks can be classiﬁed into two categories. The
ﬁrst is encryption, which aims at increasing the difﬁculty
of decoding packets by applying complicated encryption
algorithms (Albina et al. 2013). The second is to design
effective detection techniques and corresponding countermeasures. The major research efforts focus on detection
techniques, such as the method of certiﬁcate validation (Dacosta, Ahamad, and Traynor 2012) and using the characteristic of TCP packet (e.g., timestamp) (Vallivaara, Sailio, and
Halunen 2014). The measures taken after detection are relatively straightforward, such as enhancing the defense for
weak points and invoking reconnection. To summarize, all
the above work aims at either minimizing the attack success
rate or maximizing detection rate.
However, few work considers the problem of how to decrease the loss under the MITM attacks from the system’s
perspective. Since complete elimination of the MITM attacks seems an impossible task, we revisit the MITM attack
defending problem by addressing the following question:
how can we minimize the total losses within a system, given
that MITM attacks are inevitable? We model this problem
as the strategic interaction between the MITM attacker and
the defender under the Stackelberg game-theoretic framework. We show that computing the optimal defense strategy can be transformed equivalently into calculating the
Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE) of the underlying
Stackelberg game. However, the traditional searching techniques (e.g., integer/linear programming) can be computationally inefﬁcient since the defender’s strategy space is Ndimensional and inﬁnite in our model. Therefore, we employ a novel method to compute the optimal personalized
defense strategy by reducing the searching space to one di-

Abstract
The Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attack is one of the most
common attacks employed in the network hacking. MITM attackers can successfully invoke attacks such as denial of service (DoS) and port stealing, and lead to surprisingly harmful consequences for users in terms of both ﬁnancial loss and
security issues. The conventional defense approaches mainly
consider how to detect and eliminate those attacks or how to
prevent those attacks from being launched in the ﬁrst place.
This paper proposes a game-theoretic defense strategy from
a different perspective, which aims at minimizing the loss
that the whole system sustains given that the MITM attacks
are inevitable. We model the interaction between the attacker
and the defender as a Stackelberg security game and adopt
the Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE) as the defender’s
strategy. Since the defender’s strategy space is inﬁnite in our
model, we employ a novel method to reduce the searching
space of computing the optimal defense strategy. Finally, we
empirically evaluate our optimal defense strategy by comparing it with non-strategic defense strategies. The results indicate that our game-theoretic defense strategy signiﬁcantly
outperforms other non-strategic defense strategies in terms of
decreasing the total losses against MITM attacks.

Introduction
While the World Wide Web brings the convenience for
people, it has also brought in an immense risk of cyber
attacks. Especially, more and more transactions are done
online ranging from home banking, e-commerce, and eprocurement to those that involve sensitive information. The
leak of those sensitive information might result in tremendous loss to users in terms of both ﬁnance and privacy. One
of the major types of attacks to intercept sensitive information is the Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attack.
Nowadays, the MITM attack has penetrated into our daily
life. Recent news points out that 95% of HTTPS servers are
vulnerable to trivial MITM attacks (Mutton 2016). Some
incidents like the github in China (Martin 2013) and the
MITM attack against google in Iranian (Seth Schoen 2011)
indicate the endangerment of the MITM attacks. Meanwhile, attackers also commit MITM attacks in Internet of
∗

corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

593

