Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Modelling Familiarity for Intelligent
Personalized Social Mobilization
Zhengxiang Pan
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY)
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
panz0012@ntu.edu.sg

Introduction

In 2016, Pokemon Go (http://www.pokemongo.com/)
swept through the world attracting millions of players.
The game, incorporated with the main features of social
mobilization including 1) gamiﬁcation, 2) time-critical incentives, 3) inter-personal interactions, and 4) locationawareness, is an useful and timely example with the potential to support large-scale empirical studies. As the Singapore’s multi-racial population consists of people of Chinese,
Indian, Malay and Caucasian origins, a study will capture
any behaviour variability as a result of ethnic identity. Thus,
since August 2016, I have initiated an online survey studying to how people from different backgrounds respond to social mobilization approaches involving the aforementioned 4
features based on the Pokemon Go game.1
The survey consists of two major sections: 1) individual background, and 2) individual behaviour patterns in social mobilization. Under the ﬁrst section, participants were
asked about their demographic information, and to complete
a 10-question Big Five personality test (Matthews, Deary,
and Whiteman 2003) as well as a 20-question affective disposition test. Under the second section, behaviour patterns
such as depth of participation (e.g., time, effort, and money
spent), willingness to collaborate (e.g., to what extent a participant played the game alone or with others), motivation
(e.g., reasons of participation), and degree of familiarity with
Pokemons before the release of the game were collected. So
far, over 300 people have participated in the survey. The data
are currently being analyzed. The dataset is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst large-scale study on how different people respond to technology powered social mobilization.

With the rise of the Internet and social media, social mobilization - large-scale mobilization manpower for scientiﬁc,
social, and political (Michelucci and Dickinson 2016) activities through crowdsourcing - has become a widespread practice. Despite the success, social mobilization is not without
its limitations. Local trapping of diffusion and the dependence on highly connected individuals to mobilize people
in distance locations affect the effectiveness of social mobilization (Rutherford et al. 2013). Furthermore, as empirical
studies on people’s responses to various social mobilization
approaches are lacking, it is a signiﬁcant challenge for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) researchers to design effective and
efﬁcient decision support mechanisms to help manage this
emerging phenomenon (Yu et al. 2015; 2016).
In my thesis, I conduct large-scale empirical studies to
help the AI research community establish baseline personal
variabilities in different people’s response patterns to social
mobilization approaches. Based on the collected dataset, I
will further propose computational algorithmic crowdsourcing (Yu et al. 2016a) mechanisms which leverage the empirical evidence to improve the effectiveness and efﬁciency
of social mobilization, towards achieving superlinear productivity (Sornette et al. 2014). Throughout this process, I
will also incorporate human factors (e.g., emotion (Lin et
al. 2015), persuasion (Tao et al. 2011), incentives (Lin et al.
2015), and trust (Yu et al. 2014b)) into the computational
models to beneﬁt social mobilization efforts.

Empirical Study on Social Mobilization
Modelling Familiarity

The study of social mobilization depends heavily on instances which have successfully mobilized large-scale participation. Although empirical studies based on such successful instances may suffer from survival bias, data derived
from such studies can still shed light on important aspects of
social mobilization. One of the critical research questions is
“how do people from different backgrounds respond to various social mobilization approaches?” Quantitative answers
to this question can provide useful insights into the design
of future incentive mechanisms for social mobilization.

In order for AI-powered crowdsourcing to interact successfully with human beings in the loop, it is important for the AI
recommendations to take into account human factors. Some
aspects of human factors (e.g., the need to balance work
and leisure) have been incorporated into existing algorithmic
crowdsourcing for more effective social mobilization (Yu et
al. 2014a). In my thesis, I focus on familiarity which has
been found to play a critical role in collaborative activities.
The effect of familiarity on the interactions typical to a
human-in-the-loop technology system can be divided into

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5048

http://dx.doi.org/10.7303/syn7500215.1

