Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Additional Multi-Touch
Attribution for Online Advertising
Wendi Ji, Xiaoling Wang∗
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University
3663 North Zhongshan Road, Shanghai, China
wendyg8886@gmail.com, xlwang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

 

Multi-Touch Attribution studies the effects of various types
of online advertisements on purchase conversions. It is a very
important problem in computational advertising, as it allows
marketers to assign credits for conversions to different advertising channels and optimize advertising campaigns. In this
paper, we propose an additional multi-touch attribution model
(AMTA) based on two obvious assumptions: (1) the effect of
an ad exposure is fading with time and (2) the effects of ad
exposures on the browsing path of a user are additive. AMTA
borrows the techniques from survival analysis and uses the
hazard rate to measure the inﬂuence of an ad exposure. In
addition, we both take the conversion time and the intrinsic
conversion rate of users into consideration to generate the
probability of a conversion. Experimental results on a large
real-world advertising dataset illustrate that the our proposed
method is superior to state-of-the-art techniques in conversion rate prediction and the credit allocation based on AMTA
is reasonable.

 
 

  

  
  

 

 

  
   

 

t21

t32

t11
 

 

t31

t12

 

 

t33

T3

 

 

t22

t13

T1



Figure 1: Customer journeys on an advertising champaign.
Each journey is composed by a chronological sequence of
actions by a user on three advertising channels, including
display ad, social ad and paid search ad.

Introduction
As the growth of computational advertising, targeting techniques make personalized advertising possible. Based on the
contextual information and the user feedback data, online
advertising systems deliver ads to the users who are most
likely to respond. Nowadays companies launch an advertisement campaign through various channels, such as display ad,
video ad, social ad, paid search ad and etc. Attribution technology is designed to help marketers understand how particular channels contribute to user conversions, which is now
being seen as integral to the future of digital advertising. A
promising attribution model is of great help for marketing
managers to interpret the inﬂuence of channels and optimize
their advertising strategies.
In an online advertising campaign, users are exposed to
ads with various channels, as illustrated in Figure 1. Suppose that a company X launches an advertising champaign
through three channel: display ad, social ad and paid search
ad. User 1 saw X’s display ad at t11 when browsing a webpage and then saw X’s social ad at t12 . Later, she/he searched
for products and clicked X’s paid ad link at t13 . Finally,

she/he made a purchase on X’s website at time T 1 . How
shall we evaluate the contribution of the three ads to the conversion?
Post-click attribution is one of the earliest and simplest
attribution models, which assigns all credit to the last ad
clicked before a conversion. It has been considered as the
standard attribution model in digital advertising industry.
For user 1, if the last click wins, the overall contribution
is assigned to the paid search ad and the effects of former viewed ads are totally ignored. Despite its simplicity,
this attribution mechanism overestimates the contribution of
search ads and neglects the inﬂuence of the ads before the
last click. In fact, the some queries triggering paid search
ads are special conversions due to previously viewed ads.
Furthermore, in many cases, user never clicks before conversion. A reliable attribution mechanism should consider
the contributions of all relative ads in the consumer journey.
Users’ behaviors are caused by the combined effect of
the exposed ads within the journey. Multi-touch attribution
(MTA) allows marketers to capture real Return of Investment (ROI) for multiple advertising touch points. It has become a signiﬁcant research topic and has been explored by
several online marketing analytics companies (e.g. Google

∗

The corresponding author is Xiaoling Wang.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1360

