Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Greedy Flipping for
Constrained Word Deletion
Jin-ge Yao, Xiaojun Wan
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{yaojinge, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

deletion-based compression (Filippova et al. 2015), utilizing large-scale parallel training data. A potential weakness
for these approaches is the lack of explicit reassurance for
the generated compressions to be syntactically grammatical.
To ensure that the generated compressions remain to be
grammatical, there are two major paradigms. The ﬁrst is
explicitly rewrite sentences with pre-deﬁned synchronous
grammars based on constituent parse trees, known as tree
transduction (Cohn and Lapata 2007; 2009; Yamangil and
Shieber 2010). In such models a synchronous grammar is induced from a corpus of parallel constituent trees. Compressions are generated from the grammar to maximize some
weighted scores.
The other paradigm is constraints-based models, i.e. explicitly impose syntactic constraints to make the ﬁnal compressions grammatical. Many sentence compression models that explicitly deal with syntactic constraints are mostly
based on integer linear programming (ILP) (Clarke and Lapata 2008; Filippova and Strube 2008; Thadani and McKeown 2013) or Markov logic networks (MLN) (Huang et al.
2012; Yoshikawa et al. 2012). The constraints are mostly
derived from dependency parsing, which is usually much
cheaper in terms of computation, compared with constituent
parsing. Unfortunately inference problems in ILP models
and MLNs are in general NP-hard, which limits the efﬁciency and scalability of such approaches.
To enhance local smoothness in practice, language models are usually introduced when decoding tree transduction models and ILP models. This brings the challenge
that the scoring function now consists of different kinds of
local structures (ngrams in LM and local tree structure),
eliminating the possibility for efﬁcient decoding using dynamic programming and making ILP models even slower
in practice. One may use Lagrangian relaxation and dual
decomposition for approximate inference (Thadani 2014;
Yao, Wan, and Xiao 2014) for structured models, utilizing
the fact that the score function can be decomposed into subparts for efﬁcient independent decoding followed by merging the solutions from the subparts.
In this paper we present a much simpler yet more efﬁcient solution for sentence compression, enabling: (1) syntactic constraints ensuring grammaticality, and (2) rich scoring functions containing different kinds of locality or structures. Starting with an initial random bit vector indicating

Abstract
In this paper we propose a simple yet efﬁcient method for
constrained word deletion to compress sentences, based on
top-down greedy local ﬂipping from multiple random initializations. The algorithm naturally integrates various grammatical constraints in the compression process, without using
time-consuming integer linear programming solvers. Our formulation suits for any objective function involving arbitrary
local score deﬁnition. Experimental results show that the proposed method achieves nearly identical performance with explicit ILP formulation while being much more efﬁcient.

Introduction
Sentence compression is the task of generating a grammatical and usually shorter summary for a long sentence,
while preserving its most important information. This task
has aroused much attention because of its potential applications, including the generation of headlines and subtitles,
text display on small screens and non-extractive summarization. One speciﬁc instantiation of sentence compression is
word deletion, namely generating a compression by dropping words from the original sentence. This is also known
as extractive compression, as opposed to abstractive compression which allows more elaborate transformations other
than word deletion such as lexical substitution.
Although some related studies start to transfer focus onto
abstractive methods (Woodsend and Lapata 2011; Narayan
and Gardent 2014; Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015; Xu et
al. 2016), deletion-based compression is still far from being
solved. Meanwhile, it has been shown that extractive methods can still become more suitable than abstractive methods
in many scenarios (Nomoto 2009).
Various approaches have been proposed to challenge the
task of deletion-based compression. Earlier pioneering studies (Knight and Marcu 2000; Turner and Charniak 2005)
consider several insightful approaches, including generative
noisy-channel models and discriminative decision tree models. Structured discriminative compression models (McDonald 2006) are capable of integrating rich features and have
been shown effective. More recently, sequence-to-sequence
learning with gated recurrent nets has also been applied for
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3518

