Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SEAPoT-RL: Selective Exploration
Algorithm for Policy Transfer in RL
Akshay Narayan,† Zhuoru Li,†∗ Tze-Yun Leong†‡

School of Computing, National University of Singapore†
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University‡
anarayan@comp.nus.edu.sg, lizhuoru@google.com, leongty@smu.edu.sg

requires strictly less information being transferred across the
tasks.
Existing research on policy reuse includes gathering expert
suggestions related to spatial hints (Da Silva et al. 2010),
extracting partial policies using structure of the policy
space (Hawasly et al. 2013), policy reuse with probabilistic exploration (Fernández et al. 2010), reward shaping to
deﬁne target task policy from source policy (Brys et al. 2015)
and modeling policy selection as Bayesian optimization problem (Rosman et al. 2016). Unlike previous methods, our
approach does not require expert suggestions; exploration
is kept minimal in the target task, and no knowledge of the
source policy structure is required for effective transfer. Applying change detection also eliminates the need to explicitly
specify the task as source or target.

Abstract
We propose a new method for transferring a policy from a
source task to a target task in model-based reinforcement
learning. Our work is motivated by scenarios where a robotic
agent operates in similar but challenging environments, such
as hospital wards, differentiated by structural arrangements or
obstacles, such as furniture. We address problems that require
fast responses adapted from incomplete, prior knowledge of
the agent in new scenarios. We present an efﬁcient selective
exploration strategy that maximally reuses the source task
policy. Reuse efﬁciency is effected through identifying subspaces that are different in the target environment, thus limiting
the exploration needed in the target task. We empirically show
that SEAPoT performs better in terms of jump starts and
cumulative average rewards, as compared to existing state-ofthe-art policy reuse methods.

The SEAPoT Algorithm
Introduction and Related Work

Our policy transfer learning algorithm includes two major
steps: (i) Detecting change in the agent’s target environment,
and (ii) Selective exploration by sub-space extraction.
Change detection: We model the agent’s observations
as time series, where each data point is derived from an
episode in the agent’s learning history. Bayesian change point
detection (MacKay et al. 2007) is adopted to infer if the
latest data point is a result of a change in the environment.
This method can handle noisy data due to sensor errors or
other environment factors. Change points split the time series
into disjoint segments such that, given a change point, data
appearing before and after the change are independent of
each other. Figure 1 shows an example of how the change
detection mechanism works with the observations from one
particular state in the system. The red curve shows the raw
sensor readings. The blue spike shows the change likelihood
when an obstacle is introduced or removed.
Selective exploration: In the target problem, the agent performs exploration in a small sub-space, which is the location
where the environment has changed and the agent’s historical knowledge is insufﬁcient to complete the task. Selective
exploration comprises of three steps: (i) Extract sub-space
MDP, M  , that is smaller than the original task; (ii) Solve M 
to obtain local policy; (iii) Compose the target task solution
using the source task and the local policies obtained.
Sub-space extraction: We exploit the agent’s knowledge
of the source task in solving the target task. Based on

This work addresses a class of problems that requires the
agent to respond quickly in a new environment, and at the
same time adapt to changes. SEAPoT is a new mechanism
for maximal transfer of the source task policy to the target
task in model-based reinforcement learning. The algorithm
detects changes in the target environment as compared to
the source, extracts a sub-space around the changed region,
limiting exploration to this sub-space, and continues to follow
the source task policy when a “known” state with respect to
the source environment is reached in the target task.
We address two major issues in this work: (i) How to ascertain that the agent’s operational environment has changed?
(ii) Once such a change is detected, how to efﬁciently learn a
new policy to operate in the current environment with minimal exploration? We focus on the settings where the source
and target tasks share the same state-action space but differ
in the transition dynamics and/or reward functions. The similarities between the environments are captured in the shared
state-action space, and the differences are represented in a
distribution of environmental elements leading to different
transition dynamics. In such settings, policy transfer often
performs better than other transfer mechanisms because it
∗

Currently afﬁliated with Google Korea, LLC
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4975

