Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bridging Video Content and Comments:
Synchronized Video Description with Temporal
Summarization of Crowdsourced Time-Sync Comments
Linli Xu, Chao Zhang
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, matgdog@mail.ustc.edu.cn
On the other hand, automatic time-sync description of
video content can be very expensive, which may rely
on scene-text alignment or external information such as
video transcripts or subtitles. Fortunately, the application of
crowdsourced time-sync video comments which are receiving increasing popularity on many video sharing websites
including Nico Nico Douga1 in Japan, bilibili2 and iQIYI3
in China provides a new perspective. Time-sync video comments, also known as “bullet-screen comments”, are the
comments users send to express their opinions or interpretations along the playback time when watching a video. These
comments are overlaid directly over the video in a synchronized manner, and users are allowed to respond to each
other, which enhances the experience of participation and
communication. Intuitively, crowdsourced time-sync video
comments provide a valuable source of information regarding the temporal information of a video, while the task of
extracting this information is still challenging: the comments are mostly in an informal and noisy form, such as
misspellings, symbols of emotions and internet slang terms,
while containing enormous redundancies; in addition, the
comments are usually short sentences and on very different
topics along the playback time.
Recently, methods have been proposed to generate temporal tags or labels based on crowdsourced time-sync video
comments (Wu et al. 2014; Lv et al. 2016), which mainly focus on extracting keywords such as topics or semantic labels.
On the other hand, keywords sometimes are not sufﬁcient to
describe a scene, especially when the scene includes a number of characters or depicts a complicated situation. In this
context, we take a different perspective and extract representative comments rather than keywords, which are complete
sentences and convey more meaningful information regarding the video content.
To achieve that, we propose a novel temporal summarization model based on the data reconstruction principle. A
subset of representative comments are selected to describe
the video at a playback time position along the timeline at
two levels: the selected subset should be able to reconstruct
the original corpus of video comments at the text level; in

Abstract
With the rapid growth of online sharing media, we are facing a huge collection of videos. In the meantime, due to the
volume and complexity of video data, it can be tedious and
time consuming to index or annotate videos. In this paper,
we propose to generate temporal descriptions of videos by
exploiting the information of crowdsourced time-sync comments which are receiving increasing popularity on many
video sharing websites. In this framework, representative and
interesting comments of a video are selected and highlighted
along the timeline, which provide an informative description
of the video in a time-sync manner. The challenge of the proposed application comes from the extremely informal and
noisy nature of the comments, which are usually short sentences and on very different topics. To resolve these issues,
we propose a novel temporal summarization model based on
the data reconstruction principle, where representative comments are selected in order to best reconstruct the original
corpus at the text level as well as the topic level while incorporating the temporal correlations of the comments. Experimental results on real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework and justify the idea of
exploiting crowdsourced time-sync comments as a bridge to
describe videos.

Introduction
The rapid growth of online sharing media has provided
popular channels for people to watch videos of entertainment, sports, news, etc. As a consequence, we are facing an overwhelming collection of online videos which
poses major challenges of effective management and annotation of videos. To address that, automatic video tagging
techniques (Siersdorfer, San Pedro, and Sanderson 2009;
Ulges et al. 2010) have been proposed which mainly focus
on detecting concepts and associating tags of entire videos.
Meanwhile, users can get further interested to know the information of video content along the playback time. Speciﬁcally, if videos are associated with time-sync textual description or annotation, users can preview the content with both
thumbnails and text along the timeline, and this textual information can further enhance users’ search experience with
time positions.

1

http://www.nicovideo.jp/
http://www.bilibili.com/
3
http://www.iqiyi.com/
2

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1611

