Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Automated Data Extraction Using Predictive Program Synthesis
Mohammad Raza

Sumit Gulwani

Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, Washington, 98052
moraza@microsoft.com

Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, Washington, 98052
sumitg@microsoft.com

cal programming languages that can be manually edited if
required.
Towards this goal, many recent works have explored various programming-by-example (PBE) approaches (Lieberman 2001; Gulwani, Harris, and Singh 2012; Raza, Gulwani, and Milic-Frayling 2014; Manshadi, Gildea, and Allen
2013; Lau et al. 2003). In PBE, users can specify their intended task by giving some input-output examples, from
which the system attempts to automatically generate a program in some domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) that satisﬁes
the given examples. A notable commercial success in this
area is the Flash Fill feature in Microsoft Excel that is based
on the PBE technique of (Gulwani 2011).
However, PBE approaches depend on an explicit intent
speciﬁcation from the user about the task that they want to
perform, which often requires the user to correctly understand the examples that will help the system to infer the correct program, and can also require signiﬁcant manual effort
from the user in many kinds of tasks. In this work, we identify and address a wide range of data extraction tasks where
the system can operate without explicit examples speciﬁcations and generate extraction scripts in a purely predictive
manner, based on the properties of the input data alone. This
can hence be seen as inference from input-only examples
rather than input-output examples. We ﬁrst illustrate such
extraction scenarios in two concrete application domains
that we investigate here, before discussing the predictive approach and its beneﬁts in more detail.

Abstract
In recent years there has been rising interest in the use of
programming-by-example techniques to assist users in data
manipulation tasks. Such techniques rely on an explicit inputoutput examples speciﬁcation from the user to automatically
synthesize programs. However, in a wide range of data extraction tasks it is easy for a human observer to predict the
desired extraction by just observing the input data itself. Such
predictive intelligence has not yet been explored in program
synthesis research, and is what we address in this work. We
describe a predictive program synthesis algorithm that infers
programs in a general form of extraction DSLs (domain speciﬁc languages) given input-only examples. We describe concrete instantiations of such DSLs and the synthesis algorithm
in the two practical application domains of text extraction and
web extraction, and present an evaluation of our technique on
a range of extraction tasks encountered in practice.

1

Introduction

With the ever-increasing growth of data in the world, recent
years have seen rising interest from both academia and industry in the use of automatic programming techniques to
address the problem of data wrangling: the challenge faced
by data scientists to cope with data in a multitude of formats from different sources and to bring this raw data into a
form that is amenable to their analysis tools. Such data preprocessing is a time-consuming activity (responsible for up
to 80% of time in some cases (Kandel et al. 2011)) and most
often requires programming skills in order to write robust
extraction or transformation scripts.
This is where automated generation of such programs can
be extremely beneﬁcial - both to speed up the wrangling process and also to make it accessible to a wide range of data
analysts and knowledge workers who are not skilled programmers. In comparison to more opaque automated inference techniques for data processing where the user has little understanding of the inferred transformations, automatic
program synthesis has the advantage of reusability (one-off
learning of lightweight scripts that can be stored and applied
to similar datasets in future), as well as transparency and editability: transformations are programs inspired from classi-

Text extraction. Figure 1 shows a text extraction scenario,
where the input data set (shown at the top) contains entries
from a web server log. Each row is a text string that contains
values such as the client IP address, date, etc, which are separated by various delimiting regions that are particular to this
log format. The goal is to extract these values into separate
columns as shown in the table at the bottom of the ﬁgure,
where the columns representing the delimiting regions are
highlighted.
In simple text-based formats such as CSV (CommaSeparated Values), such an extraction task is relatively easy
as there is usually a ﬁxed single-character delimiter used to
separate data values. But in general, as shown in Figure 1,
there can be any number of arbitrary string delimiters used
in the same dataset, and a particular string may even be used

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

882

