Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Inductive Pairwise Ranking: Going
Beyond the n log(n) Barrier
U. N. Niranjan∗

Arun Rajkumar

Department of Computer Science
University of California Irvine
un.niranjan@uci.edu

Data Analytics Lab
Xerox Research Centre India
arun.rajkumar@xerox.com

available side information to compute an ordering more efﬁciently than existing techniques. This is relevant in many
practical applications; for instance, in addition to using a
minimal amount of customer preference data, (a) using food
characteristics like nutrition, preparation method, etc could
help in ﬁnding the top-rated dishes of a restaurant, (b) using
car features like engine type, body type, etc could help elicit
useful trends for automotive industry.

Abstract
We study the problem of ranking a set of items from nonactively chosen pairwise preferences where each item has
feature information with it. We propose and characterize a
very broad class of preference matrices giving rise to the Feature Low Rank (FLR) model, which subsumes several models
ranging from the classic Bradley–Terry–Luce (BTL) (Bradley
and Terry 1952) and Thurstone (Thurstone 1927) models
to the recently proposed blade-chest (Chen and Joachims
2016) and generic low-rank preference (Rajkumar and Agarwal 2016) models. We use the technique of matrix completion
in the presence of side information to develop the Inductive
Pairwise Ranking (IPR) algorithm that provably learns a good
ranking under the FLR model, in a sample-efﬁcient manner. In practice, through systematic synthetic simulations, we
conﬁrm our theoretical ﬁndings regarding improvements in
the sample complexity due to the use of feature information. Moreover, on popular real-world preference learning
datasets, with as less as 10% sampling of the pairwise comparisons, our method recovers a good ranking.

Our Contributions: To the best of our knowledge, our
work is the ﬁrst to derive a provable and efﬁcient method for
ranking in the non-active inductive setting. Our novelty and
technical contributions can be summarized along the following axes:
1. Model: We generalize existing models so that we can incorporate (a) features, and (b) feature correlations associated with the items to be ranked. We show that our model
subsumes many existing and popular ranking models.
2. Algorithm: Our algorithm uses two key subroutines
namely, (a) noisy inductive matrix completion, and (b) approximate pairwise ranking algorithm (Copeland 1951).

Introduction
Ranking from pairwise comparisons or preferences is an
ubiquitous problem in machine learning, statistics and theoretical computer science. In the so-called non-active setting,
one is given comparison results of m pairs pre-selected from
among all pairs of n items where each pair is compared at
least K times. Particularly, the learner does not get to choose
which pairs are to be compared. The goal is then to estimate
a suitable ordering of the items, using the observed comparison results, that conforms to the true ordering, assuming one
exists, up to the desired error  in a suitably deﬁned error
measure.
In practical ranking applications, we often have side information associated with the items that need to be ranked
– such a scenario is referred to as the inductive setting. An
advantage in this inductive learning setting is that, in addition to ranking a given set of items, one is also able to
rank new unseen items that may introduced after parameter
learning. Motivated by these factors, we wish to leverage the

3. Guarantee: We derive the guarantee that our algorithm
obtains, with high probability, an -accurate recovery using Ω(max(log n/2 , d4 log3 n/3 n2 )) independent pairwise comparisons chosen uniformly at random.
4. Experiments: We substantiate our theoretical results by
demonstrating sample complexity gains on both synthetic
and real-world experiments.
We would like to emphasize upfront that it is the sole focus of this paper to study the practically motivated regime
of d  n in detail. Furthermore, we note that our sample complexity results do not violate the standard Ω(n log n)
lower bounds for comparison-based sorting algorithms since
we develop an algorithm that effectively ranks in the feature
space rather than the item space.

Related Work and Background
We now give a brief overview of relevant work in ranking
models followed by a brief background regarding tools from
inductive matrix completion theory which will be crucial in
proving our sample complexity bounds.

∗
Part of the work done while interning at Xerox Research Centre India.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2436

