Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scalable Graph Embedding for Asymmetric Proximity
Chang Zhou,1∗ Yuqiong Liu,1 Xiaofei Liu,2 Zhongyi Liu,2 Jun Gao1∗

1

Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, EECS, Peking University
{zhouchang,liuyuqiong,gaojun}@pku.edu.cn ∗ Corresponding Authors
2
Alibaba Group, {hsiaofei.hﬂ,zhongyi.lzy}@alibaba-inc.com

and Leskovec 2016). However, none of them can preserve
asymmetric proximities in both undirected and directed
graphs, which may be critical in many tasks, e.g., link prediction in social network, recommendation in e-commerce.
In addition, they do not give theoretical analysis of what exactly the proximity they preserve by embedding the vertex
from the original graph structure.

Abstract
Graph Embedding methods are aimed at mapping each vertex into a low dimensional vector space, which preserves certain structural relationships among the vertices in the original graph. Recently, several works have been proposed to
learn embeddings based on sampled paths from the graph,
e.g., DeepWalk, Line, Node2Vec. However, their methods
only preserve symmetric proximities, which could be insufﬁcient in many applications, even the underlying graph is
undirected. Besides, they lack of theoretical analysis of what
exactly the relationships they preserve in their embedding
space. In this paper, we propose an asymmetric proximity
preserving (APP) graph embedding method via random walk
with restart, which captures both asymmetric and high-order
similarities between node pairs. We give theoretical analysis
that our method implicitly preserves the Rooted PageRank
score for any two vertices. We conduct extensive experiments
on tasks of link prediction and node recommendation on open
source datasets, as well as online recommendation services in
Alibaba Group, in which the training graph has over 290 million vertices and 18 billion edges, showing our method to be
highly scalable and effective.

A
C

C

B

A

C

B

A

A

B

C

B

(a) Directed

A
C

B

Introduction
In recent years, Graph embedding has drawn a lot of attentions from the academic ﬁelds, due to its wide usage in many
real world applications such as Recommendations (Barkan
and Koenigstein 2016; Zhang et al. 2016), Social Network
Analysis (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), Natural Language Processing (Tang et al. 2015) and Knowledge Bases
(Lin et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2014). Graph Embedding techniques try to embed each vertex from a graph into a low dimensional vector space, which preserves the structural similarities or distances among the vertices in the original graph.
By doing that, we can represent a graph vertex in a vector
form, and use well-studied machine learning methods in the
vector space to do further mining tasks like clustering, classiﬁcation and prediction.
There are many ways of learning node representations recently, most of which adopt a random walk based sampling
procedure to exploit the network structure, e.g., Deepwalk
(Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014), Node2Vec (Grover

(b) Undirected

Figure 1: Asymmetric Proximity in both Directed and Undirected Graphs. Intuitively, Sim(A, C) is not equal with
Sim(C, A) in both cases, due to their asymmetric local
structures. Even for undirected graphs, the learning model
should treat the two sampled paths C → B → A and
A → B → C differently as directed sequences, since the
probabilities of this two sampled paths are quite different,
which means the occurrence number of (C, A) and (A, C)
in a graph could vary a lot in many real world applications
that consider the asymmetric relations.
For instance, for the application of friends recommendation in social network like Twitter, the underlying directed
graph naturally has an asymmetric similarity or closeness
metric between any two nodes. As shown in Figure 1(a), A
has the potential to be liked by C while it’s not true the other
way round. Even for the undirected graph shown in Figure
1(b), we can intuitively see that A is much more important

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2942

