Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Deep Latent Spaces for Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Chih-Kuan Yeh,1∗ Wei-Chieh Wu,2∗ Wei-Jen Ko,2 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1

Research Center for IT Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
jason6582@gmail.com, {b01504088, b01901162}@ntu.edu.tw, ycwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw
2

Dembczynski 2010) aim at exploiting the cross-label dependency by assuming label prior information. Unfortunately,
since these approaches perform a series of classiﬁcation for
multi-label prediction, parallel implementation is not applicable if reducing computation loads is desirable.
Deriving a latent label space with reduced dimensionality is also a popular technique for multi-label classiﬁcation (Balasubramanian and Lebanon 2012; Tai and Lin 2012;
Chen and Lin 2012; Bi and Kwok 2013; Hsu et al. 2009;
Zhang and Schneider 2012; Zhou, Tao, and Wu 2012;
Lin et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2014; Li and Guo 2015; Bhatia
et al. 2015). Its goal is to transform the label space into a latent subspace, followed by the association between the projected input and label data for classiﬁcation purposes. With
a proper decoding process which maps the projected data
back to the original label space, the task of multi-label prediction is achieved. Since the learning of such latent subspaces not only reduces the classiﬁcation time, the correlation between the labels can be implicitly exploited. Instead of observing latent spaces with reduced dimensions,
(Tsoumakas, Katakis, and Vlahavas 2011; Ferng and Lin
2013) proposed to derive high-dimensional label embedding
space for performing the above task. Nevertheless, the above
latent space learning algorithms can all be viewed as label
embedding based approaches. Moreover, the ability to handle missing labels during the learning of multi-label classiﬁcation models is also practical for real-world application
like image annotation. Incomplete labeled data during training might result in noisy classiﬁers with insufﬁcient prediction capability. While this is typically not well addressed
in existing methods, (Wu et al. 2014) chose a transductive
setting with label smoothness regularization, and (Wu, Lyu,
and Ghanem 2015) approached the problem by formulating
a convex quadratic matrix optimization problem.
Among the ﬁrst to utilize neural network architectures,
BP-MLL (Zhang and Zhou 2006) not only treated each output node as a binary classiﬁcation task, and relied on the
architecture itself to exploit the dependency across labels.
Later, it was extended by (Nam et al. 2014) with additional
deep neural networks (DNN) techniques. Some recent works
proposed different loss functions (Gong et al. 2013) or architectures (Wei et al. 2014) for further improving the performance. For example, CNN-RNN (Wang et al. 2016) chose
to learn a linear label embedding function, with label co-

Abstract
Multi-label classiﬁcation is a practical yet challenging task
in machine learning related ﬁelds, since it requires the prediction of more than one label category for each input instance. We propose a novel deep neural networks (DNN)
based model, Canonical Correlated AutoEncoder (C2AE),
for solving this task. Aiming at better relating feature and
label domain data for improved classiﬁcation, we uniquely
perform joint feature and label embedding by deriving a deep
latent space, followed by the introduction of label-correlation
sensitive loss function for recovering the predicted label outputs. Our C2AE is achieved by integrating the DNN architectures of canonical correlation analysis and autoencoder,
which allows end-to-end learning and prediction with the
ability to exploit label dependency. Moreover, our C2AE can
be easily extended to address the learning problem with missing labels. Our experiments on multiple datasets with different scales conﬁrm the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed method, which is shown to perform favorably against
state-of-the-art methods for multi-label classiﬁcation.

Introduction
With rich information presented in multimedia data, many
real-world classiﬁcation tasks require one to assign more
than one label to each instance. For example, multiple types
of objects in an image need to be annotated, or different
identities need to be determined from an audio clip (Zhang
and Zhou 2014). Thus, different from standard multi-class
recognition problems (i.e., only one class label for each
input data), multi-label classiﬁcation typically requires additional efforts in extracting and describing the associated
data/label information to produce satisfactory performances.
By dividing the original multi-label classiﬁcation problem
into multiple independent binary classiﬁcation tasks, binary
relevance (Tsoumakas and Katakis 2006) is a straightforward technique and solution, which has been widely applied
by users in related ﬁelds. However, in addition to the concern
of high computational costs, such techniques cannot identify the correlation between label information, which would
limit the resulting prediction performance. As a result, methods proposed by (Read et al. 2011; Cheng, Hüllermeier, and
∗

- indicates equal contribution.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2838

