Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Random Features for Shift-Invariant
Kernels with Moment Matching
†

Weiwei Shen,†, ‡ Zhihui Yang,‡ Jun Wang†

School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
‡
GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY, USA,
realsww@gmail.com, yangz@ge.com, wongjun@gmail.com
of dimensionality renders the curse of support, i.e., that
kernel-based learning algorithms scale poorly with the number of training samples (Bengio, Delalleau, and Roux 2005).
For example, out-of-sample evaluation requires computing
the kernel measures between a new data point and all the
training data. Hence, it becomes the tradeoff between generalization accuracy and computational costs.
In order to eradicate the challenge in the scalability of kernel methods, intensive research has been conducted over recent years. The seminal paper by (Rahimi and Recht 2007)
provides one solution to this difﬁculty via a randomized construction of low-dimensional approximate feature maps. Denote k(x, y) = Ψ(x), Ψ(y)H as a kernel function, which
is an inner product of the associated feature map Ψ : Rd →
H, with two data points x, y ∈ Rd and a Hilbert space H.
The essence of randomized feature construction is to embed
the original nonlinear feature space H into a relatively lowdimensional Euclidean space while incurring an arbitrarily
small distortion in the inner product values. Mathematically,
the explicit randomized feature map from the d-dimensional
data to an m-dimensional Euclidean inner product space can
be represented as Z : Rd → Cm , and the kernel value can
be approximately evaluated by the inner product between
the transformed data pair, i.e., k(x, y) ≈ Z(x), Z(y)Cm ,
where Cm denotes an m-dimensional complex
m Euclidean
space with the inner product α, βCm = j=1 αj βj∗ , with
vectors α = (α1 , . . . , αm ) and β = (β1 , . . . , βm ) . Its
theoretical foundation builds upon the classical Bochner’s
theorem that links a continuous shift-invariant kernel to a
unique probability density (Bochner 1933), thereby allowing random sampling to play a critical role in deﬁning random feature maps. Thus, the performance of this construction predominately relies on the quality of the elected sampling procedure. Yet, that procedure has been relatively less
acknowledged, highlighted and studied. Consequently, approximating the kernel up to sufﬁcient accuracy generally
demanding a large sample size m to perform well has fatally
affected the applicability and popularization of the method
of random features (Hamid et al. 2014; Huang et al. 2014).
Recently, the illuminating paper by (Yang et al.
2014a) demonstrates one effective way of replacing
pseudo-random numbers by quasi-random numbers to improve the sampling efﬁciency, i.e., reducing the sample
size to achieve the desired accuracy. However, quasi-

Abstract
In order to grapple with the conundrum in the scalability of
kernel-based learning algorithms, the method of approximating nonlinear kernels via random feature maps has attracted
wide attention in large-scale learning systems. Speciﬁcally,
the associated sampling procedure is one critical component
that dictates the quality of random feature maps. However,
for high-dimensional features, the standard Monte Carlo sampling method has been shown to be less effective in producing
low-variance random samples. In consequence, it demands
constructing a large number of features to attain the desired accuracy for downstream use. In this paper, we present
a novel sampling algorithm powered by moment matching
techniques to reduce the variance of random features. Our extensive empirical studies and comparisons with several highly
competitive peer methods verify the superiority of the proposed algorithm in Gram matrix approximation and generalization errors in regression. Our rigorous theoretical proofs
justify that the proposed algorithm is guaranteed achieving
lower variance than the standard Monte Carlo method in high
dimensional settings.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods have evoked remarkable repercussions in
machine learning tasks, ranging from regression to classiﬁcation to image reconstruction (Schölkopf and Smola 2002).
As kernel methods allow malleable generalization of algorithms developed in explicit linear feature spaces to implicit
nonlinear feature spaces, nonlinear structures of data can be
efﬁcaciously explored. Speciﬁcally, the well-known kernel
trick allows us to circumvent operating in high (often inﬁnite) dimensional nonlinear feature spaces through directly
exploiting nonlinear kernel functions (Aizerman, Braverman, and Rozoner 1964). By reaping beneﬁts of obviating
explicitly computing coordinates in those high-dimensional
feature spaces, computational costs are dramatically saved.
While algorithms in high-dimensional feature spaces inevitably encounter the curse of dimensionality, the classical
Representation Theorems guarantee the existence of ﬁnitedimensional solutions to associated optimization problems
even in inﬁnite-dimensional feature spaces (Argyriou, Micchelli, and Pontil 2009). However, this solution to the curse
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2520

