Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Incidental Supervision:
Moving beyond Supervised Learning
Dan Roth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana/Champaign
danr@illinois.edu

making decisions that depend on these require learning and,
in turn, supervision. Given a task, the standard machine
learning methodology suggests to collect annotated data for
this task, and then train a model for it. However, we believe
that this methodology is not scalable – we will never have
enough annotated data to train all the models we need this
way. Annotating data for complex tasks is difﬁcult, costly,
and sometimes impossible, especially when a required intermediate representation is ill-deﬁned, but the outcome building on it is. The popular direction of using crowd-sourcing,
while often important and helpful in relatively small tasks,
is not a realistic solution when an annotation of a single instance takes an expert 5 minutes – a common situation when
dealing with annotating involved meaning representations
for semantic parsing, or relations between events for an information extraction task.
This paper suggests to re-think the current annotationheavy approaches to Natural Language Processing and many
other areas that make use of machine learning methods to
deal with messy, naturally occurring data. Speciﬁcally, we
argue that in many realistic cases learning should be (and
is) driven by incidental signals. Incidental Signals refer to a
collection of weak signals that exist in the data and the environment, independently of the tasks at hand. These signals
are co-related to the target tasks, and can be exploited, along
with appropriate algorithmic support, to provide sufﬁcient
supervision and facilitate learning.
Consider, for example, the task of Named entity (NE)
transliteration – the process of transcribing a NE from a
source language to some target language based on phonetic similarity between the entities (e.g., determine how to
write ”Obama” in Hebrew). Identifying transliteration pairs
is an important component in many linguistic applications
which require identifying out-of-vocabulary words, such as
machine translation and multilingual information retrieval.
Naturally, to know how to write the word Hussein in Russian, say, one needs to train a model that requires as input
a long list of pairs: NEs in English and their corresponding transliteration in Russian. These resources do not exists for many pairs of languages. However, (Klementiev and
Roth 2006) showed that it is possible to automatically discover NEs in low resource languages, given bilingual corpora that are weakly temporally aligned. This is a much easier resource to come by, given that multiple news services

Abstract
Machine Learning and Inference methods have become ubiquitous in our attempt to induce more abstract representations
of natural language text, visual scenes, and other messy, naturally occurring data, and support decisions that depend on
it. However, learning models for these tasks is difﬁcult partly
because generating the necessary supervision signals for it is
costly and does not scale.
This paper describes several learning paradigms that are designed to alleviate the supervision bottleneck. It will illustrate their beneﬁt in the context of multiple problems, all
pertaining to inducing various levels of semantic representations from text. In particular, we discuss (i) Response Driven
Learning of models, a learning protocol that supports inducing meaning representations simply by observing the model’s
behavior in its environment, (ii) the exploitation of Incidental
Supervision signals that exist in the data, independently of the
task at hand, to learn models that identify and classify semantic predicates, and (iii) the use of weak supervision to combine simple models to support global decisions where joint
supervision is not available.
While these ideas are applicable in a range of Machine Learning driven ﬁelds, we will demonstrate it in the context of several natural language applications, from (cross-lingual) text
classiﬁcation, to Wikiﬁcation, to semantic parsing.

Introduction
The fundamental issue underlying natural language understanding is that of Semantics. There is a need to move toward understanding the text at an appropriate level of abstraction, beyond the word level, in order to support access,
knowledge extraction and communication.
In all these cases there is a need to get around the inherent
ambiguity in natural language expressions – every utterance
might carry multiple meanings, depending on the context
in which it is being used, the audience, the producer of the
utterance, etc. – and the variability in natural language – a
desired meaning can be expressed in a very large number of
quite different surface forms.
This necessitates the use of machine learning and inference methods to support inducing the desired level of abstraction. Inducing models and semantic representations and
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4885

