Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Stable Marriage
Begum Genc, Mohamed Siala, Barry O’Sullivan

Gilles Simonin

Insight Centre for Data Analytics
Department of Computer Science
University College Cork, Ireland
{begum.genc, mohamed.siala, barry.osullivan}@insight-centre.org

TASC - LINA
École des Mines de Nantes
Nantes, France
gilles.simonin@mines-nantes.fr

dominates another rotation ρ if ρ cannot be exposed until
exposing ρ. This dominance relation deﬁnes a partial order
on the set of rotations and the associated structure is called a
rotation poset. Although the number of all stable matchings
can be exponential in the number of men/women, the size of
rotation poset remains polynomial. A closed subset S is a set
of rotations such that for any rotation ρ in S, if there exists
a rotation ρ that dominates ρ then ρ is also in S. There is a
one-to-one correspondence between such closed subsets and
the set of stable matchings (Gusﬁeld and Irving 1989).

Abstract
Stable Marriage (SM) is a well-known matching problem,
where the aim is to match a set of men and women. The
resulting matching must satisfy two properties: there is no
unassigned person and there are no other assignments where
two people of opposite gender prefer each other to their
current assignments. We propose a new version of SM
called as Robust Stable Marriage (RSM) by combining stability and robustness. We deﬁne robustness by introducing (a,b)-supermatches, which has been inspired by (a, b)supermodels (Ginsberg, Parkes, and Roy 1998). An (a, b)supermatch is a stable matching, where if at most a pairs want
to break up, it is possible to ﬁnd another stable matching by
breaking at most b other pairs.

Motivation
We introduce the notion of (a, b)-supermatch which we deﬁne as a stable matching M such that if at most a men (or
women) decide to break their matches in M , it is possible
to “repair” the matching (i.e., ﬁnd another stable matching)
by changing the partners of those a men/women and at most
b others. This concept is inspired by the notion of (a, b)supermodels in boolean satisﬁability (Ginsberg, Parkes, and
Roy 1998). We study the problem of ﬁnding a stable matching Mi that is closest to a given stable matching M if a pair
(man,woman) decides to break their match in M . The distance between matchings is measured as the total number of
men that have different partners between M and Mi .
The intuition behind using this notion of robustness is
to provide solutions that can be repaired as a result of unforeseen cases with bounded cost. The most robust matching is the one that requires the minimum number of repairs
(i.e. minimum b) amongst all stable matchings. The concept
of (a, b)-supermatches is also meaningful in the context of
other matching problems such as carpooling, stable roommate problems, etc.

Introduction & Background
Many matching problems involve the assignment of agents
to agents while respecting an optimality criterion. Such
problems include the assignment of junior doctors to hospitals, workers to ﬁrms, and training programs (Gusﬁeld and
Irving 1989). Stable marriage, introduced by Gale and Shapley (Gale and Shapley 1962), is a classic approach to solving
such problems. An instance of the stable marriage problem
involves two disjoint sets of men and women. Each person is
associated with a strictly ordered preference list containing
members of the opposite sex. A stable matching M is one
between men and women in which each person is matched
to at most one person in his/her preference list such that no
two persons prefer each other to their current match in M .
A stable matching Mi dominates a stable matching Mj , denoted by Mi  Mj , if every man prefers his match in Mi to
Mj or is indifferent between them. The structure that represents all stable matchings according to the dominance order
is a lattice. We denote by M0 (Mz ) the man-optimal (respectively, woman-optimal or man-pessimal) stable matching.
A rotation ρ corresponds to an ordered list of pairs taking
part in a stable matching M such that eliminating these pairs
from M and matching each man to the woman of the next
man (with respect to ordering of ρ) corresponds to a stable
matching. In this case ρ is said to be exposed in M . An important property of rotations is that every pair is a part of at
most one rotation (Gusﬁeld and Irving 1989). A rotation ρ

Methodology
Let M be a stable matching and S be the closed subset that
corresponds to M . Suppose that m, w ∈ M is a pair to
remove. Let ρp be the unique rotation that produces m, w
and ρe be the unique rotation that eliminates m, w.
The closest matching that does not include m, w is a
matching in which either m, w was not produced at all
or was eliminated. Hence, if ρp exists, there exists a set of
stable matchings Su that dominate M and do not include
m, w. Similarly, if ρe exists, there exists another set of

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4925

