Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Option-Critic Architecture
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, Doina Precup
Reasoning and Learning Lab, School of Computer Science
McGill University
{pbacon, jharb, dprecup}@cs.mcgill.ca

ing options. Based on the policy gradient theorem (Sutton
et al. 2000), we derive new results which enable a gradual
learning process of the intra-option policies and termination
functions, simultaneously with the policy over them. This
approach works naturally with both linear and non-linear
function approximators, under discrete or continuous state
and action spaces. Existing methods for learning options are
considerably slower when learning from a single task: much
of the beneﬁt comes from re-using the learned options in
similar tasks. In contrast, we show that our approach is capable of successfully learning options within a single task
without incurring any slowdown and while still providing
beneﬁts for transfer learning.
We start by reviewing background related to the two main
ingredients of our work: policy gradient methods and options. We then describe the core ideas of our approach:
the intra-option policy and termination gradient theorems.
Additional technical details are included in the appendix.
We present experimental results showing that our approach
learns meaningful temporally extended behaviors in an effective manner. As opposed to other methods, we only need
to specify the number of desired options; it is not necessary
to have subgoals, extra rewards, demonstrations, multiple
problems or any other special accommodations (however,
the approach can take advantage of pseudo-reward functions
if desired). To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst end-to-end approach for learning options that scales to very large domains
at comparable efﬁciency.

Abstract
Temporal abstraction is key to scaling up learning and planning in reinforcement learning. While planning with temporally extended actions is well understood, creating such abstractions autonomously from data has remained challenging.
We tackle this problem in the framework of options [Sutton,
Precup & Singh, 1999; Precup, 2000]. We derive policy gradient theorems for options and propose a new option-critic
architecture capable of learning both the internal policies and
the termination conditions of options, in tandem with the policy over options, and without the need to provide any additional rewards or subgoals. Experimental results in both discrete and continuous environments showcase the ﬂexibility
and efﬁciency of the framework.

Introduction
Temporal abstraction allows representing knowledge about
courses of action that take place at different time scales.
In reinforcement learning, options (Sutton, Precup, and
Singh 1999; Precup 2000) provide a framework for deﬁning such courses of action and for seamlessly learning and
planning with them. Discovering temporal abstractions autonomously has been the subject of extensive research efforts in the last 15 years (McGovern and Barto 2001;
Stolle and Precup 2002; Menache, Mannor, and Shimkin
2002; Şimşek and Barto 2009; Silver and Ciosek 2012),
but approaches that can be used naturally with continuous state and/or action spaces have only recently started
to become feasible (Konidaris et al. 2011; Niekum 2013;
Mann, Mannor, and Precup 2015; Mankowitz, Mann, and
Mannor 2016; Kulkarni et al. 2016; Vezhnevets et al. 2016;
Daniel et al. 2016).
The majority of the existing work has focused on ﬁnding
subgoals (useful states that an agent should reach) and subsequently learning policies to achieve them. This idea has
led to interesting methods but ones which are also difﬁcult
to scale up given their “combinatorial” ﬂavor. Additionally,
learning policies associated with subgoals can be expensive
in terms of data and computation time; in the worst case, it
can be as expensive as solving the entire task.
We present an alternative view, which blurs the line between the problem of discovering options from that of learn-

Preliminaries and Notation
A Markov Decision Process consists of a set of states S, a set
of actions A, a transition function P : S ×A → (S → [0, 1])
and a reward function r : S × A → R. For convenience,
we develop our ideas assuming discrete state and action
sets. However, our results extend to continuous spaces using
usual measure-theoretic assumptions (some of our empirical
results are in continuous tasks). A (Markovian stationary)
policy is a probability distribution over actions conditioned
on states, π : S × A → [0, 1]. In discounted problems, the
value function of
a∞policy π is deﬁned as the expected return:
| s0 = s] and its action-value
Vπ (s) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t rt+1
∞
function as Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [ t=0 γ t rt+1 | s0 = s, a0 = a],
where γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. A policy π is
greedy with respect to a given action-value function Q if

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1726

