Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Conﬁdence-Rated
Discriminative Partial Label Learning
1

Cai-Zhi Tang,1,2 Min-Ling Zhang2,3,∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
3
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
220141515@seu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn∗ (corresponding author)
Beringer 2006; Chen et al. 2014) or superset label learning
(Liu and Dietterich 2014).
To learn from partial label examples, the common discriminative solution is to assume one parametric model
g(yj | x; θ) for each class label yj , whose modeling outputs are aggregated to optimize speciﬁc objectives such as
likelihood or margin over the training examples (Jin and
Ghahramani 2003; Nguyen and Caruana 2008; Cour, Sapp,
and Taskar 2011; Liu and Dietterich 2012; Chen et al. 2014;
Yu and Zhang 2016). Existing discriminative approaches
conduct aggregation by treating the modeling outputs from
all parametric models in an equal manner, where the conﬁdence of each candidate label being the ground-truth label is
not differentiated. This strategy might be suboptimal as each
candidate label should contribute differently to the learning
process, especially the contribution from the ground-truth
label (i.e. yi ) against those from the false positive labels (i.e.
Si \ {yi }) (Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2016).
To overcome the potential drawback of existing strategy,
a novel partial label learning approach named C ORD, i.e.
COnﬁdence-Rated Discriminative partial label learning, is
proposed in this paper. C ORD learns from partial label examples by adapting the popular boosting techniques, where the
weights over training examples and the ground-truth conﬁdences of candidate labels are maintained in each boosting round. Accordingly, the discriminative base classiﬁer
is trained by utilizing the currently-available weight and
ground-truth conﬁdence information. Empirical studies on a
broad range of controlled UCI data sets and real-world partial label data sets clearly verify the effectiveness of the proposed conﬁdence-rated discriminative learning approach.
We start the rest of this paper by brieﬂy reviewing related
work on partial label learning. Then, we present technical
details of the proposed C ORD approach and report experimental results of the comparative studies. Finally, we conclude the paper and indicate future research issues.

Abstract
Partial label learning aims to induce a multi-class classiﬁer
from training examples where each of them is associated
with a set of candidate labels, among which only one label is valid. The common discriminative solution to learn
from partial label examples assumes one parametric model
for each class label, whose predictions are aggregated to optimize speciﬁc objectives such as likelihood or margin over
the training examples. Nonetheless, existing discriminative
approaches treat the predictions from all parametric models
in an equal manner, where the conﬁdence of each candidate
label being the ground-truth label is not differentiated. In this
paper, a boosting-style partial label learning approach is proposed to enabling conﬁdence-rated discriminative modeling.
Speciﬁcally, the ground-truth conﬁdence of each candidate
label is maintained in each boosting round and utilized to
train the base classiﬁer. Extensive experiments on artiﬁcial
as well as real-world partial label data sets validate the effectiveness of the conﬁdence-rated discriminative modeling.

Introduction
Partial label learning deals with the problem where each
training example is associated with a set of candidate labels,
among which only one label corresponds to the ground-truth
one (Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Zhang 2014). Formally,
let X = Rd denote the d-dimensional instance space and
Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yq } denote the label space consisting of q
class labels. The task of partial label learning is to induce a
multi-class classiﬁer f : X → Y from the partial label training set D = {(xi , Si ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ m}. Here, xi ∈ X is a
d-dimensional feature vector and Si ⊆ Y is the set of candidate labels associated with xi . Particularly, the ground-truth
label yi for xi is conﬁned within Si but not directly accessible to the learning algorithm.
The need of partial label learning arises in a number of
real-world scenarios where only weak labeling information
can be acquired during training data collection, such as automatic face naming (Cour et al. 2009; Zeng et al. 2013), web
mining (Jie and Orabona 2010), ecoinformatics (Liu and Dietterich 2012), etc. In some literature, partial label learning
is also termed as ambiguous label learning (Hüllermeier and

Related Work
In partial label learning, the labeling information conveyed
by the training examples is weak as the ground-truth label is not accessible to the learning algorithm. It is worth
noting that partial label learning is related to other wellstudied weakly-supervised learning frameworks including
semi-supervised learning (Zhu and Goldberg 2009), multi-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2611

