Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Explainable Image Understanding
Using Vision and Reasoning
Somak Aditya
Department of Computer Science
Arizona State University
saditya1@asu.edu

Introduction

We leverage the concept of actions and ﬂuents in Answer
Set Programming language to answer the above questions.
In another constrained setting, we formulate how to detect
higher level activity such as “making a sandwich” or “robbery” from ﬁne-grained detailed actions. In several such scenarios, one might not have enough data to train on and might
be completely constrained on one or two examples and background knowledge.
Image Understanding Through Scene Description
Graphs: A popular formulation of the problem of Image Understanding is in terms of the task of generating
meaningful textual description from images. Current deeplearning based image region-to-text grounding based methods (Karpathy and Li 2014; Xu et al. 2015) have shown
amazing results. But, we are still far from “understanding”
or answering deep questions about an image. Motivated by
the preliminary reasoning-based approaches in (Aditya et al.
2015), we developed a combined Perception and reasoning
module to retrieve a knowledge-structure (a graph that represents knowledge) from a static image. The visual perception module produces an initial set of objects, scenes and
constituent detections. Our reasoning module then rectiﬁes
the object detections, predicts correct constituents and then
creates a knowledge-structure. To predict how the objects
interact in the scene, we build a common-sense knowledge
base from image annotations along with co-occurrence frequency table of commonly occurring objects and abstract
concepts. With these two precomputed knowledge-sources,
we infer the following: 1) the correct set of correlated objects; 2) the most probable events (verbs) that these objects
participate in; 3) the roles that the objects play in this event;
and 4) given the events, objects and constituents, the concept that emerges from such information. Based on these inferences, we output a Scene Description Graph (SDG) (Figure 1) that depicts how these different entities and events
interact. SDG is essentially a directed labeled graph among
entities and events that enables an array of possibilities to
do further analysis beyond visual appearance, such as evententity based analysis, question answering about the scene
and ﬂexible caption generation2 . Our initial experiments on
the sentences generated from SDG shows that we achieve

Image Understanding is fundamental to intelligent agents.
Researchers have explored Caption Generation and Visual
Question Answering as independent aspects of Image Understanding (Johnson et al. 2015; Xiong, Merity, and Socher
2016). Common to most of the successful approaches,
are the learning of end-to-end signal mapping (image-tocaption, image and question to answer). The accuracy is impressive. However, t is also important to explain a decision to
end-user (justify the results, and rectify based on feedback).
Very recently, there has been some focus (Hendricks et al.
2016; Liu et al. ) on explaining some aspects of the learning
systems. In my research, I look towards building explainable
Image Understanding systems that can be used to generate
captions and answer questions. Humans learn both from examples (learning) and by reading (knowledge). Inspired by
such an intuition, researchers have constructed KnowledgeBases that encode (probabilistic) commonsense and background knowledge. In this work, we look towards efﬁciently
using this probabilistic knowledge on top of machine learning capabilities, to rectify noise in visual detections and generate captions or answers to posed questions.

Current Research
My current work on Image Understanding spans from outlining broader pictures to developing systems for speciﬁc applications. Here, I brieﬂy outline the projects1 .
Visual Common-sense for Scene Understanding using Perception, Semantic Parsing and Reasoning: In this
work (Aditya et al. 2015), we combine visual processing
with techniques from natural language understanding (especially semantic parsing), common-sense reasoning and
knowledge representation and reasoning to improve visual
perception to reason about ﬁner aspects of activities. We
show how from a video about “making a line” shot in a
constrained setting, we are able to answer questions such
as (a) Which hand is being used in aligning the ruler? (b)
Is the ruler aligned when the pen is drawing on the plank?
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Most of these works are jointly done with Dr. Yezhou Yang
(currently Assistant Professor, ASU) and Prof. Yiannis Aloimonos
of University of Maryland, College Park.

2
Such structures are also generated by Semantic parsers such as
K-parser (www.kparser.org).

5028

