Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Learning for
Lexicon-Based Classiﬁcation
Jacob Eisenstein
Georgia Institute of Technology
801 Atlantic Drive NW
Atlanta, Georgia 30318

its relative simplicity and ease of use: for domain experts,
creating lexicons is intuitive, and, in comparison with labeling instances, it may offer a faster path towards a reasonably
accurate classiﬁer (Settles 2011). Furthermore, classiﬁcation
errors can be iteratively debugged by reﬁning the lexicons.
However, from a machine learning perspective, there
are a number of drawbacks to lexicon-based classiﬁcation.
First, while intuitively reasonable, lexicon-based classiﬁcation lacks theoretical justiﬁcation: it is not clear what conditions are necessary for it to work. Second, the lexicons
may be incomplete, even for designers with strong substantive intuitions. Third, lexicon-based classiﬁcation assigns an equal weight to each word, but some words may
be more strongly predictive than others.1 Fourth, lexiconbased classiﬁcation ignores multi-word phenomena, such
as negation (e.g., not so good) and discourse (e.g., the
movie would be watchable if it had better acting). Supervised classiﬁcation systems, which are trained on labeled
examples, tend to outperform lexicon-based classiﬁers, even
without accounting for multi-word phenomena (Liu 2015;
Pang and Lee 2008).
Several researchers have proposed methods for lexicon
expansion, automatically growing lexicons from an initial
seed set (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown 1997; Qiu et al.
2011). There is also work on handling multi-word phenomena such as negation (Wilson, Wiebe, and Hoffmann 2005;
Polanyi and Zaenen 2006), and discourse (Somasundaran,
Wiebe, and Ruppenhofer 2008; Bhatia, Ji, and Eisenstein
2015). However, the theoretical foundations of lexiconbased classiﬁcation remain poorly understood, and we lack
principled means for automatically assigning weights to lexicon items without resorting to labeled instances.
This paper elaborates a set of assumptions under which
lexicon-based classiﬁcation is equivalent to Naı̈ve Bayes
classiﬁcation. I then derive expected error rates under these
assumptions. These expected error rates are not matched by
observations on real data, suggesting that the underlying assumptions are invalid. Of key importance is the assumption
that each lexicon item is equally predictive. To relax this as-

Abstract
In lexicon-based classiﬁcation, documents are assigned labels
by comparing the number of words that appear from two opposed lexicons, such as positive and negative sentiment. Creating such words lists is often easier than labeling instances,
and they can be debugged by non-experts if classiﬁcation performance is unsatisfactory. However, there is little analysis
or justiﬁcation of this classiﬁcation heuristic. This paper describes a set of assumptions that can be used to derive a probabilistic justiﬁcation for lexicon-based classiﬁcation, as well
as an analysis of its expected accuracy. One key assumption
behind lexicon-based classiﬁcation is that all words in each
lexicon are equally predictive. This is rarely true in practice,
which is why lexicon-based approaches are usually outperformed by supervised classiﬁers that learn distinct weights on
each word from labeled instances. This paper shows that it is
possible to learn such weights without labeled data, by leveraging co-occurrence statistics across the lexicons. This offers
the best of both worlds: light supervision in the form of lexicons, and data-driven classiﬁcation with higher accuracy than
traditional word-counting heuristics.

Introduction
Lexicon-based classiﬁcation refers to a classiﬁcation rule
in which documents are assigned labels based on the count
of words from lexicons associated with each label (Taboada
et al. 2011). For example, suppose that we have opposed
labels Y ∈ {0, 1}, and we have associated lexicons W0 and
W1 . Then for a document with a vector of word counts x,
the lexicon-based decision rule is,


xi ≷
xj ,
(1)
i ∈W0

j ∈W1

where the ≷ operator indicates a decision rule. Put simply,
the rule is to select the label whose lexicon matches the most
word tokens.
Lexicon-based classiﬁcation is widely used in industry
and academia, with applications ranging from sentiment
classiﬁcation and opinion mining (Pang and Lee 2008;
Liu 2015) to the psychological and ideological analysis
of texts (Laver and Garry 2000; Tausczik and Pennebaker
2010). The popularity of this approach can be explained by

1

Some lexicons attach coarse-grained predeﬁned weights to
each word. For example, the OpinionFinder Subjectivity lexicon
labels words as “strongly” or “weakly” subjective (Wilson, Wiebe,
and Hoffmann 2005). This poses an additional burden on the lexicon creator.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3188

