Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Active Video Summarization:
Customized Summaries via On-line Interaction with the User
Ana Garcia del Molino,†‡ Xavier Boix,§¶ Joo-Hwee Lim,† Ah-Hwee Tan‡
†

Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
§
LCSL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, MA
¶
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines, McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA
{stugdma,joohwee}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, xboix@mit.edu, asahtan@ntu.edu.sg
‡

judges, etc. (Ma et al. 2005; Jiang, Cotton, and Loui 2011;
Gygli et al. 2014; Potapov et al. 2014; Lin, Morariu, and Hsu
2015; Zhang et al. 2016; Chu, Song, and Jaimes 2015; Yao,
Mei, and Rui 2016); or both (Ngo, Ma, and Zhang 2005;
Lu and Grauman 2013; Gygli, Grabner, and Van Gool 2015).
Recently, however, several authors stressed the need to
take into account the user’s preferences, as the usability of
video summarization can be signiﬁcantly improved if customizing the summary. Furthermore, the data show that summaries generated by different people are not consistent between each other (Gygli et al. 2014). Thus, customization
might be crucial to effectively summarize consumer videos,
as these videos are inherently personal.
Previous work to customize video summaries obtains the
user’s preferences passively, by analyzing data that the user
provided previously to the summarization. Several methods
create a customized summary given a text query from the
user (Yang et al. 2003; Varini, Serra, and Cucchiara 2015;
Sharghi, Gong, and Shah 2016) or a set of video segments
that match a set of user’s preferences (Tseng and Smith
2003; Han, Hamm, and Sim 2011). Another strand of methods assesses each segment’s interest from the user’s behavior while watching that video (Peng et al. 2011), or similar
videos (Masumitsu and Echigo 2000; Yoshitaka and Sawada
2012).
In this paper, we introduce Active Video Summarization
(AVS), which enriches the set of user’s preferences while
creating the summary. AVS improves the usability of the
aforementioned passive approaches, as these approaches are
constrained by the initial feedback the user provided. A
probabilistic model is used to infer both the customized summary and the next question to ask, which reduces the time
the user needs to produce a summary.
We evaluate AVS on two challenging datasets for video
summarization: UTEgo (Lee, Ghosh, and Grauman 2012),
which is a commonly used egocentric video dataset, and
CSumm, a new dataset for customizable video summarization that we introduce. CSumm contains single-shot unconstrained videos of long duration recorded with a Google
Glass, which depict a varied range of events and daily life activities. The results show that the summaries generated with
AVS exploit better the user’s preferences than the state-ofthe-art video summarization algorithms. Namely, AVS signiﬁcantly reduces the time spent by the users to generate

Abstract
To facilitate the browsing of long videos, automatic video
summarization provides an excerpt that represents its content. In the case of egocentric and consumer videos, due
to their personal nature, adapting the summary to speciﬁc
user’s preferences is desirable. Current approaches to customizable video summarization obtain the user’s preferences
prior to the summarization process. As a result, the user needs
to manually modify the summary to further meet the preferences. In this paper, we introduce Active Video Summarization (AVS), an interactive approach to gather the user’s
preferences while creating the summary. AVS asks questions
about the summary to update it on-line until the user is satisﬁed. To minimize the interaction, the best segment to inquire next is inferred from the previous feedback. We evaluate AVS in the commonly used UTEgo dataset. We also
introduce a new dataset for customized video summarization (CSumm) recorded with a Google Glass. The results
show that AVS achieves an excellent compromise between
usability and quality. In 41% of the videos, AVS is considered
the best over all tested baselines, including summaries manually generated. Also, when looking for speciﬁc events in the
video, AVS provides an average level of satisfaction higher
than those of all other baselines after only six questions to the
user.

1

Introduction

The emergence of compact and portable cameras in the consumer market has created the need for automatic and customizable summarization tools. Videos recorded with smartphones and wearable cameras are ﬂooding social networks,
and our lives are being recorded in a hands-free and nonintrusive way. As a result, video summarization tools will
play a key role to facilitate sharing consumer videos in the
near future, as these tools can save a considerable amount of
resources to the user, e.g. time to create the summary, cost
of sharing and keeping long videos, etc.
Many state-of-the-art summarization tools select video
segments to include in the summary by optimizing a predeﬁned criteria. Such criteria frequently relates to story coherence such as diversity and representativity (Dang and
Radha 2014; Zhao and Xing 2014); interestingness from
visual aesthetics, attention, importance to external human
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4046

