Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Catch’Em All: Locating Multiple Diffusion
Sources in Networks with Partial Observations
Kai Zhu

Zhen Chen and Lei Ying

Google Inc.
zhukai93@gmail.com

School of of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
Arizona State University
{Zhen.Chen.1, Lei.Ying.2}@asu.edu

and the observed information is one or multiple complete
network snapshot(s). Furthermore, provably guarantees on
the detection rate have only been established for tree networks except a recent paper by Zhu and Ying (Zhu and Ying
2016), where they proposed a Short-Fat Tree (SFT) algorithm and proved that under the single-source, homogeneous
Independent-Cascade (IC) model, SFT locates the actual
source in the Erdős-Rényi random graph (Erdos and Renyi
1959) with probability one asymptotically (as the size of the
network increases) when a complete snapshot of the network
is given.
In this paper, we consider the diffusion source localization
problem in a setting that generalizes the existing ones at
several important directions.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of locating multiple diffusion
sources in networks with partial observations. We propose
a new source localization algorithm, named Optimal-JordanCover (OJC). The algorithm ﬁrst extracts a subgraph using a
candidate selection algorithm that selects source candidates
based on the number of observed infected nodes in their neighborhoods. Then, in the extracted subgraph, OJC ﬁnds a set
of nodes that “cover” all observed infected nodes with the
minimum radius. The set of nodes is called the Jordan cover,
and is regarded as the set of diffusion sources. Considering the
heterogeneous susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) diffusion
in the Erdős-Rényi (ER) random graph, we prove that OJC can
locate all sources with probability one asymptotically with partial observations. OJC is a polynomial-time algorithm in terms
of network size. However, the computational complexity increases exponentially in m, the number of sources. We further
propose a low-complexity heuristic based on the K-Means for
approximating the Jordan cover, named Approximate-JordanCover (AJC). Simulations on random graphs and real networks
demonstrate that both AJC and OJC signiﬁcantly outperform
other heuristic algorithms.

1

• Multiple sources versus single source: In this paper, the
diffusion can be originated from multiple nodes simultaneously, instead of from a single source. When the infection
duration is sufﬁciently short, the infected subnetworks
from different sources are disconnected components. In
such cases, the single-source localization algorithms can
be applied to each of the infected subnetwork. We, however, do not make such an assumption, and consider the
scenario where the infected subnetworks may overlap with
each other, so the single-source localization algorithms
cannot be directly applied.

Introduction

Diffusion source localization (or called the information
source detection) is to infer the source(s) of an epidemic diffusion process in a network based on some observations of the
diffusion. Possible observed information includes node states
(e.g., infected or susceptible) and the timestamps at which
nodes changed their states. The solution to this problem has
a wide range of applications. In epidemiology, identifying
patient zero helps diagnose the cause and the origin of the
disease. For cybersecurity, tracing the source of malware is
an important step in the investigation of a cyber attack. On online social networks, the trustworthiness of news/information
heavily depends on its source.
Since the seminal work of Shah and Zaman (Shah and Zaman 2010), the problem has received a lot of attention from
different research communities, including machine learning,
signal processing and information theory (a detailed discussion can be found in the related work). However, most existing results assume that the diffusion is from single source

• A partial snapshot versus a complete snapshot: In this
paper, we assume a partial snapshot in which each node
reports its state with some probability, which is in contrast
to a complete snapshot assumed in the literature where all
nodes’ states are observed. Because of a partial snapshot,
the sources may not report their states and be observed
as infected nodes; and the observed infected nodes may
not form a connected component. Both increase the uncertainty and complexity of the problem. In fact, it turns
out to be critical to have a candidate selection algorithm to
select source candidates from unobserved nodes but only
use observed infected nodes in computing the infection
eccentricity. The selection step yields 27× reduction on
the computing time in our simulations while guaranteeing
the same the detection rate, and yields 600× reduction on
the computing time with a slight reduction of the detection
rate.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Heterogeneous diffusion versus homogeneous diffusion:

1676

