Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Relational Deep Learning:
A Deep Latent Variable Model for Link Prediction
Hao Wang, Xingjian Shi, Dit-Yan Yeung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
hwangaz@cse.ust.hk, xshiab@connect.ust.hk, dyyeung@cse.ust.hk
2009) view the link prediction problem as a supervised classiﬁcation task where each instance corresponds to a pair of
nodes in the network. Hybrid methods (Chang and Blei 2010;
Chen et al. 2014) try to jointly model the link structures and
node attributes in an attempt to get the best of both worlds.
Link-based methods, though powerful, account only for the
link structures of networks. They ignore the node attributes
which are in fact also useful for link prediction (Al Hasan et
al. 2006; Doppa et al. 2009; Hunter et al. 2011). For example, the text and abstracts (text-based attributes) of scientiﬁc
articles play a crucial role in determining the links of citation networks, the similarity and relevance of content in web
pages often affect whether they link each other, and the proﬁle descriptions in online social networks may be the sole
source of information deciding how friends are recommended
to new users. On the other hand, attribute-based methods ﬁrst
extract attribute-based features for pairs of nodes and pose
link prediction as a classiﬁcation problem. Although attributebased methods can take node attributes into account and are
easy to implement, they often involve tedious feature crafting
which is very labor intensive. There are models that directly
use the node attributes for link prediction (Hoff, Raftery, and
Handcock 2002), but they fail to make meaningful prediction
with high-dimensional attributes like text data, as mentioned
in (Chang and Blei 2010).
On the other hand, by jointly modeling the node attributes
and link structures, hybrid methods can get the best of both
worlds and deliver state-of-the-art performance. They can
fully integrate the node attributes into a principled model
without the need for feature crafting. What’s more, they can
even infer the node attributes according to the link structures.
This is impossible for both link-based and attribute-based
methods. Among the hybrid methods, the relational topic
model (RTM) (Chang and Blei 2010) integrates both node
attributes and link structures into a principled probabilistic
model and gives very promising accuracy. Subsequently, discriminative RTM (Chen et al. 2014) extends RTM by modeling topic interaction and using regularized Bayesian inference
(RegBayes), leading to signiﬁcant performance boost. However, the representations (features) that the current hybrid
methods learn from the link structures and node attributes are
still not effective enough.
As a separate research direction, recent advances in deep
learning show that models like stacked denoising autoen-

Abstract
Link prediction is a fundamental task in such areas as social
network analysis, information retrieval, and bioinformatics.
Usually link prediction methods use the link structures or
node attributes as the sources of information. Recently, the
relational topic model (RTM) and its variants have been proposed as hybrid methods that jointly model both sources of
information and achieve very promising accuracy. However,
the representations (features) learned by them are still not effective enough to represent the nodes (items). To address this
problem, we generalize recent advances in deep learning from
solely modeling i.i.d. sequences of attributes to jointly modeling graphs and non-i.i.d. sequences of attributes. Speciﬁcally,
we follow the Bayesian deep learning framework and devise a
hierarchical Bayesian model, called relational deep learning
(RDL), to jointly model high-dimensional node attributes and
link structures with layers of latent variables. Due to the multiple nonlinear transformations in RDL, standard variational
inference is not applicable. We propose to utilize the product
of Gaussians (PoG) structure in RDL to relate the inferences
on different variables and derive a generalized variational
inference algorithm for learning the variables and predicting
the links. Experiments on three real-world datasets show that
RDL works surprisingly well and signiﬁcantly outperforms
the state of the art.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of social network services (SNS)
and other Internet applications, network data have become
very pervasive (Wang et al. 2016). For example, there exist hyperlinks among web pages, social relationships among
friends in online social networks like Facebook, and citations among scientiﬁc articles. Link prediction, as a fundamental task for such network data, can help to recommend
relevant pages for newly created websites, new friends in
online social networks, or citations for newly written articles. Roughly speaking, existing link prediction methods can
be categorized into three classes (Goldenberg et al. 2010):
link-based methods, attribute-based methods, and hybrid
methods. Link-based methods seek to model the link structures of networks in a principled way (Taskar et al. 2003;
Airoldi et al. 2008), e.g., using latent variable models or linear
algebraic formulations. Attribute-based methods (Doppa et al.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2688

