Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Non-Linear Dynamics of Decision
Boundaries for Maintaining Classiﬁcation Performance
Atsutoshi Kumagai

Tomoharu Iwata

NTT Secure Platform Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
3-9-11, Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo, Japan
kumagai.atsutoshi@lab.ntt.co.jp

NTT Communication Science Laboratories,
NTT Corporation
2-4, Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan
iwata.tomoharu@lab.ntt.co.jp
quite expensive since labels need to be manually assigned
by domain experts. Even using unlabeled data is impossible
in some domains such as security. For example, anti-virus
software vendors distribute their update ﬁles (data for updating classiﬁers) many times a day for immediately dealing
with rapidly evolving malware. When software is used in an
off-line environment, which has a risk of virus infection via
physical media such as USB, it cannot receive the update
ﬁles; therefore, it cannot update the classiﬁers.

Abstract
We propose a method that involves a probabilistic model for
learning future classiﬁers for tasks in which decision boundaries nonlinearly change over time. In certain applications,
such as spam-mail classiﬁcation, the decision boundary dynamically changes over time. Accordingly, the performance
of the classiﬁers will deteriorate quickly unless the classiﬁers
are updated using additional data. However, collecting such
data can be expensive or impossible. The proposed model alleviates this deterioration in performance without additional
data by modeling the non-linear dynamics of the decision
boundary using Gaussian processes. The method also involves our developed learning algorithm for our model based
on empirical variational Bayesian inference by which uncertainty of dynamics can be incorporated for future classiﬁcation. The effectiveness of the proposed method was demonstrated through experiments using synthetic and real-world
data sets.

1

To overcome this problem, a method for learning future
decision boundaries given only labeled data with timestamps
collected until the current time has been proposed (Kumagai and Iwata 2016). This method learns the dynamics of
the decision boundary without additional data and predicts
the future decision boundary. The dynamics of the decision
boundary is modeled using vector autoregressive models,
with which the decision boundary is assumed to depend linearly on the previous decision boundaries. However, this linearity assumption is too strong because decision boundaries
would change more intricately in real-world data.

Introduction

The decision boundary dynamically changes over time in
certain applications. For example, in web-site classiﬁcation, malicious web sites are uninterruptedly created to scam
users; therefore, the decision boundary that classiﬁes a web
site into malicious or not malicious can vary over time (Ma
et al. 2009). In activity recognition using sensor data, the
decision boundary can vary over time since user activity
patterns dynamically change (Abdallah et al. 2012). When
we do not update classiﬁers for tasks in which the decision
boundary evolves over time, the classiﬁcation performance
deteriorates quickly (Gama et al. 2014).
There have been many methods proposed for updating
classiﬁers to maintain performance, such as online learning (Rosenblatt 1958; Crammer, Kulesza, and Dredze 2009;
Crammer et al. 2010; Wang, Zhao, and C.Hoi 2012), forgetting algorithms (Klinkenberg 2004), ensemble learning
(Wang et al. 2003; Kolter and Maloof 2007; Bach and Maloof 2010; Brzezinski and Stefanowski 2014), and domain
adaptation (Hoffman, Darrell, and Saenko 2014). These
methods require additional labeled and/or unlabeled data to
update classiﬁers. However, using these data can be expensive or impossible. For example, collecting labeled data is

In this paper, we propose a method that involves a novel
probabilistic model for learning future classiﬁers, whose dynamics is non-linear, when only labeled data with timestamps collected until the current time are available. With
the proposed model, a decision boundary is deﬁned by the
classiﬁer parameters, and the dynamics of each parameter
is modeled by Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen and
Williams 2006). By handling the dynamics of each parameter, our model can reﬂect the characteristics of each feature. For example, in spam-mail classiﬁcation, words such
as ‘free’, ‘viagra’, and ‘DISCOUNT’, have been used in
spam mail for a long time; therefore, the parameters for such
words (features) would be effective over time. In contrast,
for words temporarily used in spam mail, such as new product names and celebrity’s names, the parameters would become ineffective over time. The proposed method also involves our developed learning algorithm based on empirical
variational Bayesian inference for optimizing classiﬁer parameters and hyperparameters for GPs simultaneously. By
using a Bayesian framework, the proposed method can classify data collected at a future time by taking account into
the uncertainty of predicted future classiﬁers, which enables
robust classiﬁcation.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2117

