Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

JAG: A Crowdsourcing Framework
for Joint Assessment and Peer Grading
Igor Labutov

Christoph Studer

Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853

this intuition formally. In this work, we focus on the speciﬁc
instance of this problem in the context of education, although
our approach applies to general crowdsourcing tasks.
Recently, massive open online courses (MOOCs) brought
crowdsourcing into the realm of education, via a task known
as peer-grading. In its traditional form, peer-grading assigns
to each student a secondary role of a grader. Students are
responsible for validating the correctness of other students’
solutions in order to assign a score, typically in accordance
with a rubric provided by an instructor. The advantage of
peer-grading is its ﬂexibility to students’ submissions, which
may range from short answers, to essays, diagrams, code, or
entire projects (Kulkarni et al. 2015). In a practical deployment, however, peer-grading, faces the same challenges as
crowdsourcing. First, each student differs in their ability to
grade, and the grades assigned by different students must be
reconciled in a reasonable way. Second, grading becomes an
additional burden on the students, and mechanisms must be
put in place that not only incentivize participation and effort,
but prevent students from “gaming” the process. Only recently, research in peer-grading has started to address all these
challenges (Piech et al. 2013; Raman and Joachims 2014;
Wu et al. 2015).
The remainder of this paper will focus on the problem of
open-response assessment and grading in the context of education. Nevertheless, the presented framework, model, and
algorithms are not limited to this context, and can be applied
to many crowdsourcing tasks where the goal is to identify
high-quality contributions made by competent contributors.

Abstract
Generation and evaluation of crowdsourced content is commonly treated as two separate processes, performed at different
times and by two distinct groups of people: content creators
and content assessors. As a result, most crowdsourcing tasks
follow this template: one group of workers generates content
and another group of workers evaluates it. In an educational
setting, for example, content creators are traditionally students
that submit open-response answers to assignments (e.g., a
short answer, a circuit diagram, or a formula) and content
assessors are instructors that grade these submissions. Despite
the considerable success of peer-grading in massive open online courses (MOOCs), the process of test-taking and grading
are still treated as two distinct tasks which typically occur at
different times, and require an additional overhead of grader
training and incentivization. Inspired by this problem in the
context of education, we propose a general crowdsourcing
framework that fuses open-response test-taking (content generation) and assessment into a single, streamlined process that
appears to students in the form of an explicit test, but where everyone also acts as an implicit grader. The advantages offered
by our framework include: a common incentive mechanism for
both the creation and evaluation of content, and a probabilistic
model that jointly models the processes of contribution and
evaluation, facilitating efﬁcient estimation of the quality of
the contributions and the competency of the contributors. We
demonstrate the effectiveness and limits of our framework via
simulations and a real-world user study.

1

Introduction

Crowdsourcing open-ended content—for example, seeking
an answer to “What is the best way to brew a cup of coffee?”—
requires both: ﬁnding people willing to contribute an original
answer and ﬁnding competent people to identify the correct
answer(s) among these contributions. Traditional crowdsourcing mechanisms separate the two tasks into two stages: one
group of workers contribute the content, and another group
evaluates it. However, it is natural to assume that the same
workers who contribute “good” original content will also be
competent at evaluating the contributions of other workers on
the same topic, and vice versa. Consequently, if our ultimate
goal is to identify “good” content and competent contributors, it is natural to seek a statistical model that captures

JAG: An alternative to Peer Grading
We present a novel, alternative approach to peer-grading that
naturally resolves the challenges of grade aggregation and
incentivization. We propose joint assessment and grading
(JAG), which fuses peer grading and assessment into a single,
streamlined process by re-framing grading as additional testing. Our approach is motivated by the fact that a “grader” that
has no answer key, when presented with the listing of other
students’ answers, is no different than a test-taker facing a
multiple-choice question (with multiple possible correct or
incorrect answers). In other words: a student selecting what
they believe to be the correct answer in a multiple choice
question (MCQ) constructed from the open-response submissions of other students is in effect simultaneously (i) grading

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1010

