Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Inﬁnite Kernel Learning: Generalization Bounds and Algorithms
Yong Liu,1 Shizhong Liao,2 Hailun Lin,1 Yinliang Yue,1∗ Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University
{liuyong,linhailun,yueyinliang,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, {szliao,yongliu}@tju.edu.cn
2

these measures
have slow convergence rates with or
 usually
der at most O √1n , where n is the size of data set.
Instead of learning a single kernel, multiple kernel learning (MKL) follows a different route to learn a set of
combination coefﬁcients of basic kernels (Lanckriet et al.
2004; Bach, Lanckriet, and Jordan 2004; Ong, Smola, and
Williamson 2005; Sonnenburg et al. 2006; Rakotomamonjy
et al. 2008; Kloft et al. 2009; 2011; Cortes, Mohri, and
Rostamizadeh 2010; Cortes, Kloft, and Mohri 2013; Liu,
Liao, and Hou 2011). Within this framework, the ﬁnal kernel is usually a convex (or conic) combination of ﬁnite basic kernels that should be speciﬁed in advance by users.
To improve the accuracy of MKL, some researchers studied the problem of learning a kernel in the convex hull of a
prescribed set of continuously parameterized basic kernels
(Micchelli and Pontil 2005; Argyriou, Micchelli, and Pontil 2005; Argyriou et al. 2006; Gehler and Nowozin 2008;
Ghiasi-Shirazi, Safabakhsh, and Shamsi 2010). This ﬂexibility of the kernel class can translate into signiﬁcant improvements in terms of accuracy. However, the measures used for
the existing ﬁnite and inﬁnite MKL algorithms are usually
radius-margin (SVM objective) or other related regularization functionals, which usually have slow convergence rate.
In this paper, we introduce a novel measure of generalization errors based on spectral analysis, called principal
eigenvalue proportion (PEP), and create a new kernel learning method over a possibly inﬁnite set of basic kernels. We
ﬁrst derive generalization bounds with convergence rates of
order O( log(n)
n ) based on the PEP measure. By minimizing
the derived PEP-based sharp generalization bounds, we design two new kernel learning algorithms for ﬁnite kernel and
inﬁnite kernels respectively: one can be formulated as a convex optimization and the other one as a semi-inﬁnite program. For inﬁnite case, the basic kernels are learned automatically instead of being speciﬁed in advance. Experimental results on lots of benchmark data sets show that our proposed method can signiﬁcantly outperform the existing kernel learning methods. Theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate that our PEP-based kernel learning
method is sound and effective.

Abstract
Kernel learning is a fundamental problem both in recent research and application of kernel methods. Existing kernel learning methods commonly use some measures of generalization errors to learn the optimal kernel in a convex (or conic) combination of prescribed
basic kernels. However, the generalization bounds derived by these measures usually have slow convergence
rates, and the basic kernels are ﬁnite and should be speciﬁed in advance. In this paper, we propose a new kernel learning method based on a novel measure of generalization error, called principal eigenvalue proportion
(PEP), which can learn the optimal kernel with sharp
generalization bounds over the convex hull of a possibly
inﬁnite set of basic kernels. We ﬁrst derive sharp generalization bounds based on the PEP measure. Then we
design two kernel learning algorithms for ﬁnite kernels
and inﬁnite kernels respectively, in which the derived
sharp generalization bounds are exploited to guarantee
faster convergence rates, moreover, basic kernels can be
learned automatically for inﬁnite kernel learning instead
of being prescribed in advance. Theoretical analysis and
empirical results demonstrate that the proposed kernel
learning method outperforms the state-of-the-art kernel
learning methods.

Introduction
Kernel methods have been successfully applied in solving
various problems in machine learning community. The performance of these methods strongly depends on the choice
of kernel functions (Micchelli and Pontil 2005). The earliest learning method of a kernel function is cross-validation,
which is computationally expensive and only applicable to
kernels with a small number of parameters. Minimizing theoretical estimate bounds of generalization error is an alternative to cross-validation (Liu, Jiang, and Liao 2014). To this
end, some measures are introduced: such as VC dimension
(Vapnik 2000), covering number (Zhang 2002), Rademacher
complexity (Bartlett and Mendelson 2002), radius-margin
(Vapnik 2000), maximal discrepancy (Anguita et al. 2012),
etc. Unfortunately, the generalization bounds derived by

Related Work

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In this subsection, we introduce the related measures of generalization error and inﬁnite kernel learning methods.

2280

