Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Goal Operations for Cognitive Systems
Michael T. Cox, Dustin Dannenhauer, Sravya Kondrakunta
Wright State Research Institute
Beavercreek, OH 45431
michael.cox@wright.edu

Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
dtd212@lehigh.edu

Wright State University
Dayton, OH 45435
kondrakunta.2@wright.edu

procedures can be incorporated into various mechanisms of a
cognitive architecture.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces the concept of goal operations and formalizes the
notion of goal transformation to subsume such operations.
Section 3 describes the MIDCA cognitive architecture within
which we have implemented such transformations. Section 4
discusses the differences in goal transformation mechanisms
(i.e., at the planning level or the metacognitive level). Section
5 presents experiments and discusses the results. Related
work is discussed in Section 6, and we conclude in Section 7.

Abstract
Cognitive agents operating in complex and dynamic domains
benefit from significant goal management. Operations on
goals include formulation, selection, change, monitoring and
delegation in addition to goal achievement. Here we model
these operations as transformations on goals. An agent may
observe events that affect the agent’s ability to achieve its
goals. Hence goal transformations allow unachievable goals to
be converted into similar achievable goals. This paper examines an implementation of goal change within a cognitive architecture. We introduce goal transformation at the metacognitive level as well as goal transformation in an automated
planner and discuss the costs and benefits of each approach.
We evaluate goal change in the MIDCA architecture using a
resource-restricted planning domain, demonstrating a performance benefit due to goal operations.

Goal Operations
Work by Roberts and colleagues suggests that agents performing goal reasoning transition sets of goals through a series of modes in a goal life cycle (Johnson, et al. 2016; Roberts et al., 2015). To transition between two modes in the
cycle, an agent executes a cognitive strategy. For example,
a goal may be selected from among a set of pending goals
to become the currently active goal using some selection
strategy. Many of these transitions correspond to what we
conceive of as goal operations as opposed to planning operations. A goal selection strategy is an example of the former;
whereas an expansion strategy moving a goal from a committed to expanded mode represents a planning operation
that creates a plan for the goal.
Our taxonomy of goal operations includes the following.
x Goal formulation – create a new pending goal
x Goal selection – choose an active goal from pending
x Goal change – change a goal to a similar one
x Goal monitoring – watch that a goal is still useful
x Goal delegation – give a goal to another agent
x Goal achievement – execute action to attain a goal state
Early work by Cox and Veloso (1998) a r g u e s that
goals can exist in an abstraction hierarchy whereby some
goals specify desired state predicates that are more general
than others. The concept introduced in their work is that an
important strategy for re-planning in dynamic environments is to shift goals along this hierarchy and other goal
spaces. S uch movement is called a goal transformation.

Introduction
Recent work on goal reasoning (Aha, et al., 2013; Hawes,
2011) has started to examine how intelligent agents can
reason about and generate their own goals instead of always
depending upon a human user directly. Broadly construed,
the topic concerns complex systems that self-manage their
desired goal states (Vattam, et al., 2013). In the decisionmaking process, goals are not simply given as input from a
human, rather they constitute representations that the system
itself formulates, changes, and achieves. Here we examine
the idea that goal reasoning constitutes a series of
fundamental operations on goals that focus cognition on what
is important for performance.
When the world changes during planning or during
execution (in the real world, a clear chronological line
between the two is not always present), goals may become
obsolete. For example, it makes little sense to pursue the goal
of securing a town center if the battlefield has shifted to an
adjacent location. At such a point, a robust agent must be able
to alter the goal minimally to compensate; otherwise, a
correct plan to secure the old location will not be useful at
execution time. We view a goal transformation to be a
movement in a goal space and in this paper show how such

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4385

