Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Options in Multiobjective Reinforcement Learning
Rodrigo Cesar Bonini, Felipe Leno da Silva, Anna Helena Reali Costa∗
Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Av. Prof. Luciano Gualberto, n.158, Engenharia Elétrica, Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, CEP: 05508-970.
{rodrigo cesarb,f.leno,anna.reali}@usp.br

Nowé 2013) ones, are better described through multiple reward functions {R1 , . . . , Ri }, as they require the maximization of multiple and possibly conﬂicting objectives. MORL
methods solve such tasks by balancing all objectives as well
as possible, but scalability issues are further intensiﬁed and
the learning process may becomes even slower. Hence, as
domains become progressively complex, scalability gains
more importance for RL methods.
The Options Framework (Sutton, Precup, and Singh
1999) was proposed to alleviate scalability issues. Options
are high-level actions that encapsulate a partial policy, often
representing the solution of a subtask. Including well-built
options into the action space accelerate learning. While in
the original Options Framework each option was provided
by a domain expert, later works like the PolicyBlocks Algorithm (Pickett and Barto 2002), propose autonomous optiondiscovery methods through the evaluation of previous task
solutions. Furthermore, learned options are reported to accelerate learning even when transferred across similar tasks.
The PolicyBlocks Algorithm autonomously learn useful
options by analyzing previous task solutions(optimal policies) and ﬁnding commonly occuring partial policies, named
options. However, as well as in other option-discovering solutions, only single-objective domains are take into account.
Besides that, although MORL algorithms aim at solving
multiple objective problems, there is no MORL approach
from option-discovery methods until now and even the effect
of human-speciﬁed options in MORL is not regarded in the
literature.
Therefore, we argue that MORL algorithms can also beneﬁt from option-based solutions to accelerate learning. We
here propose a method, hereafter called Multiobjective Options (MO-Opt), to learn options in multiobjective domains.
Our initial experiments show that our proposal can autonomously learn useful options that accelerate learning in
multiobjective domains. The next step is to evaluate our
option-discovery algorithm when transferring options across
different domains.

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a successful technique to
train autonomous agents. However, the classical RL methods
take a long time to learn how to solve tasks. Option-based solutions can be used to accelerate learning and transfer learned
behaviors across tasks by encapsulating a partial policy into
an action. However, the literature report only single-agent and
single-objective option-based methods, but many RL tasks,
especially real-world problems, are better described through
multiple objectives. We here propose a method to learn options in Multiobjective Reinforcement Learning domains in
order to accelerate learning and reuse knowledge across tasks.
Our initial experiments in the Goldmine Domain show that
our proposal learn useful options that accelerate learning in
multiobjective domains. Our next steps are to use the learned
options to transfer knowledge across tasks and evaluate this
method with stochastic policies.

Introduction
The RL Framework (Sutton and Barto 1998) allows autonomous agents to learn with interactions in the environment. Many sequential decision problems are modeled by a
Markov Decision Process (MDP)(Sutton and Barto 1998),
and RL is an extensively used solution for MDPs through
environment interactions. An MDP is described by the tuple
S, A, T, R, where S is the set of environment states, A is
the set of available actions, T is the transition function, and
R is the reward function (the agent does not know T and R).
The agent goal is to learn an optimal policy π ∗ , that maps
the best action for each possible state.
Although RL has been succesfully applied in many problems, its classical approaches learns very slowly. Learning
π ∗ may take too many time, because RL classical approach
needs many steps to explore the state-action space.
Further, many RL tasks cannot be easily described by a
single reward function, and are rather described by multiple reward functions. Many tasks, as the Multiobjective Reinforcement Learning (MORL)(Van Moffaert, Drugan, and

Proposal

∗

We are grateful for the support from the CEST Group,
CNPq (grant 311608/2014-0), and São Paulo Research Foundation
(FAPESP), grant 2015/16310-4.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

We here introduce MO-Opt, an approach based in the Options Framework, for option-discovery in multiobjective domains. The main idea of MO-Opt is to learn options for each
of the objectives separately (for which the PolicyBlocks al-

4907

