Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Interpretation of Social Network Communities
Tushar Maheshwari, Aishwarya N. Reganti,
Upendra Kumar, Tanmoy Chakraborty,∗ Amitava Das
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Sri City, AP, India, 517588
∗
University of Maryland, College Park, USA, 20742
tushar.m14,aishwarya.r14, upendra.k14, amitava.das}@iiits.in
∗
tanchak@umiacs.umd.edu

properties (Network size, betweenness centrality, density
and transitivity), and Speech-Act classes.

Abstract
A community in a social network is considered to be a group
of nodes densely connected internally and sparsely connected
externally. Although previous work intensely studied network topology within a community, its semantic interpretation is hardly understood. In this paper, we attempt to understand whether individuals in a community possess similar Personalities, Values and Ethical background. Finally, we
show that Personality and Values models could be used as
features to discover more accurate community structure compared to the one obtained from only network information.

Table 1: Performance of Personality and Values Models.
Features
Lexicon
+Non-Linguistic
+Speech-Act

Model
Personality
Values
Personality
Values
Personality
Value

F-Score (SVM)
0.78
0.74
0.79
0.76
0.80
0.81

F-Score (LR)
0.62
0.59
0.66
0.61
0.70
0.63

F-Score(RF)
0.65
0.62
0.68
0.65
0.71
0.67

Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression
(LR), and Random Forest (RF) were tested for the classiﬁcation tasks. The best performing Personality classiﬁcation system (Verhoeven, Daelemans, and De Smedt 2013) at
WCPR’13 achieved an average F-Score of 0.73. In Table 1,
we see that our SVM-based model outperforms their system
by achieving an average F-Score of 0.80. The Values model
achieves an accuracy of 0.81.

Personality & Values Model
In this paper we examine Personality and Values models to
understand semantic homogeneity of network communities.
The Big 5 Personality model [Openness (O), Conscientiousness (C), Extroversion (E), Agreeableness (A), Neuroticism(N)] is being used to understand the characteristics
or blend of characteristics at individual level, whereas the
Schwartz Values model [Achievement (AC), Benevolence
(BE), Conformity (CO), Hedonism (HE), Power (PO),
Security (SE), Self-direction (SD), Stimulation (ST), Tradition (TR), Universalism (UN)] is being used to understand and analyze inter-personal dynamics of societal sentiment (see SI Text for further details).1
The Personality labeled gold corpus (10K Facebook status updates of 250 users and their Facebook network properties), released in WCPR’13 workshop, was used to build the
Personality model. For the Values model we crowd-sourced
a Twitter corpus using the Amazon Mechanical Turk. Selfassessments were obtained using the Portrait Values Questionnaire (PVQ). At the end of the data collection process,
data from 367 unique users had been gathered, having 1,608
average tweets per user (see SI Text for details).
For the automatic categorization of Personalities and Values, several psycholinguistic features were tested including Linguistic features (LIWC2 , Harvard General Inquirer,
MRC psycholinguistic feature, and Sensicon3 ), network

Semantic Interpretation of Communities
The Twitter network, released by SNAP (Leskovec and
Krevl, 2014) (nodes: 81,306, edges: 1,768,149) has been
used to study community structure. We considered 1,562
ground-truth communities (after discarding communities
having size less than 5 and with tweets less than 100).
In order to analyse whether people within the same community tend to be homogeneous with respect to their Personality and background Values/Ethics, we measure Shannon’s Entropy (measure of the uncertainty) for each dimension separately. Higher entropy scores suggest lower similarity. Cross-relational entropy scores both for Personality and Values models are reported in Table 2a and Table
2b respectively. In these tables, rows represent communities having less entropy scores for the corresponding psychological dimension. For example in Table 2a, the ﬁrst
row AC (Achievement) represents all the communities having less entropy scores for achievement. Columns represent
the fuzzy orientations of community members in rest of the
dimensions. Resulting entropy scores for different Personality and Values differ greatly across communities. Therefore
min )
we normalize entropy scores using: xscaled = x(x−x
max −xmin
which keeps the range between (0,1). Entropy scores are
further normalized based on the community size since the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://aishwarya-nr.github.io/AAAI.pdf
2
http://www.liwc.net/
3
https://hlt-nlp.fbk.eu/technologies/sensicon

4967

