Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Adaptive Proximal Average
Approximation for Composite Convex Minimization
Li Shen,† Wei Liu,‡ Junzhou Huang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Shiqian Ma§

†School of Mathematics, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
‡Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
 School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
§Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
shen.li@mail.scut.edu.cn, wliu@ee.columbia.edu, sqma@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Notice that the boundedness assumption about Qi is actually equivalent to the global Lipschitz continuousness of gi
used in (Yu 2013, Assumption 1) according to (Borwein and
Vanderwerff 2010, Proposition 4.4.6).
This multi-term nonsmooth composite convex minimization problem (1) covers a large number of important applications in machine learning, such as overlapping group Lasso
(Zhao, Rocha, and Yu 2009; Mairal et al. 2010), graphguided fused Lasso (Chen et al. 2012; Kim and Xing 2009),
graph-guided logistic regression (Ouyang et al. 2013), and
other types of regularized risk minimization problems (Teo
N
et al. 2010). The regularization term g(x) = i=1 αi gi (x)
often carries some important structure information about
the structure of the problem itself or data, such as the
structured sparsity (Bach et al. 2011; 2012) and nonnegativity. However, the involved vital multi-term nonsmooth
components make the optimization problem (1) too complicated to be solved even if N is small. For the special
case N = 0, 1, the most popular ﬁrst-order methods are
the accelerated gradient-type methods enjoying the O( K12 )
optimal iteration complexity (Nesterov 2013b), which were
ﬁrst proposed by Nesterov (Nesterov 1983) for N = 0 and
then popularized for N = 1 by Beck and Teboulle (Beck
and Teboulle 2009a) and Nesterov (Nesterov 2013a). Beck
and Teboulle’s method is called “FISTA” while Nesterov’s
method in (Nesterov 2013a) is called “APG”. When N is
larger, one feasible method is the subgradient-type method
(Nemirovsky, Yudin, and Dawson 1982; Polyak 1977) with
an extremely slow iteration complexity O( √1K ). To opt out
of this dilemma, Nesterov proposed the smoothed accelerated proximal gradient (S-APG) method (Nesterov 2005a;
2005b) for dealing with nonsmooth minimization involving
multi-term nonsmooth functions. To make the smoothed accelerated proximal gradient method to achieve the iteration
1
), the smoothing parameter must be taken
complexity O( K
1
as small as O( K ). However, the small smoothing parameter leads to a small iteration stepsize, which has a negative effect on practical optimization performance. To make
the smoothed accelerated proximal gradient method much
more appealing, some adaptive smoothing algorithms (Boţ
and Hendrich 2015; Tran-Dinh 2015) were proposed based
on Nesterov’s smoothing technique. However, another draw-

Abstract
We propose a fast ﬁrst-order method to solve multi-term nonsmooth composite convex minimization problems by employing a recent proximal average approximation technique
and a novel adaptive parameter tuning technique. Thanks to
this powerful parameter tuning technique, the proximal gradient step can be performed with a much larger stepsize in
the algorithm implementation compared with the prior PAAPG method (Yu 2013), which is the core to enable significant improvements in practical performance. Moreover, by
choosing the approximation parameter adaptively, the proposed method is shown to enjoy the O( k1 ) iteration complexity theoretically without needing any extra computational
cost, while the PA-APG method incurs much more iterations for convergence. The preliminary experimental results
on overlapping group Lasso and graph-guided fused Lasso
problems conﬁrm our theoretic claim well, and indicate that
the proposed method is almost ﬁve times faster than the stateof-the-art PA-APG method and therefore suitable for higherprecision required optimization.

Introduction
Let X be a ﬁnite-dimensional linear space endowed with the
inner product ·, · and its induced norm  · . Here, we are
interested in solving the following multi-term nonsmooth
composite convex minimization problem
F ∗ := min F (x) = f (x) + g(x)
x∈X

(1)

N
with g(x) =
i=1 αi gi (x), where αi ≥ 0 satisfying
N
i=1 αi = 1, gi : X → [−∞, +∞] is a proper, closed
convex function, and f : X → (−∞, +∞) is a continuously
differentiable and gradient Lipschitz convex function with
modulus Lf , i.e.,
∇f (x) − ∇f (y) ≤ Lf x − y,

∀x, y ∈ X.

dom gi∗

is a bounded
Moreover, we assume that Qi =
convex set for all i = 1, · · · , N , in which gi∗ denotes the
Fenchel conjugate of gi with the following deﬁnition
gi∗ (x) = sup {ui , x − gi (ui )} .
ui ∈Qi

(2)

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2513

