Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

BattRAE: Bidimensional Attention-Based Recursive
Autoencoders for Learning Bilingual Phrase Embeddings
Biao Zhang,1 Deyi Xiong,2 Jinsong Su1∗

Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 3610051
Soochow University, Suzhou, China 2150062
zb@stu.xmu.edu.cn, dyxiong@suda.edu.cn, jssu@xmu.edu.cn

Src (Ref)
shijie geda chengshi
(major cities in the world)
dui jingji xuezhe
(to the economists)

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a bidimensional attention based recursive autoencoder (BattRAE) to integrate clues and sourcetarget interactions at multiple levels of granularity into bilingual phrase representations. We employ recursive autoencoders to generate tree structures of phrases with embeddings
at different levels of granularity (e.g., words, sub-phrases and
phrases). Over these embeddings on the source and target
side, we introduce a bidimensional attention network to learn
their interactions encoded in a bidimensional attention matrix, from which we extract two soft attention weight distributions simultaneously. These weight distributions enable
BattRAE to generate compositive phrase representations via
convolution. Based on the learned phrase representations, we
further use a bilinear neural model, trained via a max-margin
method, to measure bilingual semantic similarity. To evaluate
the effectiveness of BattRAE, we incorporate this semantic
similarity as an additional feature into a state-of-the-art SMT
system. Extensive experiments on NIST Chinese-English test
sets show that our model achieves a substantial improvement
of up to 1.63 BLEU points on average over the baseline.

1

Tgt
in other major cities
to economists

Table 1: Examples of bilingual phrases ((romanized)
Chinese-English) from our translation model. The important
words or phrases are highlighted in bold. Src = source, Tgt
= target, Ref = literal translation of source phrase.

either explore clues (linguistic items from contexts) only at
a single level of granularity or capture interactions (alignments between source and target items) only at the same
level of granularity to learn bilingual phrase embeddings.
We believe that clues and interactions from a single
level of granularity are not adequate to measure underlying semantic similarity of bilingual phrases due to the high
language divergence. Take the Chinese-English translation
pairs in Table 1 as examples. At the word level of granularity, we can easily recognize that the translation of the ﬁrst
instance is not faithful as Chinese word “shijie” (world) is
not translated at all. While in the second instance, semantic judgment at the word level is not sufﬁcient as there is
no translation for single Chinese word “jingji” (economy)
or “xuezhe” (scholar). We have to elevate the calculation
of semantic similarity to a higher sub-phrase level: “jingji
xuezhe” vs. “economists”. This suggests that clues and interactions between the source and target side at multiple levels of granularity should be explored to measure semantic
similarity of bilingual phrases.
In order to capture multi-level clues and interactions, we
propose a bidimensional attention based recursive autoencoder (BattRAE). It learns bilingual phrase embeddings according to the strengths of interactions between linguistic
items at different levels of granularity (i.e., words, subphrases and entire phrases) on the source side and those on
the target side. The philosophy behind BattRAE is twofold:
1) Phrase embeddings are learned from weighted clues at
different levels of granularity; 2) The weights of clues are
calculated according to the alignments of linguistic items at
different levels of granularity between the source and target side. We introduce a bidimensional attention network to

Introduction

As one of the most important components in statistical machine translation (SMT), translation model measures the
translation faithfulness of a hypothesis to a source fragment (Och and Ney 2003; Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003;
Chiang 2007). Conventional translation models extract a
huge number of bilingual phrases with conditional translation probabilities and lexical weights (Koehn, Och, and
Marcu 2003). Due to the heavy reliance of the calculation
of these probabilities and weights on surface forms of bilingual phrases, traditional translation models often suffer from
the problem of data sparsity. This leads researchers to investigate methods that learn underlying semantic representations of phrases using neural networks (Gao et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2014; Cho et al. 2014; Su et al. 2015).
Typically, these neural models learn bilingual phrase embeddings in a way that embeddings of source and corresponding target phrases are optimized to be close as much as
possible in a continuous space. In spite of their success, they
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3372

