Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Event Video Mashup: From Hundreds
of Videos to Minutes of Skeleton
Lianli Gao,1 Peng Wang,2 Jingkuan Song,3 Zi Huang,2 Jie Shao,1 Heng Tao Shen1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China.
2
The University of Queensland, QLD 4072, Australia.
3
Columbia University, NY 10027, USA. {lianli.gao, shaojie}@uestc.edu.cn, {p.wang6, huang}@itee.uq.edu.au,
jingkuan.song@gmail.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com
Abstract

&ŝŶŝƐŚ>ŝŶĞ

WƌĞƐƐŽŶĨĞƌĞŶĐĞ

^ƵƐƉĞĐƚƐ

tĞďsŝĚĞŽƐZĞůĂƚĞĚƚŽ
ĀŽƐƚŽŶDĂƌĂƚŚŽŶŽŵďŝŶŐƐā

The explosive growth of video content on the Web has been
revolutionizing the way people share, exchange and perceive
information, such as events. While an individual video usually concerns a speciﬁc aspect of an event, the videos that are
uploaded by different users at different locations and times
can embody different emphasis and compensate each other
in describing the event. Combining these videos from different sources together can unveil a more complete picture
of the event. Simply concatenating videos together is an intuitive solution, but it may degrade user experience since it
is time-consuming and tedious to view those highly redundant, noisy and disorganized content. Therefore, we develop
a novel approach, termed event video mashup (EVM), to automatically generate a uniﬁed short video from a collection of
Web videos to describe the storyline of an event. We propose
a submodular based content selection model that embodies
both importance and diversity to depict the event from comprehensive aspects in an efﬁcient way. Importantly, the video
content is organized temporally and semantically conforming
to the event evolution. We evaluate our approach on a realworld YouTube event dataset collected by ourselves. The extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed framework.

DĂƐŚƵƉ

dŝŵĞ>ŝŶĞ

ĂƐƵĂůƚŝĞƐ

KďĂŵĂ

sŝĐƚŝŵƐ

Figure 1: Overview of Event Video Mashup

ods usually rely on low-level cues to determine the importance of segments of a video (Ma et al. 2005; Ngo, Ma,
and Zhang 2005), and formulate summarization as a reconstruction problem (Zhao and Xing 2014) where sparse
coding is employed to remove the redundant video content
from a single video. More recently, based on the assumption that Web images tend to capture subjects from canonical
viewpoint, (Khosla et al. 2013; Kim, Sigal, and Xing 2014;
Song et al. 2015) utilize Web image prior to help extract
meaningful subsets of user videos. Meng et al (Meng et al.
2016) selects representative objects to form video summarization. Apart from the aforementioned unsupervised methods, the works in (Potapov et al. 2014; Gong et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2016) formulate video summarization as a supervised content selection problem and utilize priori to train
a system to determine the relevance of video content. However, the above methods are focusing on a single video summarization.
There are some recent multiple-video summarization
works (Chu, Song, and Jaimes 2015; Yeo, Han, and Han
2016; Hong et al. 2011; Tan, Tan, and Ngo 2010; Wang
et al. 2012). However, video co-summarization methods
(Chu, Song, and Jaimes 2015; Yeo, Han, and Han 2016)
only focus on extracting visual co-occurrence across multiple videos. This summarization criterion may fail to capture some important information which are not shared by
multiple videos. On the other hand, (Hong et al. 2011;
Tan, Tan, and Ngo 2010; Wang et al. 2012) extract typical frames/shots and then assign them with semantic annotations, which is very similar to our method. But during
the temporal alignment step, (Hong et al. 2011; Wang et al.
2012) simply assume that each tag is given a time stamp, and

Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed the explosive growth of
Web video content on the Internet due to the tremendous advance of video-sharing platforms, digital cameras, fast network and massive storage. Users are often overwhelmed by
the unstructured videos and in danger of getting lost in the
video data world. Therefore, it is increasingly important to
automatically summarize a large collection of Web videos in
an efﬁcient yet comprehensive way.
Inspired by text and image summarization (Mason et
al. 2016; Liu, Yu, and Deng 2015; Singla, Tschiatschek,
and Krause 2016; Lin and Bilmes 2011), video summarization (Truong and Venkatesh 2007) has be proposed as
an early attempt to solve this problem. Based on some designed criteria, video summarization typically selects a subset of frames and/or subshots from a long-running video
to form a short summary. Traditional summarization methc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1323

