Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Web-Based Semantic Fragment Discovery
for Online Lingual-Visual Similarity
1

Xiaoshuai Sun,1,2 Jiewei Cao,1 Chao Li,1 Lei Zhu,1 Heng Tao Shen1,3

The University of Queensland, Brisbane 4067, Australia. 2 Harbin Institute of Tehcnology, Heilongjiang 150001, China.
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China.
xiaoshuaisun.hit@gmail.com, {j.cao3, c.li1}@uq.edu.au, leizhu0608@gmail.com, shenht@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we present an automatic approach for on-line
discovery of visual-lingual semantic fragments from weakly
labeled Internet images. Instead of learning region-entity correspondences from well-labeled image-sentence pairs, our
approach directly collects and enhances the weakly labeled
visual contents from the Web and constructs an adaptive visual representation which automatically links generic lingual
phrases to their related visual contents. To ensure reliable and
efﬁcient semantic discovery, we adopt non-parametric density estimation to re-rank the related visual instances and proposed a fast self-similarity-based quality assessment method
to identify the high-quality semantic fragments. The discovered semantic fragments provide an adaptive joint representation for texts and images, based on which lingual-visual
similarity can be deﬁned for further co-analysis of heterogeneous multimedia data. Experimental results on semantic
fragment quality assessment, sentence-based image retrieval,
automatic multimedia insertion and ordering demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed framework.The experiments
show that the proposed methods can make effective use of the
Web knowledge, and are able to generate competitive results
compared to state-of-the-art approaches in various tasks.

Introduction

Figure 1: Concept Illustration. This work captures the meaning of a sentence based on a group of visual-linguistic semantic fragments. Unlike traditional methods that learn such
latent representation from human labeled data, our method
discovers such fragments directly from the Web which is
highly efﬁcient and free of human interactions.

Every day, trillions of multimedia contents including texts,
images and videos as well as the attached contextual data
are generated and shared on the Internet, recording almost
every aspect of human society, from the worldwide economic events to a person’s personal feeling. For the last
few decades, researchers from both academia and industry
have developed a variety of information processing techniques trying to make computers understand the semantics
in both texts and visual media. Despite the great progress
made by the community, the visual intelligence of our computers is still at its early stage, which can only recognize
simple lingual-visual links, and speak about shallow facts
such as what and where. For example, image knowledge
bases such as ImageNet(Deng et al. 2009) enable the possibility for the visualization of semantic entities deﬁned as
words or simple phrases. However, even as large as ImageNet, the current knowledge bases are still unable to characterize complex phrases like “the most dangerous dog in

Asia”, not to mention longer sentences and paragraphs. The
huge gap between visual and lingual data still exists and becomes larger when the spatio-temporal scale goes up.
Recent research has pushed forward with a new challenge of bridging the semantic gap between textual and
visual media in a long-term sentential level. Some pioneering models have been proposed to generate textual
descriptions for images and videos (Farhadi et al. 2010;
Yao et al. 2010; Rohrbach et al. 2013; Kulkarni et al. 2013;
Socher et al. 2014; Donahue et al. 2015; Vinyals et al.
2015; Chen and Lawrence Zitnick 2015) or building imagesemantic correspondences (Lin et al. 2014; Kong et al. 2014;
Zhu et al. 2015; Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015).These mod-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

182

