Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Structured Inference Networks
for Nonlinear State Space Models
Rahul G. Krishnan, Uri Shalit, David Sontag
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
{rahul, shalit, dsontag}@cs.nyu.edu

and the latent spaces, without compromising the quality of
inference and learning.
When the parametric form of the model is unknown, we
propose learning deep Markov models (DMM), a class of
generative models where classic linear emission and transition distributions are replaced with complex multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs). These are GSSMs that retain the Markovian structure of HMMs, but leverage the representational
power of deep neural networks to model complex high dimensional data. If one augments a DMM model such as the
one presented in Fig. 1 with edges from the observations
xt to the latent states of the following time step zt+1 , then
the DMM can be seen to be similar to, though more restrictive than, stochastic RNNs (Bayer and Osendorfer 2014) and
variational RNNs (Chung et al. 2015).
Our learning algorithm performs stochastic gradient ascent on a variational lower bound of the likelihood. Instead of introducing variational parameters for each data
point, we compile the inference procedure at the same time
as learning the generative model. This idea was originally
used in the wake-sleep algorithm for unsupervised learning
(Hinton et al. 1995), and has since led to state-of-the-art
results for unsupervised learning of deep generative models (Kingma and Welling 2014; Mnih and Gregor 2014;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014).
Speciﬁcally, we introduce a new family of structured inference networks, parameterized by recurrent neural networks,
and evaluate their effectiveness in three scenarios: (1) when
the generative model is known and ﬁxed, (2) in parameter
estimation when the functional form of the model is known
and (3) for learning deep Markov models. By looking at the
structure of the true posterior, we show both theoretically
and empirically that inference for a latent state should be
performed using information from its future, as opposed to
recent work which performed inference using only information from the past (Chung et al. 2015; Gan et al. 2015;
Gregor et al. 2015), and that a structured variational approximation outperforms mean-ﬁeld based approximations. Our
approach may easily be adapted to learning more general
generative models, for example models with edges from observations to latent states.
Finally, we learn a DMM on a polyphonic music dataset
and on a dataset of electronic health records (a complex high
dimensional setting with missing data). We use the model

Abstract
Gaussian state space models have been used for decades as
generative models of sequential data. They admit an intuitive
probabilistic interpretation, have a simple functional form, and
enjoy widespread adoption. We introduce a uniﬁed algorithm
to efﬁciently learn a broad class of linear and non-linear state
space models, including variants where the emission and transition distributions are modeled by deep neural networks. Our
learning algorithm simultaneously learns a compiled inference
network and the generative model, leveraging a structured
variational approximation parameterized by recurrent neural
networks to mimic the posterior distribution. We apply the
learning algorithm to both synthetic and real-world datasets,
demonstrating its scalability and versatility. We ﬁnd that using
the structured approximation to the posterior results in models
with signiﬁcantly higher held-out likelihood.

1

Introduction

Models of sequence data such as hidden Markov models
(HMMs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are widely
used in machine translation, speech recognition, and computational biology. Linear and non-linear Gaussian state space
models (GSSMs, Fig. 1) are used in applications including
robotic planning and missile tracking. However, despite huge
progress over the last decade, efﬁcient learning of non-linear
models from complex high dimensional time-series remains
a major challenge. Our paper proposes a uniﬁed learning
algorithm for a broad class of GSSMs, and we introduce an
inference procedure that scales easily to high dimensional
data, compiling approximate (and where feasible, exact) inference into the parameters of a neural network.
In engineering and control, the parametric form of the
GSSM model is often known, with typically a few speciﬁc parameters that need to be ﬁt to data. The most
commonly used approaches for these types of learning
and inference problems are often computationally demanding, e.g. dual extended Kalman ﬁlter (Wan and Nelson
1996), expectation maximization (Briegel and Tresp 1999;
Ghahramani and Roweis 1999) or particle ﬁlters (Schön,
Wills, and Ninness 2011). Our compiled inference algorithm
can easily deal with high-dimensions both in the observed
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2101

