Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Recurrent Neural Networks with Auxiliary Labels
for Cross-Domain Opinion Target Extraction
Ying Ding, Jianfei Yu, Jing Jiang
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{ying.ding.2011,jfyu.2014,jingjiang}@smu.edu.sg

from a domain different from the test data. For example, the
labeled training data may contain laptop reviews, but the test
data may contain restaurant reviews. This domain difference
often causes a serious problem because the opinion target
words can be very different in the two domains. For example, in the restaurant domain, words such as food and drink
are frequent opinion targets, but if the training data comes
from the laptop domain, you may not see these words at all
in the training data. In our experiments, we ﬁnd that some
state-of-the-art RNN based method for opinion target extraction may face a performance drop of up to 40% when
the training and the test data comes from different domains.

Abstract
Opinion target extraction is a fundamental task in opinion
mining. In recent years, neural network based supervised
learning methods have achieved competitive performance on
this task. However, as with any supervised learning method,
neural network based methods for this task cannot work well
when the training data comes from a different domain than the
test data. On the other hand, some rule-based unsupervised
methods have shown to be robust when applied to different
domains. In this work, we use rule-based unsupervised methods to create auxiliary labels and use neural network models
to learn a hidden representation that works well for different
domains. When this hidden representation is used for opinion
target extraction, we ﬁnd that it can outperform a number of
strong baselines with a large margin.

On the other hand, people have also developed some rulebased methods for opinion target extraction that are unsupervised and therefore more robust in different domains. For
example, the double propagation method developed by Qiu
et al. (2011) is an unsupervised method that has been shown
to work well without any training data.

Introduction
Opinion target extraction is a fundamental problem in opinion mining. Its goal is to extract from opinionated texts
the targets on which opinions have been expressed. For example, given the sentence “I like the tuna sandwich and
chicken salad very much,” the opinion targets should be tuna
sandwich and chicken salad. Opinion target extraction has
many downstream applications such as sentiment classiﬁcation and opinion summarization. Given its importance, the
problem has attracted much attention in the research community in the last decade (Schouten and Frasincar 2016).
Opinion target extraction is typically modeled as a supervised sequence labeling problem. A traditional approach
is to use hand-crafted discrete features at token level coupled with Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001) to extract opinion targets. In recent years, with the advances of deep learning techniques
for NLP, many researchers also tried to apply deep neural
networks to this problem. In particular, Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) and their variants such as BiRNNs and
LSTMs have been applied to opinion target extraction and
shown to be effective (Liu, Joty, and Meng 2015).
As with any supervised learning method, the neural network based methods for opinion target extraction also suffers from the domain adaptation problem. This happens
when the training data labeled with opinion targets comes

In this paper, we study how we can take advantage of neural network based supervised methods and rule-based unsupervised methods to develop a method for cross-domain
opinion target extraction. Our method is motivated by the
idea of learning a good hidden representation for both the
source and the target domains by utilizing syntactic rules
that are domain-independent. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst use these
syntactic rules to generate auxiliary labels. We then use recurrent neural networks, in particular, long short-term memory networks (LSTMs), to learn a good hidden layer that
works well for predicting these auxiliary labels for both the
source and the target domains. In addition, this hidden layer
is also trained to work well for predicting the opinion targets in the source domain. We propose two different neural network architectures to learn the hidden representations.
Our experiments using reviews from four different domains
show that our proposed method can signiﬁcantly outperform
a number of strong baselines, including some domain adaptation methods.
The main contribution of our work is a novel way of
combining rule-based, unsupervised opinion target extraction with neural network based supervised models to achieve
better performance in a cross-domain setting.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3436

