Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Diagnosability Planning for Controllable Discrete Event Systems
Hassan Ibrahim,1 Philippe Dague,1 Alban Grastien,2 Lina Ye,1 Laurent Simon3
1

LRI, Univ. Paris-Sud and CNRS, Univ. Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
Email: ﬁrstname.name@lri.fr
2
Data61 and Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Email: alban.grastien@data61.csiro.au
3
LaBRI, Univ. Bordeaux and CNRS, Bordeaux, France
Email: lsimon@labri.fr
the wear of expensive equipment. To this end, we assume
that only one sequence of actions (a plan) is allowed to be
performed on a paused system in order to bring it in a diagnosable state and let it run freely after that. Our problem
therefore translates as follows: ﬁnd a plan that leads the system from an initial given belief state to a belief state where
diagnosability holds again. Typically, the initial belief could
be the output of a previous operation like a repair plan following a fault occurrence identiﬁed thanks to previous diagnosability property, but suffering thus in general from uncertainty and from being different from the initial nominal state
for which diagnosability was ensured by design.
We provide a formal deﬁnition of Diagnosability Planning. We analyze the problem and show that it is PS PACE COMPLETE, compared to E XPTIME - COMPLETENESS of active diagnosability (where control is authorized during execution (Haar et al. 2013)). Then we propose a method to
solve it: while searching for a plan, we build a twin plant
(Jiang et al. 2001; Yoo and Lafortune 2002) to verify that the
current belief state is diagnosable and we show how the twin
plant constructed for a belief state can be partially reused for
the diagnosability test of the next one and also prune useless plan tests. We present experimental results on a scalable
benchmark. Finally we present related work and conclude
with perspectives for future research.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an approach to ensure the diagnosability of a partially controllable system. Given a model of
correct and faulty behaviors of a partially observable discrete
event system, equipped with a set of elementary actions that
do not intertwine with autonomous events, we search a diagnosability plan, i.e., a sequence of applicable actions that
leads the system from an initial belief state (a set of potentially current states) to a diagnosable belief state, in which the
system is then left to run freely. This helps in reducing the diagnosis interaction with running systems and can be applied,
e.g., on the output of a repair plan, like in power networks.
The two successive stages of this approach keep diagnosability planning, including diagnosability tests, in PS PACE in
comparison to the E XPTIME test for the more complex active diagnosability used usually in such cases. For this, we
propose to construct incrementally the twin plant structure of
the given system and to exploit its parts already constructed
while testing the candidate plans and constructing its next
parts. This helps in pruning the twin plant constructions and
many non-diagnosability plan tests. We have created a special
benchmark and tested three proposed methods, according to
the recycling level of twin plants construction, with one cost
function used for plan optimality and an optional heuristics.

Introduction
In the recent years, discrete event systems (DES) have been
widely used to model and reason about large and complex
systems because of their simplicity and ability to represent
at a certain abstraction level real-world problems in various
domains (Cassandras and Lafortune 2008). These systems
are usually only partially observable and often subject to
faults. In this context, diagnosability (the property that the
faults can always be detected and identiﬁed (Sampath et al.
1995)) is an important property to guarantee.
We are interested in the problem of ensuring diagnosability of a partially observable DES. Our setting is different
from the classical literature (cf. Section on Related Work).
We assume that the system is partially controllable through
“actions” that can change its state, but we want to minimize
the interactions between the controller and the system, e.g.,
in an electrical power system, to reduce the outage time and

Diagnosability Planning in DES
Discrete Event Systems
This work is done in the context of DES. We assume that the
system runs in two distinct modes that do not intertwine: the
active one, when the system runs freely, i.e., its states are
changed autonomously through partially observable transitions without any controlled exogenous event, and the reactive one, in which only feasible exogenous actions are applied to change the system state through reactive transitions.
Deﬁnition 1. A Controllable Labeled Transition System
(CLTS) is a tuple G = Q, Σ, δ, I, with Σ = A ∪ E, where:
Q is a ﬁnite set of states; E is a ﬁnite set of events; A is a
ﬁnite set of actions; δ ⊆ Q × Σ × Q is the (active for labels
in E, reactive for labels in A) transition relation; I ⊆ Q is
the initial belief state.
E is partitioned into three ﬁnite sets: Σo of observable correct events, Σu of unobservable correct events and Σf of un-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1149

