Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Arnold: An Autonomous Agent to Play FPS Games
Devendra Singh Chaplot,∗ Guillaume Lample∗
{chaplot,glample}@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

collect items and ﬁnd enemies) and action (ﬁghting the enemies when they are observed), and uses separate Deep Qnetworks to learn policies for each phase of the game. The
navigation is done by a DQN (Mnih et al. 2013), while the
action network is controlled by a DRQN (Hausknecht and
Stone 2015). The DRQN network is augmented with highlevel game information, such as the presence of enemies on
the screen. It is trained to simultaneously learn these features along with minimizing a Q-learning objective, which
is shown to dramatically improve the performance.

Abstract
Advances in deep reinforcement learning have allowed autonomous agents to perform well on Atari games, often outperforming humans, using only raw pixels to make their decisions. However, most of these games take place in 2D environments that are fully observable to the agent. In this paper, we present Arnold, a completely autonomous agent to
play First-Person Shooter Games using only screen pixel data
and demonstrate its effectiveness on Doom, a classical ﬁrstperson shooter game. Arnold is trained with deep reinforcement learning using a recent Action-Navigation architecture,
which uses separate deep neural networks for exploring the
map and ﬁghting enemies. Furthermore, it utilizes a lot of
techniques such as augmenting high-level game features, reward shaping and sequential updates for efﬁcient training and
effective performance. Arnold outperforms average humans
as well as in-built game bots on different variations of the
deathmatch. It also obtained the highest kill-to-death ratio
in both the tracks of the Visual Doom AI Competition and
placed second in terms of the number of frags.

1

2

Visual Doom AI Competition

Recently, Visual Doom AI Competition (ViZDoom)1 was
organised to evaluate AI agents playing deathmatchs in
Doom. In the deathmatch scenario, all the agents spawn on
the same map with the objective to frag as many enemies
as possible within a ﬁxed time limit. When an agent dies, it
respawns on the same map at another location immediately.
The competition consisted of two tracks:
• Limited deathmatch on a known map: The map is
known beforehand and the only available weapon is a
rocket launcher. Agents can gather health packs and
ammo, but no other weapon is available.

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has proved to be very successful in mastering human-level control policies in a wide variety of tasks. In particular, Deep Q-Networks (DQN) are
shown to be effective in playing Atari 2600 games (Mnih
et al. 2013) and more recently, in defeating world-class Go
players (Silver et al. 2016). The task of playing a FirstPerson-Shooting (FPS) game in a 3D environment is much
more challenging than playing most Atari games as it involves a wide variety of skills, such as navigating through a
map, collecting items, recognizing and ﬁghting enemies, etc.
Furthermore, states are partially observable, and the agent
navigates a 3D environment in a ﬁrst-person perspective,
which makes the task more suitable for real-world robotics
applications.
In this paper, we present Arnold, an autonomous agent
trained using the architecture introduced by Lample and
Chaplot (2017). It divides the problem of playing FPS
games into two phases: navigation (exploring the map to

• Full deathmatch on unknown maps: Agents start with a
pistol, but can pick up different weapons around the map,
as well as gather health packs and ammo. They are evaluated on unknown maps.
Both the tracks consisted of 12 rounds of 10 minutes each,
with a maximum of 8 agents by round. The competition organizers also released an API for efﬁciently interacting with
the Doom game engine (Kempka et al. 2016).

3

Training

Arnold was trained on 2 Nvidia GTX Titan X GPUs. It
roughly took 3 days to train it on the limited deathmatch, and
about 5 days for the full deathmatch, although some minor
improvements were still observable after that. It was implemented with UltraDeep2 , a deep learning library built on top
1

ViZDoom
Competition
at
IEEE
Computational
Intelligence
And
Games
(CIG)
Conference,
2016
(http://vizdoom.cs.put.edu.pl/competition-cig-2016)
2
https://github.com/glample/UltraDeep

∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5085

