Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Probabilistic Non-Negative Matrix Factorization
and Its Robust Extensions for Topic Modeling
1

Minnan Luo,1,4 Feiping Nie,2∗ Xiaojun Chang,3
Yi Yang,3 Alexander Hauptmann,4 Qinghua Zheng1
Shaanxi Province Key Lab. of Satellite and Terrestrial Network Tech. R&D, Department of Computer Science,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, P. R. China.
2
School of Computer Science and Center for Optical Imagery Analysis and Learning,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, P. R. China.
3
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney.
4
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA
to overﬁtting (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003). On the other hand,
how to assign a probability to a document outside of the
training set is not explicit in the framework of PLSA (Blei,
Ng, and Jordan 2003). Considering the exchangeable representations for documents and words, Blei, et al. extended
the PLSA by introducing a Dirichlet prior on the topic distribution of documents, and proposed a fully Bayesian generalization of latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng,
and Jordan 2003). In the past decades, topic model and its
variations have been widely used to discover latent semantic
structures from collections of text documents (Mcauliffe and
Blei 2008), images (Kivinen, Sudderth, and Jordan 2007;
Wang, Blei, and Li 2009), audio ﬁles (Hoffman, Blei, and
Cook 2009) and even biological data (Airoldi et al. 2009).
Topic models indeed attempt to ﬁnd a low-dimensional
representation of the content of a set of documents (Steyvers
and Grifﬁths 2007), which can be modeled from two different views. On one hand, it inherits the explicit probabilistic meaning of factors in aspect model and describes
the mixture approximation of the co-occurrence with underlying generative probabilistic semantics. On the other
hand, the topic model can be interpreted as a matrix factorization of the conditional distribution of words given
the documents. Previous studies (Ding, Li, and Peng 2006;
Gaussier and Goutte 2005) have suggested that PLSA and
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence based Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) indeed optimize the same objective
function although they converge to different local minima.
It is noteworthy that, as a widely used dimension reduction
technique, traditional NMF with Frobenius norm performs
well for document clustering and topic modeling (Arora et
al. 2012; 2013; Kuang, Choo, and Park 2015), although it
lacks explicit probabilistic meaning of factors.
It is based on maximum likelihood estimate that the topicword distribution and topic distribution are learned in the
framework of traditional topic model. Therefore, a fundamental probabilistic assumption is underlying the topic
models (including LSA), i.e., words in a document are conditionally independent of each other given the documents
topic distribution. In other words, the correlation information among words is completely ignored in the traditional
framework of topic models. In fact, the correlation infor-

Abstract
Traditional topic model with maximum likelihood estimate
inevitably suffers from the conditional independence of
words given the documents topic distribution. In this paper,
we follow the generative procedure of topic model and learn
the topic-word distribution and topics distribution via directly approximating the word-document co-occurrence matrix with matrix decomposition technique. These methods
include: (1) Approximating the normalized document-word
conditional distribution with the documents probability matrix and words probability matrix based on probabilistic nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF); (2) Since the standard
NMF is well known to be non-robust to noises and outliers,
we extended the probabilistic NMF of the topic model to its
robust versions using 2,1 -norm and capped 2,1 -norm based
loss functions, respectively. The proposed framework inherits the explicit probabilistic meaning of factors in topic models and simultaneously makes the conditional independence
assumption on words unnecessary. Straightforward and efﬁcient algorithms are exploited to solve the corresponding nonsmooth and non-convex problems. Experimental results over
several benchmark datasets illustrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed methods.

Introduction
Due to an ever increasing amount of document data, topic
modeling plays an important role in the ﬁeld of document
understanding and analyzing (Kuang, Choo, and Park 2015).
Typically, topic models are based on the idea that documents
are mixtures of topics, where a topic is a probability distribution over words (Steyvers and Grifﬁths 2007). Th. Hofmann (Hofmann 1999) pioneered to present latent semantic analysis (LSA) (Landauer, Foltz, and Laham 1998) from
a statistical perspective and model the word-document cooccurrence information under a framework of aspect model
(Hofmann, Puzicha, and Jordan 1999), namely Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis (PLSA). PLSA is an important
step toward probabilistic modeling of text; however, on one
hand, the number of parameters in PLSA model grows linearly with the size of the corpus, and thus it becomes prone
∗

Corresponding author. Email: feipingnie@gmail.com
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2308

