Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Multi-Document Summarization via Text Classiﬁcation
1

Ziqiang Cao,1,2 Wenjie Li,1,2 Sujian Li,3 Furu Wei4

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{cszqcao, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
lisujian@pku.edu.cn
fuwei@microsoft.com

advantage of other rich data sources might be a good idea
worth considering.

Abstract
Developed so far, multi-document summarization has
reached its bottleneck due to the lack of sufﬁcient training data and diverse categories of documents. Text classiﬁcation just makes up for these deﬁciencies. In this
paper, we propose a novel summarization system called
TCSum, which leverages plentiful text classiﬁcation
data to improve the performance of multi-document
summarization. TCSum projects documents onto distributed representations which act as a bridge between
text classiﬁcation and summarization. It also utilizes the
classiﬁcation results to produce summaries of different
styles. Extensive experiments on DUC generic multidocument summarization datasets show that, TCSum
can achieve the state-of-the-art performance without using any hand-crafted features and has the capability to
catch the variations of summary styles with respect to
different text categories.

Meanwhile, existing summarization approaches basically
apply a uniform model to generate summaries for the documents in different text categories. However, according to
what we observe, summary styles in different categories
can vary to a large degree. Take the two common categories in DUC datasets, i.e., Natural Disaster and Biography as an example. To summarize a natural disaster like a
hurricane, people tend to present its moving path and the
loss it brings. By contrast, a biography summary is expected to include the personal proﬁle and the main contributions of the person. Apparently, summaries should focus
on different aspects of the topics which belong to the corresponding categories. When the document category is given,
(Kedzie, McKeown, and Diaz 2015) ﬁnds that the introduction of category-speciﬁc language models largely promotes
the summarization performance. The experiments of (Wan et
al. 2015) also show that a summarization model with good
overall performance still produces low-quality summaries in
certain document sets. The summary style issue previously
mentioned may partly explain these phenomena and suggest
a possible way to improve the summarization performance.

Introduction
The increasing online information has necessitated the development of effective automatic multi-document summarization systems. Through long-term research, the learningbased summarization approaches have grown to become
dominant in the literature. By far, a prominent issue that
hinders the further improvement of supervised approaches
is the lack of sufﬁcient human summaries used for training (Cao et al. 2016a). For instance, the widely-used DUC1
generic multi-document summarization benchmark datasets
contain less than 400 human reference summaries in total.
Writing summaries is an extremely labor-intensive and timeconsuming process. Because of the limitation of training
data, a learning-based summarization system is often forced
to heavily rely on well-designed features. Simple models
like Support Vector Regression can achieve the state-of-theart performance with extensive linguistic and statistical features (Hong and Nenkova 2014). To break through the bottleneck of insufﬁcient summarization training data, taking

Compared with summarization, the text classiﬁcation
datasets are much richer. Note that both summarization and
text classiﬁcation require models to understand the semantics of documents. Better text representations learned by
classiﬁcation data can help to train more effective summarization models. Moreover, if we know the category of a
document, we will have a chance to explore more proper
summary styles. To this end, we propose a novel summarization system called TCSum, which leverages text classiﬁcation data to improve the performance of summarization.
Since distributed representations of documents have demonstrated advantages in both summarization (e.g., (Kobayashi,
Noguchi, and Yatsuka 2015)) and text classiﬁcation (e.g.,
(Lai et al. 2015)), TCSum projects all documents onto the
distributed representations that are shared by the two tasks.
Then, for text classiﬁcation, the document embeddings are
followed by a classiﬁer to learn their association with the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://duc.nist.gov/

3053

