Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Accelerated Gradient Temporal Difference Learning
Yangchen Pan, Adam White, Martha White
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University at Bloomington
{yangpan,adamw,martha}@indiana.edu

a high rate (Szepesvari 2010). When the amount of data is
limited or difﬁcult to acquire, the feature vectors are small, or
data efﬁciency is of primary concern, quadratic least squares
TD (LSTD) methods may be preferred. These methods directly compute the value function that minimizes the MSPBE,
and thus LSTD computes the same value function to which
linear TD methods converge. Of course, there are many domains for which neither light weight linear TD methods, nor
data efﬁcient least squares methods may be a good match.
Signiﬁcant effort has focused on reducing the computation
and storage costs of least squares TD methods in order to span
the gap between TD and LSTD. The iLSTD method (Geramifard and Bowling 2006) achieves sub-quadratic computation
per time step, but still requires memory that is quadratic in the
size of the features. The tLSTD method (Gehring, Pan, and
White 2016) uses an incremental singular value decomposition (SVD) to achieve both sub-quadratic computation and
storage. The basic idea is that in many domains the update
matrix in LSTD can be replaced with a low rank approximation. In practice tLSTD achieves runtimes much closer to TD
compared to iLSTD, while achieving better data efﬁciency.
A related idea is to use random projections to reduce computation and storage of LSTD (Ghavamzadeh et al. 2010).
In all these approaches, a scalar parameter (descent dimensions, rank, and number of projections), controls the balance
between computation cost and quality of solution.
In this paper we explore a new approach called Accelerated
gradient TD (ATD), that performs quasi-second-order gradient descent on the MSPBE. Our aim is to develop a family of
algorithms that can interpolate between linear TD methods
and LSTD, without incurring bias. ATD, when combined
with a low-rank approximation, converges in expectation to
the TD ﬁxed-point, with convergence rate dependent on the
choice of rank. Unlike previous subquadratic methods, consistency is guaranteed even when the rank is chosen to be one.
We demonstrate the performance of ATD versus many linear
and subquadratic methods in three domains, indicating that
ATD (1) can match the data efﬁciency of LSTD, with signiﬁcantly less computation and storage, (2) is unbiased, unlike
many of the alternative subquadratic methods, (3) signiﬁcantly reduces parameter sensitivity for the stepsize, versus
linear TD methods, and (4) is signiﬁcantly less sensitive to
the choice of rank parameter than tLSTD, enabling a smaller
rank to be chosen and so providing a more efﬁcient incre-

Abstract
The family of temporal difference (TD) methods span a spectrum from computationally frugal linear methods like TD(λ)
to data efﬁcient least squares methods. Least square methods
make the best use of available data directly computing the TD
solution and thus do not require tuning a typically highly sensitive learning rate parameter, but require quadratic computation
and storage. Recent algorithmic developments have yielded
several sub-quadratic methods that use an approximation to the
least squares TD solution, but incur bias. In this paper, we propose a new family of accelerated gradient TD (ATD) methods
that (1) provide similar data efﬁciency beneﬁts to least-squares
methods, at a fraction of the computation and storage (2) signiﬁcantly reduce parameter sensitivity compared to linear TD
methods, and (3) are asymptotically unbiased. We illustrate
these claims with a proof of convergence in expectation and
experiments on several benchmark domains and a large-scale
industrial energy allocation domain.

Introduction
In reinforcement learning, a common strategy to learn an optimal policy is to iteratively estimate the value function for the
current decision making policy—called policy evaluation—
and then update the policy using the estimated values. The
overall efﬁciency of this policy iteration scheme is directly inﬂuenced by the efﬁciency of the policy evaluation step. Temporal difference learning methods perform policy evaluation:
they estimate the value function directly from the sequence of
states, actions, and rewards produced by an agent interacting
with an unknown environment.
The family of temporal difference methods span a spectrum from computationally-frugal, linear, stochastic approximation methods to data efﬁcient but quadratic least squares
TD methods. Stochastic approximation methods, such as temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton 1988) and gradient
TD methods (Maei 2011) perform approximate gradient descent on the mean squared projected Bellman error (MSPBE).
These methods require linear (in the number of features)
computation per time step and linear memory. These linear TD-based algorithms are well suited to problems with
high dimensional feature vectors —compared to available
resources— and domains where agent interaction occurs at
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2464

