Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fans Economy and All-Pay Auctions
with Proportional Allocations∗
Pingzhong Tang, Yulong Zeng, Song Zuo
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
kenshinping@gmail.com,cengyl13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,songzuo.z@gmail.com

design monetization mechanisms as follows: the app allows
fans to buy and send gifts to the host and then charges a commission proportional to the price of the gift. In return, the
app rewards the fan (either by displaying his or her name to
the community (i.e., all fans) or designing a virtual badge,
similar to charity auction (Conitzer and Sandholm 2004;
Ghosh and Mahdian 2008) for each gift he or she sends. The
fan then derives positive utility for the fraction of community attention he or she gets1 . This new monetization method
has turned out to be very successful and has been witnessed
by the recent surge in stock price of MOMO (from 8 dollars
per share to 24 dollars per share in the past two months since
it switched to this monetization mechanism).
The situation above can be modeled as an all-pay auction with proportional allocation in which each bidder (fan)
submits a bid (the number of gifts he or she buys) to the
auctioneer (the app), who allocates one divisible item (community attention) among the bidders proportional to his or
her bid.
The simple auction game above turns out to be general
enough to cover a number of interesting economic scenarios. For example, a major form of crowdfunding (Alaei,
Malekian, and Mostagir 2016) aims to collect money from
crowd in order to achieve a revenue target and if succeed,
pay back to each agent an amount proportional to overall
proﬁt, to which each agent has a private estimation (type).
Clearly, such form of crowdfunding can be conveniently
modeled by the APAPA game. Similar examples abound,
ranging from buying rafﬂe tickets to mutual funds (Piliavin
and Charng 1990; Carhart 1997).
In fact, we are not the ﬁrst to consider the all-pay auction
with proportional allocation2 . A number of papers (Johari
and Tsitsiklis 2004; 2009; Nisan et al. 2007, Chapter 21.2)
study APAPA from the point of social welfare. They show
that, when each bidder is risk-averse in the sense that he or
she has a concave utility function towards proportional allo-

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze an emerging economic form, called
fans economy, in which a fan donates money to the host and
gets allocated proportional to the amount of his donation (normalized by the overall amount of donation). Fans economy is
the major way live streaming apps monetize and includes a
number of popular economic forms ranging from crowdfunding to mutual fund.
We propose an auction game, coined all-pay auctions with
proportional allocation (APAPA), to model the fans economy and analyze the auction from the perspective of revenue.
Comparing to the standard all-pay auction, which normally
has no pure Nash-Equilibrium in the complete information
setting, we solve the pure Nash-Equilibrium of the APAPA in
closed form and prove its uniqueness. Motivated by practical
concerns, we then analyze the case where APAPA is equipped
with a reserve and show that there might be multiple equilibria in this case. We give an efﬁcient algorithm to compute
all equilibria in this case. For either case, with or without reserve, we show that APAPA always extracts revenue that 2approximates the second-highest valuation. Furthermore, we
conduct experiments to show how revenue changes with respect to different reserves.

Introduction
Lately, there has been a surge of mobile apps focusing on
the so-called peer-to-peer live streaming. Prominent examples are Momo (Nasdaq: MOMO), Periscope, Twitch, and
Douyu. In essence, such apps can be seen as a social network in which each peer (fan) in the network can watch the
live videos shared by another peer (host) he/she follows. A
popular host (either commentator or player) on Twitch and
Douyu, both of which focus on video games, can gather over
a million of fans in a typical game night.
What is interesting about this type of apps is the way they
monetize. While all such apps can make money via traditional advertisements, a few such apps take the initiative to

1

∗

Strictly speaking, the fan also derives positive utility for how
happier the host becomes because of his or her gifts. Note that this
part of utility he or she gets is also proportional to the number of
gifts sent. Therefore, it is also compatible with our APAPA model.
2
More work on all-pay auctions (Baye, Kovenock, and de Vries
1996; Bertoletti 2006; DiPalantino and Vojnovic 2009; Dechenaux,
Kovenock, and Sheremeta 2015). We omit the discussions due to
space limit.

We acknowledge anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China Grant 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301, the Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61033001, 61361136003,
61303077, 61561146398, a Tsinghua Initiative Scientiﬁc Research
Grant and a China Youth 1000-talent program.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

713

