Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Multivariate Generalised von Mises
Distribution: Inference and Applications
Alexandre K. W. Navarro

Jes Frellsen

Richard E. Turner

Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
akwn2@cam.ac.uk

Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
jf519@cam.ac.uk

Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Such an approach would, however, ignore the topology of
the space e.g. that φ = 0 and φ = 2π are equivalent. Alternatively, the circular variable can be represented as a unit
vector in R2 , x = [cos(φ), sin(φ)] , and a standard bivariate
distribution used instead. This partially alleviates the aforementioned topological problem, but standard distributions
place probability mass off the unit circle which adversely
affects learning, prediction and analysis.
In order to predict and analyse circular data it is therefore
key that machine learning practitioners have at their disposal
a suite of bespoke modelling, inference and learning methods that are speciﬁcally designed for circular data (Lebanon
2005). The ﬁelds of circular and directional statistics have
provided a toolbox of this sort (Mardia and Jupp 2000). However, the focus has been on fairly simple and small models
that are applied to small datasets enabling MCMC to be
tractably deployed for approximate inference.
The goal of this paper is to extend the existing toolbox provided by statistics, by leveraging modelling and approximate
inference methods from the probabilistic machine learning
ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, the paper makes three technical contributions. First, in Section 3 it introduces a central multivariate
distribution for circular data—called the multivariate Generalised von Mises distribution—that has elegant theoretical
properties and which can be combined in a plug-and-play
manner with existing probabilistic models. Second, in Section 4 it shows that this distribution arises in two novel models
that are circular versions of Gaussian Process regression and
probabilistic Principal Component Analysis with circular hidden variables. Third, it develops efﬁcient approximate inference and learning techniques based on variational free-energy
methods as demonstrated on four datasets in Section 6.

Abstract
Circular variables arise in a multitude of data-modelling contexts ranging from robotics to the social sciences, but they have
been largely overlooked by the machine learning community.
This paper partially redresses this imbalance by extending
some standard probabilistic modelling tools to the circular
domain. First we introduce a new multivariate distribution
over circular variables, called the multivariate Generalised
von Mises (mGvM) distribution. This distribution can be constructed by restricting and renormalising a general multivariate Gaussian distribution to the unit hyper-torus. Previously
proposed multivariate circular distributions are shown to be
special cases of this construction. Second, we introduce a new
probabilistic model for circular regression inspired by Gaussian Processes, and a method for probabilistic Principal Component Analysis with circular hidden variables. These models
can leverage standard modelling tools (e.g. kernel functions
and automatic relevance determination). Third, we show that
the posterior distribution in these models is a mGvM distribution which enables development of an efﬁcient variational
free-energy scheme for performing approximate inference and
approximate maximum-likelihood learning.

1

Introduction

Many data modelling problems in science and engineering
involve circular variables. For example, the spatial conﬁguration of a molecule (Boomsma et al. 2008; Frellsen et al. 2009),
robot, or the human body (Chirikjian and Kyatkin 2000) can
be naturally described using a set of angles. Phase variables
arise in image and audio modelling scenarios (Wadhwa et
al. 2013), while directional ﬁelds are also present in ﬂuid dynamics (Jona-Lasinio, Gelfand, and Jona-Lasinio 2012), and
neuroscience (Ben-Yishai, Bar-Or, and Sompolinsky 1995).
Phase-locking to periodic signals occurs in a multitude of
ﬁelds ranging from biology (Gao et al. 2010) to the social
sciences (Brunsdon and Corcoran 2006).
It is possible, at least in principle, to model circular variables using distributional assumptions that are appropriate for
variables that live in a standard Euclidean space. For example, a naı̈ve application might represent a circular variable in
terms of its angle φ ∈ [0, 2π) and use a standard distribution
over this variable (presumably restricted to the valid domain).

2

Circular distributions primer

In order to explain the context and rationale behind the contributions made in this paper, it is necessary to know a little
background on circular distributions. Since multidimensional
circular distributions are not generally well-known in the
machine learning community, we present a brief review of
the main concepts related to these distributions in this section.
The expert reader can jump to Section 3 where the multivariate Generalised von Mises distribution is introduced.
A univariate circular distribution is a probability distribution deﬁned over the unit circle. Such distributions can

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2394

