Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Uniﬁed Model for Cross-Domain and Semi-Supervised
Named Entity Recognition in Chinese Social Media
Hangfeng He, Xu Sun
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{hangfenghe, xusun} @pku.edu.cn

another for semi-supervised learning. Our model can adjust
learning rate in deep learning for every sentence.
For cross-domain learning, a lot of previous work focuses on domain similarity (Sun, Kashima, and Ueda 2013;
Bhatt, Semwal, and Roy 2015; Bhatt, Sinha, and Roy 2016).
Sun, Kashima, and Ueda (2013) propose a multitask learning method to automatically discover task relationships from
real-world data. Their method can iteratively learn the task
similarities via measuring the similarities of model weights
of different tasks. They also show reasonable convergence
properties by convergence analysis. Our cross-domain learning function can learn out-of-domain information based on
domain similarity. We use similarity between out-of-domain
sentence and in-domain corpus to adjust learning rate for every sentence in out-of-domain corpus.
For semi-supervised learning, a lot of previous work focused on conﬁdence of prediction (Sarkar 2001; Watson and
Briscoe 2007; Yu, Elkaref, and Bohnet 2015; Maeireizo, Litman, and Hwa 2004). We design a conﬁdence based semisupervised learning function, which can be used to learn indomain unannotated information by self-training.
Our contributions in this work are as follow:

Abstract
Named entity recognition (NER) in Chinese social media is
important but difﬁcult because of its informality and strong
noise. Previous methods only focus on in-domain supervised
learning which is limited by the rare annotated data. However, there are enough corpora in formal domains and massive
in-domain unannotated texts which can be used to improve
the task. We propose a uniﬁed model which can learn from
out-of-domain corpora and in-domain unannotated texts. The
uniﬁed model contains two major functions. One is for
cross-domain learning and another for semi-supervised learning. Cross-domain learning function can learn out-of-domain
information based on domain similarity. Semi-Supervised
learning function can learn in-domain unannotated information by self-training. Both learning functions outperform existing methods for NER in Chinese social media. Finally, our
uniﬁed model yields nearly 11% absolute improvement over
previously published results.

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is a basic task in natural language processing (NLP). NER is important and useful for many high-level applications such as information
extraction and entity linking. With the development of Internet, more and more researches focus on NER in social media (Li and Liu 2015; Habib and van Keulen 2015;
Cherry and Guo 2015; Peng and Dredze 2016b). NER in social media is more challenging because of its informality and
strong noise. Although efforts in English have narrowed the
gap between social media and formal domains (Cherry and
Guo 2015), NER in Chinese social media is still quite hard.
NER is a task to identify names in texts and to assign
names with particular types (Sun et al. 2009; Sun 2014;
Sun et al. 2014). Previous work for NER in Chinese social
media (Peng and Dredze 2015; 2016a) mainly use Condition Random Field (CRF) to deal with the task. They used
supervised learning which is limited by rare annotated data.
We want to use deep learning methods to learn from out-ofdomain corpora and in-domain unannotated texts.
We propose a uniﬁed model to learn from out-of-domain
corpora and in-domain unannotated texts. The uniﬁed model
contains two functions, one for cross-domain learning and

• We propose a uniﬁed model which can learn from out-ofdomain corpora and in-domain unannotated texts.
• We propose a conﬁdence based semi-supervised function which can learn in-domain unannotated texts by selftraining.
• We propose a cross-domain function which can learn outof-domain information based on domain similarity.

Background and Related Work
Our work focus on cross-domain and semi-supervised NER
in Chinese social media with deep learning. We brieﬂy review NER in Chinese social media, cross-domain learning
and semi-supervised learning.

NER in Chinese Social Media
NER is a task to identify names in texts and to assign
names with particular types (Sun et al. 2009; Sun 2014;
Sun et al. 2014). As DEFT ERE Annotation Guidelines1
shows, there are ﬁve entity types: person (PER), titles (TTL),

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3216

Entities V1.7, Linguistic Data Consortium, 2014

