Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Universum Prescription: Regularization
Using Unlabeled Data
Xiang Zhang, Yann LeCun
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
719 Broadway, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10003
{xiang, yann}@cs.nyu.edu

originated from (Vapnik 1998) and (Vapnik 2006). The deﬁnition of universum is a set of unlabeled data that are known
not to belong to any of the classes but in the same domain.
We extended the idea of using universum from support vector machines to deep learning.
Most deep learning approaches utilizing unlabeled data
belong to the scope of representation learning (reviewed by
(Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013) and (Bengio and LeCun 2007)) and transfer learning (Thrun and Pratt 1998).
They include ideas like pretraining (Erhan et al. 2010) (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006) (Ranzato et al. 2006) and semisupervised training (Rasmus et al. 2015) (Zhao et al. 2015).
Universum prescription incoporates unlabeled data without
imposing priors such as sparsity or reconstruction.
Regularization – techniques for the control of generalization gap – has been studied extensively. Most approaches
implement a secondary optimization objective, such as an
L2 norm. Some other methods such as dropout (Srivastava
et al. 2014) cheaply simulate model averaging to control the
model variance. As part of general statistical learning theory
(Vapnik 1995), (Vapnik 1998), the justiﬁcation for regularization is well-developed. We qualitatively justify the methods using Radamacher complexity (Bartlett and Mendelson
2003), similar to (Wan et al. 2013).

Abstract
This paper shows that simply prescribing “none of the above”
labels to unlabeled data has a beneﬁcial regularization effect
to supervised learning. We call it universum prescription by
the fact that the prescribed labels cannot be one of the supervised labels. In spite of its simplicity, universum prescription
obtained competitive results in training deep convolutional
networks for CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10 and ImageNet
datasets. A qualitative justiﬁcation of these approaches using
Rademacher complexity is presented. The effect of a regularization parameter – probability of sampling from unlabeled
data – is also studied empirically.

Introduction
The idea of exploiting the wide abundance of unlabeled data
to improve the accuracy of supervised learning tasks is a
very natural one. In this paper, we study what is perhaps the
simplest way to exploit unlabeled data in the context of deep
learning. We assume that the unlabeled samples do not belong to any of the categories of the supervised task, and we
force the classiﬁer to produce a “none of the above” output
for these samples. This is by no means a new idea, but we
show empirically and theoretically that doing so has a regularization effect on supervised task and reduces the generalization gap, the expected difference between test and training errors. We study three different ways to prescribe “none
of the above” outputs, dubbed uniform prescription, dustbin
class, and background class and show that they improve the
test error of convolutional networks trained on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky 2009), STL-10 (Coates, Ng, and
Lee 2011), and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015). The
method is theoretically justiﬁed using Radamacher complexity (Bartlett and Mendelson 2003).
Here we brieﬂy describe our three universum prescription
methods. Uniform prescription forces a discrete uniform distribution for unlabeled samples. Dustbin class simply adds
an extra class and prescribe all unlabeled data to this class.
Background class also adds an extra class, but it uses a constant threshold to avoid parameterization.
Our work is a direct extension to learning in the presence
of universum (Weston et al. 2006) (Chapelle et al. 2007),

Universum Prescription
In this section we attempt to formalize the trick of prescribing “none of the above” labels – universum prescription. Consider the problem of exclusive k-way classiﬁcation. In learning we hope to ﬁnd a hypothesis function
h ∈ H mapping to Rk so that the label is determined by
y = argmini hi (x). The following assumptions are made.
1. (Loss assumption) The loss used as the optimization objective is negative log-likelihood:
 k


L(h, x, y) = hy (x) + log
exp(−hi (x)) . (1)
i=1

2. (Universum assumption) The proportion of unlabeled
samples belonging to a supervised class is negligible.
The loss assumption assumes that the probability of class
y given an input x can be thought of as
exp(−hy (x))
Pr[Y = y|x, h] = k
,
(2)
i=1 exp(−hi (x))

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2907

