Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Group Activity Selection on Social Networks
Ayumi Igarashi, Dominik Peters, Edith Elkind
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
{ayumi.igarashi, dominik.peters, edith.elkind}@cs.ox.ac.uk

However, the basic model of GASP ignores the relationships among the agents: Do they know each other? Are their
working styles and personalities compatible? Typically, we
cannot afford to ask each agent about her preferences over
all pairs of the form (coalition, activity), as the number of
possible coalitions grows quickly with the number of agents.
A more practical alternative is to adopt the ideas of Myerson
(1977) and assume that the relationships among the agents
are encoded by a social network, i.e., an undirected graph
where nodes correspond to players and edges represent communication links between them; one can then require that
each group is connected with respect to this graph.
In this paper we extend the basic model of GASP to take
into account the agents’ social network. We formulate several
notions of stability for this setting, including Nash stability
and core stability, and study the complexity of computing
stable outcomes in our model. These notions of stability are
inspired by the hedonic games literature (Aziz and Savani
2016) and were applied in the GASP setting by Darmann et
al. (2012) and Darmann (2015).
Now, hedonic games on social networks were recently considered by Igarashi and Elkind (2016), who showed that if the
underlying network is acyclic, stable outcomes are guaranteed to exist and some of the problems known to be computationally hard for the unrestricted setting become polynomialtime solvable. We obtain a similar result for GASP, but only
if several groups of agents can simultaneously engage in the
same activity, i.e., if the activities are copyable. In contrast,
we show that if each activity can be assigned to at most one
coalition, ﬁnding a stable outcome is hard even if the underlying network is very simple. Speciﬁcally, checking the
existence of Nash stable or core stable outcomes turns out
to be NP-hard even for very restricted classes of graphs, including paths, stars, and graphs with constant-size connected
components. We believe that this result is remarkable since,
in the context of cooperative games, such restricted networks
usually enable one to design efﬁcient algorithms for computing stable solutions (see, e.g., Chalkiadakis, Greco, and
Markakis 2016; Elkind 2014; Igarashi and Elkind 2016).
Given these hardness results, we switch to the ﬁxed parameter tractability paradigm. In the context of GASP, a
particularly relevant parameter is the number of activities:
generally speaking, we expect the number of players to be
considerably larger than the number of available activities.

Abstract
We propose a new variant of the group activity selection problem (GASP), where the agents are placed on a social network
and activities can only be assigned to connected subgroups.
We show that if multiple groups can simultaneously engage
in the same activity, ﬁnding a stable outcome is easy as long
as the network is acyclic. In contrast, if each activity can
be assigned to a single group only, ﬁnding stable outcomes
becomes intractable, even if the underlying network is very
simple: the problem of determining whether a given instance
of a GASP admits a Nash stable outcome turns out to be NPhard when the social network is a path, a star, or if the size of
each connected component is bounded by a constant. On the
other hand, we obtain ﬁxed-parameter tractability results for
this problem with respect to the number of activities.

Introduction
Companies assign their employees to different departments,
large decision-making bodies split their members into expert
committees, and university faculty form research groups: division of labor, and thus group formation, is everywhere. For
a given assignment of agents to activities (such as management, product development, or marketing) to be successful,
two considerations are particularly important: the agents need
to be capable to work on their activity, and they should be
willing to cooperate with other members of their group.
Many relevant aspects of this setting are captured by the
group activity selection problem (GASP), introduced by Darmann et al. (2012). In GASP players have preferences over
pairs of the form (activity, group size). The intuition behind
this formulation is that certain tasks are best performed in
small or large groups, and agents may differ in their preferences over group sizes; however, they are indifferent about
other group members’ identities. In the analysis of GASP,
desirable outcomes correspond to stable and/or optimal assignments of players to activities, i.e., assignments that are resistant to player deviations and/or maximize the total welfare.
In the work of Darmann et al. (2012), players are assumed to
have approval preferences, and a particular focus is placed on
individually rational assignments with the maximum number
of participants; subsequently, Darmann (2015) investigated a
model where players submit ranked ballots.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

565

