Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Differentiating Between Posed and Spontaneous Expressions
with Latent Regression Bayesian Network
1

Quan Gan,1∗ Siqi Nie,2∗ Shangfei Wang,1† Qiang Ji2

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
1
{gqquan@mail., sfwang@}ustc.edu.cn
2
Department of Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
{nies, jiq}@rpi.edu
Gevers 2015) (Seckington 2011), and spatial features consist
of distance and angular features (Dibeklioglu et al. 2010). In
addition to deﬁning posed vs spontaneous expression speciﬁed features, some research adopts commonly used features
for expression recognition, such as Gabor wavelet features
(Littlewort, Bartlett, and Lee 2009), Completed local binary
patterns from Three Orthogonal Planes (CLBP-TOP) (Pﬁster et al. 2011a), scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT)
appearance features and facial animation parameters (FAP)
geometric features (Zhang, Tjondronegoro, and Chandran
2011). Instead of using hand-crafted features, Gan et al.
(Gan et al. 2015) proposed to learn features using a deep
Boltzmann machine. After feature extraction, both static and
dynamic machine learning methods have been investigated
to distinguish posed expressions from spontaneous expressions. The static classiﬁers include linear discriminant analysis (Cohn and Schmidt 2004), support vector machines
(Littlewort, Bartlett, and Lee 2009), Adaboost (Littlewort,
Bartlett, and Lee 2009), gentle Boost and relevance vector
machines (Valstar et al. 2006). The dynamic classiﬁers include hidden Markov models (Dibeklioglu et al. 2010) and
dynamic Bayesian networks (Seckington 2011). The static
classiﬁers capture the mapping between extracted features
and expressions ignoring the dynamic aspects of expressions, while the dynamic ones can model the temporal dynamics. All these research demonstrates the progress in distinguishing posed and spontaneous expressions. However,
most current works employ different features and classiﬁers
for posed and spontaneous expression distinction, without
explicitly capturing spatial patterns embedded in posed and
spontaneous expression respectively, and leverage such spatial patterns for posed and spontaneous expression distinction. We call them feature-driven methods.

Abstract
Spatial patterns embedded in human faces are crucial for differentiating posed expressions from spontaneous ones, yet
they have not been thoroughly exploited in the literature. To
tackle this problem, we present a generative model, i.e., Latent Regression Bayesian Network (LRBN), to effectively
capture the spatial patterns embedded in facial landmark
points to differentiate between posed and spontaneous facial expressions. The LRBN is a directed graphical model
consisting of one latent layer and one visible layer. Due to
the “explaining away” effect in Bayesian networks, LRBN is
able to capture both the dependencies among the latent variables given the observation and the dependencies among visible variables. We believe that such dependencies are crucial
for faithful data representation. Speciﬁcally, during training,
we construct two LRBNs to capture spatial patterns inherent
in displacements of landmark points from spontaneous facial
expressions and posed facial expressions respectively. During
testing, the samples are classiﬁed into posed or spontaneous
expressions according to their likelihoods on two models. Efﬁcient learning and inference algorithms are proposed. Experimental results on two benchmark databases demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed approach in modeling spatial
patterns as well as its superior performance to the existing
methods in differentiating between posed and spontaneous
expressions.

Introduction
Distinguishing between posed and spontaneous expressions
is crucial for human-computer interaction, even humanhuman interaction, since spontaneous expressions reveal
one’s real emotions, while posed expressions may disguise
one’s inner feelings.
The main components of current work on posed and spontaneous expression distinction consists of feature extraction
and classiﬁcation. For feature extraction, most research proposes temporal features and spatial features specially designed for differentiating posed expressions from spontaneous ones. Temporal features include duration, amplitude,
speed, acceleration, symmetry and trajectory (Cohn and
Schmidt 2004) (Valstar et al. 2006) (Dibeklioglu, Salah, and

Behavior research indicates that posed and spontaneous
expressions are different from each other in both temporal
and spatial patterns. Spatial patterns mainly consist of the
movement of facial muscles that show up as the occurrence
of facial action units (AUs). For example, for spontaneous
disgust, the three most frequently observed AUs are AU6,
AU7 and AU10, while for posed disgust, they are AU4, AU7
and AU17. For posed sadness, the three most frequently observed AUs are AU4, AU7, AU17, and this pattern doesn’t
apply to spontaneous sadness (Namba et al. 2016). Both
zygomatic major and orbicularis oculi are contracted dur-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
The two authors contributed equally to this paper.
†
This is the corresponding author.

4039

