Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Strategic Sequences of Arguments for
Persuasion Using Decision Trees
Emmanuel Hadoux and Anthony Hunter
Department of Computer Science, University College London
London, UK
{e.hadoux, anthony.hunter}@ucl.ac.uk

of goals as long as only one persuader is involved. Building upon Dung’s abstract argumentation (1995), a dialogue
concerns an argument graph G without self-attacks where
Args(G) is the set of arguments in G, and Attacks(G) is
the set of attack relations in G.
More formally, a persuasion dialogue is a sequence of
moves D = [m1 , . . . , mh ]. In this work, a move consists in
positing an argument a ∈ Args(G). The attacks to and from
this argument in relation to the arguments already posited
come from the original graph. Equivalently, we use D as a
function with an index position i to return the move at i (i.e.,
D(i) = mi ). The parameter h is the horizon of the debate,
i.e., the maximum number of moves that can be played. It
is justiﬁed by the need to keep the persuadee engaged. A
shorter debate (i.e., a smaller value for h) gives more chance
to keep the persuadee in the debate until the end. However,
it also lowers the number of ways to make a valid point in
the debate (see Section experiments for a discussion).

Abstract
Persuasion is an activity that involves one party (the persuader) trying to induce another party (the persuadee) to believe or do something. For this, it can be advantageous for
the persuader to have a model of the persuadee. Recently,
some proposals in the ﬁeld of computational models of argument have been made for probabilistic models of what the
persuadee knows about, or believes. However, these developments have not systematically harnessed established notions
in decision theory for maximizing the outcome of a dialogue.
To address this, we present a general framework for representing persuasion dialogues as a decision tree, and for using
decision rules for selecting moves. Furthermore, we provide
some empirical results showing how some well-known decision rules perform, and make observations about their general
behaviour in the context of dialogues where there is uncertainty about the accuracy of the user model.

Introduction
Probabilistic User Models

Computational models of argument can potentially be used
for systems to persuade users to change their behaviour (e.g.,
to eat less, to exercise more, to vote) (Hunter 2014a).
In this work, we make no assumption on the knowledge
or on the behaviour of the persuadee. We propose a general framework representing persuasion problems as decision problems to solve them exactly using state-of-the-art
methods in decision theory. Composed of several independent units, the framework is general enough to be able to
take into account various types of behaviour for both the persuader and the persuadee. The determination of a dialogue
as being succesful in the persuasion can be done using, for
instance, different Dung’s semantics (1995) or other types
of functions (e.g., degree of belief in a persuasion goal).

Each odd (resp. even) move in the dialogue is a persuader
(resp. persuadee) move. However, the persuadee moves are
played with respect to the arguments she believes in, in reaction to the persuader positing an argument. Therefore,
an efﬁcient strategy needs to take into account the possible
subsets of arguments the persuadee believes in. Indeed, an
agent is unlikely to posit arguments she does not have faith
in. To that end, the persuader keeps and updates a belief
model of the persuadee and uses it in her decision process.
We use the epistemic approach to probabilistic argumentation (Thimm 2012; Hunter 2013; Hunter and Thimm 2014;
Baroni, Giacomin, and Vicig 2014), deﬁning a model as a
mass distribution over all possible subsets of believed arguments.

Persuasion Dialogues

Deﬁnition
1 A mass distribution P over Args(G) is such

that X⊆Args(G) P (X) = 1. The probability of an argu
ment A is P (A) = X⊆Args(G) s.t. A∈X P (X).

A persuader (the proponent) has a dialogue with a persuadee (the opponent) to make her believe (or disbelieve)
some combination of arguments (e.g., to do more exercise or
to eat healthier food). For the sake of simplicity, in this paper, we deal with two agents and a singleton goal. However,
our work can be extended to more agents and any number

For a mass distribution P and A ∈ Args(G), P (A) is
the belief that an agent has in A (i.e., the degree to which
the agent believes the premises and the conclusion drawn
from those premises). When P (A) > 0.5 the agent believes
the argument to some degree, whereas when P (A) ≤ 0.5
the agent disbelieves the argument to some degree. Each

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1128

