Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bootstrapping with Models:
Conﬁdence Intervals for Off-Policy Evaluation
Josiah P. Hanna, Peter Stone, Scott Niekum
{jphanna,pstone,sniekum}@cs.utexas.edu
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, TX 78712 USA

Abstract
Algorithm 1 Bootstrap Conﬁdence Interval
Input is πe , D, δ, and a number of bootstrap estimates, B.

In many reinforcement learning applications, it is desirable
to determine conﬁdence interval lower bounds on the performance of any given policy without executing said policy. In
this context, we propose two bootstrapping off-policy evaluation methods which use learned MDP transition models in
order to estimate lower conﬁdence bounds on policy performance with limited data. We empirically evaluate the proposed
methods in a standard policy evaluation tasks.1

input πe , D, δ, B
output 1 − δ conﬁdence interval lower bound on V (πe ).
1: for all i ∈ [1, B] do
2:
D̃i = {H1i , ..., Hni } where Hji ∼ D
3:
V̂i = Off-PolicyEstimate(πe , D̃i )
4: end for
5: sort({V̂i |i ∈ [1, B]}) // Sort ascending
6: l ← δB
7: Return V̂l

Introduction
As reinforcement learning (RL) methods ﬁnd application in
the real world, it will be critical to establish the performance
of policies with high conﬁdence before they are executed.
This problem is known as the high conﬁdence off-policy
evaluation problem (HCOPE). We propose data-efﬁcient approximate solutions to this problem.
We propose two new bootstrap methods which use models to lower the variance of off-policy value estimates. We
empirically evaluate both methods on two policy evaluation
tasks and show these methods are far more data-efﬁcient
than existing importance sampling based approaches. Finally,
we combine theoretical and empirical results to make speciﬁc recommendations about when to use different off-policy
conﬁdence bound methods in practice.

L
g(H) = t=1 γ t−1 r(St , At ). The policy, π, and transition
dynamics, P , induce a distribution over trajectories, pπ . We
also write H ∼ π to denote a trajectory sampled by executing
π. The expected discounted return of a policy, π, is deﬁned
as V (π) := EH∼π [g(H)].
Given a set of n trajectories, D = {H1 , .., Hn }, where
Hi ∼ πb for some πb , an evaluation policy, πe , and a conﬁdence level, δ, we propose two methods to approximate a
conﬁdence interval lower bound, V−,δ (πe ), on V (πe ) such
that V−,δ (πe ) < V (πe ) with probability 1 − δ.

Bootstrapping Policy Lower Bounds
Bootstrapping is a statistical technique that samples with
replacement from a given sample to approximate conﬁdence
intervals. See Efron (1979) for further reading on bootstrap
conﬁdence intervals. Deﬁne Off-PolicyEstimate to be any
method that takes a data set of trajectories D and a policy
πe and returns a policy value estimate V̂ (πe ). Algorithm 1
gives a Bootstrap Conﬁdence Interval procedure for computing a conﬁdence interval on V̂ (πe ), as computed by OffPolicyEstimate. Since we desire lower bounds on V (πe ) we
give pseudocode for a bootstrap lower bound. The method is
equally applicable to upper bounds and two sided intervals.
A similar method using weighted importance sampling was
proposed by Thomas et al. (2015).

Problem Statement
We formalize our problem as a Markov decision process
(MDP) deﬁned as S, A, P, r, γ, d0  where S is a set of states,
A is a set of actions, P : S × A × S → R≥0 is a distribution over next states given the current state and action,
r : S × A → [−rmin , rmax ] is a reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1] is
a discount factor, and d0 is an initial state distribution. An
agent samples actions from a policy π : S × A → [0, 1]
which is a probability mass function for actions conditioned
on a given state.
A trajectory, H of length L is deﬁned as a state-action history, S1 , A1 , S2 , ...SL , AL where S1 ∼ d0 , At ∼ π(·|st ),
and St+1 ∼ P (·|St , At ). The return of a trajectory is

Direct Model-Based Bootstrapping

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An extended version of this work can be found at https://arxiv.
org/abs/1606.06126

The model-based off-policy estimator, MB, computes V̂ (πe )
by ﬁrst using all trajectories in D to build a model M̂ =
S, A, P̂ , r, γ, dˆ0  where P̂ and dˆ0 are estimated from data

4933

