Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scalable Feature Selection via Distributed Diversity Maximization
Sepehr Abbasi Zadeh,∗ Mehrdad Ghadiri∗

Vahab Mirrokni, Morteza Zadimoghaddam

Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
{sabbasizadeh, ghadiri}@ce.sharif.edu

Google Research
{mirrokni, zadim}@google.com

as bioinformatics (Greene et al. 2014), neuroscience (TurkBrowne 2013), ﬁnance, and document classiﬁcation. Although there are various methods that are fast enough to handle several thousands of features, they become less applicable in the presence of millions or billions of features. To deal
with such big datasets, we need more scalable and faster approaches such as distributed methods. Most of the developed
distributed methods distribute the data by instances among
machines—horizontally distributing—(Zhao et al. 2012;
Peralta et al. 2015) and there are a few recent works tackling
the problem by distributing the feature vectors—vertically
distributing (Moran-Fernandez, Bolón-Canedo, and AlonsoBetanzos 2015). Intuitively, horizontal distribution is infeasible when the dataset has many features but a few instances,
e.g., bioinformatics datasets. As a matter of fact, it is harder
to deal with the redundancy of the features in a vertically distributed setting in comparison to horizontally distributed or
centralized settings (Bolón-Canedo, Sánchez-Maroño, and
Alonso-Betanzos 2015b). In the rest of the paper we use centralized setting in contrast to distributed setting.
Over the past decade, several information-theoretic methods have been developed for feature selection. In addition
to having a strong theoretical foundation, these techniques
have shown reasonable performance in practice. They consider two intuitive criteria: minimizing redundancy of the
selected features by reducing mutual information between
them, and maximizing their relevance by increasing mutual information between them and class labels. These criteria are the foundations of a widely used and well-known
feature selection framework called mRMR (Ding and Peng
2005). In this paper, we note that a potential way of considering these criteria in a distributed setting is through diversity maximization framework. Therefore, our method can be
viewed as a distributed version of mRMR that also guarantees a theoretical bound for its objective function.
In the diversity maximization framework, the goal is to
ﬁnd a ﬁxed-sized set of points from a metric space which
maximizes a certain diversity function. This diversity function is deﬁned based on a distance between elements of
the metric space (Abbassi, Mirrokni, and Thakur 2013;
Indyk et al. 2014; Abbasi Zadeh and Ghadiri 2015). As one
of our main contributions toward modeling feature selection
through diversity maximization, we introduce a metric distance between feature vectors which considers their redun-

Abstract
Feature selection is a fundamental problem in machine learning and data mining. The majority of feature selection algorithms are designed for running on a single machine (centralized setting) and they are less applicable to very large
datasets. Although there are some distributed methods to
tackle this problem, most of them are distributing the data
horizontally which are not suitable for datasets with a large
number of features and few number of instances. Thus, in this
paper, we introduce a novel vertically distributable feature selection method in order to speed up this process and be able
to handle very large datasets in a scalable manner. In general, feature selection methods aim at selecting relevant and
non-redundant features (Minimum Redundancy and Maximum Relevance). It is much harder to consider redundancy
in a vertically distributed setting than a centralized setting
since there is no global access to the whole data. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt toward solving the
feature selection problem with a vertically distributed ﬁlter
method which handles the redundancy with consistently comparable results with centralized methods. In this paper, we
formalize the feature selection problem as a diversity maximization problem by introducing a mutual-information-based
metric distance on the features. We show the effectiveness of
our method by performing an extensive empirical study. In
particular, we show that our distributed method outperforms
state-of-the-art centralized feature selection algorithms on a
variety of datasets. From a theoretical point of view, we have
proved that the used greedy algorithm in our method achieves
an approximation factor of 1/4 for the diversity maximization
problem in a distributed setting with high probability. Furthermore, we improve this to 8/25 expected approximation
using multiplicity in our distribution.

Introduction
Feature selection is the task of choosing a small representative subset of features from a dataset. It is a crucial preprocessing step in several data mining and machine learning
applications as it can signiﬁcantly reduce the learning time
and the error rate (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003). This problem has received even more attention in the big data era
with ultrahigh-dimensional datasets in different ﬁelds such
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2876

