Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Healthy Cognitive Aging: A Hybrid Random Vector
Functional-Link Model for the Analysis of Alzheimers Disease
Peng Dai,1,2,3 Femida Gwadry-Sridhar,1,3 Michael Bauer,1 Michael Borrie,4 Xue Teng3

for the Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)∗
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
2
Robarts Research, London, ON, Canada
3
Pulse Infoframe Inc., London, ON, Canada
4
Division of Geriatric Medicine, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
peng.dai.ca@ieee.org, {fgwadrys, bauer}@uwo.ca, michael.borrie@sjhc.london.on.ca, xt.biomedical@gmail.com
1

increase to a trillion dollar by 2018 (Alzheimers Disease International, 2015). Alzheimers disease (AD) is one of the
most common causes for dementia, accounting for about
60% of the total. The disease presents a tremendous burden
and challenge to public health, health care delivery, social
services and the family (Alzheimers Disease International,
2015). AD usually develops in situ while the patient is cognitively normal. At some point in time, sufﬁcient brain damage accumulates to result in cognitive symptoms, which may
further deteriorate to disability and ultimately death. There is
currently no effective cure to reverse the damages caused by
Alzheimer’s. Treatments are mainly to ease cognitive symptoms, delay progression and improve quality of life via assistive technologies. Therefore, it is crucial to diagnose or
predict AD as early as possible so as to allow treatments
start early, which helps patients to maintain cognitive functionality.

Abstract
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a genetically complex neurodegenerative disease, which leads to irreversible brain damage,
severe cognitive problems and ultimately death. A number
of clinical trials and study initiatives have been set up to
investigate AD pathology, leading to large amounts of high
dimensional heterogeneous data (biomarkers) for analysis.
This paper focuses on combining clinical features from different modalities, including medical imaging, cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF), etc., to diagnose AD and predict potential progression. Due to privacy and legal issues involved with clinical research, the study cohort (number of patients) is relatively small, compared to thousands of available biomarkers (predictors). We propose a hybrid pathological analysis
model, which integrates manifold learning and Random Vector functional-link network (RVFL) so as to achieve better
ability to extract discriminant information with limited training materials. Furthermore, we model (current and future)
cognitive healthiness as a regression problem about age. By
comparing the difference between predicted age and actual
age, we manage to show statistical differences between different pathological stages. Veriﬁcation tests are conducted
based on the Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) database. Extensive comparison is made against different machine learning algorithms, i.e. Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). Experimental results show that our
proposed algorithm achieves better results than the comparison targets, which indicates promising robustness for practical clinical implementation.

Clinical diagnosis of AD often includes establishing the
presence of dementia, amnesia and a deﬁcit in one or
more cognitive functions, such as skilled movements (limb
apraxia), language (aphasia) or executive function (e.g.,
planning, attention and abstract reasoning)(Scott and Barrett
2007; American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The diagnosis process is complex, which involves a number of assessments, e.g. medical history review, physical examination, neurological examination, cognitive testing, laboratory
testing and brain imaging. Physicians usually evaluate the
above mentioned tests based on experience with quantitative
guidelines. It is very challenging especially for early AD patients without clear cognitive symptoms.

Introduction
According to the 2015 World Alzheimer report, there are an
estimated 46 million people worldwide living with dementia at a total cost of over $818 billion, which is estimated to

With recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence, evidence
has shown that effective application of machine learning algorithms can greatly improve the efﬁciency of many tasks.
Machine learning offers valuable tools for advanced diagnostic techniques, which can assist the clinicians to better
understand the information underlying the high dimensional
heterogeneous medical variables. Diagnosis of AD can be
formulated as a classiﬁcation problem. The problem is particularly challenging due to the inherent difﬁculty in distinguishing between normal aging, mild cognitive impairment
(MCI), and early signs of AD. For example, patients with
dementia may not complain of cognitive difﬁculty owing to

∗
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained
from the Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within
the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of
ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete list of ADNI
investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wpcontent/uploads/how to apply/ADNI Acknowledgement List.pdf
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4567

