Simultaneous Clustering
and Ensemble
1

Zhiqiang Tao,1 Hongfu Liu,1 Yun Fu1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Abstract

Ensemble Clustering

Traditional Clustering

Ensemble Clustering (EC) has gained a great deal of attention throughout the ﬁelds of data mining and machine learning, since it emerged as an effective and robust clustering
framework. Typically, EC methods try to fuse multiple basic partitions (BPs) into a consensus one, of which each BP is
obtained by performing traditional clustering method on the
same dataset. One promising direction for ensemble clustering is to derive pairwise similarity from BPs, and then transform it as a graph partition problem. However, these graphbased methods may suffer from an information loss when
computing the similarity between data points, because they
only utilize the categorical data provided by multiple BPs,
yet neglect rich information from raw features. This problem
can badly undermine the underlying cluster structure in the
original feature space, and thus degrade the clustering performance. In light of this, we propose a novel Simultaneous
Clustering and Ensemble (SCE) framework to alleviate such
detrimental effect, which employs the similarity matrix from
raw features to enhance the co-association matrix summarized by multiple BPs. Two neat closed-form solutions given
by eigenvalue decomposition are provided for SCE. Experiments conducted on 16 real-world datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed SCE over the traditional clustering and state-of-the-art ensemble clustering methods. Moreover, several impact factors that may affect our method are
also explored extensively.

Final Partition



Data
Points

r BPs

Enhance

Similarity L

Co-association S

Enhanced S

Simultaneous Clustering and Ensemble

Figure 1: Traditional clustering is directly performed with
raw features, while the input of EC is only the multiple BPs.
However, the information loss of BPs may undermine the
cluster structure in the original feature space. To alleviate
this problem, SCE employs the similarity matrix to enhance
the co-association matrix obtained by BPs.
Clearly, co-association matrix is the key factor for EC
methods to conduct graph partitioning for the ﬁnal consensus partition (Liu et al. 2015). However, it only computes
the similarity between data points with the categorical data
provided by BPs, yet neglects the rich information from raw
features. Thus, the co-association matrix may suffer from
a problem of information loss, which can badly undermine
the clustering structure existing in the original feature space.
Moreover, since BPs generally partition data with diverse
cluster numbers (larger than the true cluster number) (Fred
and Jain 2005; Wu et al. 2015), the co-association matrix
may “dilute” the pairwise similarity between data points inevitably. Due to these problems, some EC methods even perform worse than the traditional clustering algorithms, as we
observe in the empirical evidence.
In this paper, we propose a novel Simultaneous Clustering and Ensemble (SCE) framework to address the above
challenges. As shown in Fig. 1, the similarity matrix from
raw features and the co-association matrix derived by BPs
are jointly involved for the clustering task. Different from
the existing EC work, whose input is only multiple BPs, we
reuse the feature information from original data to alleviate

Introduction
Ensemble Clustering (EC) (Strehl and Ghosh 2003; Fred and
Jain 2005), also known as consensus clustering, emerges as
an effective and robust alternative to the traditional clustering method. It aims to fuse multiple basic partitions (BPs)
into a consensus one, where each BP is obtained by performing traditional clustering method on the same dataset.
Tremendous efforts have been made on this area (Vega-Pons
and Ruiz-Shulcloper 2011). One promising direction is to
derive pairwise similarity from BPs and then transform ensemble clustering as a graph partition problem (Fred and
Jain 2005; Liu et al. 2015; Zhou et al. 2015). These graphbased methods usually summarize BPs into a co-association
matrix, which actually calculates the co-occurrence of instances belonging to the same cluster.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1546

