Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Personalized Donor-Recipient
Matching for Organ Transplantation
1

Jinsung Yoon,1 Ahmed M. Alaa,1 Martin Cadeiras,2 Mihaela van der Schaar1

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), CA, 90095, USA
2
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), CA, 90095, USA
jsyoon0823@g.ucla.edu, ahmedmalaa@g.ucla.edu, MCardeiras@mednet.ucla.edu, mihaela@ee.ucla.edu

identify these for whom the risk of transplantation is too
high and would therefore provide no survival beneﬁts. Such
a risk assessment task is quite complicated for that postoperative patient survival depends on different types of risk
factors: recipient-related factors (e.g. cardiovascular disease severity of heart recipients (Wozniak 2014; Nwakanma
2007; Russo 2006; Silva 2016)), recipient-donor matching factors (e.g. weight ratio and human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) (Jayarajan 2013), blood group compatibility (Jawitz
2013), race (Allen 2010), etc), and donor-related factors
(e.g. diabetes (Arnaoutakis 2012; Taghavi 2013)). The interactions among all these risk factors make the prognosis problem for the organ transplant outcomes highly complex; the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
working group suggests resolving this problem by enhancing the phenotypic compatibility characterization of the
pre-transplant recipient-donor population (Mancini 2010;
Collins 2015; Shah 2012).
In the light of the above, we seek an enhanced phenotypic characterization for the compatibility of patient-donor
pairs via a precision medicine approach (Collins 2015) in
which we construct personalized predictive models that are
tailored to the individual traits of both the donor and the recipient to the ﬁnest possible granularity. The advent of electronic health records (EHR) inspire a data-driven approach
for constructing such predictive models in which the complex recipient-donor compatibility patterns are discovered
from observational data. To that end, we develop ConﬁdentMatch: an automated system that learns the recipient-donor
compatibility patterns from the EHR data in terms of the
probability of transplant success for given recipient-donor
pairs. The clinicians can utilize ConﬁdentMatch as a prognostic tool for managing organ transplantation selection decisions in which information about the donor and recipient
are fed to the system, and the output comes as the probability of the transplant’s success. The system can also be used
in conjunction with any matching algorithms, such as the
Nobel prize-winning algorithm of Shapley and Roth (Shapley 1962; Roth 2003). More speciﬁcally, a set of patients is
matched to a set of donors using the compatibility score that
ConﬁdentMatch computes as an input to the matching algorithm.
In order to learn the highly complex recipient-donor compatibility patterns, ConﬁdentMatch adopts a novel learn-

Abstract
Organ transplants can improve the life expectancy and quality of life for the recipient but carry the risk of serious postoperative complications, such as septic shock and organ rejection. The probability of a successful transplant depends in
a very subtle fashion on compatibility between the donor and
the recipient - but current medical practice is short of domain knowledge regarding the complex nature of recipientdonor compatibility. Hence a data-driven approach for learning compatibility has the potential for signiﬁcant improvements in match quality. This paper proposes a novel system
(ConﬁdentMatch) that is trained using data from electronic
health records. ConﬁdentMatch predicts the success of an organ transplant (in terms of the 3-year survival rates) on the
basis of clinical and demographic traits of the donor and
recipient. ConﬁdentMatch captures the heterogeneity of the
donor and recipient traits by optimally dividing the feature
space into clusters and constructing different optimal predictive models to each cluster. The system controls the complexity of the learned predictive model in a way that allows for
assuring more granular and accurate predictions for a larger
number of potential recipient-donor pairs, thereby ensuring
that predictions are “personalized” and tailored to individual characteristics to the ﬁnest possible granularity. Experiments conducted on the UNOS heart transplant dataset show
the superiority of the prognostic value of ConﬁdentMatch to
other competing benchmarks; ConﬁdentMatch can provide
predictions of success with 95% accuracy for 5,489 patients
of a total population of 9,620 patients, which corresponds to
410 more patients than the most competitive benchmark algorithm (DeepBoost).

Introduction
Organ transplantation is the therapy of choice for patients
with end-stage diseases who are refractory to medical therapies (Shah 2012). Even though organ transplantation can
increase the life expectancy and quality of life for the recipient, the operation can entail various complications, including infection, acute and chronic rejection and malignancy (Huynh 2014). The pre-operative anticipation of the
risk associated with organ transplantation is a regular task
that transplant centers perform in order to determine which
patients would beneﬁt from transplantation and accurately
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1647

