Leveraging Video Descriptions to
Learn Video Question Answering
Kuo-Hao Zeng,∗† Tseng-Hung Chen,∗ Ching-Yao Chuang,∗
Yuan-Hong Liao,∗ Juan Carlos Niebles,† Min Sun∗
∗

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University
†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University

Video

Abstract

(Our Method Section)

VideoQA
model

We propose a scalable approach to learn video-based question answering (QA): to answer a free-form natural language
question about the contents of a video. Our approach automatically harvests a large number of videos and descriptions
freely available online. Then, a large number of candidate QA
pairs are automatically generated from descriptions rather
than manually annotated. Next, we use these candidate QA
pairs to train a number of video-based QA methods extended
from MN (Sukhbaatar et al. 2015), VQA (Antol et al. 2015),
SA (Yao et al. 2015), and SS (Venugopalan et al. 2015). In order to handle non-perfect candidate QA pairs, we propose a
self-paced learning procedure to iteratively identify them and
mitigate their effects in training. Finally, we evaluate performance on manually generated video-based QA pairs. The results show that our self-paced learning procedure is effective,
and the extended SS model outperforms various baselines.

(Harvested Data Section)

time

Description:
Perhaps in an attempt to practice
for her World Cup debut, this girl (QG Section)
tried to score a goal in her Question
backyard. But as she approached Generator
the soccer ball to make her big
kick, she slipped in the grass and
fell hard to the ground.



Question:

Answer:

Who tried to score a
goal in her
backyard?

She.

Who slipped in the
grass?

This girl.

Did she fall hard to
the ground?

Yes.

Figure 1: Illustration of our approach. Given harvested
videos and descriptions (see harvested data section), our system automatically generate question-answer pairs from descriptions (see questions generation section (QG section)).
Then our VideoQA model takes a video and the generated
questions as input and outputs the corresponding answers
(see our method section). Anspred denotes the predicted answer and Ansgt denotes the ground truth answer.

Introduction
Understanding video contents at human-level is a holy grail
in visual intelligence. Towards this goal, researchers have
studied intermediate tasks such as detection of objects and
events, semantic segmentation, and video summarization.
Recently, there has been increased interest in many tasks that
bridge language and vision, which are aimed at demonstrating abilities closer to human-level understanding. For example, many researchers (Zeng et al. 2016b; Xu et al. 2016;
Pan et al. 2016b; 2016a; Yu et al. 2016; Hendricks et al.
2016) have worked on video captioning and generated natural language descriptions of videos recently. Despite the
great progress, video captioning suffers from similar issues
as image captioning: (1) it is fairly easy to generate a relevant, but non-speciﬁc, natural language description (Vinyals
et al. 2015); (2) it is hard to evaluate the quality of the generated open-ended natural language description.
An alternative task that addresses these issues is visual
question answering (QA) (Antol et al. 2015), which brings
two important properties: (1) speciﬁc parts of a visual observation need to be understood to answer a question; (2)
the space of relevant answers for each question is greatly reduced. Thanks to these properties, visual QA has become a
viable alternative towards human-level visual understanding

at a ﬁner level of detail. Moreover, with the reduced answer
space, simple metrics such as standard accuracy (percentage
of correct answers) can be used to evaluate performance.
The biggest drawback of visual QA comes from the
signiﬁcant human efforts required to build benchmarking
datasets. Most current collection techniques (Antol et al.
2015; Malinowski and Fritz 2014) require humans to view
the visual data and manually create QA pairs for both training and testing. Furthermore, the situation becomes worse
when the data consists of videos rather than images. One of
the earliest attempts to create a QA benchmark for videos
is the MovieQA dataset by (Tapaswi et al. 2016). Since it
is expensive to hire annotators to watch entire movies, plot
synopses are used as a proxy during the ﬁrst step. Human
annotators may form any number and type of questions for
each plot paragraph. Given the initial set of questions, annotators are asked to localize context in the movie to answer
the question. Annotators may correct the questions if they
cannot localize context in the movie. Finally, annotators provide one correct answer and four wrong answers. In total,
MovieQA consists of 14944 QA pairs from 408 movies.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4334

