Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Logical Filtering and Smoothing:
State Estimation in Partially Observable Domains
Brent Mombourquette,† Christian Muise,∗ Sheila A. McIlraith†
†

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
∗
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
†
{bgmomb,sheila}@cs.toronto.edu, ∗ cjmuise@mit.edu

Our concern is with logical state estimation in service
of tasks such as planning, execution monitoring, diagnosis,
and activity recognition. We are particularly concerned with
systems that include a rich characterization of how the actions of an agent indirectly affect their environment. These
are typically captured by causal or ramiﬁcation constraints
(e.g., a causal constraint might say that if the battery and radio
are ok and the radio is on then sound is emitted.). We assume
that such constraints are compiled into the transition system
as additional effects of actions following, e.g., (Pinto 1999;
Strass and Thielscher 2013; Baier, Mombourquette, and
McIlraith 2014). In planning such constraints tend to create
problems with large conformant width (Palacios and Geffner
2009).
We exploit the observation that only a subset of the state
is necessary to track. Planning systems need to know when
actions are applicable, and when the goal is reached (Bonet
and Geffner 2014). Execution monitoring systems need only
track the conditions under which a plan remains valid (e.g.,
(Fikes, Hart, and Nilsson 1972; Fritz and McIlraith 2007)).
Diagnosis systems track the conﬁrmation and refutation of
candidate diagnoses. These observations motivate the development of state estimation techniques tailored to the task of
tracking the truth of (conjunctions of) ﬂuent literals. In Section we formalize state estimation as semantic logical ﬁltering and propose a sound under-approximation that is computationally appealing. Motivated by the technique of smoothing for stochastic systems (e.g., (Einicke 2012)), in Section
, we introduce the notion of logical smoothing, which allows for the updating of beliefs about the past in light of
observations about the present. In Section 7, we propose
an algorithm for backwards-forwards reasoning that combines smoothing and ﬁltering in order to perform state estimation. The application of (approximate) logical smoothing mitigates for the incompleteness of approximate logical
ﬁltering, while preserving many of its computational advantages. We evaluate our approach and discuss related work.

Abstract
State estimation is the task of estimating the state of a partially observable dynamical system given a sequence of executed actions and observations. In logical settings, state estimation can be realized via logical ﬁltering, which is exact
but can be intractable. We propose logical smoothing, a form
of backwards reasoning that works in concert with approximated logical ﬁltering to reﬁne past beliefs in light of new observations. We characterize the notion of logical smoothing
together with an algorithm for backwards-forwards state estimation. We also present an approximation of our smoothing
algorithm that is space efﬁcient. We prove properties of our
algorithms, and experimentally demonstrate their behaviour,
contrasting them with state estimation methods for planning.
Smoothing and backwards-forwards reasoning are important
techniques for reasoning about partially observable dynamical systems, introducing the logical analogue of effective
techniques from control theory and dynamic programming.

Introduction
Many applications of artiﬁcial intelligence from automated
planning and diagnosis to activity recognition require reasoning about dynamical systems that are only partially observable. A necessary component of such systems is state
estimation – the task of estimating the state of the systems given a sequence of executed actions and observations. With stochastic transition systems, state estimation
is commonly realized via ﬁltering, of which Kalman ﬁltering (Kalman 1960) is a well-known example. In logical settings, an analogous form of logical ﬁltering was proposed
by Amir and Russell [2003] in which an agent’s belief state
– the set of possible world states – can be compactly represented as a formula, and ﬁltering is a form of belief update. While logical ﬁltering is intractable in the general case
(Eiter and Gottlob 1992), there are tractable subclasses often involving restricted transition systems or compact encodings of the belief state (e.g., (Shahaf and Amir 2007;
Shirazi and Amir 2011)). Unfortunately, typical belief state
representations often require further inference to ascertain
beliefs about individual ﬂuents – a frequent and time critical
component of many decision-making systems.

The Problem: State Estimation
State estimation is a core task in reasoning about dynamical systems with partial observability. Informally, the state
estimation task we address is:
Given a dynamical system, a belief state, and a sequence of executed actions and observations, infer the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3613

