Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Dynamic Window Neural Network for CCG Supertagging
Huijia Wu,1,3 Jiajun Zhang,1,3 Chengqing Zong∗1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{huijia.wu,jjzhang,cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

2

Abstract
Combinatory Category Grammar (CCG) supertagging is a
task to assign lexical categories to each word in a sentence.
Almost all previous methods use ﬁxed context window sizes
to encode input tokens. However, it is obvious that different
tags usually rely on different context window sizes. This motivates us to build a supertagger with a dynamic window approach, which can be treated as an attention mechanism on
the local contexts. We ﬁnd that applying dropout on the dynamic ﬁlters is superior to the regular dropout on word embeddings. We use this approach to demonstrate the state-ofthe-art CCG supertagging performance on the standard test
set.

Њ

P(c|L(warm))

... ...

...
...

...

...

tanh

...

softmax

...
...

...

Њ

L(warm)
filters

Introduction
Combinatory Category Grammar (CCG) provides a connection between syntax and semantics of natural language. The
syntax can be speciﬁed by derivations of the lexicon based
on the combinatory rules, and the semantics can be recovered from a set of predicate-argument relations. CCG provides an elegant solution for a wide range of semantic analysis, such as semantic parsing (Zettlemoyer and Collins 2007;
Kwiatkowski et al. 2010; 2011; Artzi, Lee, and Zettlemoyer
2015), semantic representations (Bos et al. 2004; Bos 2005;
2008; Lewis and Steedman 2013), and semantic compositions, all of which heavily depend on the supertagging and
parsing performance. All these motivate us to build a more
accurate CCG supertagger.
CCG supertagging is the task to predict the lexical categories for each word in a sentence. Existing algorithms on
CCG supertagging range from point estimation (Clark and
Curran 2007; Lewis and Steedman 2014) to sequential estimation (Xu, Auli, and Clark 2015; Lewis, Lee, and Zettlemoyer 2016; Vaswani et al. 2016), which predict the most
probable supertag of the current word according to the context in a ﬁxed size window. This ﬁxed size window assumption is too strong to generalize. We argue this from two perspectives.
One perspective comes from the inputs. For a particular
word, the number of its categories may vary from 1 to 130
in CCGBank 02-21 (Hockenmaier and Steedman 2007). We

...

...

...

...

...

L(warm)

on

a

warm

autumn

day

word indices

Figure 1: A dynamic window approach for supertagging using a multilayer perceptron. We add “ﬁlters” to each token
in the context window. If one ﬁlter is closed to 0, then the
corresponding token will be blocked, otherwise it will be
passed as a normal input.

need to choose different context window sizes to meet different ambiguity levels. The other perspective is for the targets.
There are about 21000 different words together with 31 different Part-Of-Speech(POS) tags which have the same category N/N . Using the same context window size for each
word is obviously inappropriate.
To overcome these problems, we notice that Xu et al.
(2015) use dropout in the embedding layer to make the input
contexts sparse. This method motivates us to get rid of the
unnecessary information in the contexts automatically rather
than use a pre-speciﬁed prior. Then we observe that the gating mechanism of long short-term memory (LSTM) blocks,
especially the input gate, can determine when to enter into
the block. All these inspire us to add a gate to each item in
the context windows to make them sparse but informative.
This method can be interpreted as the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), which focuses on
parts of the memories when making decisions. From this
perspective, the contexts of the current word are the memories, and the dynamic window is the attention. We focus on
the contexts extracted from the attended windows to predict

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3337

