Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Solving High-Dimensional Multi-Objective
Optimization Problems with Low Effective Dimensions∗
Hong Qian, Yang Yu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
{qianh,yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

are suitable for a wide range of sophisticated real-world
optimization problems, such as non-convex functions, nondifferentiable functions, and discontinuous functions.
The MO optimization has achieved many remarkable
applications such as in reinforcement learning (Moffaert
and Nowé 2014), constrained optimization (Qian, Yu, and
Zhou 2015a), and software engineering (Harman, Mansouri,
and Zhang 2012; Minku and Yao 2013). Two reasons accounting for its successful applications. First, the MO algorithm can ﬁnd the solutions that reach different optimal balances of the objectives (e.g., performance and cost),
which can satisfy different demands from different users.
Besides, it has been shown that MO optimization can do
better than single-objective optimization in some machine
learning tasks (Li et al. 2014; Qian, Yu, and Zhou 2015b;
2015c).
Driven by the demand from real-world applications, despite the hardness of MO optimization such as the objectives are often conﬂicted with each other, derivativefree MO optimization methods have obtained substantial
achievements. Well-known MO optimization methods, such
as improved version of the strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm (SPEA2) (Zitzler, Laumanns, and Thiele 2001),
region-based selection in evolutionary multi-objective optimization (PESA-II) (Corne et al. 2001), non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) (Deb et al. 2002), and
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D) (Zhang and Li 2007), non-dominated neighbor immune algorithm (NNIA) (Gong et al. 2008), etc., have
been proposed and successfully applied in various applications.
Problem. Previous studies have shown that derivativefree MO methods are effective and efﬁcient for the MO
functions in low-dimensional solution space. However, MO
optimization methods may lose their power for the highdimensional MO functions, because the convergence rate
is slow or the computational cost of each iteration is high
in high-dimensional solution space. Furthermore, high dimensionality of the solution space can hurt MO optimization much severer than single-objective optimization, since
an MO algorithm needs to ﬁnd a set of solutions that reaches
different optimal balances of the objectives. Therefore, scalability becomes one of the main bottlenecks of MO optimization, which restricts the further applications of it.

Abstract
Multi-objective (MO) optimization problems require simultaneously optimizing two or more objective functions. An MO
algorithm needs to ﬁnd solutions that reach different optimal balances of the objective functions, i.e., optimal Pareto
front, therefore, high dimensionality of the solution space
can hurt MO optimization much severer than single-objective
optimization, which was little addressed in previous studies. This paper proposes a general, theoretically-grounded yet
simple approach ReMO, which can scale current derivativefree MO algorithms to the high-dimensional non-convex MO
functions with low effective dimensions, using random embedding. We prove the conditions under which an MO function has a low effective dimension, and for such functions,
we prove that ReMO possesses the desirable properties of
optimal Pareto front preservation, time complexity reduction, and rotation perturbation invariance. Experimental results indicate that ReMO is effective for optimizing the highdimensional MO functions with low effective dimensions,
and is even effective for the high-dimensional MO functions
where all dimensions are effective but most only have a small
and bounded effect on the function value.

Introduction
Solving sophisticated optimization problems plays an essential role in the development of artiﬁcial intelligence. In some
real-world applications, we need to simultaneously optimize
two or more objective functions instead of only one, which
leads to the progress
of multi-objective
(MO) optimization.


Let f (x) = f1 (x), . . . , fm (x) denote a multi-objective
function. In this paper, we assume that the optimization
problems are deterministic, i.e., each call of f returns the
same function value for the same solution x. Furthermore,
we focus on the derivative-free optimization. That is to say,
f is regarded as a black-box function, and we can only perform the MO optimization based on the sampled solutions
and their function values. Other information such as gradient is not used or even not available. Since the derivativefree optimization methods do not depend on gradient, they
∗
This research was supported by the NSFC (61375061,
61333014,
61305067),
Jiangsu
Science
Foundation
(BK20160066), and Foundation for the Author of National
Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (201451).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

875

