Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Execution of Probabilistic Temporal Plans
Kyle Lund, Sam Dietrich, Scott Chow, and James C. Boerkoel Jr.
Human Experience & Agent Teamwork Laboratory (http://cs.hmc.edu/HEAT/)
Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, CA
{klund, sdietrich, schow, boerkoel}@hmc.edu

Abstract

[0,10]

[0,10]

A critical challenge in temporal planning is robustly dealing with non-determinism, e.g., the durational uncertainty of
a robot’s activity due to slippage or other unexpected inﬂuences. Recent advances show that robustness is a better measure of solution quality than traditional metrics such as ﬂexibility. This paper introduces the Robust Execution Problem
for ﬁnding maximally robust dispatch strategies for general
probabilistic temporal planning problems. While generally
intractable, we introduce approximate solution techniques—
one that can be computed statically prior to the start of execution with robustness guarantees and one that dynamically
adjusts to opportunities and setbacks during execution. We
show empirically that our dynamic approach outperforms all
known approaches in terms of execution success rate.

[0,∞)

AST

N(6,2)

AET
[-2,2]

[0,∞)

BST

N(2,1)
[0,10]

BET
[0,10]

Figure 1: Temporal network for our example. Robot A and
B’s navigation tasks take ∼ 6 and ∼ 2 minutes respectively.
ﬁnding maximally-robust dispatch strategies to general
probabilistic temporal planning problems;
• a new LP-based approximation for determining a static
dispatch strategy with strict robustness guarantees;
• the ﬁrst dynamic probabilistic temporal plan dispatch
strategy that opportunistically reﬁnes the dispatch strategy in response to environmental dynamism; and
• an empirical comparison that shows our dynamic approach outperforms all known approaches in terms of
temporal plan execution success rate.

Introduction
Successfully executing tasks in uncertain environments requires close coordination between agents. Consider an automated warehouse where two robots must deliver pallets
to a pick station so that a box can be manually packed for
shipment. Navigation can take an uncertain amount of time
due to slippage and localization error. Further, due to starting in different locations, robot A takes around six minutes
to navigate to the pickup, while robot B can arrive in around
two minutes. To avoid congestion and ensure efﬁciency, the
robots must arrive at the pick station within two minutes of
each other. Clearly, the likelihood of successfully arriving at
the pick station at the same time improves if Robot B waits
to begin. However, the critical question is: given the durational uncertainty of tasks, how long should Robot B wait
to maximize its chance of arriving within 2 minutes of A?
Probabilistic temporal planning provides a framework for
representing systems of scheduling constraints, like our example, and captures how those constraints restrict the times
at which activities can occur, including characterizing activities with uncertain durations. The challenge that this paper
addresses is determining the best way to schedule events to
account for scheduling uncertainty in probabilistic temporal
plans. More speciﬁcally, this paper contributes:

Background
Our example scheduling problem is displayed graphically in
Figure 1. Each vertex represents an event such as the start
and end times for robot A’s navigation task, which are represented as AST and AET respectively. Directed edges represent temporal constraints and are labeled with the range
of time that is allowed to elapse between the occurrence of
the events of the source and target vertices. Note the two
styles of directed edges: dashed edges highlight constraints
between agents (e.g., both robots must end navigation within
two minutes of each other), and thick edges convey that
the duration is controlled by an uncertain process (e.g., the
time to completion of each robot’s task). In our example, the
robots are given 10 minutes to complete all tasks. This constraint is represented by loops labeled [0, 10] at each event
node. The uncertain navigation durations for robots A (approximately 6 minutes) and B (approximately 2 minutes)

• a formal deﬁnition of the Robust Execution Problem for
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3597

