Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Gated Neural Networks for Option Pricing: Rationality by Design
Yongxin Yang, Yu Zheng,♠ Timothy M. Hospedales

EECS, Queen Mary, University of London , Imperial Business School, Imperial College London♠
yongxin.yang@qmul.ac.uk, t.hospedales@qmul.ac.uk, y.zheng12@imperial.ac.uk

Regression models trained by machine learning techniques, such as kernel machines and neural networks, generalise well to out-of-sample cases as long as the training
data is sufﬁcient. Such data-driven methods give good option price estimates (Malliaris and Salchenberger 1993), and
can even surpass formula derived from economic principles.
One drawback of existing data-driven approaches is that they
seek a unique solution for all options. However, learned pricing models fail on certain options, for example, some overestimate deep out-of-the money options (Bennell and Sutcliffe 2004), or underestimate options very close to maturity
(Dugas et al. 2000). To alleviate these issues, (Gradojevic,
Gencay, and Kukolj 2009) proposed a ‘divide-and-conquer’
strategy, by ﬁrst grouping options into sub-categories, and
building distinct pricing models for each sub-category. However, this categorisation is done by manually deﬁned heuristics, and may not be consistent with market conditions, and
their changes in time. In this paper, we propose a novel class
of neural networks for option pricing. These implement a
divide-and-conquer method where option grouping is automatic and learned from data rather than manual heuristics.
Therefore, it can dynamically adjust both option classiﬁcation and reﬁne the per-class pricing model as the market
changes with time. Experiments on S&P 500 index options
show that our approach is signiﬁcantly better than others.

Abstract
We propose a neural network approach to price EU call
options that signiﬁcantly outperforms some existing pricing
models and comes with guarantees that its predictions are
economically reasonable. To achieve this, we introduce a
class of gated neural networks that automatically learn to
divide-and-conquer the problem space for robust and accurate pricing. We then derive instantiations of these networks
that are ‘rational by design’ in terms of naturally encoding a
valid call option surface that enforces no arbitrage principles.
This integration of human insight within data-driven learning
provides signiﬁcantly better generalisation in pricing performance due to the encoded inductive bias in the learning, guarantees sanity in the model’s predictions, and provides econometrically useful byproduct such as risk neutral density.

Introduction
Option pricing models have long been a popular research
area. From a theoretical perspective, new option pricing
models provide an opportunity for academics to examine
ﬁnancial markets’ mechanics. From a practical viewpoint,
market makers desire efﬁcient pricing models to set bid and
ask prices in derivative markets. The earliest and simplest
pricing model, Black–Scholes (Black and Scholes 1973)
gives a rough theoretical estimate of European option price.
Since then many studies attempted to ﬁnd better option pricing models by relaxing the strict assumptions in Black–
Scholes. The models proposed by economists usually start
from a set of economic assumptions and end up with a deterministic formula that takes as input some market signals
(e.g., moneyness, time to maturity, and risk-free rate). In
contrast, machine learning studies solve option pricing in a
data-driven way: as a regression problem, with similar inputs to econometric models, and real market option prices
as outputs. The complicated relationship between input and
output (e.g., a Black–Scholes like formula) is learned from
a large amount of data rather than derived from econometric
axioms. Progress in data-driven option pricing can be driven
by improvements in model expressivity, as well as integrating selected econometric axioms into a data-driven model
as inductive bias. In this paper we achieve excellent option
pricing results by contributing on both of these lines.

A limitation of all the above machine learning-based
methods is that while they may ﬁt the data well (e.g., mean
square error), they do not enforce some economic principles,
thus ruling out their suitability for pricing in practice. E.g.,
option prices have theoretical bounds, the violation of which
makes investors gain risk-free proﬁt (so-called arbitrage).
This motivates another less-studied approach to improving
data-driven option pricing: opening up black box models to
integrate economic axioms as constraints into learning algorithms (Dugas et al. 2000). From an economic perspective, this is designing a NN to make economically meaningful predictions, and from a learning perspective it is providing domain-speciﬁc inductive bias to improve generalisation
and avoid overﬁtting. In this paper, we derive a class of gated
neural networks with stronger economic rationality guarantees than existing work. In particular our neural price predictor is the ﬁrst learning based approach to carry a valid risk
neutral density function, i.e., a valid probability distribution
over the future asset price in risk neutral probability space.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

52

