Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Large Graph Hashing with Spectral Rotation
Xuelong Li, Di Hu, Feiping Nie∗
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
xuelong li@opt.ac.cn, hdui831@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, feipingnie@gmail.com

(Wang et al. 2016). The well-known hashing technique Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Andoni and Indyk 2006)
belongs to the ﬁrst one. It utilizes random projection to
map the data into binary codes. And the projection can be
realized by various similarity measures, e.g. p-norm distance for p ∈ (0 , 1] (Datar et al. 2004), kernel similarity (Kulis and Grauman 2012). Although the random fashion takes low computation complexity, it need more binary
codes to achieve high precision and recall (Shen et al. 2013;
Liu et al. 2014), which leads to the improvement of corresponding storage space and retrieval time cost.
The second category, the data-dependent hashing method,
is mainly developed to generate more compact codes and
has attracted more attention in recent research. Unlike the
randomly selected hyperplane in the LSH, these methods attempt to learn the parameters with different projection functions from a training set . For example, Iterative Quantization (ITQ) (Gong et al. 2013b) utilizes PCA projection to
generate hash function with large variance, while Isotropic
Hashing (Kong and Li 2012) aims to produce the projected
dimensions with equal variance. And these hashing functions can also be learned in the kernel space, such as Binary
Reconstruction Embedding (BRE) (Kulis and Darrell 2009).
Besides, hashing method based on reconstruction network
is also considered, e.g., Binary Autoencoder (BA) (CarreiraPerpinán and Raziperchikolaei 2015). However, compared
with the aforementioned methods, hashing technique based
on the graph Laplacian shows its effectiveness in embedding the original data into low dimensional space, i.e. the
compact binary codes. This mainly results from the more
semantically accurate neighbors after the nonlinear embedding of Laplacian eigenmaps (Shen et al. 2013).
This paper focuses on the unsupervised graph Laplacian
hashing method. The previous hashing based on spectral
graph, e.g., Spectral Hashing (SH) (Weiss, Torralba, and
Fergus 2009) and Anchor Graph Hashing (AGH) (Liu et al.
2011), mainly suffers from two problems. First, the discrete
codes are not exactly the spectral solution but a rounding
result of the real value codes to spectral relaxation. The directly thresholding scheme may lead to the improving error when the hashing length increases. Although Discrete
Graph Hasing (DGH) (Liu et al. 2014) proposes a discrete
optimization framework to directly learn the binary codes,
but it needs much more time and cannot guarantee the opti-

Abstract
Faced with the requirements of huge amounts of data processing nowadays, hashing techniques have attracted much
attention due to their efﬁcient storage and searching ability.
Among these techniques, the ones based on spectral graph
show remarkable performance as they could embed the data
on a low-dimensional manifold and maintain the neighborhood structure via a non-linear spectral eigenmap. However,
the spectral solution in real value of such methods may deviate from the discrete solution. The common practice is just
performing a simple rounding operation to obtain the ﬁnal
binary codes, which could break constraints and even result
in worse condition. In this paper, we propose to impose a
so-called spectral rotation technique to the spectral hashing
objective, which could transform the candidate solution into
a new one that better approximates the discrete one. Moreover, the binary codes are obtained from the modiﬁed solution
via minimizing the Euclidean distance, which could result in
more semantical correlation within the manifold, where the
constraints for codes are always held. We provide an efﬁcient alternative algorithm to solve the above problems. And
a manifold learning perceptive for motivating the proposed
method is also shown. Extensive experiments are conducted
on three large-scale benchmark datasets and the results show
our method outperforms state-of-the-art hashing methods, especially the spectral graph ones.

Introduction
With the increasing demand of massive data organization,
storage, and retrieval, hashing technique has attracted universal attention at present. Hashing is mainly explored to
map the raw image or document into a sequence of binary
codes while preserving the similarity structure among the
original data. As the generated short binary codes take a
few storage space and computation cost, hashing has been
widely used in machine learning and computer vision, e.g.,
multimodal learning (Zhang, Wang, and Si 2011), classiﬁcation (Gong et al. 2013a), image retrieval (Liu et al. 2011),
and image patch matching (Korman and Avidan 2011).
Unsupervised hashing methods can be roughly grouped
into two categories, data-independent and data-dependent
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2203

