Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scalable Optimization of Multivariate Performance
Measures in Multi-Instance Multi-label Learning
Apoorv Aggarwal,∗ Sandip Ghoshal,∗ Ankith M. S., Suhit Sinha, Ganesh Ramakrishnan
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{apoorvaggarwal21, sandip.iem, suhit.iitb, msankith}@gmail.com, ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in

Purushottam Kar

Prateek Jain

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
purushot@cse.iitk.ac.in

Microsoft Research
prajain@microsoft.com
vided only with relational facts in a database along with a
non-annotated corpus that overall, supports most of the facts.
The general MIML problem has been explored through
reductions to single instance or single label learning in the
past (Zhou and Zhan 2006; Zhan and Zhou 2008). The RE
problem has enjoyed more focused attention and several diverse approaches have been proposed for this problem such
as structural risk minimization Hoffmann et. al. (2011), neural networks (Zeng et al. 2015) and graphical models (Surdeanu et al. 2012).
Existing approaches for the MIML problem suffer from
two main drawbacks 1) Although performance measures
such as F-measure and average precision are standard for
evaluation, the algorithms do not seek to optimize them directly, instead choosing to adopt heuristics that encourage
good performance. An exception is the work of Haffari et
al. (2015) who attempt to directly optimize the F-micro
measure. 2) The algorithms are often expensive in terms of
training time and cannot scale to large, web-scale datasets.
We address both these issues by developing MIMLperf , a
plug-in classiﬁer for the MIML problem. MIMLperf directly
tries to optimize complex performance measures such as
macro and micro-F measure in a scalable manner. MIMLperf
excels over its competitors in its abilty to predict rare labels
correctly. A notable feature of MIMLperf is its streaming nature, that allows it to be executed by making several passes
over the data without the need for storing the entire dataset
in memory. We rigorously benchmark MIMLperf to establish that 1) it offers far greater label extraction accuracies
on RE than specialized methods for the problem, 2) it also
outperforms state-of-the-art MIML approaches on text categorization and scene classiﬁcation problems, and 3) it can
offer orders of magnitude faster running times.

Abstract
The problem of multi-instance multi-label learning (MIML)
requires a bag of instances to be assigned a set of labels most
relevant to the bag as a whole. The problem ﬁnds numerous
applications in machine learning, computer vision, and natural language processing settings where only partial or distant supervision is available. We present a novel method for
optimizing multivariate performance measures in the MIML
setting. Our approach MIMLperf uses a novel plug-in technique and offers a seamless way to optimize a vast variety
of performance measures such as macro and micro-F measure, average precision, which are performance measures of
choice in multi-label learning domains. MIMLperf offers two
key beneﬁts over the state of the art. Firstly, across a diverse
range of benchmark tasks, ranging from relation extraction to
text categorization and scene classiﬁcation, MIMLperf offers
superior performance as compared to state of the art methods
designed speciﬁcally for these tasks. Secondly, MIMLperf operates with signiﬁcantly reduced running times as compared
to other methods, often by an order of magnitude or more.

1

Introduction

The paucity of labeled data has fueled much interest in learning paradigms with partial or distant supervision. The task
of Multi-instance Multi-label (MIML) learning is one such
paradigm that has received much attention in areas such as
relation extraction (RE), image classiﬁcation etc. The problem requires a bag of data points to be assigned a set of labels
most relevant to the bag as a whole. To take an example, in
the RE setting, we are interested in identifying relations held
by entities being discussed in a body of text. The problem
is pretty straightforward in the presence of sentence level
annotations i.e., indications of which sentences discuss speciﬁc relations. However, this requirement is a prohibitive
one, especially when the number of relations runs into the
hundreds or thousands. Consequently, the problem is often
posed as that of learning under distant supervision (Haffari,
Nagesh, and Ramakrishnan 2015; Hoffmann et al. 2011;
Surdeanu et al. 2012; Zeng et al. 2015) wherein one is pro-

2

Related Work

Completely supervised approaches, such as those for RE
(Zhou et al. 2005; Surdeanu and Ciaramita 2007) have limited application owning to their requirement of fully annotated data which is expensive. Of the alternate paradigms,
that of distant supervision has found much appeal in both
RE and MIML literature. For the RE problem, this paradigm
shift due to (Mintz et al. 2009) fueled much interest with

∗

Work done while the author was a student at IIT Bombay
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1698

