Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Self-Correcting Models for
Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Erik Talvitie
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA 17604-3003
erik.talvitie@fandm.edu
Abstract
When an agent cannot represent a perfectly accurate model
of its environment’s dynamics, model-based reinforcement
learning (MBRL) can fail catastrophically. Planning involves
composing the predictions of the model; when ﬂawed predictions are composed, even minor errors can compound and
render the model useless for planning. Hallucinated Replay
(Talvitie 2014) trains the model to “correct” itself when it
produces errors, substantially improving MBRL with ﬂawed
models. This paper theoretically analyzes this approach, illuminates settings in which it is likely to be effective or ineffective, and presents a novel error bound, showing that a model’s
ability to self-correct is more tightly related to MBRL performance than one-step prediction error. These results inspire an
MBRL algorithm for deterministic MDPs with performance
guarantees that are robust to model class limitations.

1

Figure 1: Top: training models to predict environment states
from environment states. Bottom: training models to predict
environment states from states sampled from the model.

Introduction

racy, is an inadequate proxy for MBRL performance. For
instance, Sorg, Lewis, and Singh (2010) and Joseph et
al. (2013) both pointed out that the most accurate model by
this measure is not necessarily the best for planning. Both
proposed optimizing model parameters for control performance using policy gradient methods. Though appealing in
its directness, this approach arguably discards some of the
beneﬁts of learning a model in the ﬁrst place.
Talvitie (2014) pointed out that one-step prediction accuracy does not account for how the model behaves when
composed with itself and introduced the Hallucinated Replay meta-algorithm to address this. As illustrated in Figure
1, this approach rolls out the model and environment in parallel, training the model to predict the correct environment
state (s4 ) even when its input is an incorrect sampled state
(z3 ). This effectively causes the model to “self-correct” its
rollouts. Hallucinated Replay was shown to enable meaningful planning with ﬂawed models in examples where the
standard approach failed. However, it offers no theoretical
guarantees. Venkatraman, Hebert, and Bagnell (2015) and
Oh et al. (2015) used similar approaches to improve models’
long-range predictions, though not in the MBRL setting.
This paper presents novel error bounds that reveal the
theoretical principles that underlie the empirical success of
Hallucinated Replay. It presents negative results that identify settings where hallucinated training would be ineffective (Section 2.3) and identiﬁes a case where it yields a

In model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) the agent
learns a predictive model of its environment and uses it
to make decisions. The overall MBRL approach is intuitively appealing and there are many anticipated beneﬁts to
learning a model, most notably sample efﬁciency (Szita and
Szepesvári 2010). Despite this, with few exceptions (e.g.
Abbeel, Quigley, and Ng 2006), model-free methods have
been far more successful in large-scale problems. Even as
model-learning methods demonstrate increasing prediction
accuracy in high-dimensional domains (e.g. Bellemare, Veness, and Talvitie 2014, Oh et al. 2015) this rarely corresponds to improvements in control performance.
One key reason for this disparity is that model-free methods are generally robust to representational limitations that
prevent convergence to optimal behavior. In contrast, when
the model representation is insufﬁcient to perfectly capture the environment’s dynamics (even in seemingly innocuous ways), or when the planner produces suboptimal plans,
MBRL methods can fail catastrophically. If the beneﬁts of
MBRL are to be gained in large-scale problems, it is vital
to understand how MBRL can be effective even when the
model and planner are fundamentally ﬂawed.
Recently there has been growing awareness that the standard measure of model quality, one-step prediction accuc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2597

