Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Depth CNNs for RGB-D Scene Recognition: Learning
from Scratch Better than Transferring from RGB-CNNs
1

Xinhang Song,1,2 Luis Herranz,1 Shuqiang Jiang,1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{xinhang.song, luis.herranz, shuqiang.jiang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
layout of objects in the scene. Thus, RGB-D models can improve recognition over mere RGB models. However, in contrast to RGB data, which can be crowdsourced by crawling
the web, RGB-D data needs to be captured with a specialized
and relatively complex setup(Silberman and Fergus 2011;
Song, Lichtenberg, and Xiao 2015). For this reason, RGBD datasets are orders of magnitude smaller than the largest
RGB datasets, also with much fewer categories. This prevents from training deep CNNs properly, and handcrafted
features are still a better choice for this modality.
However, the recent SUN RGB-D dataset(Song, Lichtenberg, and Xiao 2015) is signiﬁcantly larger than previous
RGB-D scene datasets (e.g. NYU2(Silberman et al. 2012)).
While still not large enough to train from scratch deep CNNs
of comparable size to RGB counterparts (10335 RGB-D images compared with 2.5 million RGB images in Places),
at least provides enough data for ﬁne tuning deep models
(e.g. AlexNet-CNN on Places) without signiﬁcant overﬁtting. This approach typically exploit the HHA encoding for
depth data(Gupta et al. 2014a), since it also a three channel
representation (horizontal disparity, height above ground,
and angle with the direction of gravity, see Figure 1 top).
Fine tuning is typically used when the target dataset has limited data, but there is another large dataset that covers a similar domain which can be exploited ﬁrst to train a deep model.
Thus, transferring RGB features and ﬁne tuning with depth
(HHA) data is the common practice to learn deep representations for depth data(Song, Lichtenberg, and Xiao 2015;
Wang et al. 2016; Zhu, Weibel, and Lu 2016; Gupta, Hoffman, and Malik 2016). However, although HHA images resemble RGB images and shapes and objects can be identiﬁed, is it really reasonable reusing RGB features in this
inter-modal scenario?
In this paper we will focus on the low-level differences
between RGB and HHA data, and show that a large number of low-level ﬁlters are either useless or ignored during
ﬁne tuning the network from RGB to HHA. Figure 1 (middle) shows the average activation ratio (i.e. how often the
activation is non-zero) of the 96 ﬁlters in the layer conv1 of
Places-CNN for different input data (sorted in descending
order). When a network is properly designed and trained, it
tends to show a balanced activation rate curve (e.g. conv1 activations extracted from the Places validation set, where the
curve is almost a constant) meaning that most of the ﬁlters

Abstract
Scene recognition with RGB images has been extensively
studied and has reached very remarkable recognition levels,
thanks to convolutional neural networks (CNN) and large
scene datasets. In contrast, current RGB-D scene data is much
more limited, so often leverages RGB large datasets, by transferring pretrained RGB CNN models and ﬁne-tuning with the
target RGB-D dataset. However, we show that this approach
has the limitation of hardly reaching bottom layers, which is
key to learn modality-speciﬁc features. In contrast, we focus
on the bottom layers, and propose an alternative strategy to
learn depth features combining local weakly supervised training from patches followed by global ﬁne tuning with images.
This strategy is capable of learning very discriminative depthspeciﬁc features with limited depth images, without resorting
to Places-CNN. In addition we propose a modiﬁed CNN architecture to further match the complexity of the model and
the amount of data available. For RGB-D scene recognition,
depth and RGB features are combined by projecting them
in a common space and further leaning a multilayer classiﬁer, which is jointly optimized in an end-to-end network. Our
framework achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on NYU2 and
SUN RGB-D in both depth only and combined RGB-D data.

Introduction
Success in visual recognition mainly depends on the feature representing the input data. Scene recognition in particular has beneﬁted from recent developments in the
ﬁeld. Most notably, massive image datasets (ImageNet and
Places(Zhou et al. 2014)) provide the necessary amount
of data to train complex convolutional neural networks
(CNNs)(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2015), with millions of parameters, without
falling into overﬁtting. The features extracted from models
pretrained in those datasets have shown to be generic and
powerful enough to obtain state-of-the-art performance in
smaller datasets (e.g. MIT indoor 67(Quattoni and Torralba
2009), SUN397(Xiao et al. 2010)), just using an SVM(Donahue et al. 2014) or ﬁne-tuning, outperforming earlier handcrafted paradigms (e.g. SIFT, HOG, bag-of-words).
Low cost depth sensors can capture depth information in
addition to RGB data. Depth can provide valuable information to model object boundaries and understand the global
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4271

