Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Selected Summary of AI for
Computational Sustainability
Douglas H. Fisher
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt University
douglas.h.fisher@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract

but this paper does point to edited collections and overviews elsewhere, as well as describing broad dimensions
and categorizations for characterizing computational sustainability work to date.
Computational sustainability research in AI has been
previously characterized by (a) the AI methods employed,
(b) the sustainability areas addressed, and by (c) the contributions that are made to (typically, human) decisionmaking (e.g., Fisher, 2012, 2016; Eaton, Gomes, & Williams, 2014). Topic modeling has also been used to find
topics in a collection of computational sustainability documents used in university coursework (Fisher, Bian, &
Chen, 2016). In that preliminary study, sustainability areas
dominated the topic definitions, as opposed to the computational approaches.
The expectation is that categorization of computational
sustainability projects will help with a deeper synthesis of
these projects down the road, with an eventual goal of this
synthesis to be the development of holistic and sophisticated cognitive agents that advise on sustainability problems.
The paper also points out potential gaps in the current
computational sustainability landscape, to include the relative lack of research on AI for sustainable design and attention to issues of unanticipated consequences that may arise
from AI interventions.

This paper and summary talk broadly survey computational
sustainability research. Rather than a detailed treatment of
the research projects in the area, which is beyond the scope
of the paper and talk, the paper includes a meta-survey,
pointing to edited collections and overviews in the literature
for the interested reader. Computational sustainability research has been broadly characterized by AI methods employed, sustainability areas addressed, and contributions
made to (typically, human) decision-making. The paper addresses these characterizations as well, which will facilitate
a deeper synthesis later, to include the potential for developing sophisticated and holistic AI decision-making and advisory agents.

Introduction
Sustainability is a vast concern, or should be, and presents
challenges stemming from interactions between the natural
and human-developed spheres across temporal and spatial
scales. This has motivated computer science researchers to
apply their trade to environmental and societal sustainability challenges. AI is among the most important technologies for enabling humans to deal with the complexity of
sustainability challenges.
Gomes (2009) articulated research activity at the nexus
of computing and sustainability, labeling it computational
sustainability, with goals “to develop new computational
models, methods, and tools to help balance environmental,
economic, and societal needs for a sustainable future.”
Since that articulation, a dedicated International Conference on Computational Sustainability has emerged, as have
special tracks at AAAI, IJCAI, and other conferences. It
seems time for a comprehensive survey of the field, and
attention to possibilities for synthesis of projects that are
currently being independently pursued. That comprehensive survey is beyond the scope of this conference paper,

Background on Computational Sustainability
Background on computational sustainability can be found
in a variety of sources (e.g., Gomes, 2009; Milano,
O’Sullivan, & Sachenbacher, 2014; Lässig, 2016), but this
section gives the briefest overview, using roughly the
structure of the Introduction (written by the author of this
AAAI summary paper) of the wikibook entitled “Artificial
Intelligence for Computational Sustainability: A Lab Companion” (AIfCS, 2016). Importantly, the wikibook allows
the research community to further elaborate these points.
For example, if notable projects are missing in the history

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4852

