Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sparse Subspace Clustering by
Learning Approximation 0 Codes
1

Jun Li,1 Yu Kong,1 Yun Fu1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
2
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
junl.mldl@gmail.com, {yukong,yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

A main challenge in applying spectral clustering to subspace clustering is to fast obtain a “good” afﬁnity matrix,
which has a subspace preserving property so that there are
no connections between points from different subspaces.
Most of existing methods, however, have taken expensive
time to calculate the afﬁnity matrix, such as sparse subspace clustering (SSC) (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013), least
squares regression (LSR) (Lu et al. 2012; Shao et al. 2015;
Li, Li, and Fu 2015) and low rank representation (LRR)
(Liu et al. 2013; Li et al. 2016a; Zhao, Ding, and Fu 2016).
SSC, LSR, and LRR use 1 , 2 and nuclear norms to encourage the afﬁnity matrix to be sparse or low-rank by costing
more than O(n2 ), where n is the number of data points. SSC
can give a subspace-preserving afﬁnity under broad conditions (e.g., arbitrary subspaces and corrupted data) (Elhamifar
and Vidal 2013), while LRR and LSR must satisfy the extreme conditions that subspaces are independent and the data
is uncorrupted (You, Robinson, and Vidal 2016). Unfortunately, SSC based on 1 -norm still requires solving a largescale convex optimization problem. To balance the subspacepreserving afﬁnity with the computationally efﬁcient, SSC
based on 0 -norm is solved by orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) (Dyer, Sankaranarayanan, and Baraniuk 2013;
You, Robinson, and Vidal 2016), called SSC-OMP. Although
SSC-OMP achieves faster time and better accuracy than the
original SSC (You, Robinson, and Vidal 2016), it still takes
more time to search the solution in OMP when the number
of data points is large.
On the other hand, 1 sparse coding in original SSC is
solved by the iterative shrinkage and thresholding algorithm
(ISTA) (Beck and Teboulle 2009; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013),
which is referred to as SSC-ISTA in this paper. However, it
leads to a expensive inference problem. To overcome this
problem, training a feed-forward neural network (Li et al.
2016b) is used to produce the best approximation of the
1 sparse code (Kavukcuoglu, Ranzato, and LeCun 2008;
Gregor and LeCun 2010). Learned ISTA (LISTA) is used to
train the feed-forward neural network (Gregor and LeCun
2010). Given a test example, 1 code is quickly computed by
the feed-forward neural network instead of ISTA.
In light of the above arguments, learning a non-linear, feedforward neural network is an efﬁcient method to fast infer
the 0 sparse coding for the afﬁnity matrix in sparse subspace
clustering as a single hidden neural network (SHNN) with

Abstract
Subspace clustering has been widely applied to detect meaningful clusters in high-dimensional data spaces. A main challenge in subspace clustering is to quickly calculate a “good”
afﬁnity matrix. 0 , 1 , 2 or nuclear norm regularization is
used to construct the afﬁnity matrix in many subspace clustering methods because of their theoretical guarantees and
empirical success. However, they suffer from the following
problems: (1) 2 and nuclear norm regularization require very
strong assumptions to guarantee a subspace-preserving afﬁnity; (2) although 1 regularization can be guaranteed to give a
subspace-preserving afﬁnity under certain conditions, it needs
more time to solve a large-scale convex optimization problem;
(3) 0 regularization can yield a tradeoff between computationally efﬁcient and subspace-preserving afﬁnity by using
the orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) algorithm, but this
still takes more time to search the solution in OMP when the
number of data points is large. In order to overcome these
problems, we ﬁrst propose a learned OMP (LOMP) algorithm
to learn a single hidden neural network (SHNN) to fast approximate the 0 code. We then exploit a sparse subspace
clustering method based on 0 code which is fast computed
by SHNN. Two sufﬁcient conditions are presented to guarantee that our method can give a subspace-preserving afﬁnity.
Experiments on handwritten digit and face clustering show
that our method not only quickly computes the 0 code, but
also outperforms the relevant subspace clustering methods
in clustering results. In particular, our method achieves the
state-of-the-art clustering accuracy (94.32%) on MNIST.

Introduction
Subspace clustering (Vidal 2011) is an important problem
to deal with high-dimensional data clustering in many realworld clustering applications (Liu and Fu 2015; Liu et al.
2015; 2016; Zhao and Fu 2015), such as motion segmentation (Rao et al. 2010; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013), hand written
digit clustering (You, Robinson, and Vidal 2016), and face
clustering (Elhamifar and Vidal 2013). The popular methods
(You, Robinson, and Vidal 2016; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013;
Lu et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2013) are to apply spectral clustering
to an afﬁnity matrix obtained by solving an optimization problem with 0 , 1 , 2 or nuclear norm regularization because of
their theoretical guarantees and empirical success.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2189

