Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SCOPE: Scalable Composite
Optimization for Learning on Spark
Shen-Yi Zhao, Ru Xiang, Ying-Hao Shi, Peng Gao, Wu-Jun Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
{zhaosy,xiangr,shiyh,gaop}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

category is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants, such as stochastic average gradient (SAG) (Schmidt,
Roux, and Bach 2013) and stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG) (Johnson and Zhang 2013), which try to perform
optimization on the primal problem. The second category,
such as stochastic dual coordinate ascent (SDCA) (ShalevShwartz and Zhang 2013), tries to perform optimization with
the dual formulation. Many advanced SO methods, such as
SVRG and SDCA, are more efﬁcient than traditional batch
learning methods in both theory and practice for large-scale
learning problems.
Most traditional SO methods are sequential which means
that the optimization procedure is not parallelly performed.
However, with the increase of data scale, traditional sequential SO methods may not be efﬁcient enough to handle largescale datasets. Furthermore, in this big data era, many largescale datasets are distributively stored on a cluster of multiple
machines. Traditional sequential SO methods cannot be directly used for these kinds of distributed datasets. To handle
large-scale composite optimization problems, researchers
have recently proposed several parallel SO (PSO) methods
for multi-core systems and distributed SO (DSO) methods
for clusters of multiple machines.
PSO methods perform SO on a single machine with
multi-cores (multi-threads) and a shared memory. Typically, synchronous strategies with locks will be much slower
than asynchronous ones. Hence, recent progress of PSO
mainly focuses on designing asynchronous or lock-free optimization strategies (Recht et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2014;
Hsieh, Yu, and Dhillon 2015; J. Reddi et al. 2015; Zhao
and Li 2016).
DSO methods perform SO on clusters of multiple machines. DSO can be used to handle extremely large problems which are beyond the processing capability of one
single machine. In many real applications especially industrial applications, the datasets are typically distributively
stored on clusters. Hence, DSO has recently become a
hot research topic. Many DSO methods have been proposed, including distributed SGD methods from primal
formulation and distributed dual formulation. Representative distributed SGD methods include PSGD (Zinkevich et
al. 2010), BAVGM (Zhang, Wainwright, and Duchi 2012)
and Splash (Zhang and Jordan 2015). Representative distributed dual formulations include DisDCA (Yang 2013),

Abstract
Many machine learning models, such as logistic regression (LR) and support vector machine (SVM), can be formulated as composite optimization problems. Recently, many
distributed stochastic optimization (DSO) methods have been
proposed to solve the large-scale composite optimization
problems, which have shown better performance than traditional batch methods. However, most of these DSO methods
might not be scalable enough. In this paper, we propose a
novel DSO method, called scalable composite optimization for
learning (SCOPE), and implement it on the fault-tolerant distributed platform Spark. SCOPE is both computation-efﬁcient
and communication-efﬁcient. Theoretical analysis shows that
SCOPE is convergent with linear convergence rate when the
objective function is strongly convex. Furthermore, empirical results on real datasets show that SCOPE can outperform
other state-of-the-art distributed learning methods on Spark,
including both batch learning methods and DSO methods.

Introduction
Many machine learning models can be formulated as composite optimization problems which have the following
form with ﬁnite sum of some functions: min P (w) =
w∈Rd
n
1
f
(w),
where
w
is
the
parameter
to
learn
(optimize),
i i
n
n is the number of training instances, and fi (w) is the loss
function on the training instance i. For example, fi (w) =
T
log(1 + e−yi xi w ) + λ2 w2 in logistic regression (LR), and
fi (w) = max{0, 1−yi xTi w}+ λ2 w2 in support vector machine (SVM), where λ is the regularization hyper-parameter
and (xi , yi ) is the training instance i with xi ∈ Rd being the
feature vector and yi ∈ {+1, −1} being the class label. Other
cases like matrix factorization and deep neural networks can
also be written as similar forms of composite optimization.
Due to its efﬁciency and effectiveness, stochastic optimization (SO) has recently attracted much attention to
solve the composite optimization problems in machine learning (Xiao 2009; Bottou 2010; Duchi, Hazan, and Singer 2011;
Schmidt, Roux, and Bach 2013; Johnson and Zhang 2013;
Zhang, Mahdavi, and Jin 2013; Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang
2013; 2014; Lin, Lu, and Xiao 2014; Nitanda 2014). Existing
SO methods can be divided into two categories. The ﬁrst
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2928

