Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

What’s Hot at CPAIOR
(Extended Abstract)
Claude-Guy Quimper
Université Laval
Département d’informatique et de génie logiciel
claude-guy.quimper@ift.ulaval.ca

Introduction

submitted to the Constraint Journal while still be presented
at the conference. The authors were invited to add novel
material to their paper and submit it for a second round of
review. This process led to the selection of four papers.
In Breaking Symmetries in Graph Search with Canonizing Sets, (Itzhakov and Codish 2016) present a technique
that breaks symmetries when the solution of a problem is
expressed as a graph. Such problems contain as many solutions as there are isomorphisms. A solver that eliminates
a candidate solution can therefore eliminate all isomorphic
candidate solutions. The paper shows how to efﬁciently do
it.
In Computing the Ramsey Number R(4,3,3) using Abstraction and Symmetry breaking, (Codish et al. 2016) solve
an open problem, computing the Ramsey Number R(4, 3,
3), a number related to the graph colouring problem. Their
solution is based on abstraction and symmetry breaking.
In A Branch-and-Price-and-Check Model for the Vehicle Routing Problem with Location Resource Constraints,
(Lam and Van Hentenryck 2016) solve a routing problem
with pickup and delivery, time windows, and location resource constraints. They decompose the problems using a
branch-and-price-and-check algorithm, i.e. a branch-andprice solves a vehicle routing problem and a constraint
solver checks for the feasibility of the location resource.
In Multi-Language Evaluation of Exact Solvers in Graphical Model Discrete Optimization, (Hurley et al. 2016) consider optimization languages able to encode NP-Hard problems such as Cost Function Networks, Markov Random
Fields, Weighted Partial Max-SAT, 0-1 Linear Programming, and Constraint Programming. They explain how
problems expressed in one language can be translated into
another formalism. It follows an extensive comparison of
exact solvers and the creation of a portfolio able to exploit
the complementarity between the solvers.

The 13th International Conference on Integration of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Operations Research Techniques
in Constraint Programming (CPAIOR 2016), was held in
Banff, Canada, May 29 - June 1, 2016. In order to trigger
exchanges between the constraint programming and the operations research community, CPAIOR was co-located with
CORS 2016, the Canadian Operational Research society’s
conference.

Master Class
The ﬁrst day of CPAIOR is traditionally a master class where
tutorials are given around a common topic. This year’s tutorials were about decomposition methods. Jean-François
Cordeau gave a talk about Classical Benders Decomposition. John Hooker gave a tutorial about Logic-based Benders Decomposition, and J. Christopher Beck presented Hybrid CP/MIP and Benders Decomposition Methods. During the discussions following these three excellent tutorials,
many participants saw a parallel between no-good learning
and the generation of Benders cuts. Moreover, the tutorials
clearly showed how Benders decomposition can be used to
hybridize constraint programming with mathematical programming
Bernard Gendron gave a tutorial about Lagrangian Relaxation in MIP followed by Willem-Jan van Hoeve’s tutorial on Lagrangian Relaxation in Constraint Programming.
These tutorials demonstrated how Lagrangian relaxation can
greatly improve the bound on the objective function that is
computed by constraint solvers. Moreover, global constraint
ﬁltering algorithms can be derived from Lagrangian decomposition.
Louis-Martin Rousseau concluded the master class with
a tutorial on Column Generation, a decomposition method
where constraint programming can be highly effective to
generate parts of a solution while letting mathematical programming lead the optimization process.

Technical Program
Decomposition Methods

Journal Fast Track

In the technical program, decomposition methods were a
popular topic with 5 publications. In addition to the work
of (Lam and Van Hentenryck 2016) cited above, (Booth,
Tran, and Beck 2016) also solve a routing problem but
this time by using logic-based decomposition. The problem

For a second time at CPAIOR, the call for paper mentioned
a Journal fast track where the best papers would be directly
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5076

