Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Strategic Signaling and Free Information Disclosure in Auctions
Shani Alkoby

David Sarne

Igal Milchtaich

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
shani.alkoby@gmail.com

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
sarned@cs.biu.ac.il

Bar-Ilan University, Israel
igal.milchtaich@biu.ac.il

auctioneer’s proﬁt. In this context, an external information
provider can be of relevance, whenever the auctioneer herself does not have the information necessary to fully disambiguate the uncertainty associated with the item (e.g., does
not have the speciﬁc expertise or special equipment required
for generating the information) or does not want to disclose
such information for her own strategic considerations. For
example, an individual selling an antique she found in her
attic does not necessarily have the expertise needed in order
to determine its authenticity and condition. She can, however contact an expert that knows about these things in order
to get this information.

Abstract
With the increasing interest in the role information providers
play in multi-agent systems, much effort has been dedicated
to analyzing strategic information disclosure and signaling by
such agents. This paper analyzes the problem in the context
of auctions (speciﬁcally for second-price auctions). It provides an equilibrium analysis to the case where the information provider can use signaling according to some precommitted scheme before introducing its regular (costly) information selling offering. The signal provided, publicly discloses (for free) some of the information held by the information provider. Providing the signaling is thus somehow
counter intuitive as the information provider ultimately attempts to maximize her gain from selling the information
she holds. Still, we show that such signaling capability can
be highly beneﬁcial for the information provider and even
improve social welfare. Furthermore, the examples provided
demonstrate various possible other beneﬁcial behaviors available to the different players as well as to a market designer,
such as paying the information provider to leave the system
or commit to a speciﬁc signaling scheme. Finally, the paper
provides an extension of the underlying model, related to the
use of mixed signaling strategies.

Despite their importance in auctions, the study of proﬁtmaximizing information providers in this domain has been
limited, to date, to the price setting problem, i.e., the pricing
of the information offered for sale (e.g., see (Sarne, Alkoby,
and David 2014)). The choice of what information to disclose in auctions was studied only in the context of information available to the auctioneer that can possibly be disclosed
to the bidders (Dufwenberg and Gneezy 2002; Eső and
Szentes 2007; Emek et al. 2012; Miltersen and Sheffet 2012;
Ganuza and Penalva 2010; Jewitt and Li 2012). The analysis
of information disclosure by an external self-interested information provider entity, however, calls for a different analysis framework and may reveal much new insight. For example, it has been shown in various domains that information
brokers can gain much by limiting their information offers
and its accuracy (Chhabra, Das, and Sarne 2014a) or even
offering some of it for free (Alkoby, Sarne, and Das 2015;
Rysman 2009; Hajaj and Sarne 2014).

Introduction
Recent advances in information processing and communication technologies have given rise to the emergence of strategic information providers in Multi-agent settings. These information providers (typically referred to as information
brokers or experts) are capable of disambiguating much
of the uncertainty associated with the different alternatives
available to agents (e.g., in search-based markets (Nahum
et al. 2012; Chhabra, Das, and Sarne 2014b), online dating
(Das and Kamenica 2005), e-commerce (Hajaj, Hazon, and
Sarne 2015)).
One domain where the choice of the information available
to the different players is of great importance is auctions. In
particular, whenever the bidders’ valuations of the auctioned
item depend on some uncertain property of the auctioned
item, e.g, its common value, the detail and completeness
of the information disclosed is crucial (Johnson and Myatt
2006; Board 2009). The information disclosed to the bidders affects the identity of the winner in the auction and the

In this paper, we introduce a similar approach to the
auction domain, focusing in extending an information
provider’s strategy space to include signaling that aims to
selectively disclose, for free, some of the information she
holds. The signal is disclosed to the auctioneer and bidders prior to making the decision of whether to purchase the
information offered for sale. In doing so, the information
provider, at times, fully discloses the information she holds
and hence the information is not purchased. Yet, this strategy, as demonstrated in the paper, substantially improves the
price the players will be willing to pay for the information
in other cases, hence overall the effect on the information
provider’s proﬁt is positive.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

319

