Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On the Disruptive Effectiveness of Automated Planning
for LTLf -Based Trace Alignment
Giuseppe De Giacomo

Fabrizio Maria Maggi

Sapienza - Universitá di Roma, Italy
degiacomo@dis.uniroma1.it

University of Tartu, Estonia
f.m.maggi@ut.ee

Andrea Marrella

Fabio Patrizi

Sapienza - Universitá di Roma, Italy
marrella@dis.uniroma1.it

Sapienza - Universitá di Roma, Italy
patrizi@dis.uniroma1.it

checking the information they contain and, if correct, start
the claim process (by initiating some activity, possibly demanded to another operator). As a result, the log traces can
be inconsistent with the expected process behavior. Thus, the
need arises for identifying and analyzing such traces with
the aim of preventing errors from occurring again. This is
the goal of trace alignment.
Trace alignment is the problem of: (i) checking whether
an actual trace stemmed from a BP execution conforms to
the expected process behavior and, if not, (ii) ﬁnding a “minimal set” of changes that “align” the trace to the process.
Such changes consist in adding or removing activities at
some points in the trace. In this paper, we focus on trace
alignment against declarative speciﬁcations. The input trace
is a sequence of activity names, while the process behavior is speciﬁed in LTLf (Linear Temporal Logic on ﬁnite
traces (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013)). The goal of the problem is to make the trace satisfy the LTLf formula.
We address this problem by resorting to cost-optimal
planning, a form of deterministic planning where actions
have costs, and where a successful plan of minimal cost (deﬁned as the sum of the costs of the component actions) has
to be found. The intuition behind our solution is that actions capture additions and deletions to the input trace (having non-zero costs), and the goal is to make the input trace
conform with the process behavior at a minimal cost. We reduce trace alignment to cost-optimal planning in two steps.
First, we provide a sound and complete technique, based on
automata-theoretic manipulations, to synthesize the alignment instructions. Then, we show how the technique can be
implemented with planning technology.
We validate our approach through an extensive experimentation showing that it impressively outperforms a
technique included in the P RO M toolkit for BP analysis
(promtools.org) and based on an implementation of A*
speciﬁcally tailored for the alignment problem (de Leoni,
Maggi, and van der Aalst 2012; 2015), as well as previous
approaches based on classical planning (De Giacomo et al.
2016). We stress that process behaviors are typically spec-

Abstract
One major task in business process management is that of
aligning real process execution traces to a process model by
(minimally) introducing and eliminating steps. Here, we look
at declarative process speciﬁcations expressed in Linear Temporal Logic on ﬁnite traces (LTLf ). We provide a sound and
complete technique to synthesize the alignment instructions
relying on ﬁnite automata theoretic manipulations. Such a
technique can be effectively implemented by using planning
technology. Notably, the resulting planning-based alignment
system signiﬁcantly outperforms all current state-of-the-art
ad-hoc alignment systems. We report an in-depth experimental study that supports this claim.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we introduce a planning approach to solve the
problem of trace alignment for business processes (BPs). A
BP deﬁnes the temporal (partial) ordering of some activities of interest. Some examples include insurance claim processing, order handling, and hospital procedures. BPs can be
speciﬁed either procedurally or declaratively, depending on
the purpose of the speciﬁcation: the former approach is well
suited for actual execution; the latter, which is the one we
deal with, is typically used to provide a description of the
process amenable to various forms of analysis.
BPs are supported by information systems that drive process executions (e.g., guarantee that activity executions take
place in the expected order) and store the event data related
to the activities involved in each execution – e.g., in an insurance claim process, the system might record, for each claim,
the sequence of activities executed. The resulting log consists of a set of traces, each related to a distinct process execution, and consisting of a sequence of events, which, in
turn, contain information about the executed activities.
Often, BP activities are human-based. For instance, in an
insurance claim process, a human operator might be responsible for collecting all the documents related to the claim,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3555

