Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Efﬁciency of SVM k-Fold Cross-Validation by Alpha Seeding
Zeyi Wen,1 Bin Li,2 Kotagiri Ramamohanarao,1

Jian Chen,2∗ Yawen Chen,2 Rui Zhang1
{zeyi.wen, kotagiri, rui.zhang}@unimelb.edu.au
The University of Melbourne, Australia
2
{gitlinux@gmail.com, ellachen@scut.edu.cn, elfairyhyuk@gmail.com}
South China University of Technology, China
1

In this paper, we propose three algorithms that reuse the
hth SVM for training the (h + 1)th SVM in k-fold crossvalidation. The intuition behind our algorithms is that the
hyperplanes of the two SVMs are similar, since many training instances (e.g. more than 80% of the training instances
when k is 10) are the same in training the two SVMs. Note
that in this paper we are interested in k > 2, since when
k = 2 the two SVMs share no training instance.
We present our ideas in the context of training SVMs
using Sequential Minimal Optimisation (SMO) (Platt and
others 1998), although our ideas are applicable to other
solvers (Osuna, Freund, and Girosi 1997; Joachims 1999).
In SMO, the hyperplane of the SVM is represented by a subset of training instances together with their weights, namely
alpha values. The training instances with alpha values larger
than 0 are called support vectors. Finding the optimal hyperplane is effectively ﬁnding the alpha values for all the training instances. Without reusing the previous SVM, the alpha
values of all the training instances are initialised to 0. Our
key idea is to use the alpha values of the hth SVM to initialise
the alpha values for the (h + 1)th SVM. Initialising alpha
values using the previous SVM is called alpha seeding in
the literature of studying leave-one-out cross-validation (DeCoste and Wagstaff 2000). At some risk of confusion to the
reader, we will use “alpha seeding” and “initialising alpha
values” interchangeably, depending on which interpretation
is more natural.
Reusing the hth SVM for training the (h + 1)th SVM in kfold cross-validation has two key challenges. (i) The training dataset for the hth SVM is different from that for the
(h + 1)th SVM, but the initial alpha values for the (h + 1)th
SVM should be close to their optimal values; improper initialisation of alpha values leads to slower convergence than
that without reusing the hth SVM. (ii) The alpha value initialisation process should be very efﬁcient; otherwise, the
time spent in the initialisation may be larger than the time
saved in the SVM training. This is perhaps the reason that
existing work either (i) reuses the hth SVM trained with parameter C for training the hth SVM with parameter (C + Δ)
where both SVMs have the identical training dataset (Chu et
al. 2015), or (ii) only studies alpha seeding in the leave-oneout cross-validation (DeCoste and Wagstaff 2000; Lee et al.
2004) which is a special case of k-fold cross-validation.
Our key contributions in this paper are the proposal of

Abstract
The k-fold cross-validation is commonly used to evaluate the
effectiveness of SVMs with the selected hyper-parameters. It
is known that the SVM k-fold cross-validation is expensive,
since it requires training k SVMs. However, little work has
explored reusing the hth SVM for training the (h + 1)th SVM
for improving the efﬁciency of k-fold cross-validation. In this
paper, we propose three algorithms that reuse the hth SVM for
improving the efﬁciency of training the (h + 1)th SVM. Our
key idea is to efﬁciently identify the support vectors and to accurately estimate their associated weights (also called alpha
values) of the next SVM by using the previous SVM. Our experimental results show that our algorithms are several times
faster than the k-fold cross-validation which does not make
use of the previously trained SVM. Moreover, our algorithms
produce the same results (hence same accuracy) as the k-fold
cross-validation which does not make use of the previously
trained SVM.

1

Introduction

In order to train an effective SVM classiﬁer1 , the hyperparameters (e.g. the penalty C) need to be selected carefully. The k-fold cross-validation is a commonly used process to evaluate the effectiveness of SVMs with the selected
hyper-parameters. It is known that the SVM k-fold crossvalidation is expensive, since it requires training k SVMs
with different subsets of the whole dataset. To improve
the efﬁciency of k-fold cross-validation2 , some recent studies (Wen et al. 2014; Athanasopoulos et al. 2011) exploit
modern hardware (e.g. Graphic Processing Units). Chu et
al. (Chu et al. 2015) proposed to reuse the k linear SVM classiﬁers trained in the k-fold cross-validation with parameter
C for training the k linear SVM classiﬁers with parameter
(C + Δ). However, little work has explored the possibility
of reusing the hth (where h ∈ {1, 2, ..., (k − 1)}) SVM for
improving the efﬁciency of training the (h+1)th SVM in the
k-fold cross-validation with parameter C.
∗
Jian Chen is the corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
For ease of presentation, we discuss binary classiﬁcation, although our approaches are applicable to multi-class classiﬁcation
and regression.
2
Without confusion, we omit “SVM” in SVM k-fold crossvalidation.

2768

