Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Incrementally Learning the Hierarchical
Softmax Function for Neural Language Models
†

‡

Hao Peng,† Jianxin Li,† Yangqiu Song,‡ Yaopeng Liu†

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{penghao,ljx,liuyp}@act.buaa.edu.cn yqsong@cse.ust.hk

we adopt the popular word2vec tool due to its simplicity
and time efﬁciency, and comparable performance to other
NNLMs (Mikolov et al. 2013a; 2013b; Levy, Goldberg, and
Dagan 2015). To speedup the process of indexing and querying, word2vec employed two techniques called hierarchical softmax and negative sampling (Mikolov et al. 2013a;
2013b). Hierarchical softmax was ﬁrst proposed by Mnih
and Hinton (Mnih and Hinton 2008) where a hierarchical
tree is constructed to index all the words in a corpus as
leaves, while negative sampling is developed based on noise
contrastive estimation (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2012), and
randomly samples the words not in the context to distinguish the observed data from the artiﬁcially generated random noise. It is empirically shown that hierarchical softmax performs better for infrequent words while negative
sampling performs better for frequent words (Mikolov et
al. 2013b). The reason is that hierarchical softmax builds a
tree over the whole vocabulary, and the leaf nodes representing rare words will inevitably inherit their ancestors’ vector
representations in the tree, which can be affected by other
frequent words in the corpus. Thus, we choose hierarchical
softmax due to its good performance on rare words, which
can beneﬁt the further incremental training for new corpus.

Abstract
Neural network language models (NNLMs) have attracted a
lot of attention recently. In this paper, we present a training
method that can incrementally train the hierarchical softmax
function for NNMLs. We split the cost function to model
old and update corpora separately, and factorize the objective function for the hierarchical softmax. Then we provide a
new stochastic gradient based method to update all the word
vectors and parameters, by comparing the old tree generated
based on the old corpus and the new tree generated based
on the combined (old and update) corpus. Theoretical analysis shows that the mean square error of the parameter vectors
can be bounded by a function of the number of changed words
related to the parameter node. Experimental results show that
incremental training can save a lot of time. The smaller the
update corpus is, the faster the update training process is,
where an up to 30 times speedup has been achieved. We also
use both word similarity/relatedness tasks and dependency
parsing task as our benchmarks to evaluate the correctness
of the updated word vectors.

Neural network language models (NNLMs) (Bengio et
al. 2003; Morin and Bengio 2005; Mnih and Hinton 2008;
Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010; Collobert et al. 2011;
Mikolov et al. 2013a; 2013b; Levy and Goldberg 2014;
Levy, Goldberg, and Dagan 2015) have attracted a lot of
attention recently given their compact representation form
and generalization property compared to the traditional lexical representations. It has been applied to many natural language processing tasks such as word similarity/relatedness
and word analogy (Mikolov et al. 2013a; 2013b), working as features for part-of-speech tagging, chunking, named
entity recognition, etc. (Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010;
Collobert et al. 2011). However, the above NNLMs only
consider the static training corpus. There are a lot of applications, such as news and tweets text processing, requiring
incremental update of the word vectors given the fact that
the working domains are fast evolving. When the new corpus is relatively smaller than the old corpus, it will be much
less efﬁcient to retrain the word vectors with the combined
corpus.
In this paper, we consider the problem of training the
NNLMs given new corpora incrementally. In particular,

When applying hierarchical softmax to NNLMs, there is
a preprocessing step to build a hierarchical tree of words.
When we incrementally incorporate more data, the hierarchical tree should be changed to reﬂect the change of data.
For example, in word2vec, it uses the Huffman coding to
construct the tree over the vocabulary because Huffman tree
uses shorter codes for more frequent words with less visits to the leaves (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2012), and results in faster training process. When frequencies of words
change, Huffman tree will be changed. To handle this problem, we retain the paths from root to leaves of the old tree,
and perform preﬁx matching between the old tree and the
new tree. When updating the vectors for the matched ancestors of a leaf, we follow the original CBOW (Continuous
Bag-of-Words) or Skip-gram algorithms in word2vec based
on stochastic gradient ascent of log-likelihood. When updating the vectors for the different ancestors, we modify the
old tree with stochastic gradient descent, while update the
new tree with stochastic gradient ascent. In this way, we only
modify all the nodes that need to be updated while retaining
all the other nodes as the same as the ones trained based on

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3267

