Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Embedded Bandits for Large-Scale Black-Box Optimization
1

Abdullah Al-Dujaili,1 S. Suresh1,2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU, Singapore
2
ST Engineering - NTU Corporate Lab, Singapore
aldujail001@e.ntu.edu.sg, ssundaram@ntu.edu.sg

for the value of f at a speciﬁc solution (point ) x ∈ X . Highorder information (e.g., derivatives) are unavailable symbolically nor numerically or are tedious to compute compared
to zero-order information—i.e., point-wise function evaluations. Thus, the task is to ﬁnd the (or one) optimal solution
x∗ ∈ X to (1) or a good approximation using a ﬁnite number v of function evaluations, which is commonly referred
to as the evaluation budget. The quality of the returned solution x(v) ∈ X after v function evaluations, denoted by fv∗ ,
is assessed by the regret,

Abstract
Random embedding has been applied with empirical
success to large-scale black-box optimization problems
with low effective dimensions. This paper proposes the
E M B E D D E D H U N T E R algorithm, which incorporates the technique in a hierarchical stochastic bandit setting, following
the optimism in the face of uncertainty principle and breaking away from the multiple-run framework in which random embedding has been conventionally applied similar to
stochastic black-box optimization solvers. Our proposition
is motivated by the bounded mean variation in the objective value for a low-dimensional point projected randomly
into the decision space of Lipschitz-continuous problems.
In essence, the E M B E D D E D H U N T E R algorithm expands optimistically a partitioning tree over a low-dimensional—equal
to the effective dimension of the problem—search space
based on a bounded number of random embeddings of sampled points from the low-dimensional space. In contrast to the
probabilistic theoretical guarantees of multiple-run randomembedding algorithms, the ﬁnite-time analysis of the proposed algorithm presents a theoretical upper bound on the
regret as a function of the algorithm’s number of iterations.
Furthermore, numerical experiments were conducted to validate its performance. The results show a clear performance
gain over recently proposed random embedding methods for
large-scale problems, provided the intrinsic dimensionality is
low.

r(v) = fv∗ − f ∗ .

(2)

Besides the aforementioned challenging nature of black-box
problems, the high dimensionality n of the decision space
X poses another challenge towards ﬁnding the global optimum. Despite their witnessed success, the effectiveness of
most black-box optimization algorithms is restricted to moderate dimensions (typically, n < 100) and they do not scale
well to high-dimensional (say, n  102 ) problems. As the
dimensionality increases, the number of evaluations (sampled points) required to cover X increases exponentially.
Despite the curse of dimensionality, it has been noted
that for artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications, most dimensions of certain classes of the associated optimization problems do not affect the objective function signiﬁcantly. In
other words, such problems have low effective dimensionality, e.g., hyper-parameter optimization for neural and deep
belief networks (Bergstra and Bengio 2012).

Introduction
Problem. This paper is concerned with the large-scale
black-box optimization problem given a ﬁnite number of
function evaluations. Mathematically, the problem has the
form:
minimize f (x)
(1)
subject to x ∈ X ,

Related Work. The literature on black-box optimization is
huge and we only highlight here works that are closely related to the paper’s contribution. The bulk of algorithmic
work on large-scale black-box optimization has been following one of two approaches: decomposition and embedding.
Decomposition algorithms break the problem into several subproblems, and solutions for the original problem
are recognized in a coordinated manner. In (Kandasamy,
Schneider, and Póczos 2015), Bayesian optimization was
scaled to high-dimensional problems whose objectives have
an additive structure. i.e., the function f is the sum of
several sub-functions with smaller dimensions, such that
no two sub-functions share one or more variables. On the
other hand, Friesen and Domingos (2015) proposed to decompose the function into approximately locally independent sub-functions and optimize them separately. Chen et

where f : X ⊆ Rn → R and n  102 . Without loss of
generality, it is assumed that X = [−1, 1]n , and there exists
at least one global optimizer x∗ whose objective value is denoted by f ∗ , i.e., minx∈X f (x) = f (x∗ ) = f ∗ . Solving the
optimization problem (1) is notoriously difﬁcult as the sole
source of information about its objective function f is available through a black-box or an oracle, which one can query
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

758

