Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Query Answering in DL-Lite with Datatypes:
A Non-Uniform Approach
André Hernich and Julio Lemos and Frank Wolter
University of Liverpool
Department of Computer Science
{hernich, jlemos, wolter}@liverpool.ac.uk

The aim of this paper is to revisit OBDM with expressive datatypes from a new, non-uniform perspective. Instead
of the standard approach that aims at the deﬁnition of DLs
L and query languages Q such that for any TBox T in L
and any query q in Q, answering q under T is tractable in
data-complexity we now aim at describing the complexity of
query answering with datatypes at a more ﬁne-grained level
by taking into account the way in which datatype atoms can
occur in TBoxes and in queries. To this end, we establish
a close link between the complexity of query answering and
of constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) over the datatype.
This link enables us to transfer complexity results from the
CSP world to the world of OBDM and leads, in some cases,
to complete classiﬁcations of the complexity of query answering into PTime and coNP-complete classes.

Abstract
Adding datatypes to ontology-mediated queries (OMQs) often makes query answering hard. As a consequence, the use
of datatypes in OWL 2 QL has been severely restricted. In
this paper we propose a new, non-uniform, way of analyzing
the data-complexity of OMQ answering with datatypes. Instead of restricting the ontology language we aim at a classiﬁcation of the patterns of datatype atoms in OMQs into those
that can occur in non-tractable OMQs and those that only occur in tractable OMQs. To this end we establish a close link
between OMQ answering with datatypes and constraint satisfaction problems over the datatypes. In a case study we apply
this link to prove a P/coNP-dichotomy for OMQs over DLLite extended with the datatype (Q, ≤). The proof employs
a recent dichotomy result by Bodirsky and Kára for temporal
constraint satisfaction problems.

1

In more detail, we consider TBoxes in the DL DL-LiteR
underpinning the OWL proﬁle OWL 2 QL extended with
concept inclusions that contain attribute restrictions qualiﬁed by unary datatype atoms on their right hand side and
UCQs that contain datatype atoms of arbitrary arity. If T is
such a TBox over datatype D and q such a UCQ over D, then
Q = (T , q) is called an ontology-mediated query (OMQ)
over D. We aim at understanding the complexity of query
answering for this very broad class of OMQs. A ﬁrst observation is that query answering becomes undecidable for
many important datatypes D including (Q, <), (Z, <) and
(Z, ≤). To restore decidability and enable a polynomial reduction to the complement of CSPs over D we introduce
the bounded match depth property (BMDP), a new property
of OMQs that ensures that answers to OMQs can be determined based on a bounded subset of the standard chase of
a DL-LiteR knowledge base. This property is a generalization of the bounded derivation depth property in (Calı̀, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012). Many practical OMQs have the
BMDP. For example, all OMQs with either TBoxes whose
chase always terminates (which is often the case in practice (Grau et al. 2013)) or with rooted UCQs whose variables
are all connected via non-datatype variables to answer variable (which covers a broad class of UCQs). If the datatype D
is homogeneous (as is the case for (Q, <) and (Q, ≤)), then
the latter condition can be relaxed even further to certain
Boolean UCQs. As the CSP of many important datatypes
is in NP, it follows that query answering for OMQs with
the BMDP over such datatypes is in coNP, a signiﬁcant im-

Introduction

In recent years, querying data using ontologies has become
one of the main applications of description logics (DLs).
The general idea is that an ontology is used to enrich incomplete and heterogenous data with a semantics and with
background knowledge and thereby serves as an interface
for querying data that also allows the derivation of additional facts. In this area called ontology-based data management (OBDM) one of the main research problems is to identify ontology languages and queries for which query answering scales to large amounts of data (Calvanese et al. 2007;
Bienvenu and Ortiz 2015). In DL, ontologies take the form
of a TBox, data is stored in an ABox, and the most important
class of queries are (unions of) conjunctive queries, or simply (U)CQs. A basic observation regarding this setup is that
even for DLs from the DL-Lite family that have been designed for tractable OBDM the addition of datatypes to the
TBoxes or the UCQs easily leads to non-tractable query answering problems (Artale, Ryzhikov, and Kontchakov 2012;
Savkovic and Calvanese 2012). As a consequence of this,
the use of datatypes in TBoxes and query languages for
OBDM has been severely restricted (Motik and Horrocks
2008; Motik et al. 2009). In applications, however, there is
clearly a need for expressive datatypes both in TBoxes and
in queries.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1142

