Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Inductive Reasoning about Ontologies Using Conceptual Spaces
Zied Bouraoui

Shoaib Jameel

Steven Schockaert

Cardiff University, UK
BouraouiZ@Cardiff.ac.uk

Cardiff University, UK
JameelS1@Cardiff.ac.uk

Cardiff University, UK
SchockaertS1@Cardiff.ac.uk

with some form of induction. This is especially true in applications such as information retrieval, where getting a plausible answer may be better than not getting an answer at all,
even if the correctness of that answer cannot be guaranteed.
A key requirement in such applications, however, is that answers can be supported by intuitive explanations, as this allows users to determine their plausibility. Another important
requirement is that the inductive reasoning process should be
relatively cautious, as in a deductive setting the impact of accepting incorrect conclusions could be far-reaching. Finally,
conclusions which are derived inductively should be associated with commensurable conﬁdence scores that can be
used to restore consistency when conﬂicts arise. Clearly, approaches which rely on solving a global optimization problem (Bordes et al. 2013) or on aggregating large amounts
of individually weak pieces of evidence (Lao, Mitchell, and
Cohen 2011) do not meet these requirements.
In this paper, we propose a method which is inspired by
cognitive models of category based induction (Osherson et
al. 1990; Tenenbaum and Grifﬁths 2001). In particular, given
the knowledge that concepts C1 , ..., Ck all have some property P , our aim is to determine the degree to which we can
plausibly conclude that some other concept C has property
P . To this end, we ﬁrst rely on the method from (Jameel and
Schockaert 2016) to learn a vector space representation of
the entities of each considered semantic type (e.g. people,
countries, movies), which can be interpreted as a conceptual
space (Gärdenfors 2000). From these conceptual spaces, we
subsequently derive a set of representative and interpretable
features for each semantic type. The plausibility that C has
property P is then obtained using a form of Bayesian inference over the resulting feature values. We argue that this
approach indeed meets the three aforementioned criteria: as
it is similar in spirit to cognitive models for category based
induction, and relies on interpretable representations, supporting explanations can be derived in a natural way, while
the use of Bayesian inference supports cautious forms of interest and yields conﬁdence scores in a principled way. Unlike most existing methods, our method can be used for both
TBox and ABox reasoning.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
the next section we give an overview of related work, after
which we recall some basic notions from description logics
and the theory of conceptual spaces. Subsequently we de-

Abstract
Structured knowledge about concepts plays an increasingly
important role in areas such as information retrieval. The
available ontologies and knowledge graphs that encode such
conceptual knowledge, however, are inevitably incomplete.
This observation has led to a number of methods that aim
to automatically complete existing knowledge bases. Unfortunately, most existing approaches rely on black box models, e.g. formulated as global optimization problems, which
makes it difﬁcult to support the underlying reasoning process with intuitive explanations. In this paper, we propose a
new method for knowledge base completion, which uses interpretable conceptual space representations and an explicit
model for inductive inference that is closer to human forms of
commonsense reasoning. Moreover, by separating the task of
representation learning from inductive reasoning, our method
is easier to apply in a wider variety of contexts. Finally, unlike
optimization based approaches, our method can naturally be
applied in settings where various logical constraints between
the extensions of concepts need to be taken into account.

Introduction
Ontologies encode structured knowledge about the concepts and properties of a given domain. They are typically encoded using description logics, and divided in two
parts: a TBox, which contains information about the semantic relationships between concepts, and an ABox, which
contains information about which entities belong to what
concepts. Similar to ontologies, knowledge graphs encode
information about concepts and entities as a set of subject/predicate/object triples. The key difference with ontologies is that knowledge graphs are considerably less expressive (e.g. we cannot express that two concepts are disjoint,
or that the intersection of two concepts is subsumed by another concept). To date, ontologies have mostly been used
in applications where deductive reasoning sufﬁces, whereas
knowledge graphs are often used in combination with forms
of inductive reasoning (Lao, Mitchell, and Cohen 2011;
Bordes et al. 2013).
As most ontologies are incomplete, it is clearly of interest to combine the deductive machinery of description logics
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4364

