Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
with a Relaxed Covariate Shift Assumption
Tameem Adel

Han Zhao

Alexander Wong

University of Manchester, UK
tameem.hesham@gmail.com

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

University of Waterloo, Canada
a28wong@uwaterloo.ca

but the default setting is one source and one target domain.
Regarding target data, several frameworks have access to a
target sample containing labeled data instances, and a larger
target unlabeled sample , e.g. Blitzer et al.; Oquab et al.
(2008; 2014). In other frameworks, like Huang et al. (2006),
referred to as unsupervised domain adaptation, the target data
is fully unlabeled. The proposed model is an unsupervised
domain adaptation framework, although it can incorporate
target labeled data, if available, in a forthright manner.
The manner by which source labeled data are utilized
in learning the target distribution and consequently the allimportant target labels heavily depends on the relationship between the source and target domains. Such relationship is depicted by the learner’s assumptions about
the similarities/differences between source and target domains. In this regard, covariate shift represents one of the
most widely used domain adaptation assumptions (Sugiyama
and Mueller 2005), on which much of the domain adaptation research is based. Covariate shift states that the conditional labeling distributions of both the source and target
domains are the same, while their respective marginal data
distributions can be different (Storkey and Sugiyama 2006;
Ben-David and Urner 2012; 2014). Covariate shift is a valid
assumption in some problems, but it can as well be quite
unrealistic for many other domain adaptation tasks where the
conditional label distributions are not (or, more precisely, not
guaranteed to be) identical. The simpliﬁcation resulting from
assuming identical labeling distributions facilitates the quest
for a tractable learning algorithm, albeit possibly at the cost
of reducing the expressiveness power of the representation,
and consequently the accuracy of the resulting hypothesis.
We propose a probabilistic relaxation of the covariate shift
assumption where the more uncertain a learner is about the
source labeling of an instance, the more uncertain it is that
its target conditional labeling probability has a value similar
to the corresponding source conditional labeling probability (the more uncertain it is that the label remains the same
across domains), and vice versa. We formalize this notion
in a generative model that learns a representation from both
the target unlabeled data and a probabilistic prospect of the
change in their labels across domains, and we use such representation to learn the target labels. The proposed model
incorporates a tractable inference procedure for a broad
range of problems by exploiting the recent advances in vari-

Abstract
Domain adaptation addresses learning tasks where training is
performed on data from one domain whereas testing is performed on data belonging to a different but related domain.
Assumptions about the relationship between the source and
target domains should lead to tractable solutions on the one
hand, and be realistic on the other hand. Here we propose
a generative domain adaptation model that allows for modelling different assumptions about this relationship, among
which is a newly introduced assumption that replaces covariate
shift with a possibly more realistic assumption without losing
tractability due to the efﬁcient variational inference procedure
developed. In addition to the ability to model less restrictive
relationships between source and target, modelling can be performed without any target labeled data (unsupervised domain
adaptation). We also provide a Rademacher complexity bound
of the proposed algorithm. We evaluate the model on the Amazon reviews and the CVC pedestrian detection datasets.

Introduction
Domain adaptation focuses on modelling problems where the
training and test distributions are different but related. The
training and test domains are commonly referred to in the
domain adaptation literature as the source and target domains,
respectively. Domain diversity can emerge as a result of the
scarcity of available labeled data from the target domain. It
can as well be innate in the problem itself due to, for example, an ongoing change occurring to the source domain like
in cases where the original source domain keeps changing
over time. Domain adaptation aims at ﬁnding solutions for
this kind of problem, where the training (source) data are
generated from a distribution different from that of the test
(target) data, by leveraging the available labeled data from
the similar source domain (Ben-David et al. 2007).
More details about seminal works in the domain adaptation
literature can be found in Section 1 in the supplementary.
The principal metric of a domain adaptation algorithm is
the performance of the target learning hypothesis, which as a
matter of fact depends on the labeled source data, (primarily
unlabeled) target data and the relationship between the source
and target domains. There can be multiple source domains
to learn from (Mansour, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2009b),
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1691

