Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Mixed Discrete-Continuous Planning with Convex Optimization
Enrique Fernández-González

Erez Karpas

Brian Williams

MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
efernan@mit.edu

Technion
Haifa, Israel
karpase@technion.ac.il

MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
williams@mit.edu

of the velocity of the robot, instead of its principal components independently (vx , vy ). Moreover, these velocities,
apart from affecting the position of the robot, need to be
able to also affect other magnitudes simultaneously (e.g. to
model velocity dependent battery drain). Some applications
also require robots to be subject to complex state constraints,
such as staying within a maximum distance of another robot
or object, or being inside ellipsoidal regions. Finally, preferred plans often minimize magnitudes other than the typical plan length, such as distances traveled or fuel consumption. None of these requirements can be modeled with Scotty
or other HFS planners. Satisfying these requirements while
maintaining the same performance of Scotty is challenging
due to the non-linearity of these characteristics.
In this work we achieve this goal through three insights.
First, due to recent advances in optimization, a restricted
form of quadratically constrained programs, called Second
Order Cone Programs (SOCPs), can be solved efﬁciently for
real world problems. Second, nearly all of the requirements
outlined above can be encoded with cone constraints, with
the exception of a non-convex term resulting from the product of control variables and time. Third, an encoding trick
allows us to eliminate this non-convex term, resulting in a
SOCP encoding that is very fast to solve and that our planner repeatedly uses to test the consistency of partial plans.
Our new SOCP encoding allows us to impose upper bound
constraints on the norm of vectors of control variables (e.g.
2
), enforce convex quadratic state constraints
vx2 + vy2 ≤ vmax
(such as being inside ellipsoidal regions or ensuring a maximum distance between objects) and use the same control
variables in as many simultaneous effects as needed. We
do this without resorting to time, state or control variable
discretization, which allows us to maintain the high performance of continuous time HFS planners. Since SOCPs are
convex programs and can be solved very efﬁciently, we keep
the same properties that Scotty had (optimality and completeness of consistency checks) at the cost of a slight increase in computation.
Motivating example
Our example scenario (Figure 1) consists of an underwater ocean science mission carried out by a Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV), an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
(AUV) and a ship. Initially the ship is transporting both the
AUV and the ROV to the science site. The AUV needs to

Abstract
Robots operating in the real world must be able to handle both
discrete and continuous change. Many robot behaviors can be
controlled through numeric parameters (called control variables), which affect the rate of the continuous change. Previous approaches capable of reasoning efﬁciently with control variables impose severe restrictions that limit the expressivity of the problems that can be solved. A broad class of
robotic applications require, for example, convex quadratic
constraints on state variables and control variables that are
jointly constrained and that affect multiple state variables simultaneously. However, extensions to prior approaches are
not straightforward, since these characteristics are non-linear
and hard to scale. We introduce cqScotty, a heuristic forward
search planner that solves these problems efﬁciently. While
naive formulations of consistency checks are not convex and
do not scale, cqScotty uses an efﬁcient convex formulation,
in the form of a Second Order Cone Program (SOCP), that
is very fast to solve. We demonstrate the scalability of our
approach on three new realistic domains.

Introduction
In order to achieve their missions, autonomous robots need
to reason with both discrete and continuous change (e.g. dynamics and temporal constraints). Over the last few years,
planners like Kongming (Li and Williams 2008), COLIN
(Coles et al. 2012) or Scotty (Fernandez, Karpas, and
Williams 2015) have emerged to address this problem. Of
these, heuristic forward search (HFS) approaches, such as
COLIN’s and Scotty’s, have shown to perform best. An important characteristic of these two is that they do not require
time discretization. This is essential for efﬁciently planning
for typical scenarios with long horizons and activities with
multiple time scales.
Scotty signiﬁcantly increased the expressivity of the problems that could be modeled by introducing continuous
control variables in this continuous time heuristic forward
search setting. However, there is still a large class of problems that cannot be modeled with this approach. A broad
range of robotic applications need to be able to specify constraints between the control variables (that often represent
velocities) in order to limit, for example, the magnitude
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4574

