Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Reactive Dialectic Search Portfolios for MaxSAT∗
Carlos Ansótegui, Josep Pon

Meinolf Sellmann

Kevin Tierney

DIEI
Universitat de Lleida, Spain
{carlos,jponfarreny}@diei.udl.cat

IBM Research, USA
meinolf@us.ibm.com

DS&OR Lab
University of Paderborn, Germany
tierney@dsor.de

The methods above all focus on choices made before
the actual target algorithm is run. Approaches that aim
at modifying algorithm behavior a posteriori during the
actual run have also been developed. The reactive tabu
search (RTS) algorithm from (Battiti and Tecchiolli 1994)
is the prototypical example. RTS modiﬁes the length of the
tabu list dynamically during search depending on how the
search progresses. Another example is the Stage approach
from (Boyan and Moore 2000), a heuristic local search
method that analyzes search trajectories to construct predictive evaluation functions that are used during search to escape local minima. New theoretical results (e.g. by (Doerr
and Doerr 2015)) prove that dynamic updates during search
can guarantee strictly better asymptotic performance. In addition, (Stützle and López-Ibáñez 2016) argues that ofﬂine
conﬁguration can be used to create online control strategies.
In this paper we combine automatic, input-speciﬁc algorithm conﬁguration with reactive search. We do so with the
objective of complementing an existing MaxSAT solver with
a portfolio of automatically generated search algorithms
and thus achieve a more robust, state-of-the-art heuristic
MaxSAT solver.
We ﬁrst give a review of the existing research, followed by
an introduction to our new reactive metaheuristic. Finally,
we apply it to MaxSAT and compare it empirically with
state-of-the-art MaxSAT solvers as well as its non-reactive
counterpart, both in combination with the existing solver
and in isolation. In the end, we obtain a solver that outperforms the state of the art in various categories of heuristic MaxSAT solving, as assessed independently in the 2016
MaxSAT Evaluation (Argelich et al. 2016).

Abstract
Metaheuristics have been developed to provide general purpose approaches for solving hard combinatorial problems.
While these frameworks often serve as the starting point for
the development of problem-speciﬁc search procedures, they
very rarely work efﬁciently in their default state. We combine
the ideas of reactive search, which adjusts key parameters
during search, and algorithm conﬁguration, which ﬁne-tunes
algorithm parameters for a given set of problem instances, for
the automatic compilation of a portfolio of highly reactive dialectic search heuristics for MaxSAT.
Even though the dialectic search metaheuristic knows nothing more about MaxSAT than how to evaluate the cost of
a truth assignment, our automatically generated solver deﬁnes a new state of the art for random weighted partial
MaxSAT instances. Moreover, when combined with an industrial MaxSAT solver, the self-assembled reactive portfolio
was able to win four out of nine gold medals at the recent
2016 MaxSAT Evaluation on random, crafted, and industrial
partial and weighted-partial MaxSAT instances.

Introduction
The meta-algorithmics community has seen major advances
in recent years. On the one hand, techniques for algorithm
selection (Gomes and Selman 2001; Leyton-Brown et al.
2003) have led to major advances in our ability to solve great
ranges of different types of instances in various domains (Xu
et al. 2008; O’Mahony et al. 2008; Kadioglu et al. 2011;
Xu et al. 2012; Malitsky et al. 2013; Bischl et al. 2016).
On the other hand, algorithm conﬁgurators have advanced
from limited tuning approaches (Adenso-Diaz and Laguna
2006) to scalable, high-powered general methods (Hutter
et al. 2009; Ansotegui, Sellmann, and Tierney 2009; Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011; Ansotegui et al. 2015;
Birattari et al. 2010). Combining portfolios and automatic
conﬁguration has led to input-speciﬁc tuners (Xu, Hoos, and
Leyton-Brown 2010; Kadioglu et al. 2010; Ansótegui et al.
2016) that not only choose superior parameterizations for a
target algorithm, but also create new ones based on the input
to be processed.

Background
To position our contribution, we provide background information in three areas. We ﬁrst introduce the problem domain, MaxSAT. We then review instance-speciﬁc algorithm
conﬁguration, and ﬁnally present the dialectic search metaheuristic that we make reactive. As we have to be brief, for
full details we refer the reader to the respective literature.

MaxSAT

∗
Research partially supported by the Ministerio de Economı́a y
Competividad research project TASSAT2:TIN2013-48031-C4-4-P.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The MaxSAT problem is the optimization version of the
well-known, quintessentially NP-hard Satisﬁability (SAT)
problem. Formally:

765

