Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Natural Language Acquisition and
Grounding for Embodied Robotic Systems
Muhannad Alomari, Paul Duckworth, David C. Hogg and Anthony G. Cohn
School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
(scmara, p.duckworth, d.c.hogg, a.g.cohn)@leeds.ac.uk

This work aims to answer the following two questions,
(i) can a robot bootstrap its knowledge in language and vision? and (ii) can it ground language to concepts in vision?
To answer these questions in a cognitively plausible setting,
we take into consideration human learning which is incremental and is typically loosely supervised. Further, our system is tasked with learning incrementally from human description of the world, while the outcome of the learning process should be representable in a form also understandable
by humans. We present a novel individual learning approach
capable of acquiring symbolic knowledge in both language
and vision simultaneously, and use this knowledge to parse
previously unseen natural language commands. The learning
is accomplished using a show-and-tell procedure; this is inspired by how children acquire knowledge of their everyday
physical world by interacting with their parents. Volunteers
controlled a robot to perform a variety of table top tasks,
which were subsequently annotated with natural language
commands, as shown in Figure 1. The recorded videos and
commands are used as input data to our system to learn two
key components, (i) the words’ visual representation (actions, spatial-relations, and object properties); and (ii) the
grammar rules. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
system that learns these concurrently.
We use the term loosely-supervised to describe the kind of
learning that requires the videos and sentences to be temporally aligned beforehand, which is more suitable for teaching infants about basic concepts such as colours or shapes.
A fully unsupervised system would be able to learn from
longer non-segmented videos and documents (i.e. be able to
temporally segment and align long videos and documents),
which remains an ambition for the future.

Abstract
We present a cognitively plausible novel framework capable
of learning the grounding in visual semantics and the grammar of natural language commands given to a robot in a table
top environment. The input to the system consists of video
clips of a manually controlled robot arm, paired with natural
language commands describing the action. No prior knowledge is assumed about the meaning of words, or the structure of the language, except that there are different classes
of words (corresponding to observable actions, spatial relations, and objects and their observable properties). The learning process automatically clusters the continuous perceptual
spaces into concepts corresponding to linguistic input. A
novel relational graph representation is used to build connections between language and vision. As well as the grounding
of language to perception, the system also induces a set of
probabilistic grammar rules. The knowledge learned is used
to parse new commands involving previously unseen objects.

Introduction
Understanding how children learn the components of their
mother tongue and the meanings of each word has long fascinated cognitive scientists; equally robots face a similar
challenge unless this knowledge is pre-programmed, which
is no easy task either (nor does it solve the problem of
language change over time). In this paper we show how a
robot can start with no such knowledge and can gradually
acquire certain components of language and their groundings in the perceptual world. Researchers have tackled the
language acquisition problem using different approaches,
such as individual and social learning. In individual learning, the robot is provided with data to learn about natural language without any further assistance from a teacher,
and is expected to learn from such data (Siskind 1996;
Roy, Schiele, and Pentland 1999; Needham et al. 2005;
Alomari et al. 2016). In social learning, the teacher plays
an important role in the learning process, by providing feedback to guide the learner in acquiring different language
components (Steels and Kaplan 2002; Spranger 2015). In
this research, we follow the individual approach, as it enables learning from large datasets without the need for constant supervision, such as learning from youtube videos.

Figure 1: An example of a video clip annotated with the natural language command “place the apple in the bowl”.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4349

