Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Randomized Mechanisms for Selling Reserved Instances in Cloud
Jia Zhang,1,2 Weidong Ma,3 Tao Qin,3 Xiaoming Sun,1,2 Tie-Yan Liu,3
1

CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{zhangjia, sunxiaoming}@ict.ac.cn, {weima,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com
and the subscription model for reserved instances. The ﬁrst
model charges customers a ﬁxed per-instance-hour rate for
their utilization of instance hours. Compared with the ﬁrst
model, the subscription model offers two beneﬁts to customers: (1) Customers enjoy a much lower per-instance-hour
price by reserving instances in advance; (2) it is more reliable to reserve some instances before hands for expected
future usage, since there may be no on-demand instances
available if one goes to the cloud to request on-demand instances in the last minute.
A limitation of the current subscription model in practice is that there are only a few reservation options available to customers. For example, Amazon’s EC2 only provides 1-year and 3-year reservations for customers2 . However, many cloud customers demand short-term and ﬂexible
reservations. For example, a researcher needs to run many
experiments in the last week before the paper deadline of
an academic conference and wants to reserve 100 virtual instances for that week. Certainly, she does not want to reserve
for 1 or 3 years3 . In this work, we study a more ﬂexible pricing model in which the customers can deﬁne the reservation
option by themselves.

Abstract
Selling reserved instances (or virtual machines) is a basic service in cloud computing. In this paper, we consider a more
ﬂexible pricing model for instance reservation, in which a
customer can propose the time length and number of resources of her request, while in today’s industry, customers
can only choose from several predeﬁned reservation packages. Under this model, we design randomized mechanisms
for customers coming online to optimize social welfare and
providers’ revenue.
We ﬁrst consider a simple case, where the requests from
the customers do not vary too much in terms of both length
and value density. We design a randomized mechanism that
1
achieves a competitive ratio 42
for both social welfare and
revenue, which is a improvement as there is usually no revenue guarantee in previous works such as (Azar et al. 2015;
1
Wang et al. 2015). This ratio can be improved up to 11
when
we impose a realistic constraint on the maximum number of
resources used by each request. On the hardness side, we
show an upper bound 13 on competitive ratio for any randomized mechanism. We then extend our mechanism to the
1
general case and achieve a competitive ratio 42log klog
T
for both social welfare and revenue, where T is the ratio of
the maximum request length to the minimum request length
and k is the ratio of the maximum request value density to
the minimum request value density. This result outperforms
1
the previous upper bound CkT
for deterministic mechanisms
(Wang et al. 2015). We also prove an upper bound log 28kT
for any randomized mechanism. All the mechanisms we provide are in a greedy style. They are truthful and easy to be
integrated into practical cloud systems.

Model
We ﬁrst formally deﬁne the model studied in this work and
introduce some notations for further use.
Consider a cloud provider with C reserved instances to
be sold to customers. Each customer has a request to reserve some instances. We denote this request as a reservation or a job. Each reservation j is characterized by a 5-tuple
(aj , dj , tj , cj , vj ), where aj and dj are earliest start time4
and deadline respectively, tj is the reservation length (certainly, tj ≤ dj − aj ), cj is the number of resources needed
by j, and vj is the value that the customer can obtain if j is
ﬁnished on time. For convenience, let ρj be the value density
v
of reservation j, i.e., ρj = cj jtj .

Introduction
Cloud computing is transforming today’s IT industry and
more and more enterprise customers and personal customers
have moved their computational tasks from local devices to
cloud. Among all kinds of cloud service models, infrastructure as a service (IaaS) is the most basic one; among many
IaaS services, virtual machines/instances are the most basic ones. Two pricing models1 are adopted to sell virtual instances, the pay-as-you-go model for on-demand instances

2

This business model is still used when this paper is composed.
Actually, this leads to the formation of (AWS) Reserved Instance Marketplace where users sell their redundant instances.
http://goo.gl/hwzXx9.
4
aj is not the submission time of the reservation. Since we consider reservation, the submission time of the reservation is assumed
to be no later than aj .
3

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
There is another one, the spot pricing, which is not widely
adopted by cloud providers.

750

