Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Human-Aware Plan Recognition
Hankz Hankui Zhuo
Department of Computer Science,
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. 510006
zhuohank@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Despite the success of previous approaches, they all ignore the preferences humans have on the plans they aim to
execute. In many real-world applications, humans often have
different preferences on plans. For example, in travel planning systems, such as triphobo1 , which provides personalized trip plans to 14000 cities, travelers would like to have
a trip from Hong Kong to Phoenix. Some travelers may prefer to stay at Los Angeles to visit Disney Land before going
to Phoenix, while others may prefer to go directly from Los
Angeles to Phoenix. Suppose we observe two actions that a
traveler “ﬂies from Hong Kong to Los Angeles” and “ﬂies
from Los Angeles to Phoenix”. We do not have any clues
telling us the traveler is executing the former plan or the latter. As another example, a kid in a shopping mall might prefer to “executing” a plan of playing in water park, while an
adult might prefer to “executing” a plan of having a cup of
coffee.
In this paper, we aim to consider human preferences when
recognizing plans with observed actions. We assume that human preferences are described by a matrix of rating scores,
suggesting that human provides a rating score on a plan after he executes the plan to express his interest in the plan. It
is feasible to collect rating scores in real world applications.
For example, in travel planning systems, they collect rating
scores after travelers ﬁnish their trips by asking the travelers’
feedbacks. We also assume we have a set of observations of
action sequences. It is also possible in real world applications. For example, travel systems can “observe” some actions of travelers by communicating with travelers via mobile phone apps.
With rating scores and observed action sequences as input, we propose a novel plan recognition approach called
HARE, which stands for Human-Aware plan REcognition.
In HARE, we ﬁrst estimate the possible preferences (in the
form of rating scores) humans may have on plans that they
did not execute before according to “relations” to others’ rating scores. We then learn vector representations of actions
to calculate the possibility of the target plans that cover the
observed action sequences. After that we compute the ﬁnal
target plans that best explain the estimated rating scores and
observed action sequences.
In the remainder of the paper we organize the paper as

Abstract
Plan recognition aims to recognize target plans given observed actions with history plan libraries or domain models
in hand. Despite of the success of previous plan recognition
approaches, they all neglect the impact of human preferences
on plans. For example, a kid in a shopping mall might prefer to “executing” a plan of playing in water park, while an
adult might prefer to “executing” a plan of having a cup of
coffee. It could be helpful for improving the plan recognition
accuracy to consider human preferences on plans. We assume
there are historical rating scores on a subset of plans given by
humans, and action sequences observed on humans. We estimate unknown rating scores based on rating scores in hand using an off-the-shelf collaborative ﬁltering approach. We then
discover plans to best explain the estimated rating scores and
observed actions using a skip-gram based approach. In the
experiment, we evaluate our approach in three planning domains to demonstrate its effectiveness.

Introduction
Plan recognition aims to look for target plans to best explain the observed actions based on plan libraries and/or domain models (Kautz and Allen 1986; Ramı́rez and Geffner
2009a; Zhuo, Yang, and Kambhampati 2012). Computeraided cooperative work scenarios become increasingly popular, human-in-the-loop decision support has become a
critical challenge (Cohen et al. 2015; Dong et al. 2004;
Manikonda et al. 2014). An important aspect of such a
support is recognizing what plans the human in the loop
is making. There have been large amount of works on
plan recognition. For example, Kautz and Allen proposed
an approach to recognizing plans based on parsing observed actions as sequences of subactions and essentially
model this knowledge as a context-free rule in an “action
grammar” (Kautz and Allen 1986); Bui et al. (Bui 2003;
Geib and Goldman 2009) presented approaches to probabilistic plan recognition problems; Kabanza and Filion (Kabanza et al. 2013) proposed an anytime plan recognition algorithm to reduce the number of generated plan execution
models based on weighted model counting; just to name a
few.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

3686

https://www.triphobo.com

