Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Non-Deterministic Planning with Temporally Extended Goals:
LTL over Finite and Inﬁnite Traces
Alberto Camacho,† Eleni Triantaﬁllou,† Christian Muise, Jorge A. Baier,‡ Sheila A. McIlraith†
†

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto

CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
‡
Center for Semantic Web Research, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile
†
{acamacho,eleni,sheila}@cs.toronto.edu,  cjmuise@mit.edu, ‡ jabaier@ing.puc.cl
and Geffner (2013) have proposed the only compilationbased approach that existed prior to this work. Unfortunately, the latter approach is limited to the proper subset of
LTL for which there exists deterministic Büchi automata. In
addition, it is restricted to the interpretation of LTL over inﬁnite traces and the compilation is worst-case exponential in
the size of the goal formula. Finally, it is subject to a doubleexponential blowup, since there exist LTL formulae of size
n for which
any recognizing deterministic Büchi automaton
n
has 22 states (Kupferman and Rosenberg 2010).
In this paper, we propose four compilation-based approaches to LTL planning with non-deterministic actions
that exploit translations from LTL to alternating or nondeterministic (Büchi) automata. In each case, we compile
LTL goals, together with the original planning domain, speciﬁed in the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language (PDDL),
into PDDL that is suitable for input to standard fully observable non-deterministic (FOND) planners. We compare
compilations that exploit alternating automata to those that
exploit non-deterministic automata, in the differing cases
where LTL is interpreted over either ﬁnite or inﬁnite traces.
The approaches based on non-deterministic automata compilations capture the full expressivity of LTL for ﬁnite and
inﬁnite traces. They are sound, complete, and although the
compilations are theoretically worst-case exponential in size
with respect to the size of the original LTL, they do not
manifest these exponential properties in practice. The other
two approaches based on alternating automata have compilations that are linear in the size of the original LTL. The
approaches are sound but incomplete for both the ﬁnite and
inﬁnite cases. To obtain completeness we would have lost
the linear properties of the compilation. This restricted linear compilation produced inferior performance compare to
our non-deterministic approach, so we did not include our
complete alternating automata based approaches which lose
the linear properties whose merits we wished to evaluate.
Our approaches build on methods for ﬁnite LTL planning
with deterministic actions by Baier and McIlraith (2006)
and Torres and Baier (2015), and for the inﬁnite nondeterministic case, on the work of Patrizi, Lipovetzky, and
Geffner (2013). While in the ﬁnite case the adaptation of
these methods was fairly straightforward, the inﬁnite case
required non-trivial insights and modiﬁcations to Torres and
Baier’s and Baier and McIlraith’s approaches. We evaluate

Abstract
Temporally extended goals are critical to the speciﬁcation of a
diversity of real-world planning problems. Here we examine
the problem of non-deterministic planning with temporally
extended goals speciﬁed in linear temporal logic (LTL), interpreted over either ﬁnite or inﬁnite traces. Unlike existing
LTL planners, we place no restrictions on our LTL formulae beyond those necessary to distinguish ﬁnite from inﬁnite
interpretations. We generate plans by compiling LTL temporally extended goals into problem instances described in
the Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language that are solved by
a state-of-the-art fully observable non-deterministic planner.
We propose several different compilations based on translations of LTL to alternating or non-deterministic (Büchi) automata, and evaluate various properties of the competing approaches. We address a diverse spectrum of LTL planning
problems that, to this point, had not been solvable using AI
planning techniques, and do so in a manner that demonstrates
highly competitive performance.

1

Introduction

Real-world planning problems involve complex goals that
are temporally extended, require adherence to safety and
liveness constraints, and often necessitate the optimization
of preferences or other quality measures. Linear Temporal
Logic (LTL) is a language that can be used to specify such
constraints (Pnueli 1977).
Planning with deterministic actions and LTL goals has
been well studied, commencing with the works of Bacchus
and Kabanza (2000) and Doherty and Kvarnström (2001).
Signiﬁcant attention has been given to compilation-based
approaches (e.g., (Rintanen 2000; Cresswell and Coddington 2004; Edelkamp 2006; Baier and McIlraith 2006; Patrizi et al. 2011)), which take a planning problem with an
LTL goal and transform it into a classical planning problem for which state-of-the-art classical planning technology
can often be leveraged. The more challenging problem of
planning with non-deterministic actions and LTL goals has
not been studied to the same extent; Kabanza, Barbeau, and
St.-Denis (1997), and Pistore and Traverso (2001) have proposed their own LTL planners, while Patrizi, Lipovetzky,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3716

