Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A General Clustering Agreement Index:
For Comparing Disjoint and Overlapping Clusters
Reihaneh Rabbany, Osmar R. Zaı̈ane
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB, Canada
{rabbanyk, zaiane}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
A clustering agreement index quantiﬁes the similarity between two given clusterings. It is most commonly used to
compare the results obtained from different clustering algorithms against the ground-truth clustering in the benchmark
datasets. In this paper, we present a general Clustering Agreement Index (CAI) for comparing disjoint and overlapping
clusterings. CAI is generic and introduces a family of clustering agreement indexes. In particular, the two widely used
indexes of Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), and Normalized Mutual Information (NMI), are special cases of the CAI. Our index, therefore, provides overlapping extensions for both these
commonly used indexes, whereas their original formulations
are only deﬁned for disjoint cases. Lastly, unlike previous
indexes, CAI is ﬂexible and can be adapted to incorporate
the structure of the data, which is important when comparing
clusters in networks, a.k.a communities.

(a) Three clusterings of a dataset with 13 data points.

(b) Comparing the pair-wise similarity of clusterings.

Figure 1: A clustering agreement measure compares the
pair-wise similarity of clusterings.

nities, are shown to be highly overlapping (Gregory 2010;
Leskovec, Lang, and Mahoney 2010). However, the current extensions of the clustering agreement indexes for overlapping cases (Lancichinetti, Fortunato, and Kertesz 2008;
McDaid, Greene, and Hurley 2011; Yang and Leskovec
2013), which are used in the evaluation of overlapping community detection methods, are either inaccurate or inefﬁcient, as discussed in detail in the related works.
In this paper, we present a general clustering agreement
formula which naturally extends to overlapping clusters. The
main contributions of this paper are ﬁve-fold:

Introduction
Clustering agreement indexes are well-studied and widelyused in cluster validation (Aggarwal and Reddy 2014),
where they measure the agreement between clustering results and the ground-truth clustering, available in the benchmark datasets. More generally, clustering agreement indexes
quantify the similarity between two clusterings of the same
dataset (see Fig. 1 for a visualized for a toy example), and are
utilized to compare and combine multiple clusterings, usually obtained from different objectives, different algorithms,
or different parameters of an algorithm; notable cases are
consensus clustering (Fred and Jain 2005), ensemble clustering (Strehl and Ghosh 2003), and multi-view clustering (Cui,
Fern, and Dy 2007). The stability and robustness of clustering algorithms can also be assessed based on the similarity
of their results when introducing noise/variations/sampling,
and/or changing the order of the data (Fred and Jain 2003;
Wagner and Wagner 2007).
More recently, clustering agreement indexes have been
applied extensively in the comparison of community mining algorithms (Danon et al. 2005; Lancichinetti and Fortunato 2009; Gustafsson, Hörnquist, and Lombardi 2006);
which cluster nodes in a given network, based on the relationships between them. Clusters in networks, a.k.a commu-

1. The introduction of a novel, generalized Clustering
Agreement Index (CAI);
2. Proofs that CAI generalizes a number of well-known existing agreement measures;
3. The derivation of a novel NMI measure, CMI, for overlapping clusterings, which reduces to the original NMI if
clusterings are disjoint, and is both faster to compute and
performs better compared to the current available overlapping extensions.
4. The derivation of a ARI formulation, CRI, for overlapping clusterings, which reduces to the original ARI if
clusterings are disjoint, and is faster to compute compared
to the current available extension, i.e., computational order is reduced from O(n3 ) to O(n);
5. Empirical comparison of four well-known overlapping
community detection methods, obtained based on the previous and the newly proposed agreement indexes.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2492

