Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Structural Correspondence Learning for Cross-Lingual
Sentiment Classiﬁcation with One-to-Many Mappings
Nana Li

Shuangfei Zhai, Zhongfei Zhang

Boying Liu

School of Computer Science
and Engineering,
Hebei University of Technology
Tianjin 300401, China
lin@binghamton.edu

Computer Science Department
Binghamton University
Binghamton, NY 13902,USA
szhai2@binghamton.edu,
zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

School of Electrical Engineering
Hebei University of Technology
Tianjin 300401, China
lby@hebut.edu.cn

typically sufﬁcient training samples in a resource-rich language to target, resource-scarce language. As a result, domain adaptation has been proposed to address this problem
((Blitzer, McDonald, and Pereira 2006); (Banea et al. 2008);
(Prettenhofer and Stein 2011)). There has been a lot of work
in domain adaptation, and one effective method for CLSC is
based on structural correspondence learning (SCL), named
as cross-lingual structural correspondence learning (CLSCL) proposed by Prettenhofer and Stein (Prettenhofer and
Stein 2010). Its key idea is to identify a low-dimensional representation that captures the correspondence between features from both domains by modeling their correlations with
some special pivot features. From these correspondences a
cross-lingual representation is created that enables the transfer of classiﬁcation knowledge from the source to the target
language. This approach is a good ﬁt for CLSC as it transfers
knowledge through identifying important features. However,
for simplicity, CL-SCL assumes that the word translation oracle maps each pivot word in source language to exactly only
one word in target language. As we all know, machine translation performs simple substitution of words in one language
for words in another, but that alone usually cannot produce
a good translation. Furthermore, this one-to-one translation
between words in different languages is too strict.

Abstract
Structural correspondence learning (SCL) is an effective
method for cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation. This approach uses unlabeled documents along with a word translation oracle to automatically induce task speciﬁc, cross-lingual
correspondences. It transfers knowledge through identifying
important features, i.e., pivot features. For simplicity, however, it assumes that the word translation oracle maps each
pivot feature in source language to exactly only one word
in target language. This one-to-one mapping between words
in different languages is too strict. Also the context is not
considered at all. In this paper, we propose a cross-lingual
SCL based on distributed representation of words; it can
learn meaningful one-to-many mappings for pivot words using large amounts of monolingual data and a small dictionary.
We conduct experiments on NLP&CC 2013 cross-lingual
sentiment analysis dataset, employing English as source language, and Chinese as target language. Our method does not
rely on the parallel corpora and the experimental results show
that our approach is more competitive than the state-of-the-art
methods in cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation.

Introduction
Sentiment classiﬁcation is the task to predict the sentiment
polarity of a given document such as a product review or
commentary essay. Its goal is to develop automated approaches that can classify sentiment polarity in text as positive, neutral, or negative. To obtain a satisfactory classiﬁcation performance, most methods require lots of labeled data,
which can be costly in terms of both time and human efforts.
While there have been lots of resources available in English,
including labeled corpora and sentiment lexicons, for other
languages, such resources are often insufﬁcient. Thus, it is
expected to make use of the knowledge learned from those
resource-rich languages to perform sentiment classiﬁcation
in other languages, which can substantially reduce human
efforts. This problem is called cross-lingual sentiment classiﬁcation (CLSC), which we address in this paper.
CLSC uses annotated sentiment corpora in one language
as the training data, to predict the sentiment polarity of the
data in another language. Domain adaptation focuses on
solving this problem by transferring knowledge from the

In 2013, Mikolov et al.(Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013)
proposed a method for exploiting similarities among languages. It used the distributed representation of words and
learned a linear mapping between vector spaces that represent the corresponding languages, respectively. It translated word and phrase entries by learning language structures based on large monolingual data and mappings between languages from small amount of bilingual data. Despite its simplicity, the results showed that their method
was surprisingly effective, especially for the translation between languages that are substantially different (such as English to Chinese). In this paper we introduce the distributed
representation of words into the CL-SCL, and propose a
novel structural correspondence learning method with oneto-many mappings (SCL-OM). This method aims at building
up the one-to-many mappings between the pivot features in
source language and those in the target language. Evaluations on NLP&CC 2013 datasets show that our algorithm
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3490

