Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

CBRAP: Contextual Bandits
with RAndom Projection
Xiaotian Yu, Michael R. Lyu, Irwin King
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
Email: {xtyu,lyu,king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

problems with side information (Wang, Kulkarni, and Poor
2005; Dani, Hayes, and Kakade 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál,
and Szepesvári 2011; Chu et al. 2011). Speciﬁcally, given
feature information of arm space for each of T rounds, a
learner is required to choose one of K arms. Linear bandits
contain a basic assumption of linearly mapping from the arm
space to the reward space (Filippi et al. 2010), which should
be the most common case in reality.
Recently, contextual bandits with linear payoffs have been
successfully applied into many practical applications, such
as recommender systems (Tang et al. 2013), social network
analysis (Zhao, McAuley, and King 2014; Zhao and King
2016b) and information retrieval (Zhao and King 2016a).
In (Tang et al. 2013), the demonstration of advertisements
was based on users’ input information on web pages. The
authors formulated the problem of automatic layout selection in online advertisements as a contextual bandit problem. These personalized advertisements are expected to improve click-through rates of web links. For these models of
sequential decisions, recommendation algorithms always receive additional contextual information from users, which
could be greatly useful for the online sequential decisions.
In the big data era, it is pretty common to encounter highdimensional and/or sparse contextual information. In this
case, traditional bandit algorithms, which are mostly designed in the setting of low-dimensional data, are facing new
challenges in applications. Due to the curse of dimensionality, there are two challenges in most the of current bandit algorithms. The ﬁrst is high time-complexity; and the
second is extremely large upper regret bounds with highdimensional data. Speciﬁcally, traditional contextual bandits
(e.g., LinUCB in (Chu et al. 2011)) contain inverse operations in the original contextual space, which will be timeconsuming for computations. Besides, the regret bounds of
linear bandits in (Chu et al. 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and
Szepesvári 2011) are related to the original dimension of
contextual data, which can lead to increasing regret bounds
with the curse of dimensionality. This will be even worse
when the original dimension of contextual data is larger than
the the total sequential rounds of playing bandits.
There have been some efforts on context bandits with
linear payoffs in high-dimensional and/or sparse contextual
data (Deshpande and Montanari 2012; Carpentier, Munos,
and others 2012). The corresponding bandit algorithms are

Abstract
Contextual bandits with linear payoffs, which are also
known as linear bandits, provide a powerful alternative
for solving practical problems of sequential decisions,
e.g., online advertisements. In the era of big data, contextual data usually tend to be high-dimensional, which
leads to new challenges for traditional linear bandits
mostly designed for the setting of low-dimensional contextual data. Due to the curse of dimensionality, there
are two challenges in most of the current bandit algorithms: the ﬁrst is high time-complexity; and the second is extreme large upper regret bounds with highdimensional data. In this paper, in order to attack the
above two challenges effectively, we develop an algorithm of Contextual Bandits via RAndom Projection
(CBRAP) in the setting of linear payoffs, which works
especially for high-dimensional contextual data. The
proposed CBRAP algorithm is time-efﬁcient and ﬂexible, because it enables players to choose an arm in
a low-dimensional space, and relaxes the sparsity assumption of constant number of non-zero components
in previous work. Besides, we prove an upper regret
bound for the proposed algorithm, which is associated with reduced dimensions. By comparing with three
benchmark algorithms, we demonstrate improved performance on cumulative payoffs of CBRAP during its
sequential decisions on both synthetic and real-world
datasets, as well as its superior time-efﬁciency.

Introduction
The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem was proposed and
investigated by Robbins in 1952, which has attracted great
interests from numerous researchers in operation research
and computer science (Robbins 1952; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi,
and Fischer 2002; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012). The fundamental issue in the MAB problem and its variants focuses
on the exploration-exploitation trade-off, which refers to an
algorithm trying to maximize cumulative rewards in sequential decisions but the algorithm has only limited knowledge
about the mechanism of generating the rewards (Auer 2002).
As a natural and important variant of the basic MAB
problem, contextual bandits with linear payoffs, which are
also known as linear bandits, are sequential decision-making
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2859

