Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

RQUERY: Rewriting Natural Language Queries on Knowledge Graphs to
Alleviate the Vocabulary Mismatch Problem
Saeedeh Shekarpour

Edgard Marx

Sören Auer

Amit Sheth

Kno.e.sis Center
Dayton, United States
saeedeh@knoesis.org

AKSW Research Group
Leipzig, Germany
marx@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

EIS Research Group
Bonn, Germany
auer@cs.uni-bonn.de

Kno.e.sis Center
Dayton, United States
amit@knoesis.org

lutions for reducing this type of mismatching by converting
words to a base form. (ii) Lexical form, which relates words
based on lexical categories. For example, the word ‘wife’
holds a lexical relation to the word ‘spouse’ or ‘altitude’ to
‘elevation’ because they hold the same meaning.
So far, various approaches have been proposed to address
the vocabulary mismatch problem. The most important ones
include these. (i) Using a controlled vocabulary maintained
by human editors. This approach is common for relatively
small or restricted domains. (ii) Automatically deriving a
thesaurus. For instance, word co-occurrence statistics over
a text corpus is an automatic way to induce a thesaurus. (iii)
Interactive query expansion, which provides a list of recommendations for the end user. The recommendations can
come from sources such as query logs or thesaurus. (iv) Automatic query expansion, which automatically (without any
user intervention) adds derived words to the input query
in order to increase recall in retrieval systems. (v) Query
rewriting based on query log mining, which leverages the
manual query rewriting. This approach requires comprehensive query logs, thus being particularly appropriate for web
search engines.
Expansion and rewriting methods are endangered to yield
large number of irrelevant words which negatively inﬂuence
runtime as well as accuracy. (Shekarpour et al. 2013) showed
that for short queries, the number of derived words is signiﬁcantly high. Hence we require approaches to heuristically restrict number of derived words and rank them based
on their appropriateness. Thus, in this paper, we propose a
method for automatic query rewriting on RDF data called
RQUERY1 . This method takes into account the topology
(i.e. internal structure) as well as the semantics of background knowledge base for query rewriting. Our main contributions are as follows:

Abstract
For non-expert users, a textual query is the most popular and
simple means for communicating with a retrieval or question answering system. However, there is a risk of receiving queries which do not match with the background knowledge. Query expansion and query rewriting are solutions for
this problem but they are in danger of potentially yielding a
large number of irrelevant words, which in turn negatively
inﬂuences runtime as well as accuracy. In this paper, we propose a new method for automatic rewriting input queries on
graph-structured RDF knowledge bases. We employ a Hidden
Markov Model to determine the most suitable derived words
from linguistic resources. We introduce the concept of triplebased co-occurrence for recognizing co-occurred words in
RDF data. This model was bootstrapped with three statistical distributions. Our experimental study demonstrates the superiority of the proposed approach to the traditional n-gram
model.

Introduction
While the amount of information being published on the
Web of Data is dramatically high, retrieving information
is an issue due to several known challenges. A key persisting challenge is "the lack of accurate knowledge of the
vocabulary used", which even expert users frequently use
incorrectly. Use of simple interfaces (i.e., textual queries
as used by commercial Web search engines) require automatic ways for tackling the vocabulary mismatch challenge.
This challenge is even more important for schema-aware
search systems such as question answering systems rather
than schema-unaware search systems such as information
retrieval approaches because there precise interpretation of
the input query as well as accurate spotting of the answer is
more demanding. For instance, using DBpedia as knowledge
base, the query ?Who is the designer of Brooklyn Bridge??
could fail, because the desired property in DBpedia is labeled ?architect? and not ?designer?. Key causes of vocabulary mismatching include (i) Inﬂectional form, which is variation of a word for different grammatical categories such as
tense, aspect, person, number, etc. For example, the word
‘actress’ might be required to be altered to ‘actor’ or ‘companies’ to ‘company’. Stemming and lemmatization are so-

• we deﬁne the concept of triple-based co-occurrence of
words in RDF knowledge bases.
• We extend the Hidden Markov Model for producing and
ranking tuples of derived words (i.e. query rewrites).
• We assess and analyze the effectiveness of the proposed
approach in two directions:
1
The
source
code
is
https://github.com/shekarpour/RQUERY

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3936

available

at:

