Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Attention-Based LSTM for Target-Dependent Sentiment Classiﬁcation
Min Yang,1 Wenting Tu,1 Jingxuan Wang,1 Fei Xu,∗2 Xiaojun Chen3
1

University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
{myang,wttu}@cs.hku.hk jingxuan@hku.hk xufei@iie.ac.cn xjchen@szu.edu.cn
2

Related work

Abstract

In order to capture the sentiments on target entities, there are
a variety of approaches being proposed for target-dependent
sentiment classiﬁcation (Hu and Liu 2004). Since feature
engineering is labor intensive, several recent studies (Dong
et al. 2014; Tang et al. 2015) use deep neural networks to
tackle this problem. Our model is inspired by the recent
success of attention-based neural network (Bahdanau, Cho,
and Bengio 2014). To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the ﬁrst one that explores attention-based architecture for
target-dependent sentiment classiﬁcation.

We present an attention-based bidirectional LSTM approach
to improve the target-dependent sentiment classiﬁcation. Our
method learns the alignment between the target entities and
the most distinguishing features. We conduct extensive experiments on a real-life dataset. The experimental results
show that our model achieves state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
in real world, people may mention several target entities (or
different aspects of a target) in one sentence. Only considering the overall sentiment of the sentence fails to capture
the sentiments of different target entities. In this paper, we
mainly focus on the task of predicting the sentiment polarity
(e.g. positive, negative, neutral) of sentences towards speciﬁc targets.
Inspired by the recent success of attention neural network (see Section 2), we present an Attention-based Bidirectional LSTM (AB-LSTM) approach to improve the targetdependent sentiment classiﬁcation. Our model is a recurrent
neural network which includes a bidirectional LSTM network with an additional attention layer on top. It learns to
assign attention scores to different word locations according
to their intent importance. We then compress the input sequence into a ﬁxed-length vector by computing a weighted
sum of the hidden states at each word according to their
attention scores. The weights are adaptive to the content
of each time step, which makes it possible to assign large
weights to the “distinguishing” words. On the other hand,
unlike the models which only use the last hidden state (or
mean pooling), the attention based model has no difﬁculty
modeling long sequence since it considers different word locations in a relatively even manner. This allows the model
to cope with the situation when the input sentence is long
and the target string is far from the most distinguishing features. The experiment results show that our model achieves
state-of-the-art results.

Model
We propose two Attention-based Bidirectional LSTM (ABLSTM) approaches to improve the performance of targetdependent sentiment classiﬁcation. AB-LSTM learns to assign attention scores to different word locations according to
their relevance to the task. We compress the input sequence
into a ﬁxed-length vector by computing a weighted sum of
the hidden states of each word according to their attention
scores.
AB-LSTM1 Our ﬁrst attention method compute a weight
for every word in the sequence as the dot product of ht and
htarget . Here, ht is the hidden states of time step tobtained
by bidirectional LSTM based on the current input xt , htarget
is the hidden states of the target string. Mathematically, the
ﬁnal sentence representation takes the following form:
o=

T

t=1

at ht , with at = T

exp(s(ht · htarget ; θ))

target
exp(s(ht · htarget ; θ))
t=1

(1)

where T is the length of the sequence, s(ht · htarget ; θ) is
the attention network (θ is the parameter set of attention network), which maps a vector to a real valued score. To form a
proper probability distribution over the context, we normalize the scores across the context by using softmax function
and get attention score at . The attention score at indicates
the importance of the corresponding time step t. In this way,
with a properly trained attention network, it assigns higher
attention scores to words that are more relevant to the certain
task. In our model, s(ht · htarget ; θ) is implemented as another neural network, whose parameters are jointly trained
with those of the B-LSTM.

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5013

