Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Proportional Justiﬁed Representation
Luis Sánchez-Fernández

Edith Elkind

Martin Lackner

Norberto Fernández

Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid, Spain
luiss@it.uc3m.es

University of Oxford,
United Kingdom
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

University of Oxford,
United Kingdom
martin.lackner@cs.ox.ac.uk

Escuela Naval Militar
(CUD), Spain
norberto@cud.uvigo.es

Jesús A. Fisteus

Pablo Basanta Val

Piotr Skowron

Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid, Spain
jaf@it.uc3m.es

Universidad Carlos III
de Madrid, Spain
pbasanta@it.uc3m.es

University of Oxford,
United Kingdom
p.k.skowron@gmail.com

Decision-making based on the aggregation of possibly conﬂicting preferences is a central problem in the ﬁeld of social choice, which has received a considerable amount of attention from the artiﬁcial intelligence researchers (Conitzer
2010; Brandt et al. 2016). The most common preference aggregation scenario is the one where a single candidate has
to be selected. However, there are also many applications
where the goal is to select a ﬁxed-size set of alternatives:
example range from choosing a parliament or a committee
to identifying a set of plans, allocating resources, shortlisting candidates for a job or an award, picking movies to be
shown on a plane or creating a conference program (Barberà and Coelho 2008; Monroe 1995; Elkind, Lang, and
Safﬁdine 2015; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2015;

Elkind et al. 2017). Recently, the complexity of multiwinner voting rules (Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann 2013;
Aziz et al. 2015b) and their social choice properties (Elkind,
Lang, and Safﬁdine 2015; Aziz et al. 2015a; 2017; Elkind et
al. 2017) have been actively explored by the artiﬁcial intelligence research community.
Multi-winner voting rules are often applied in scenarios
in which the set of winners needs to represent the different
opinions or preferences of the agents involved in the election. Thus, it is important to formulate axioms that capture
our intuition about what it means for a set of winners to provide a faithful representation of voters’ preferences (Monroe 1995; Dummet 1984; Black 1958). Aziz et al. (2015a;
2017) have recently proposed two such axioms for approvalbased multi-winner voting, namely justiﬁed representation
(JR) and extended justiﬁed representation (EJR). Intuitively,
JR requires that a large enough group of agents with similar
preferences is allocated at least one representative; EJR says
that if this group is large enough and cohesive enough, it deserves not just one, but several representatives (see Section 2
for formal deﬁnitions). Similar axioms have been proposed
for multi-winner voting rules with ranked ballots (Dummet
1984; Elkind et al. 2017). Aziz et al. show that for every
collection of ballots there is a winning set that provides EJR;
they then explore a number of popular multi-winner voting
rules and show that several of them satisfy JR, but only one
rule satisﬁes EJR.
Our ﬁrst contribution in this paper is to answer a question left open by Aziz et al. Speciﬁcally, Aziz et al. prove
that Reweighted Approval Voting (RAV)1 satisﬁes JR if the
desired number of winners k is 2 but it fails JR if k ≥ 10.
We close this gap and prove that RAV satisﬁes JR if k ≤ 5
and fails JR if k ≥ 6. Our proof proceeds by constructing and solving a linear program that establishes bounds on
RAV scores.
We then formulate an axiom that we call Perfect Representation (PR), which says that if a given instance admits a
‘perfect solution’ (all voters are represented, and each winner represents the same number of voters), then we expect a
voting rule to output such a solution. This axiom is very ap-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
In the journal version of their paper, Aziz et al. (2017) refer to
this rule as Sequential Proportional Approval Voting (SeqPAV).

Abstract
The goal of multi-winner elections is to choose a ﬁxed-size
committee based on voters’ preferences. An important concern in this setting is representation: large groups of voters with cohesive preferences should be adequately represented by the election winners. Recently, Aziz et al. (2015a;
2017) proposed two axioms that aim to capture this idea: justiﬁed representation (JR) and its strengthening extended justiﬁed representation (EJR). In this paper, we extend the work
of Aziz et al. in several directions. First, we answer an open
question of Aziz et al., by showing that Reweighted Approval
Voting satisﬁes JR for k = 3, 4, 5, but fails it for k ≥ 6.
Second, we observe that EJR is incompatible with the Perfect Representation criterion, which is important for many
applications of multi-winner voting, and propose a relaxation
of EJR, which we call Proportional Justiﬁed Representation
(PJR). PJR is more demanding than JR, but, unlike EJR, it is
compatible with perfect representation, and a committee that
provides PJR can be computed in polynomial time if the committee size divides the number of voters. Moreover, just like
EJR, PJR can be used to characterize the classic PAV rule in
the class of weighted PAV rules. On the other hand, we show
that EJR provides stronger guarantees with respect to average
voter satisfaction than PJR does.

1

Introduction

670

