Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Extracting Urban Microclimates
from Electricity Bills∗
Thuy Vu and D. S. Parker
UCLA Computer Science Department
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1596

Introduction

Abstract

Urban energy management is as a key problem facing the development of cities. In this work we describe some results of
analyses on residential electricity consumption (EC), using
monthly consumer data from regional energy utilities, including the Los Angeles Department of Water and Electricity (LADWP), SoCal Edison, SoCal Gas, and others. This
included information on almost 17 million accounts and 500
million meter readings, altogether about 500GB of data. In
this paper we describe analysis of about 5000 block group
totals — a summary of EC in census-deﬁned neighborhoods
— that suggests ways to scale analysis for all of the data.

Sustainable energy policies are of growing importance in all
urban centers. Climate — and climate change — will play
increasingly important roles in these policies. Climate zones
deﬁned by the California Energy Commission have long been
inﬂuential in energy management. For example, recently a
two-zone division of Los Angeles (deﬁned by historical temperature averages) was introduced for electricity rate restructuring. The importance of climate zones has been enormous,
and climate change could make them still more important.
AI can provide improvements on the ways climate zones are
derived and managed. This paper reports on analysis of aggregate household electricity consumption (EC) data from local utilities in Los Angeles, seeking possible improvements in
energy management. In this analysis we noticed that EC data
permits identiﬁcation of interesting geographical zones — regions having EC patterns that are characteristically different
from surrounding regions. We believe these zones could be
useful in a variety of urban models.
Microclimates are characterized by common patterns of environmental variables, such as temperature, wind, humidity,
and vegetation. Our key ﬁnding is that regions in which block
groups have similar Electricity Consumption patterns over
time are topographically-deﬁned basins having common climate patterns. We call these EC-microclimate zones. Because
they reﬂect local topography and climate, but are based only
on EC data, they permit development of new solutions with
learning methods.
Although microclimates are known to play important roles
in energy management, and are important aspects of ecosystems for computational sustainability, the complexity of environmental variables makes them hard to quantify. We analyze how microclimates and household electricity consumption are linked to socioeconomic variables like income. We
show how learning-based models can be useful in prediction
of energy consumption. Related geostatistical methods also
can be used to extend models for each microclimate zone to
larger-scale models of electricity consumption.

Availability of the data has now made it possible to apply learning methods in deeper analysis of patterns and processes in energy systems. This paper shows how the Los Angeles electricity consumption data clariﬁes the importance of
climate (Erell 2008) in smart energy management. In particular, it suggests ways to identify and use microclimate zones
in management of electricity consumption.

The Need for Improved Energy Management
The California Energy Commission formulates energy policies involving climate. For example, the California Energy climate zones (California Energy Commission 2013b;
Paciﬁc Energy Center 2008) impose climatic organization
on electricity providers. Although these zones were chosen
with energy use in mind, they will need to evolve to remain
in step with the rapid growth in these areas. It is possible
that a much ﬁner zone granularity in Los Angeles could aid
in characterizing and improving electricity efﬁciency.
These zones are important in deﬁning rates, which are vital controls on electricity consumption. LADWP, in its rate
restructuring about eight years ago (L.A. DWP 2008), deﬁned two microclimate zones by historical temperature averages, and the western/coastal zone is generally associated
with higher income. These two zones are shown in Figure 1;
they have had enormous impact on energy consumption.
Faced with increasing complexity of consumer demand
and energy supply options, the California Energy Commission and state-wide electricity providers evolved the California IEPR (Integrated Energy Policy Report) over the
past decade (California Energy Commission 2013a; 2014;
2015b). It is ‘a biennial integrated energy policy report that

∗

Data for this work was obtained from the UCLA Energy Atlas
developed at CCSC (California Center for Sustainable Communities), Institute of the Environment & Sustainability, UCLA. Energy
Atlas research was funded by Los Angeles County, with access to
data obtained from the California Public Utilities Commission.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4538

