Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep MIML Network∗
Ji Feng, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
{fengj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Most previous MIML studies assumed that the instances
were given in advance, or generated by some manually designed instance generators which extract instances from the
raw data. Recently, an empirical study (Wei and Zhou 2016)
on image tasks exhibit that there is no manually designed
instance generator dominating others. Considering that representation learning techniques have beat manually feature
engineering in various domains, it naturally motivates us to
try to facilitate MIML with automatic representation learning, though larger amount of data are required for this purpose.
In this paper, we propose the DeepMIML network. As
its name suggested, this is a deep neural network model for
MIML. Born with the representation learning ability of deep
models, in DeepMIML we do not need to use another instance generator to generate instance descriptions. Instead,
the model itself will accomplish the instance representation
generation and the successive learning process. Moreover,
with a carefully designed sub-concepts layer, an apparent
advantage of MIML, i.e., discovering the latent relation between input patterns and output semantic labels (Zhou et al.
2012; Li et al. 2012) has been reserved. Such a layer can
also be plugged into other types of network structures, such
as CNNs, to endow them with the ability of pattern-label relation discovery ability. The effectiveness of DeepMIML are
validated in experiments.
The rest of the paper starts from a brief review of related
work. Then we present the DeepMIML network, followed
by experiments and conclusion.

Abstract
In many real world applications, the concerned objects are
with multiple labels, and can be represented as a bag of
instances. Multi-instance Multi-label (MIML) learning provides a framework for handling such task and has exhibited
excellent performance in various domains. In a MIML setting, the feature representation of instances usually has big
impact on the ﬁnal performance; inspired by the recent deep
learning studies, in this paper, we propose the DeepMIML
network which exploits deep neural network formation to
generate instance representation for MIML. The sub-concept
learning component of the DeepMIML structure reserves the
instance-label relation discovery ability of MIML algorithms;
that is, it can automatically locating the key input patterns that
trigger the labels. The effectiveness of DeepMIML network
is validated by experiments on various domains of data.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, an object of interest has
its inherent structure and it can be represented as a bag
of instances, and multiple labels are associated on the bag
level. For example, in text categorization, each document
may have sentences as instances and multiple labels are
assigned on document level. Multi-Instance Multi-Label
(MIML) (Zhou and Zhang 2006; Zhou et al. 2012) provides
a framework for handling these kinds of tasks.
Concretely, in a MIML perspective, the training data
{(X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xm , Ym )} consists of m bags of instances,
where each bag Xi can be represented as zi instances such
as {xi,1 , xi,2 ...xi,zi }. The output Yi is a subset of all possible labels {y1 , y2 , ...yL } where L is the number of possible
single labels. Many MIML algorithms such as (Zhou et al.
2012; Briggs, Fern, and Raich 2012; Yang, Jiang, and Zhou
2013; Nguyen et al. 2014; Huang, Gao, and Zhou 2014)
have been proposed during the past years and have been
successfully applied in different domain of tasks such as
image classiﬁcation, text categorization, video annotation,
gene function prediction, ecosystem protection, etc. (Xu,
Xue, and Zhou 2011; Zhou et al. 2012; Surdeanu et al. 2012;
Briggs, Fern, and Raich 2013; Wu, Huang, and Zhou 2014)

Related Works
During the past few years, many successful algorithms for
MIML have been proposed, to name a few, Li et al. tried
(2012) to model what instances trigger what labels by considering the shared patterns across relevant labels; Briggs
et al. (2012) proposed rank-loss support instance machines
for MIML instance anotation; Briggs et al. (2013) considered the problem of predicting instance labels while learning
from data labeled only at the bag level by using a new regularized rank-loss objective; Huang et al. (2014) proposed
a fast MIML algorithm by exploiting label relations with
shared space and discovering sub-concepts for complicated
labels; Pham et al.(2015) used a discriminative probabilistic
model to discover novel class instances in a MIML setting.

∗
Supported by the 973 Program (2014CB340501) and NSFC
(61333014).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1884

