Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Heuristic Search Value Iteration
for One-Sided Partially Observable Stochastic Games
Karel Horák, Branislav Bošanský, Michal Pěchouček
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague
{horak,bosansky,pechoucek}@agents.fel.cvut.cz

However, real-world security scenarios naturally require
partial observability and no strictly deﬁned horizon. The
goal is to ﬁnd best robust strategies that provide guarantees on the expected outcome for one player (the defender)
against any opponent (the attacker). Therefore, we focus
on discounted two-player zero-sum POSGs with concurrent
moves and one-sided partial observability where it is assumed that the attacker has full information about the game
– the attacker knows the state of the game as well as the
history of actions played. One-sided partial observability
has been used in speciﬁc domains such as patrolling games,
e.g. (Vorobeychik et al. 2014), or pursuit-evasion games,
e.g. (Horak and Bosansky 2016). We generalize this concept to a broad class of POSGs.
Our main contribution is the ﬁrst domain-independent algorithm that has guarantees to approximate optimal strategies in one-sided POSGs. Our algorithm is a generalization of the heuristic search value iteration algorithm
(HSVI) for Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs). Similarly to POMDPs, one-sided POSGs allow us to compactly represent strategies and value functions representing values of the game based on the belief
the ﬁrst player has about the state of the game. Contrary to
POMDPs, the presence of the opponent player causes signiﬁcant technical challenges that we address in this paper.
First, we show that the assumption of the one-sided partial
observability guarantees that the value functions are convex.
Second, we deﬁne a value backup operator and show that
an iterative application of this operator converges to the optimal values. Third, we generalize the ideas behind HSVI
towards one-sided POSGs, and show that our algorithm approximates optimal strategies. Finally, we demonstrate the
applicability and scalability of our algorithm on three different domains – patrolling games (including the variant with
alarms), pursuit-evasion games, and search games. The results show that our algorithm can closely approximate solutions of large games with more than 4000 states.

Abstract
Security problems can be modeled as two-player partially observable stochastic games with one-sided partial observability and inﬁnite horizon (one-sided POSGs). We seek for optimal strategies of player 1 that correspond to robust strategies against the worst-case opponent (player 2) that is assumed to have a perfect information about the game. We
present a novel algorithm for approximately solving onesided POSGs based on the heuristic search value iteration
(HSVI) for POMDPs. Our results include (1) theoretical
properties of one-sided POSGs and their value functions, (2)
guarantees showing the convergence of our algorithm to optimal strategies, and (3) practical demonstration of applicability and scalability of our algorithm on three different domains: pursuit-evasion, patrolling, and search games.

Introduction
Game theory is widely used in security problems and strategies from game-theoretic models are applied to protect critical infrastructures (Pita et al. 2008; Kiekintveld et al. 2009;
Shieh et al. 2012), computer networks (Vanek et al. 2012) or
wildlife (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015; Fang et al. 2016).
Many real-world situations, however, contain a dynamic
strategic interaction between the players that has to be addressed in the models. Players can observe (possibly imperfectly) information about actions of their opponent and
react to these observations. Examples include patrolling
games (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009; Vorobeychik
et al. 2014; Basilico, Nittis, and Gatti 2016), where a defender protects a set of targets against an attacker, pursuitevasion (Chung, Hollinger, and Isler 2011), or search games,
where a defender is trying to ﬁnd and capture an attacker.
Finding optimal strategies in such dynamic games with
imperfect information is often computationally challenging.
If the horizon of the interaction is restricted, we can use
the extensive-form games formulation. Typically, the size of
this representation grows exponentially with the horizon and
prohibits us from solving large games. If the horizon is inﬁnite (or indeﬁnite), we can use partially observable stochastic games (POSGs). In POSGs, however, many problems are
undecidable (Madani, Hanks, and Condon 1999) even when
we use a discount factor to restrict future gains.

Related Work
There are only a few relevant algorithms for computing
strategies in POSGs. An algorithm for computing strategies
in POSGs where all players have imperfect information was
proposed in (Hansen, Bernstein, and Zilberstein 2004). The
algorithm approximates an inﬁnite horizon game by increas-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

558

