Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Creating Serious Robots That Improve Society
Susan P. Imberman1, Jean McManus2, Gina Otts3

1

susan.imberman@csi.cuny.edu, College of Staten Island, 2800 Victory Blvd., Staten Island, NY 10314
2
jean.m.mcmanus@verizon.com, Verizon Labs, One Verizon Way, Basking Ridge, NJ 07920
3
gina.otts@verizon.com, Verizon Labs, 700 Hidden Ridge. Irving, TX

encouraging open discussion and exchange of ideas while
learning about new and current technology. Tech Nodes
are open to all conference attendees and usually run two
hours in length. As many as 200 participants can participate. Our activity resulted from a collaboration between
Verizon Labs and a faculty member from The College of
Staten Island who teaches robotics and publishes in the
area of robotic education.

Abstract
The Grace Hopper conference has many lectures/activities
for participants. Tech Node presentations at this conference
are two hours and focus on encouraging open discussion
around a topic. This "not so grand" challenge, originally
created for this conference, requires participants to brainstorm a robot creation that could somehow improve society
in one of four societal areas: Elder Care (non- medical),
Search and Rescue, Environment, and Affordable Home
Health Care. This project format also can be used as an
unplugged activity for a CS0/CS1 class or as a more advanced project that employs image processing and AI techniques such as machine learning.
.

With the advent of mobile apps, the game development
community has branched off into a subgroup that develops
what has been termed "serious games". These games have
some societal use such as educational instruction, engagement of children with autism, etc. The thesis of this
TechNode was to engage Grace Hopper participants in the
creation of a robot that would in some way benefit society
in contrast to the current popular perception that robots are
"hobby toys", used in robot competitions such as
BattleBots and RoboCup, as well as their use in the military and manufacturing. "Serious robots" already exist to
some extent, and the success of robots such as the Roomba® Robot Vacuum, have demonstrated the potential for
robot commercialization. The self-driving car is another
example of a serious robot that has the potential to make an
immense impact on society.

Introduction
Many robot curriculum activities are centered on a competitive task. Many times these tasks illustrate and use some
type of AI algorithm, be it searching or machine learning.
(Imberman, 2004). The amount of AI knowledge/skill
varies with the activity. Task time allocation also varies
from semester-long to a few class sessions to a single lecture/lab session. As well as the time allocation, the level at
which the task is suited also varies from a CS0 to a higher
level robotics class. There are few activities that are suited
for a CS0/unplugged activity as well as an advanced robotics course. This paper describes one such activity.

It was along the theme of societal improvement that Grace
Hopper participants were challenged to create a serious
robot within a two-hour timeframe.

Background
The activity described in this article was conceived as a
Tech Node activity for the October 2016 Grace Hopper
Celebration of Women conference. Tech Nodes are run by
two co-chairs, both experts on the topic, one from industry
and one from an academic institution. Tech Nodes are not
lecture/hands-on activities. Rather, some background information is provided to participants with the intention of

Methodology
The Tech Node session was broken into four segments:
Learning, Creating, Sharing, and Winning, with times devoted to each segment of 45 minutes, 30 minutes, 30
minutes, and 15 minutes, respectively. The participants
were divided into teams of five, each tasked with creating a
robot that will improve society in some way. In order to
further focus the task, four societal areas were identified
from which the participant teams could choose: Elder Care
(non- medical), Search and Rescue, Environment, and Af-

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4781

