Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-Objective Inﬂuence Diagrams with Possibly Optimal Policies
Radu Marinescu

Abdul Razak and Nic Wilson

IBM Research – Ireland
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

Insight Centre for Data Analytics
University College Cork, Ireland
{abdul.razak,nic.wilson}@insight-centre.org

utility is a rather weak one; the effect of this is that the set of
maximal values of expected utility and the corresponding set
of decision policies can often become huge. Therefore, the
main drawback of MOIDs is that in most practical situations
the set of undominated decision policies is often too large to
be meaningful to the decision maker. Sometimes, the decision maker may be happy to provide additional tradeoffs between objectives, and these can be used to reduce further the
set of undominated expected utility values and their policies
(but typically not to singleton sets) as was recently shown in
(Marinescu, Razak, and Wilson 2012).

Abstract
The formalism of multi-objective inﬂuence diagrams has recently been developed for modeling and solving sequential
decision problems under uncertainty and multiple objectives.
Since utility values representing the decision maker’s preferences are only partially ordered (e.g., by the Pareto order)
we no longer have a unique maximal value of expected utility, but a set of them. Computing the set of maximal values of expected utility and the corresponding policies can be
computationally very challenging. In this paper, we consider
alternative notions of optimality, one of the most important
one being the notion of possibly optimal, namely optimal
in at least one scenario compatible with the inter-objective
tradeoffs. We develop a variable elimination algorithm for
computing the set of possibly optimal expected utility values,
prove formally its correctness, and compare variants of the
algorithm experimentally.

Contribution In this paper we take a different approach
and focus on ﬁnding optimal values of expected utility with
respect to alternative notions of optimality, such as the notion of possibly optimal solutions considered in (Wilson,
Razak, and Marinescu 2015a) for multi-objective constraint
optimization problems. More speciﬁcally, we extend this
approach to multi-objective inﬂuence diagrams and look to
compute the set of possibly optimal values of expected utility and the corresponding decision policies. A possibly optimal policy is a policy that is optimal in at least one scenario
that is compatible with the inter-objective tradeoffs. We develop a variable elimination algorithm for computing this
set, and give the key formal properties that ensure the correctness of the computation. Quite often, the decision maker
is happy to provide some preferences for one multi-objective
utility vector over another; these may arise, for example,
from an iterative elicitation technique. We use such inputs
to infer other preferences and use them to eliminate dominated utility vectors during the computation. Our numerical
experiments demonstrate the efﬁciency of the proposed algorithm both in terms of solution quality (as the cardinality
of the solution sets obtained) and the solution times.
Proofs and additional experimental results are contained
in a longer version of the paper (Marinescu, Razak, and Wilson 2017).

Introduction
Multi-Objective Inﬂuence Diagrams (MOID) (Marinescu,
Razak, and Wilson 2012) are a recent extension of inﬂuence
diagrams (ID) (Howard and Matheson 1984) that provide a
general framework for modeling and solving sequential decision making problems under uncertainty and multiple objectives. They involve both chance variables, where the outcome is determined randomly based on the values assigned
to other variables, and decision variables, which the decision maker can choose the value of, based on observations
of some other variables. Uncertainty is represented (like in
Bayesian networks) by a collection of conditional probability distributions, one for each chance variable. To cope with
multiple and non-commensurate utility scales on which the
decision maker’s preferences are expressed, it is natural to
consider multi-objective or multi-attribute utility functions
(White, Sage, and Dozono 1984; Keeney and Raiffa 1993;
Roy 1996; Ehrgott 1999). Therefore, the utility values are
vectors in IRp , with p being the number of objectives, and
the overall value of an outcome is given by the sum of a set
of local multi-objective utility functions.
Since the utility values are only partially ordered (for instance by the Pareto ordering) we no longer have a unique
maximal value of expected utility, but a set of them. In general, given a MOID, the Pareto ordering on multi-objective

Background
Multi-objective Utility Values
Let p be the number of objectives (or attributes). A
multi-objective utility value is deﬁned to be a vector u =
(u1 , . . . , up ) ∈ IRp , where ui represents the utility with
respect to objective i ∈ {1, . . . , p}. We assume the standard pointwise arithmetic operations, namely u + v =
(u1 + v1 , . . . , up + vp ) and q × u = (q × u1 , . . . , q × up ),

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3783

