Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Large Graph Embedding
1

Feiping Nie,1 Wei Zhu,1 Xuelong Li2
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
2
Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China
{feipingnie@gmail.com, zwvews@gmail.com, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn}
we thus prefer to construct such similarity matrix. However,
conventional spectral methods always construct almost fullrank similarity matrix by k-nearest neighbor approach, which
makes both graph construction as well as spectral analysis
time consuming, and the time complexity is O(n2 d) at least,
it is surely unbearable for the data which contains hundreds
of thousands samples.
To alleviate the problem, inspired by recent progresses on
scalable semi-supervised learning (Liu, He, and Chang 2010),
large scale spectral clustering (Cai and Chen 2015)(Li et al.
2015), and large scale spectral based dimensionality reduction (Cai 2015), we propose an efﬁcient method, named Unsupervised Large Graph Embedding (ULGE). ULGE starts
with similar idea as LPP, but beneﬁts a lot from the the anchorbased graph strategy as well as the speciﬁc similarity matrix.
The overall time complexity is O(ndm), which has great
advantage over conventional spectral based methods.
Three main contributions of this paper are listed as follows:

Abstract
There are many successful spectral based unsupervised dimensionality reduction methods, including Laplacian Eigenmap (LE), Locality Preserving Projection (LPP), Spectral
Regression (SR), etc. LPP and SR are two different linear
spectral based methods, however, we discover that LPP and
SR are equivalent, if the symmetric similarity matrix is doubly stochastic, Positive Semi-Deﬁnite (PSD) and with rank p,
where p is the reduced dimension. The discovery promotes
us to seek low-rank and doubly stochastic similarity matrix,
we then propose an unsupervised linear dimensionality reduction method, called Unsupervised Large Graph Embedding
(ULGE). ULGE starts with similar idea as LPP, it adopts an
efﬁcient approach to construct similarity matrix and then performs spectral analysis efﬁciently, the computational complexity can reduce to O(ndm), which is a signiﬁcant improvement
compared to conventional spectral based methods which need
O(n2 d) at least, where n, d and m are the number of samples,
dimensions and anchors, respectively. Extensive experiments
on several public available data sets demonstrate the efﬁciency
and effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. We discover that LPP is equivalent to SR under certain
condition, which is of importance in guiding the efﬁcient
spectral based dimensionality reduction method design.

Introduction

2. We propose a spectral based unsupervised linear dimensionality reduction method ULGE with a time complexity
of O(ndm). ULGE is efﬁcient on both large graph construction and spectral analysis, which makes it suitable for
large scale data sets.

As one of the most efﬁcient approach to deal with highdimensional data, dimensionality reduction attracts many
researchers’ attentions, and lots of successful methods have
been proposed. However, the excessive amounts of data bring
lots of challenges, and make conventional methods inappropriate in real life application. The most popular spectral
based unsupervised dimensionality reduction methods include Laplacian Eigenmap (LE) (Belkin and Niyogi 2001),
Locality Preserving Projections (LPP) (He and Niyogi 2003),
Spectral Regression (SR) (Cai, He, and Han 2007), etc. Spectral based methods always construct similarity matrix ﬁrstly,
and then perform spectral analysis on the obtained matrix.
LPP and SR are two different linear methods, nevertheless,
we discover that if the similarity matrix is symmetric, PSD,
doubly stochastic and with rank p, LPP is equivalent to SR.
As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst research to discover the
equivalence between these two popular methods, moreover,
the discovery indicates that such speciﬁc similarity matrix
has lots of advantages on both performance and efﬁciency,

3. Comprehensive experiments on several large scale data
sets demonstrate the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the
proposed method for dealing with large scale data.
We ﬁrst introduce some notations that are used throughout
the paper. For matrix M ∈ Rr×t , the (i, j)-th entry of M
is denoted by mij , the transpose of the i-th row of M is
denoted by mi ∈ Rt×1 . Identity matrix is denoted by I. The
trace of M is denoted by T r(M ). The transpose of matrix
M is denoted by M T . The inverse of matrix M is denoted
by M −1 . The F -norm of M is denoted by M F . 1 is the
column vector of all ones.

Background
In the past decades, many spectral based dimensionality reduction methods have been proposed. Most initial attempts
are non-linear methods, e.g. LE (Belkin and Niyogi 2001),

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2422

