Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Vote Until Two of You Agree:
Mechanisms with Small Distortion and Sample Complexity
Stephen Gross, Elliot Anshelevich, Lirong Xia
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180

ian properties, normative properties, and low sample complexity?
While the normative aspects of social choice mechanisms
have been well-studied, the utilitarian aspects have received
less attention. We answer the main question in the framework of implicit utilitarian voting in a metric space, in
which agents are assumed to have private, possibly latent
utilities or costs for each alternative that are represented
by agents’ distances to alternatives in an unknown metric
space (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015). Instead of
submitting numerical utilities, however, these agents specify
only ordinal preferences to the social choice mechanism, for
example submitting only their top-ranked alternative.
In implicit utilitarian voting, a mechanism is often evaluated by its distortion (Procaccia and Rosenschein 2006).
Distortion measures the quality (e.g., social welfare or social cost) of an outcome produced by a social choice mechanism which only receives ordinal preferences as input, as
compared to the quality of an outcome produced by an omniscient mechanism which knows the true values of the exact
numerical utilities of all agents for all alternatives.
Previous work provided distortion bounds for the metric setting using well-known deterministic mechanisms (Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl 2015), and randomized
mechanisms (Anshelevich and Postl 2016; Feldman, Fiat,
and Golomb 2016). In the latter works, it is shown that
random dictatorship, which has extremely low sample complexity, always achieves distortion of at most 3, and that no
voting mechanism can always achieve distortion better than
7/3. This leaves a substantial gap for improvement.

Abstract
To design social choice mechanisms with desirable utility
properties, normative properties, and low sample complexity, we propose a new randomized mechanism called 2-Agree.
This mechanism asks random voters for their top alternatives
until at least two voters agree, at which point it selects that
alternative as the winner. We prove that, despite its simplicity
and low sample complexity, 2-Agree achieves almost optimal
distortion on a metric space when the number of alternatives
is not large, and satisﬁes anonymity, neutrality, ex-post Pareto
efﬁciency, very strong SD-participation, and is approximately
truthful. We further show that 2-Agree works well for larger
number of alternatives with decisive agents.

Introduction
In social choice, the goal is to aggregate the preferences of
many agents with conﬂicting interests via a social choice
mechanism, which returns a single winning alternative based
on the preferences of the agents. There is no single best
mechanism; researchers usually focus either on normative
criteria, especially fairness, or on utilitarian criteria, in
which the goal is to design mechanisms which optimize
some objective social utility function.
Over recent years, we have seen a shift of paradigm in
computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016) from focusing on high-stakes applications such as political elections, towards low-stakes, everyday-life, applications such
as polling, recommender systems (Dwork et al. 2001), learning to rank (Liu 2011), and crowdsourcing (Mao, Procaccia,
and Chen 2013).
In many of these new applications, the cost of eliciting
agents’ preferences is high compared to the stake of the situation. For example, when a group of friends vote to decide the restaurant for dinner, it is desirable to elicit as little
information as possible to make a quick (and correct) decision. Moreover, mechanisms that elicit little preferences
also preserve more privacy. Therefore, in such situations,
low sample complexity becomes another desideratum for social choice mechanisms.
The fundamental question we are facing is thus: Does
there exist a social choice mechanism with desirable utilitar-

Our Contributions
Our main conceptual contribution is a positive answer to
the main question in the Introduction by proposing and analyzing an extremely simple mechanism which we call 2Agree. This mechanism asks random voters for their top
alternatives until at least two voters agree, at which point it
selects that alternative as the winner. Despite its simplicity, and despite its low sample complexity — it only needs
to ask at most m + 1 voters for their top-ranked alternatives, where m is the number of alternatives — 2-Agree has
smaller worst-case distortion for small m than any previously analyzed mechanism. This includes all deterministic
mechanisms, which have a worst-case distortion of at least

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

544

