Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Open-Ended Robotics Exploration
Projects for Budding Researchers
David R. Musicant, Abha Laddha, Tom Choi
Carleton College
1 North College Street
Northﬁeld, MN 55057

that students can begin working on. We have found that for
this audience, unpublished manuscripts, masters theses, and
other like works can often be a rich source of material.
To summarize, here are the key contributions that we provide via this paper and the associated online materials (Musicant 2016):

Abstract
There are many beneﬁts to introducing students to the idea
of doing projects where the outcome is unknown or unsure.
Some have proposed that engaging students in research can
help with retention of underrepresented groups. In this paper, we report on a particular approach we have used to introduce high school students to open-ended robotics projects in
a three-week summer program. We describe the structure of
our summer program, how we ramp the students up to speed,
and we summarize the ﬁve open-ended “research” projects
that the students work on. These projects can be adopted for
open-ended work elsewhere by high school students or undergraduates.

• We present four structured labs for bringing students up
to speed on a variety of robotics concepts, including PID
control, ﬁnite state machines, and Q-learning.
• We present ﬁve open-ended research-like projects. In addition to presenting the project ideas and frameworks
(some of which were conceived of by others), we discuss
successful techniques as well as pitfalls that we have run
into.

Introduction
There are many beneﬁts to introducing students to the idea
of doing projects where the outcome is unknown or unsure.
Some have proposed that engaging students in research can
help with retention of underrepresented groups (Peckham et
al. 2007; Cuny and Aspray 2000). In this paper, we report
on a particular approach we have used to introduce high
school students to open-ended robotics projects in a threeweek summer program. Our goals are to introduce students
to the idea of having control over their own projects, but in
a structured way. Is the work that they do “research”? At the
level we’re working with the students, we don’t expect them
to complete innovative work that is new to the ﬁeld, but we
do hope to see students show creativity and begin engaging
some key academic principles of robotics.
It is our belief that the projects we use, and the structure
accompanying them, can work well for older high-school
or lower-level undergraduate students at a variety of experience levels. At least one of our projects is designed for students with essentially no computing experience at all; others are designed for students with previous programming
experience. In this paper, we describe the structure of our
summer program, how we ramp the students up to speed,
and most importantly, we summarize the various open-ended
“research” projects that the students work on.
When possible, we point students towards papers that
have been written that target the work that they are doing. Being able to read research papers is an important skill

Initial Labs
Our program runs for three weeks. During the ﬁrst two days,
students begin with four half-days of structured classes, designed to bring them up to speed. In our program, the experience students have varies from nearly none at all, to many
years of programming and/or high school robotics contests;
therefore, we believe the activities we present here could
work for a variety of experience levels. It is our goal to introduce programming skills as well as academic robotics ideas
at a level appropriate for a range of experiences. While these
initial labs are not the main emphasis of this paper, we are
happy to share them. They can be adapted in a variety of
ways for other programs. The full text from the most recent versions of our labs is available online (Musicant 2016).
We emphasize vigorously that in constructing these labs,
we stand on the shoulders of giants. Many aspects of these
projects have been done before, in a variety of ways.
Our ﬁrst half-day lab is intended simply as a warmup to
programming with the robots we have. We currently use
LEGO Mindstorms NXT robots. In the past, we used the
NXC programming language (Hansen 2011); more recently,
we have switched over to leJOS (leJOS 2015). On the second
half day, we introduce them to PID control, and task them
in particular with having their robot follow a line. We have
found that of the students who enroll for our program, a very
few of them have encountered this beforehand. Nonetheless,
the exercise seems to challenge them. On the third half day,
we introduce ﬁnite state machines and subsumption as ar-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4792

