Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Explicit Defense Actions Against Test-Set Attacks
∗

Scott Alfeld,∗ Xiaojin Zhu,∗ Paul Barford∗†
Department of Computer Sciences University of Wisconsin–Madison
Madison WI 53706, USA
†
comScore, Inc. 11950 Democracy Drive, Suite 600
Reston, VA 20190, USA.
{salfeld, jerryzhu, pb}@cs.wisc.edu

premium) of the insurance plan offered. An actor, the adversary Alice with motivation unknown to Bob, asserts her
limited control over the features (e.g., to lie about her age,
credit history, etc.) fed into Bob’s prediction function, to attempt to pull his prediction toward her goal. An attacker is
deﬁned by her target and her loss function (measuring the
distance of Bob’s resulting prediction to her target), both of
which we assume are unknown to Bob. Bob may select some
action from a set of available defense actions, and aims to
limit the effectiveness of any potential attacker. In our insurance example, perhaps Bob can verify certain aspects of her
application with third parties.
We assume no security through obscurity. That is, Bob
publishes his model and selected defense action, and Alice
studies both to plan her attack. Under this setting, Bob aims
to best defend himself. In this work, we answer the question:
What action should Bob take to best defend against an unknown attacker, assuming worst case initial values, attacker
target, and attacker loss function?
A primary goal of adversarial learning research is defense. That is, to augment or create learners (or models) so
as to harden them against attackers. We address the issue
of defense explicitly, by framing the interaction between attacker and predictor as a two player, non-zero sum, Stackelberg game. Speciﬁcally, in this work we make three primary contributions: (i) We deﬁne a general framework for a
predictor’s explicit defense strategy against intelligent, unknown adversaries. (ii) We utilize the framework to provide
tractably computable optimal actions for linear predictors.
(iii) We empirically demonstrate our methods on real world
data sets, and perform an investigation of their properties on
synthetic data.

Abstract
Automated learning and decision making systems in publicfacing applications are vulnerable to malicious attacks. Examples of such systems include spam detectors, credit card
fraud detectors, and network intrusion detection systems.
These systems are at further risk of attack when money is
directly involved, such as market forecasters or decision systems used in determining insurance or loan rates. In this paper, we consider the setting where a predictor Bob has a ﬁxed
model, and an unknown attacker Alice aims to perturb (or
poison) future test instances so as to alter Bob’s prediction
to her beneﬁt. We focus speciﬁcally on Bob’s optimal defense actions to limit Alice’s effectiveness. We deﬁne a general framework for determining Bob’s optimal defense action
against Alice’s worst-case attack. We then demonstrate our
framework by considering linear predictors, where we provide tractable methods of determining the optimal defense
action. Using these methods, we perform an empirical investigation of optimal defense actions for a particular class of
linear models — autoregressive forecasters — and ﬁnd that
for ten real world futures markets, the optimal defense action
reduces the Bob’s loss by between 78 and 97%.

Introduction
Systems in domains such as ﬁnance, energy, medicine, entertainment, security, advertising, etc., increasingly rely on
diverse input data. If decisions in these systems are based on
the output of automated learning systems, then some actors
may have incentive to alter (or poison) input data so as to
affect the learned system. Thus, any such system should be
robust to these threats.
The study of effective strategies in the presence of adversaries has long been of interest (Tzu Circa 500 BCE).
Broadly speaking, there are two forms of data poisoning attacks against a learning system — altering the data while
the model is being trained, and altering the data fed into an
already learned model. In this work, we focus on the latter
setting.
We consider the setting where a predictor, Bob, has a
ﬁxed, publicly known prediction function. For example, Bob
may be an insurance company estimating the expected future
cost of an applicant to determine terms (e.g., the monthly

Defense Framework
An agent Bob is a predictor with a ﬁxed function mapping
instances in an input space X to target values in an output space Y. We denote Bob’s ﬁxed, presumably learned,
prediction function as f : X → Y. Our framework is applicable to general prediction. That is, Bob’s task may be,
e.g., (binary) classiﬁcation (f : Rd → {0, 1}) regression
(f : Rd → R), clustering (hard or soft) (f : Rd → [1, . . . , k]


) or other
or f : Rd → Sk ), ranking (Rd×n → {1,...,k}
k
forms of prediction. For ease of notation we assume X ⊆ Rd

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1274

