Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Feature Selection Guided Auto-Encoder
Shuyang Wang,1 Zhengming Ding,1 Yun Fu1,2
1

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
2
College of Computer & Information Science,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
{shuyangwang, allanding, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

6HOHFWHG'LVFHUQLQJ8QLWV

Abstract
Recently the auto-encoder and its variants have demonstrated
their promising results in extracting effective features. Specifically, its basic idea of encouraging the output to be as similar
as input, ensures the learned representation could faithfully
reconstruct the input data. However, one problem arises that
not all hidden units are useful to compress the discriminative information while lots of units mainly contribute to represent the task-irrelevant patterns. In this paper, we propose
a novel algorithm, Feature Selection Guided Auto-Encoder,
which is a uniﬁed generative model that integrates feature
selection and auto-encoder together. To this end, our proposed algorithm can distinguish the task-relevant units from
the task-irrelevant ones to obtain most effective features for
future classiﬁcation tasks. Our model not only performs feature selection on learned high-level features, but also dynamically endows the auto-encoder to produce more discriminative units. Experiments on several benchmarks demonstrate
our method’s superiority over state-of-the-art approaches.

ܺ

்ܲ ݂ሺܺሻ

)RUIXWXUH
WDVN

݃ሺ݂ሺܺሻሻ

,QSXW
7DVNLUUHOHYDQW8QLWV

2XWSXW

Figure 1: The feature selection is adopted in hidden layer
to distinguish discerning units from task-irrelevant units,
which in turn constrains the encoder to focus on compressing important patterns to selected units. All of the units
are contributed to reconstruct the input, while only selected
units are used for future tasks.

Introduction
When dealing with high-dimensional data, the curse of
dimensionality is a fundamental difﬁculty in many practical machine learning problems (Duda, Hart, and Stork
2001). For many real-world data (e.g., video analysis, bioinformatics), their dimensions are usually very high, which
results in the signiﬁcant increase of the computational time
and space. In practice, not all features are equally important and discriminative, since most of them are often highly
correlated or even redundant to each other (Guyon and Elisseeff 2003). The redundant features generally would make
learning methods over-ﬁtting and less interpretable. Consequently, it is necessary to reduce the data dimensionality and
select the most important features.
Recently, the auto-encoder and its variants have drawn
increasing attention as nonlinear dimensionality reduction
methods (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006; Wang, Ding, and
Fu 2016). The conventional auto-encoder tries to learn an
approximation to the identity by encouraging the output to
be as similar to the input as possible. The architecture forces
the network to seek a compressed representation of the data
while preserving the most important information. However,

this scheme leads to one problem that the majority of the
learned high-level features may be blindly used to represent the irrelevant patterns in the training data. Although
the effort to incorporate supervision (Socher et al. 2011) has
been deployed, it is still challenging to learn task-relevant
hidden-layer representation since there must be some hidden units mainly used to faithfully reconstruct the irrelevant
or noisy part of the input. It is unreasonable to endow the discriminablity to this kind of task-irrelevant units. Take object
recognition for example, lots of hidden units are mainly used
to reconstruct the background clutters, then its performance
could be improved signiﬁcantly if we can distinguish important hidden units (e.g., those encoding foreground) from
large amounts of distracting hidden units (e.g., those encoding background).
To address this issue, a uniﬁed framework is proposed to
integrate feature selection and auto-encoder (Fig.1). Intuitively, the feature selection is applied on learned hiddenlayer to extract the discriminative features from the irrelevant ones. Simultaneously, the task-relevant hidden units
can feed back to optimize the encoding layer to achieve
more discriminability only on selected hidden units. Therefore, our model not only performs dynamic feature selection

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2725

