Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Virtual Personal Fashion Consultant:
Learning from the Personal Preference of Fashion
Jingtian Fu,12 Yejun Liu,12 Jia Jia,1* Yihui Ma,1 Fanhang Meng,1 Huan Huang1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
2
Academy of Art and Design, Tsinghua University
jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

ures or tastes. The diversity could be reflected by people’s
choice of clothing collocation.
Therefore, this paper focuses on the personal preference
of wearing. Magic Mirror uses genetic algorithm to learn
users’ personal preferences from their behaviors. Balance
fashion trend and personal preference to appreciate and
recommend clothing collocation better.

Besides fashion, personalization is another important factor
of wearing. How to balance fashion trend and personal preference to better appreciate wearing is a non-trivial task. In
previous work we develop a demo, Magic Mirror, to recommend clothing collocation based on the fashion trend.
However, the diversity of people’s aesthetics is huge. In order to meet different demand, Magic Mirror is upgraded in
this paper, and it can give out recommendations by considering both the fashion trend and personal preference, and
work as a private clothing consultant. For more suitable recommendation, the virtual consultant will learn users’ tastes
and preferences from their behaviors by using Genetic algorithm. Users can get collocations or matched top/bottom
recommendation after choosing occasion and style. They
can also get a report about their fashion state and aesthetic
standpoint on recent wearing.

System Overview
System Architecture
We designed a demo to simulate the environment of a fitting room. Magic Mirror includes a display that is placed
on end like a mirror, a Kinect to optimize the interaction
and a computing device.

Introduction
What to wear? This is an inevitable problem we are facing
everyday. Nowadays, following the fashion trend is the
need of wearing beautifully, and it is necessary to help
people wear by appreciating and recommending the suitable and fashionable wearing automatically.
In previous work, (J. Jia 2016) researched how to appreciating the fashion of clothing collocation based on aesthetic theory. (Y. Liu 2016) also developed virtual fashion
consultant, Magic Mirror, for further research and case
study. The system uses the photos of clothing as the input,
then automatically analyzes the style and parses the fashionable aesthetics of wearing in the photo. The recommendation is completely based on the appreciation of fashion.
However, personalization is another important factor of
wearing. The diversity of people is huge, regardless in fig-

Figure 1:System Structure

System Modules
What can Magic Mirror do specifically? Magic Mirror system has 3 modules (Shown in Figure 1) :
• Management module. User can get into a virtual wardrobe to browse, add/delete, pick clothes by gestures,
having a simple try-on looking in the screen.

Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5087

