Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Phase Transitions for
Scale-Free SAT Formulas
Tobias Friedrich, Anton Krohmer,
Ralf Rothenberger, Andrew M. Sutton
Algorithm Engineering Group
Hasso Plattner Institute
Potsdam, Germany
this, the SAT community has expanded their view to study
so-called industrial problem instances. Industrial instances
arise from problems in practice, such as hardware and software veriﬁcation, automated planning and scheduling, and
circuit design. Empirically, industrial instances appear to
have strongly different properties than formulas generated
uniformly at random, and SAT solvers behave very differently when applied to them (Crawford and Baker 1994;
Konolige 1994). However, benchmark industrial instances
are typically only available on an instance-by-instance basis,
so they are impossible to generate for any speciﬁc given parameter setting such as problem size; and empirical results
are difﬁcult to generalize (Rish and Dechter 2000). Moreover, rigorous theoretical results have been out of reach for
such problems because a formal deﬁnition of their distribution is still lacking (Williams, Gomes, and Selman 2003).
In fact, generating synthetic instances that are more similar to real-world instances is one of the “Ten Grand Challenges” proposed in satisﬁability research over the last two
decades (Selman, Kautz, and McAllester 1997; Selman 2000;
Kautz and Selman 2003; 2007).

Abstract
Recently, a number of non-uniform random satisﬁability models have been proposed that are closer to practical satisﬁability
problems in some characteristics. In contrast to uniform random Boolean formulas, scale-free formulas have a variable
occurrence distribution that follows a power law. It has been
conjectured that such a distribution is a more accurate model
for some industrial instances than the uniform random model.
Though it seems that there is already an awareness of a threshold phenomenon in such models, there is still a complete
picture lacking. In contrast to the uniform model, the critical
density threshold does not lie at a single point, but instead
exhibits a functional dependency on the power-law exponent.
For scale-free formulas with clauses of length k = 2, we give
a lower bound on the phase transition threshold as a function
of the scaling parameter. We also perform computational studies that suggest our bound is tight and investigate the critical
density for formulas with higher clause lengths. Similar to
the uniform model, on formulas with k ⩾ 3, we ﬁnd that the
phase transition regime corresponds to a set of formulas that
are difﬁcult to solve by backtracking search.

An observable difference between uniform random instances and real world instances is the statistics of variable
occurrence. On the uniform random model, the occurrence
of variables is strongly concentrated around its expectation.
On the other hand, very large variations in variable occurrence can be observed on real world instances such as those
that arise in bounded model checking and software veriﬁcation. It has been conjectured (Boufkhad et al. 2005) that this
property might be modeled well by a random formula model
with a power-law variable distribution. In such a distribution, the fraction of variables that occur z times in a formula
is proportional to z −β , where the constant β is called the
power-law exponent. The left plot of Figure 1 shows the
correspondence between the variable distributions of industrial formulas and random power-law formulas. The ﬁgure is
generated by plotting the empirical cumulative variable distribution of two groups of industrial formulas selected from
SAT Race 2015 competition: hwmcc10 (hardware model
checking) and SAT dat (IBM formal veriﬁcation suite). We
used the Clauset-Shalizi-Newman method (2009) to estimate
the power-law exponent in the industrial data and match it
in the randomly generated formula. A more detailed look at
the variable distribution statistics of industrial formulas is

Introduction
Despite the worst-case complexity results of SAT, many
large industrial instances can be solved efﬁciently by modern solvers. These instances, unlike formulas generated uniformly at random, appear to have some kind of underlying
tractable substructure that can be exploited by solvers during
preprocessing or execution (Williams, Gomes, and Selman
2003; Kullmann 2004; Ansótegui et al. 2008). Nevertheless,
most theoretical work on SAT instance distributions has focused almost exclusively on the uniform random distribution.
Uniform random formulas are easy to construct, and are comparatively more accessible to probabilistic analysis due to
their statistical uniformity.
A narrow focus on uniform random instances comes with
a risk of driving SAT research in the wrong direction (Kautz
and Selman 2007) because such instances do not possess
the same structural properties as those encountered in practice. It is also well-known that solvers that have been tuned
to perform well on one class of instances do not necessarily perform well on another (Birattari 2009). To address
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3893

