Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Patch-Based Dynamic Graph for Visual Tracking
1

Chenglong Li,1,2 Liang Lin,2∗ Wangmeng Zuo,3 Jin Tang1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei,China
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
lcl1314@foxmail.com, linliang@ieee.org, cswmzuo@gmail.com, tj@ahu.edu.cn
2

object classiﬁer in subsequent frames often undertakes the
risk of model drifting due to introducing outlier samples.
In literature of visual tracking, many efforts have been
devoted to alleviate the effects of outlier samples (Comaniciu, Ramesh, and Meer 2003; Hare, Saffari, and Torr
2011; He et al. 2013; Zhang, Ma, and Sclaroff 2014;
Kim et al. 2015). For example, the methods in (Comaniciu, Ramesh, and Meer 2003; Hare, Saffari, and Torr 2011;
He et al. 2013) update the object classiﬁers by considering
the distances of samples with respect to the bounding box
center, e.g., the samples close to the center receiving higher
weights. Some other methods (Duffner and Garcia 2013;
Yang, Lu, and Yang 2014) performs object segmentation during the tracking process to exclude background information.
However, these methods are limited in dealing with cluttered
backgrounds (e.g., unreliable segmented object masks). To
improve the robustness, Kim et al. (Kim et al. 2015) proposed
to deﬁne an image patch based 8-neighbor graph to represent
the tracked object, in which the 8-neighbor graph denote that
if two nodes are 8-neighbors, they are connected by an edge,
and the edge weight is computed by their low-level feature
distance. This approach has two main shortcomings: i) It only
considers the spatial neighbors, and cannot capture the intrinsic relationship between patches; ii) It directly uses low-level
features, which are easily contaminated by video noises.
To handle this problem, we aim to learn a more robust
object representation for visual tracking. Given one bounding
box of the target object, we partition it into non-overlapping
local patches, which are described by color and gradient
histograms. We take these patches as graph nodes, and the
bounding box can thus be represented with a graph structure,
in which the weight of each node describes how likely it
belongs to the target object, and the edge weight between two
neighboring patches indicates their appearance compatibility.
In this work, we propose a novel weighted low-rank and
sparse representation model to dynamically learn the graph
for each frame that infers the edges and the node weights in
a joint fashion.
According to Wright et al. (Wright et al. 2010), an informative graph should have three characteristics: high discriminative power, enhanced sparsity and adaptive neighborhood.
Therefore, we represent each patch descriptor as a linear
combination of other patch descriptors, and employ the nonnegativeness, sparsity, and low-rank constraints to suppress

Abstract
Existing visual tracking methods usually localize the object
with a bounding box, in which the foreground object trackers/detectors are often disturbed by the introduced background
information. To handle this problem, we aim to learn a more
robust object representation for visual tracking. In particular, the tracked object is represented with a graph structure
(i.e., a set of non-overlapping image patches), in which the
weight of each node (patch) indicates how likely it belongs
to the foreground and edges are also weighed for indicating
the appearance compatibility of two neighboring nodes. This
graph is dynamically learnt (i.e., the nodes and edges received
weights) and applied in object tracking and model updating.
We constrain the graph learning from two aspects: i) the global
low-rank structure over all nodes and ii) the local sparseness
of node neighbors. During the tracking process, our method
performs the following steps at each frame. First, the graph is
initialized by assigning either 1 or 0 to the weights of some image patches according to the predicted bounding box. Second,
the graph is optimized through designing a new ALM (Augmented Lagrange Multiplier) based algorithm. Third, the object feature representation is updated by imposing the weights
of patches on the extracted image features. The object location is ﬁnally predicted by adopting the Struck tracker (Hare,
Saffari, and Torr 2011). Extensive experiments show that our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art tracking methods on
two standard benchmarks, i.e., OTB100 and NUS-PRO.

Introduction
Existing successful visual tracking methods mainly adopt
the tracking-by-detection paradigm, i.e., separating the foreground object from its background over time by maintaining
a classiﬁer on the ﬂy. These methods usually localize the
object using a bounding box, and draw positive (negative)
samples from inside (outside) of the bounding box for the
classiﬁer updating. Since the ground-truth object labelling is
only available at the initial frame, incrementally updating the
∗
Corresponding author: Liang Lin. This work was in part
supported by State Key Development Program under Grant
2016YFB1001004, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61622214 and Grant 61472002, and in
part by the Special Program for Applied Research on Super Computation of the NSFC-Guangdong Joint Fund (the second phase).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4126

