Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Where to Add Actions in
Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning
1

Travis Mandel,1 Yun-En Liu,2 Emma Brunskill,3 Zoran Popović1,2
Center for Game Science, Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
2
EnlearnTM , Seattle, WA
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
{tmandel, zoran}@cs.washington.edu, yunliu@enlearn.org, ebrun@cs.cmu.edu
new content, for example by writing new lines of dialog or
designing new ads.
Unfortunately, automatic guidance on this process has
been extremely limited. It has typically been the task of domain experts to determine not just what new content to produce, but where to produce it. For example, experts must determine where to add a new line of dialog in a dialog system
or a new hint in a educational game. In an RL framework, we
can think of this as selecting the state where the next action
should be added. Unfortunately, this task is difﬁcult, as it requires the human to possess substantial amounts of domain
expertise, machine learning expertise, and be able to understand large quantities of data. Ideally, we could develop automated methods that answer this question, deciding where
to direct human effort to best maximize performance.
Related work in human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning has looked at where to query experts for demonstrations.
A signiﬁcant amount of work has focused on on querying
the expert in a different setting where the agent’s goal is
merely to imitate (Chernova and Veloso 2009; Judah et al.
2014). Related work by Clouse 1996 studied at which state
a reinforcement learning agent should query an imperfect
expert for advice in an existing action set. However, this is
a very different setting, as the assumption is that the human,
though not perfect, can perform the task fairly well, and that
the action space is sufﬁciently small to be amenable to autonomous exploration.
In this paper, we propose Expected Local Improvement
(ELI), as a heuristic to select the state where the next action
should be added. ELI intelligently combines data gathered
by a reinforcement learning algorithm, knowledge of the
structure of the reinforcement learning problem (if present)
and the behavior of the human experts it is interacting with
to select states that will be most likely to boost performance. Although the ultimate goal is to run ELI with real
humans on important real-world problems, similar to prior
work (Clouse 1996; Amir et al. 2016) we evaluate algorithms in settings where both the RL environment and the
“human” expert are simulated, as this allows for inexpensive
and well-controlled comparisons. We ﬁnd that ELI performs
well across a variety of domains adapted from the literature,
including a domain with over a million actions, a domain
where the experts improve over time, and even a domain
where the experts are quite poor.

Abstract
In order for reinforcement learning systems to learn quickly
in vast action spaces such as the space of all possible pieces of
text or the space of all images, leveraging human intuition and
creativity is key. However, a human-designed action space is
likely to be initially imperfect and limited; furthermore, humans may improve at creating useful actions with practice
or new information. Therefore, we propose a framework in
which a human adds actions to a reinforcement learning system over time to boost performance. In this setting, however,
it is key that we use human effort as efﬁciently as possible,
and one signiﬁcant danger is that humans waste effort adding
actions at places (states) that aren’t very important. Therefore, we propose Expected Local Improvement (ELI), an automated method which selects states at which to query humans for a new action. We evaluate ELI on a variety of simulated domains adapted from the literature, including domains
with over a million actions and domains where the simulated
experts change over time. We ﬁnd ELI demonstrates excellent
empirical performance, even in settings where the synthetic
“experts” are quite poor.

1

Introduction

Consider building a system to decide which hint to give a
student playing an educational game, what to say to a user
of a spoken dialog system, or what pictorial ad to show to
generate the most revenue for a small business. In domains
such as these, the space of all possible actions (pieces of
text, soundwaves, or images) is far too large to explore from
scratch without unreasonable quantities of data. A typical
reinforcement learning (RL) approach is for human practitioners to ﬁrst use their intuition and creativity to create
a small set of discrete actions, and then use reinforcement
learning techniques to learn to behave near-optimally within
this more tractable space.
However, this initial action set is likely to be limited and
highly imperfect, and so the performance of even the truly
optimal policy with respect to the limited action space may
be far below what is truly achievable. Because of this, we
desire systems that add new actions to the set over time to
come closer to optimal performance. Indeed, in practice it is
common to try to improve performance further by creating
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2322

