Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Human Intellect and Machine Failures:
Troubleshooting Integrative Machine Learning Systems
Besmira Nushi,1 Ece Kamar,2 Eric Horvitz,2 Donald Kossmann1,2
ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science, Switzerland
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA

Abstract

System
output

Component I/O Component I/O Component
3
1
2

We study the problem of troubleshooting machine learning
systems that rely on analytical pipelines of distinct components. Understanding and ﬁxing errors that arise in such integrative systems is difﬁcult as failures can occur at multiple
points in the execution workﬂow. Moreover, errors can propagate, become ampliﬁed or be suppressed, making blame assignment difﬁcult. We propose a human-in-the-loop methodology which leverages human intellect for troubleshooting
system failures. The approach simulates potential component
ﬁxes through human computation tasks and measures the expected improvements in the holistic behavior of the system.
The method provides guidance to designers about how they
can best improve the system. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach on an automated image captioning system that has been pressed into real-world use.






Evaluation

1






Component-based machine learning system

Failures
Fixes

Logs

Figure 1: Troubleshooting with humans in the loop

in existing systems. Human intervention is crucial to the approach as human ﬁxes simulate improved component output that cannot be produced otherwise without signiﬁcant
system development efforts. Figure 1 shows the main ﬂow
of our approach. First, workers evaluate the system output
without any ﬁx to analyze the current system state. To simulate a component ﬁx, the input and output of the component
accompanied with the ﬁx description are sent to a crowdsourcing platform as microtasks. Once workers apply the
targeted ﬁxes for a component, the ﬁxed output is integrated
back into the running system, which thereby generates an
improved version of the component. The system is executed
as a simulation with the injected ﬁx and the output is evaluated again via crowdworkers. The overall process collects
a valuable set of log data on system failures, human ﬁxes,
and their impact on the ﬁnal output. This data can then be
analyzed to identify the most effective combination of component improvements to guide future development efforts.
Case study. We apply our methodology to a state-of-the-art
integrative learning system developed to automatically caption images (Fang et al. 2015). The system involves three
machine learning components in a pipeline, including visual
detection, language generation, and caption ranking. The
multimodal nature of this case study allows us to demonstrate the applicability of the approach for components processing different forms of data and carrying out various
tasks. The methodology reveals new insights on the error
dynamics previously unknown to the designers, and offers
recommendations on how to best improve the system. For
example, in contrast to what system designers had assumed,
improving the Reranker is more effective than improving the
Visual Detector. Experiments highlight the beneﬁts of mak-

Introduction
Advances in machine learning have enabled the design of
integrative systems that perform sophisticated tasks via the
execution of analytical pipelines of components. Despite the
widespread adoption of such systems, current applications
lack the ability to understand, diagnose, and ﬁx their own
mistakes which consequently reduces users’ trust and limits
future improvements. Therefore, the problem of understanding and troubleshooting failures of machine learning systems is of particular interest in the community (Sculley et al.
2015). Our work studies component-based machine learning
systems composed of specialized components that are individually trained for solving speciﬁc problems and work altogether for solving a single complex task. We analyze how the
special characteristics of these integrated learning systems,
including continuous (non-binary) success measures, entangled component design, and non-monotonic error propagation, make it challenging to assign blame to individual components. These challenges hinder future system improvements as designers lack an understanding of how different
potential ﬁxes on components may improve the overall system output.
Approach. We introduce a troubleshooting methodology
which relies on crowdworkers to identify and ﬁx mistakes
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1017

