Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Problem Formulation for Accommodation
Support in Plan-Based Interactive Narratives∗
Adam Amos-Binks

Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
aaamosbi@ncsu.edu
Branching story games have gained popularity for adapting to user actions within a story world. An active area of
Interactive Narrative (IN) research uses automated planning
to generate story plans as it can lighten the authorial burden
of writing a branching story. Rather than hand-crafting each
branch, automated planning generates them from a declarative representation. A goal of an Experience Manager (EM)
is to guide a user through an IN’s space of desirable narrative
trajectories (Riedl and Bulitko 2012), or story branches.
However, in the cases when an EM must accommodate
user actions and mediate them from a desired narrative trajectory to a new narrative trajectory, automated planning’s
authorial advantage becomes a liability as the available narrative trajectories are not known apriori. This limitation can
lead to the EM choosing a new narrative trajectory that is
not coherent with the previous one and may result in a negative user experience. The goal of my research is to develop a
problem formulation methodology for story planning problems that elicits the available narrative trajectories enabling
an EM to execute more coherent accommodations. This goal
is captured by the following thesis:
Thesis - A model of the causal and motivation dependencies
between character goals in the storyworlds represented in a
story planning problem can allow an interactive narrative
experience manager to accommodate exceptional user actions by selecting a storyworld that preserves author goals,
user agency, and coherence between narrative trajectories.
This thesis will answer the following research questions:
RQ 1 - How can a problem formulation methodology for a
story planning problem be used to measure the coherence
between narrative trajectories?
RQ 2 - What factors affect the relationship of the coherence
between two narrative trajectories and a user’s experience
of agency and fun when accommodating user actions?
The primary technical contribution is a character-goal
model of storyworlds and algorithms to generate them in a

story planning problem. This enables human subject contributions that lead to a more fundamental understanding of the
effects of accommodation coherence on agency and fun.
Answering the research questions consists of three distinct stages. The ﬁrst stage requires developing a problem formulation methodology for story planning problems.
Problem formulation research has focused on problem validity (McCluskey and Porteous 1997) and solution efﬁciency (Ware and Young 2014), however the desired output
of this methodology is a set of partial narrative trajectories
capturing the storyworlds that could solve the story planning problem. The ﬁrst challenge is to deﬁne a plan-based
storyworld model that includes essential character-goal dependencies and excludes precise syntactic details of a plan
(e.g. exact movements). Addressing this challenge enables
narrative-theoretic comparisons, rather than using comparisons that are inﬂuenced by syntactic necessities of story
plans. A second challenge is to deﬁne a process to generate the possible storyworlds that when reﬁned into a story
plan could reach a story plan’s goal state. The output from
step 1 in Figure 1 represents two storyworlds from Red
Riding Hood. The ﬁrst is the classic tale, Red’s goal is to
get to Grandma’s house with food, the Wolf desires to eat
Red, and the woodsmen protects her. A second storyworld
has Red and the Wolf’s goals staying the same, but differs
by Grandma feeding herself and protecting Red. A complete view of the possible storyworlds informs the EM of
the available accommodations and allows the EM to make
strategic choices among the options, which addresses the
EM plan generation design challenge (Roberts 2011). Finally, an EM needs to translate a storyworld into a story plan
used in an accommodation strategy. This requires deﬁning a
process to translate abstract character-goals of a storyworld
into Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language (PDDL) details
of a partial narrative trajectory (step 2, Figure 1). This stage
is represented in the top of Figure 1.
The second stage will address the ﬁrst research question
by integrating the problem formulation methodology from
the ﬁrst stage into an accommodation strategy in the General
Mediation Engine (GME) (Robertson and Young 2014). The
ﬁrst step in this integration stage is to develop a storyworld
comparison framework to rank accessible story worlds in
terms of their coherence with the current storyworld (step
3, Figure 1). There are several domain-independent and

∗
This material is based upon work supported in whole or
in part with funding from the Laboratory for Analytic Sciences
(LAS). Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the LAS and/or any agency or entity of
the United States Government.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5030

