Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Non-Parametric Estimation of Multiple Embeddings
for Link Prediction on Dynamic Knowledge Graphs
Yi Tay,1 Luu Anh Tuan,2 Siu Cheung Hui3
1, 3

Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore

augment existing facts with new ones generated by link prediction. In addition, link prediction is also useful in search,
recommendation and other IR tasks.
Despite promising results, translational embedding methods suffer from several major weaknesses. Firstly, embedding methods are known to suffer from sensitivity to hyperparameters. For example, the learning rate and margin
can critically impact performance. The difﬁculty in parameter tuning can inevitably lead to sub-optimal solutions. With
only one embedding space, there can be only one global conﬁguration of hyperparameters. Secondly, by the translation
principle, the objective of h + r − t = 0 may be too geometrically restrictive since the golden spot is only one point
in vector space. TransH and TransR have proposed relationspeciﬁc vector/matrix projections to alleviate this problem
but come with an extra computational cost and complexity. Empirically, we also found that the performance in these
extension models are often poor unless they are initialized
with pre-trained TransE embeddings. In addition, the current methods lack adaptability to dynamic data. There is no
way to incrementally update the existing models especially
for triplet deletion and inclusion of new entities since they
require a ﬁxed index during training. Thus, all other models have to be retrained. In conjunction with the problem of
hyperparameter sensitivity, the optimal hyperparameters are
likely to change given a sizable update which requires retuning again after each update. This is costly and impractical
for applications in dynamic domains.
In this paper, we propose puTransE (Parallel Universe
TransE), an online and robust adaptation of TransE to solve
the above mentioned problems. Our proposed approach explicitly generates multiple embedding spaces via semantically and structurally aware triplet selection scheme and
non-parametrically estimates the energy score of a triplet.
The intuition for our approach is that, in every parallel universe embedding space, we impose a constraint on triplets
in terms of count and diversity such that each embedding
space observes the original knowledge graph from a different view. We outline the key advantages of our approach as
follows:

Abstract
Knowledge graphs play a signiﬁcant role in many intelligent
systems such as semantic search and recommendation systems. Recent works in this area of knowledge graph embeddings such as TransE, TransH and TransR have shown extremely competitive and promising results in relational learning. In this paper, we propose a novel extension of the translational embedding model to solve three main problems of the
current models. Firstly, translational models are highly sensitive to hyperparameters such as margin and learning rate. Secondly, the translation principle only allows one spot in vector space for each golden triplet. Thus, congestion of entities
and relations in vector space may reduce precision. Lastly, the
current models are not able to handle dynamic data especially
the introduction of new unseen entities/relations or removal
of triplets. In this paper, we propose Parallel Universe TransE
(puTransE), an adaptable and robust adaptation of the translational model. Our approach non-parametrically estimates the
energy score of a triplet from multiple embedding spaces of
structurally and semantically aware triplet selection. Our proposed approach is simple, robust and parallelizable. Our experimental results show that our proposed approach outperforms TransE and many other embedding methods for link
prediction on knowledge graphs on both public benchmark
dataset and a real world dynamic dataset.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KG) are represented in the form
(head,relation,tail). Recently, representational learning on
KGs which involves learning vector representations of entities (head or tail) and relations in a knowledge graph has
become extremely popular. A simple and effective model in
this line of work is the translational model in which each tail
entity vector (denoted as t) is represented as a translation relation vector (denoted as r) from its head entity vector (denoted as h) for each golden triplet. Popular embedding models based on the translation principle include TransE (Bordes
et al. 2013), TransH (Wang et al. 2014) and TransR (Lin et
al. 2015) which learn embeddings using a margin-based objective function. Given the learned vector representations of
entities and relations, one can compute the probability of all
triplet permutations existing in the KG. This is also known
as the classic knowledge base completion task where we

• Our approach eliminates the need for hyperparameter tuning of TransE. This is because we no longer depend on
one global conﬁguration. We show that our approach is
more robust in general and across dynamic updates.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1243

