Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Solving Seven Open Problems of Ofﬂine and Online Control in Borda Elections
Marc Neveling

Jörg Rothe

Institut für Informatik
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

Institut für Informatik
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

(Erdélyi et al. 2009; Menton 2013)—and the related control
problems have been classiﬁed in terms of their complexity.
However, for one of the most prominent natural voting systems, the Borda Count, only a few such results are known.
Related Work. Bartholdi et al. (1989), Bartholdi and Orlin (1991), and Conitzer et al. (2007) were the ﬁrst to study
manipulation; see the chapter by Conitzer and Walsh (2016)
for an overview. For weighted Borda elections, the complexity of coalitional manipulation was established early on by
Conitzer et al. (2007). The unweighted case turned out to be
more challenging; eventually, it was settled independently
by Betzler et al. (2011) and Davies et al. (2011).
Control (and bribery) of elections is surveyed by Faliszewski and Rothe (2016) and Baumeister and Rothe (2015)
who provide an extensive list of references. In particular,
Bartholdi et al. (1992) introduced the standard (or ofﬂine)
constructive control settings where, roughly, an election
chair seeks to make her favorite candidate win by exerting structural changes to a given election, such as adding
or deleting or partitioning either voters or candidates. Hemaspaandra et al. (2007) introduced the corresponding destructive control settings where the chair’s goal is to prevent a
given candidate’s victory. Each of these scenarios has been
thoroughly discussed in the literature (see, e.g., the above
book chapters), along with real-world applications. However, except for plurality, not much is known about control
for scoring protocols: Hemaspaandra et al. (2014) obtained
a dichotomy result for constructive control by adding voters
in scoring protocols; some recent results on veto are due to
Maushagen and Rothe (2016); and the relatively few results
obtained for Borda so far are due to Russel (2007), Elkind et
al. (2011), Loreggia et al. (2015), and Chen et al. (2015)—
see Table 1 for an overview of their results.
Another compelling line of research, focusing speciﬁcally
on gerrymandering by analyzing geographic manipulation,
has been introduced recently by Lewenberg and Lev (2016)
(see also the related paper by Bachrach et al. (2016)).
Hemaspaandra et al. (2012a; 2012b; 2014; 2016) proposed interesting new models of online manipulation and
online control in sequential elections. (A game-theoretic
approach to sequential elections was considered earlier by
Desmedt and Elkind (2010).) Unlike the standard manipulation model where all voters cast their votes simultaneously
and the manipulators have complete knowledge of all vot-

Abstract
Standard (ofﬂine) control scenarios in elections (such as
adding, deleting, or partitioning either voters or candidates)
have been studied for many voting systems, natural and less
natural ones, and the related control problems have been
classiﬁed in terms of their complexity. However, for one of
the most important natural voting systems, the Borda Count,
only a few such complexity results are known. We reduce
the number of missing cases by pinpointing the complexity of three control scenarios for Borda elections, including
some that arguably are among the practically most relevant
ones. We also study online candidate control, an interesting
dynamical, partial-information model due to Hemaspaandra
et al. (2012a), who mainly focused on general complexity
bounds by constructing artiﬁcial voting systems—only recently they succeeded in classifying four problems of online
candidate control for one natural voting system: sequential
plurality (Hemaspaandra et al. 2016). We settle the complexity of another four natural cases: constructive and destructive
online control by deleting and adding candidates in sequential
Borda elections.

Introduction
In computational social choice, voting has been studied
comprehensively and profoundly, with applications ranging
from political elections over recommender systems (e.g.,
to select movies according to certain criteria (Ghosh et al.
1999)) and webpage ranking algorithms (Dwork et al. 2001)
to multiagent planning (Ephrati and Rosenschein 1993). Particular attention has been paid to using complexity as a barrier to tampering with election outcomes via manipulation,
control, and bribery; recent book chapters by Conitzer and
Walsh (2016), Faliszewski and Rothe (2016), and Baumeister and Rothe (2015) provide an overview.
We focus on standard (i.e., ofﬂine) and online control scenarios in elections. Control actions such as adding, deleting,
or partitioning either voters or candidates have been studied for many voting systems—natural ones such as plurality, Condorcet, and approval voting (Bartholdi et al. 1992;
Hemaspaandra et al. 2007), Copeland (Faliszewski et al.
2009), and Schulze voting (Parkes and Xia 2012) and less
natural ones such as variants of approval and range voting
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3029

