Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Lock-Free Optimization for Non-Convex Problems
Shen-Yi Zhao, Gong-Duo Zhang, Wu-Jun Li
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
{zhaosy, zhanggd}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Zhang 2013) to solve it. Many works (Roux, Schmidt,
and Bach 2012; Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2013; Johnson and Zhang 2013) have found that SGD-based methods can achieve promising performance in large-scale learning problems. According to the implementation platforms or
systems, existing SGD-based methods can be divided into
three categories: sequential SGD (SSGD) methods, parallel SGD (PSGD) methods, and distributed SGD (DSGD)
methods. SSGD methods are designed for a single thread
on a single machine, PSGD methods are designed for multicore (multi-thread) on a single machine with a shared memory1 , and DSGD methods are designed for multiple machines.
When the problem in (1) is convex, the SGD methods, including SSGD (Roux, Schmidt, and Bach 2012;
Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2013; Johnson and Zhang 2013),
PSGD (Recht et al. 2011) and DSGD (Jaggi et al. 2014; Li et
al. 2014; Xing et al. 2015; Zhang, Zheng, and Kwok 2016),
have achieved very promising empirical performance. Furthermore, good theoretical results about the convergence of
the SGD methods are also provided by these existing works.
In many real applications, the problems to optimize can
be non-convex. For example, the problems for the neural networks are typically non-convex. Because many researchers (Li et al. 2014; Xing et al. 2015) ﬁnd that the SGD
methods can also achieve good empirical results for nonconvex problems, theoretical proof about the convergence
of SGD methods for non-convex problems has recently attracted much attention. Some progress has been achieved.
For example, the works in (Ghadimi and Lan 2013; Reddi
et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016; Allen-Zhu and Hazan 2016;
Allen-Zhu and Yuan 2016) have proved the convergence of
the sequential SGD and its variants for non-convex problems. There are also some other theoretical results for some
particular non-convex problems, like PCA (Shamir 2015;
2016a; 2016b) and matrix factorization (Sa, Re, and Olukotun 2015). But all these works are only for SSGD methods.
There have appeared only two works (Lian et al. 2015;
Huo and Huang 2016) which propose PSGD methods for
non-convex problems with theoretical proof of convergence.

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants have attracted much attention in machine learning due to their efﬁciency and effectiveness for optimization. To handle largescale problems, researchers have recently proposed several
lock-free strategy based parallel SGD (LF-PSGD) methods
for multi-core systems. However, existing works have only
proved the convergence of these LF-PSGD methods for convex problems. To the best of our knowledge, no work has
proved the convergence of the LF-PSGD methods for nonconvex problems. In this paper, we provide the theoretical
proof about the convergence of two representative LF-PSGD
methods, Hogwild! and AsySVRG, for non-convex problems. Empirical results also show that both Hogwild! and
AsySVRG are convergent on non-convex problems, which
successfully veriﬁes our theoretical results.

Introduction
Many machine learning models can be formulated as the following optimization problem:
1
fi (w),
n i=1
n

min
w

(1)

where w is the parameter to learn (optimize), n is the number of training instances, fi (w) is the loss deﬁned on instance i. For example, assuming we are given a set of labeled instances {(xi , yi )|i = 1, 2, . . . , n}, where xi ∈ Rd is
the feature vector and yi ∈ {1, −1} is the label of xi , fi (w)
T
can be log(1 + e−yi xi w ) + λ2 w2 which is known as the
regularized loss in logistic regression (LR). We can also take
fi (w) to be max{0, 1 − yi xTi w} + λ2 w2 which is known
as the regularized loss in support vector machine (SVM).
Here, λ is the regularization hyper-parameter. Moreover,
many other machine learning models, including neural networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), matrix factorization (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), and principal
component analysis (PCA) (Shamir 2015) and so on, can
also be formulated as that in (1).
When the problem in (1) is large-scale, i.e., n is large,
researchers have recently proposed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants like SVRG (Johnson and

1
In some literatures, PSGD refers to the methods implemented
on both multi-core and multi-machine systems. In this paper,
PSGD only refers to the methods implemented on multi-core systems with a shared memory.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2935

