Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

POI2Vec: Geographical Latent
Representation for Predicting Future Visitors
Shanshan Feng,1 Gao Cong,2 Bo An,2 Yeow Meng Chee3
1

Interdisciplinary Graduate School
School of Computer Science and Engineering
3
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{sfeng003@e., gaocong@, boan@, ymchee@}ntu.edu.sg
2

the potential visitors for locations is of great value. Among
many other applications, it can help POI holders to ﬁnd potential customers for marketing.
A user’s mobility is highly inﬂuenced by his recent visits
and his personal interest (Cheng et al. 2013). However, the
users’ check-in data are very sparse, and it is challenging to
model the sequential inﬂuence of POIs and user preference.
This is also the main challenge for predicting future visitors
for a given POI. The progress in neural network language
models demonstrates that the word2vec technique (Mikolov
and Dean 2013; Mikolov et al. 2013) is able to effectively
capture the sequential semantic relationships among words.
Very recently, the word2vec algorithm has been utilized to
model users’ sequential check-ins (Liu, Liu, and Li 2016).
However, the method (Liu, Liu, and Li 2016) has two limitations. First, it fails to incorporate geographical inﬂuence of
POIs, i.e., users tend to visit nearby POIs, in the word2vec
model. The geographical inﬂuence is very important in modeling user movement behaviors as shown in almost all the
previous works in POI recommendation. Second, it separately models the sequential transition and user preference.
Since each check-in behavior is related to both the sequential transition and user preference, it is more reasonable to
jointly model these two factors.
To incorporate geographical inﬂuence, we propose a
novel latent representation model, called POI2Vec. In our
model, each POI is represented as a vector in a latent low
dimensional space, and the inner product of two vectors
reﬂects the relevance between two POIs. To learn the latent vectors, we exploit the hierarchical softmax (HS) technique (Morin and Bengio 2005), which is widely used in
neural network language models by exploiting a binary tree
structure. For the hierarchical softmax, the key to achieve
good performance is constructing a proper binary tree over
items (Mnih and Hinton 2009). Instead of using Huffman
tree in word2vec, we develop a novel binary tree building
method, which is able to incorporate the geographical coordinates of POIs. We hierarchically split the POIs into different regions, and then build a binary tree over the POIs in
each region. Since a POI may also inﬂuence POIs in adjacent regions, we assign a POI to multiple nearby regions.
In the generated binary tree, one POI may occur more than
once, which is able to capture the various relationships with
other POIs.

Abstract
With the increasing popularity of location-aware social media applications, Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation has
recently been extensively studied. However, most of the existing studies explore from the users’ perspective, namely recommending POIs for users. In contrast, we consider a new research problem of predicting users who will visit a given POI
in a given future period. The challenge of the problem lies
in the difﬁculty to effectively learn POI sequential transition
and user preference, and integrate them for prediction. In this
work, we propose a new latent representation model POI2Vec
that is able to incorporate the geographical inﬂuence, which
has been shown to be very important in modeling user mobility behavior. Note that existing representation models fail to
incorporate the geographical inﬂuence. We further propose a
method to jointly model the user preference and POI sequential transition inﬂuence for predicting potential visitors for a
given POI. We conduct experiments on 2 real-world datasets
to demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach over
the state-of-the-art algorithms for both next POI prediction
and future user prediction.

Introduction
With the increasing availability of location-aware social media data, such as check-ins to Points-of-Interests (POIs),
the problem of modeling users’ mobility behaviors and POI
recommendation has been extensively studied (Cho, Myers, and Leskovec 2011; Ye et al. 2011). Many variants
of the POI recommendation problem are also explored,
among which the next-POI recommendation problem has
recently attracted signiﬁcant attention (Cheng et al. 2013;
Feng et al. 2015; He et al. 2016), which is to recommend
POIs for a user to visit in the near future.
Most of existing POI recommendation studies focus on
suggesting POIs for users from the users’ perspective. In
contrast, very little research has been done to predict visitors for a location. In this paper, we investigate a new research problem from the perspective of POI: Given a POI,
we predict the users who will visit this POI in the next few
hours. For example, given a restaurant and the current time,
we want to predict potential consumers who would visit this
restaurant in the next several hours. Obviously, identifying
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

102

