Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Finite Memory Automaton for
Two-Armed Bernoulli Bandit Problems
Ariel Rao
Carnegie Mellon University
5032 Forbes Avenue, SMC 3662
Pittsburgh, PA 15289-3662
(650) 996-4637
https://raoariel.github.io
arielrao@cmu.edu

Introduction

probabilities (Granmo 2008). However, the MAB is not fundamentally an estimation problem; the MAB is a ranking
problem. The FMA bypasses probability estimation to directly produce a relative ranking of the arms.
Further, most existing approaches to MAB rely on the full
history of received signals for perfect Bayesian updating of
beliefs about the arm payoff probabilities. There have been
a number of techniques using ﬁnite automata (Wilson 2014)
and Turing machines (Halpern and Pass 2015) to represent
computationally limited agents for other problems within
game and decision theory. The FMA borrows constructs for
bounded decision making from automata theory while leveraging a payoff probability tracking mechanism similar to
that presented in the BLA. By encoding beliefs about the
relative ranking of the arms within a ﬁnite state space, the
FMA is essentially restricted to a ﬁnite set of possible beliefs. Moreover, the fact that the FMA maintains rankings
rather than point-estimates makes it a ﬂexible enough framework to perform well in both static and dynamic environments.

Existing approaches to the multi-armed bandit (MAB) primarily rely on perfect recall of past actions to generate estimates for arm payoff probabilities; it is further assumed that
the decision maker knows whether arm payoff probabilities
can change. To capture the computational limitations many
decision making systems face, we explore performance under bounded resources in the form of imperfect recall of past
information. We present a ﬁnite memory automaton (FMA)
designed to solve static and dynamic MAB problems. The
FMA demonstrates that an agent can learn a low regret strategy without knowing whether arm payoff probabilities are
static or dynamic and without having perfect recall of past
actions. Roughly speaking, the automaton works by maintaining a relative ranking of arms rather than estimating precise payoff probabilities.

Two-Armed Bernoulli Bandits
For simplicity, we restrict our analysis of the FMA’s performance to the class of two-armed Bernoulli bandit (TABB)
problems, where there are exactly two arms with probabilistic win-loss payoffs of {0, 1} following Bernoulli distributions. We consider static environments where the true payoff probabilities remain constant as well as dynamic environments with either small frequent changes to payoff probabilities or unbounded infrequent changes to payoff probabilities. Static TABB (Granmo 2008) and dynamic TABB
with small frequent changes (Gupta, Granmo, and Agrawala
2011) have been studied previously. We include TABB with
unbounded changes because these capture a distinct feature
of real world decision problems.

Finite Memory Automaton
We model a decision maker (DM) as a stochastic ﬁnite state
automaton where each state encodes discrete beliefs about
the payoff probabilities of the arms in the decision problem.
Formally, a DM for the TABB is a tuple DM =
(Ω, ω0 , a, t) where
• Ω = {1, ..., m}2 is the state space;
• ω0 ∈ Ω is the starting state;
• a : Ω → Δ({1, 2}) where a(ω) speciﬁes probabilistically
which arm the decision maker should play at state ω;

Motivation
Many approaches to solving bandit problems work by estimating payoff probabilities of the arms; -greedy strategies
sample all arms to get a rough estimate for each arm, upper
conﬁdence bound (UCB) strategies estimate a range that the
payoff probabilities are likely to lie within (Mayo-Wilson,
Zollman, and Danks 2012), and the Bayesian learning automaton (BLA) uses a beta distribution to estimate payoff

• t : Ω × {1, 2} × {0, 1} → Δ(Ω) where t(ω, i, s) determines the decision maker’s new state as updated by the
last signal s from arm i.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Starting State Prior beliefs the decision maker may have
can be captured in the initial rankings as the starting state.

State Space Each state ω = (r1 , r2 ) encodes beliefs about
the rankings of the two arms. ri represents the current rank
of arm i and is constrained by 1 ≤ ri ≤ m.

4981

