Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Sampling Based Approach for Proactive Project Scheduling
with Time-Dependent Duration Uncertainty
Wen Song, Donghun Kang, Jie Zhanga , Hui Xib
a

Rolls-Royce@NTU Corp Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
b
Rolls-Royce Singapore Pte Ltd, Singapore
{songwen, donghun.kang, a zhangj}@ntu.edu.sg, b hui.xi@rolls-royce.com

Problem Description

Abstract

A static Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling Problem
(RCPSP) consists of a project with a set of non-preemptive
activities A = {a1 , ..., an }, and a set of renewable resources
R = {r1 , ..., rm }. Each ai ∈ A has a duration of di time
slots (days), and requires bik amount of rk ∈ R with a limited capacity of ck units per time slot. A pair of activities
could have a precedence relation ai ≺ aj , indicating ai must
complete before the start of aj . A schedule S = [s1 , ..., sn ]
is a vector where si is the start time of ai . A feasible S must
satisfy all the resource and precedence constraints. A feasible schedule S ∗ is optimal if it minimizes the makespan
M S(S) = maxj {ci }, where ci = si + di is the completion
time of ai . When uncertainty is considered, duration of ai is
not ﬁxed but subject to the weather conditions of its scheduled interval [si , ci ]. Nevertheless, ai must obtain at least di
workable days in [si , ci ]. Here we associate each ai with a
type zi ∈ {1, ..., Z}, and different types of activities could
be affected differently by the same weather condition. Let pzt
be the Probability of Workability (POW) of day t for activity
type z. We assume the scheduling horizon {1, ..., T } is split
into a set of periods {E1 , ..., El }, where Eg = [eg , fg ] is a
consecutive time period (e.g. season, month, week) starts at
eg and ends at fg . We further assume for an activity type z,
all days in a period have the same POW.
In general, a proactive schedule S can be evaluated from
two aspects: quality and stability (Van de Vonder, Demeulemeester, and Herroelen 2007). Let S be the ﬁnal schedule after executing S in an actual scenario, and S∗ be the optimal
schedule assuming to have full knowledge of that scenario.
S is obtained with a reactive strategy to handle schedule disruptions (here we adopt the commonly used early start policy with ﬁxed resource allocation (Van de Vonder, Demeulemeester, and Herroelen 2007)), while S∗ can be obtained by
solving an ofﬂine problem (here we solve it using Integer
Linear Programming, ILP). The quality of S is evaluated using the makespan deviation of S from S∗ , i.e. dev(S) =
 − M S(S∗ ))/M S(S∗ ). The stability of S is evalu(M S(S)

ated using a stability cost function sc(S) = i |si − si |.

Most of the existing proactive scheduling approaches assume
the durations of activities can be described by independent
random variables that have no relation with time. We deal
with the more challenging problem where the duration uncertainty is related to the scheduled time period. We propose a
sampling based approach by extending the Consensus method
from stochastic optimization. Experimental results show the
effectiveness of our approach in solution quality and stability.

Introduction
Project scheduling is a common problem for business management. In most of the real-world environments, durations
of activities are highly uncertain. Though it is possible to
conduct online scheduling during execution, a proactive
schedule generated before execution by exploiting stochastic knowledge of the duration uncertainty is of great value
in providing visibility for coordination of the execution process (Van de Vonder, Demeulemeester, and Herroelen 2007).
Many approaches have been proposed for proactive project
scheduling, e.g. (Varakantham, Fu, and Lau 2016). These
approaches assume that activity durations can be modeled as
independent random variables that are not affected by their
scheduled time periods. However, this may not hold under
many circumstances. For example, suppose a product test
project involving a set of outdoor testing activities that are
sensitive to weather conditions (e.g. temperature, humidity,
wind speed). Due to seasonality, activity durations could be
affected differently based on their scheduled time periods.
In this work, we study the more challenging problem of
proactive project scheduling with time-dependent duration
uncertainty. Our approach is based on the Consensus method
(Hentenryck and Bent 2009) from stochastic optimization. It
ﬁrst samples a set of scenarios from the probability distributions, then solves these scenarios as deterministic problems,
and ﬁnally makes scheduling decisions according to a Consensus vote process. Different from its previous application
in online scheduling, here we adopt Consensus to construct
an ofﬂine schedule. After sampling scenarios, our approach
incrementally constructs the schedule through an iterative
solving and voting process.

Methodology

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The ﬁrst step of our approach is to sample a set of scenarios Q = {Q1 , ..., QN }. A scenario Q is a matrix [qzt ]Z×T ,

4985

