Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Treatment Effect Estimation with Data-Driven Variable Decomposition
Kun Kuang,1,2 Peng Cui,1,2 Bo Li,3 Meng Jiang,4 Shiqiang Yang,1,2 Fei Wang5
1

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
5
Department of Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical School, Cornell University
kk14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
mjiang89@illinois.edu, yangshq@tsinghua.edu.cn, feiwang03@gmail.com
2

Abstract
Automated
Variables
Decomposition

One fundamental problem in causal inference is the treatment
effect estimation in observational studies when variables are
confounded. Control for confounding effect is generally handled by propensity score. But it treats all observed variables
as confounders and ignores the adjustment variables, which
have no inﬂuence on treatment but are predictive of the outcome. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the adjustment
variables are effective in reducing the variance of estimated
treatment effect. However, how to automatically separate the
confounders and adjustment variables in observational studies is still an open problem, especially in the scenarios of high
dimensional variables, which are common in big data era. In
this paper, we propose a Data-Driven Variable Decomposition (D2 VD) algorithm, which can 1) automatically separate
confounders and adjustment variables with a data driven approach, and 2) simultaneously estimate treatment effect in
observational studies with high dimensional variables. Under standard assumptions, we show experimentally that our
D2 VD algorithm can automatically separate the variables precisely, and estimate treatment effect more accurately and with
tighter conﬁdence intervals than the state-of-the-art methods
on both synthetic data and real online advertising dataset.

Variables

ܷ

Adjustment
Variables

Confounders

ܺ

ܼ

Treatment

ܶ

Outcome
Treatment Effect
Estimation

ܻ

Figure 1: Our causal diagram. We separate all observed variables U into three different sets: (1) Confounders X, which
are associated with the treatment T and may be causally related to the outcome Y , (2) Adjustment Variables Z, which
are causally related to outcome Y , but independent with
treatment T , and (3) Irrelevant Variables I (Omitted), which
are independent with both treatment and outcome.

Introduction
on propensity score adjustment. Such framework has been
widely used in observational causal study, including matching, stratiﬁcation, inverse weighting and regression on
propensity score (Austin 2011; Lunceford and Davidian
2004; Kuang et al. 2016). The inverse propensity weighting is a most commonly used method and has been part
of a large family of causal models known as marginal
structural model (Hernán, Brumback, and Robins 2000;
2002). With combination of inverse propensity weighting
and regression, (Bang and Robins 2005) proposed a doubly
robust estimator. These methods have been widely used in
various ﬁelds, including economics (Stuart 2010), epidemiology (Funk et al. 2011), health care (Reis et al. 2015), social
science (Lechner 1999) and advertising (Sun et al. 2015).
The essence of these methods is to eliminate the confounding impact of confounders so that the precision of
treatment effect estimation can be signiﬁcantly improved.
However, most of these works treat all observed variables
as confounders when estimating propensity score. Eventu-

Causal inference, which refers to the process of drawing
a conclusion about a causal connection based on the conditions of the occurrence of an effect (Holland 1986), is
a powerful statistical modeling tool for explanatory analysis. The gold standard approaches for causal inference are
randomized experiments, for example, A/B testing (Lewis
and Reiley 2009), where different treatments are randomly
assigned to units 1 . However, the fully randomized experiments are usually extremely expensive (Kohavi and Longbotham 2011) or sometimes even infeasible (Bottou et al.
2013) in many scenarios. Hence it is highly demanding to
develop automatic statistical approaches to infer treatment
effect in observational studies.
In literature, (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) proposed a
statistical framework for treatment effect estimation based
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Units represent the objects of treatment. For example, in online
advertising campaign, the units refer to the users in the campaign.

140

