Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast Compressive Phase Retrieval under Bounded Noise
Hongyang Zhang,∗1 Shan You,∗2,3 Zhouchen Lin,†2,3 Chao Xu2,3
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, U.S.A.
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, P. R. China
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, P. R. China
hongyanz@cs.cmu.edu, youshan@pku.edu.cn, zlin@pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

2

Abstract
We study the problem of recovering a t-sparse vector ±x0
in Rn from m quadratic equations yi = (aTi x)2 with noisy
measurements yi ’s. This is known as the problem of compressive phase retrieval, and has been widely applied to Xray diffraction imaging, microscopy, quantum mechanics, etc.
The challenge is to design a a) fast and b) noise-tolerant algorithms with c) near-optimal sample complexity. Prior work
in this direction typically achieved one or two of these goals,
but none of them enjoyed the three performance guarantees
simultaneously. In this work, with a particular set of sensing vectors ai ’s, we give a provable algorithm that is robust to any bounded yet unstructured deterministic noise. Our
algorithm requires roughly O(t) measurements and runs in
O(tn log(1/)) time, where  is the error. This result advances the state-of-the-art work, and guarantees the applicability of our method to large datasets. Experiments on synthetic and real data verify our theory.

(a) real scene

(b) recovered image

Figure 1: Recovery results of our algorithm in the framework
of compressive phase retrieval, where the high-resolution
real image contains a crescent Uranus taken by Voyager.
One long-standing challenge is designing fast algorithms
with near-optimal sample complexity. If there is no speed requirement, the recovery problem can be solved easily by dimension lifting approach, whose basic idea is to convert the
problem of recovering a sparse signal ±x ∈ Rn to the problem of recovering a rank-one matrix xxT ∈ Rn×n by implementing nuclear norm minimization (Candès, Strohmer,
and Voroninski 2013) or matrix completion (Candès, Li, and
Soltanolkotabi 2015; Zhang, Lin, and Zhang 2016; Zhang
et al. 2015b). While this method enjoys intriguing performance guarantee with near-optimal sample complexity, the
computational cost is large (Bahmani and Romberg 2015).
This deﬁnitely limits its applicability to large datasets.
When the measurements are noisy, the problem becomes
even more challenging. Prior work in this direction mostly
assumed certain statistical structures on the noise model,
e.g., the noise is subject to Poisson distribution, and maximized the likelihood function corresponding to the structure. However, when no assumption is made on the nature of
noise, the likelihood functions are unavailable and so these
approaches do not work. In this paper, with a particular set of
sensing vectors, we propose a provable algorithm that is fast,
noise-tolerant, and performs well with near-optimal sample
complexity.

Introduction
Phase retrieval is a new research topic in machine learning, signal processing, and statistics. In machine learning
and signal processing, the goal of phase retrieval is to recover a hidden signal +x or −x from a quadratic system
m
{yi = (aTi x)2 }m
i=1 with known sensing vectors {ai }i=1 and
m
measurements {yi }i=1 . In statistics, the x indicates a set of
parameters remaining estimated for some probability distribution. The problem becomes more challenging when the
signal, or the unknown parameter vector x, is t-sparse and
only m = Õ(t)1 equations are available. This is known as
the problem of compressive phase retrieval, and has been
widely applied to X-ray diffraction imaging (Schniter and
Rangan 2015), microscopy (Miao et al. 2008), quantum mechanics (Corbett 2006), and many other domains. See Figure
1 for an application of compressive phase retrieval in image
sensing and restoration.
Despite a large amount of work on compressive phase
retrieval, many fundamental problems remain unresolved.
∗

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We denote by Õ(·) the simplicity of O(·) that omits the logarithm factor.
†

Related Work
Lots of literatures have investigated the problem of general (a.k.a. non-sparse) phase retrieval (PR) in recent years.

2884

