Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Handwriting Proﬁling Using Generative Adversarial Networks
Arna Ghosh,∗ Biswarup Bhattacharya,∗ Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury∗
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
{arnaghosh, biswarup}@iitkgp.ac.in, brcsomnath@ee.iitkgp.ernet.in

system for the speciﬁc handwriting technique. This acts as
an added beneﬁt as we can use the discriminator to provide
feedback to the generator while developing words from individual alphabets regarding the desired style. Once again, we
believe it is closely linked to the way the human brain works
in daily life. With every word we write, we tend to adjust
our writing style to correct any difference from the reference
- our desired style of writing. Therefore, we expect the algorithm to provide human-like results. Extending this idea,
similar networks can be trained to learn other complicated
tasks which require practice, like playing a sport, generating
music etc. The implementation details and the network speciﬁcations along with experiments performed are laid out in
the further sections.

Abstract
Handwriting is a skill learned by humans from a very early
age. The ability to develop one’s own unique handwriting as
well as mimic another person’s handwriting is a task learned
by the brain with practice. This paper deals with this very
problem where an intelligent system tries to learn the handwriting of an entity using Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). We propose a modiﬁed architecture of DCGAN
(Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015) to achieve this. We also
discuss about applying reinforcement learning techniques to
achieve faster learning. Our algorithm hopes to give new insights in this area and its uses include identiﬁcation of forged
documents, signature veriﬁcation, computer generated art,
digitization of documents among others. Our early implementation of the algorithm illustrates a good performance with
MNIST datasets.

Architecture
Introduction

We have used the popular architecture of a stable deep convolutional generative adversarial network (DCGAN) (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015). The initial layers of the DCGAN consist of a convolutional network which performs
strided convolution, replacing the spatial sampling in conventional CNNs. This aids the generator depicted in Figure
1 to learn its own upsampling. The same convolutional layers are also present in the discriminator in reverse order. The
fully connected layers are absent in DCGAN. The features
extracted from the highest convolutional layer form the input of the generator and output of the discriminator. In order
to stabilize the learning process, batch normalization is applied to the discriminator input. Batch normalization is used
for normalizing the input to have a zero mean and unit variance.

Developing a style of handwriting is a relatively complex
task for human beings. It is learned from a very young age
and is mastered with practice. In fact, the skill to mimic
one’s own handwriting is not infallible. A person’s style
of writing has slight variations depending upon the conditions. Therefore, we believe that using Generative Adversarial Networks to artiﬁcially synthesize a style of handwriting
could offer a better solution to achieve human-like writing.
Present state of handwriting recognition is done using recurrent neural networks (Graves et al. 2008). We present a more
biologically inspired outlook.
We aim to provide the network a training environment
similar to that of humans. We provide the dataset consisting of alphabets (A-Z and a-z) to the generator network to be
able to learn to generate individual alphabets. With a reasonably well-trained generator, we use the generator to generate
basic words. The initial words generated would be spaced
letters, which is what we desire as it is similar to the human
behavior. We aim to improve upon the generation of words
using the technique of reinforcement learning. The generator learns to generate words looking similar to the reference
word provided. Also, we realize that the discriminator network can be used as an OCR (optical character recognition)
∗

Equal Contribution
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: Generator Network

4927

