Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

FeaBoost: Joint Feature and Label Reﬁnement for Semantic Segmentation
Yulei Niu,1 Zhiwu Lu,1∗ Songfang Huang,2 Xin Gao,3 Ji-Rong Wen1
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods,
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
2
IBM China Research Lab, Beijing, China
3
Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division,
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Jeddah 23955, Saudi Arabia
nyl92@163.com, zhiwu.lu@gmail.com
Abstract
We propose a novel approach, called FeaBoost, to image semantic segmentation with only image-level labels taken as
weakly-supervised constraints. Our approach is motivated
from two evidences: 1) each superpixel can be represented
as a linear combination of basic components (e.g., predeﬁned
classes); 2) visually similar superpixels have high probability
to share the same set of labels, i.e., they tend to have common combination of predeﬁned classes. By taking these two
evidences into consideration, semantic segmentation is formulated as joint feature and label reﬁnement over superpixels. Furthermore, we develop an efﬁcient FeaBoost algorithm
to solve such optimization problem. Extensive experiments
on the MSRC and LabelMe datasets demonstrate the superior
performance of our FeaBoost approach in comparison with
the state-of-the-art methods, especially when noisy labels are
provided for semantic segmentation.

Figure 1: Top Left: original image, top right: ground truth,
bottom left: oversegmented superpixels, bottom right: the result of semantic segmentation.

Introduction
Image semantic segmentation (Arbelaez et al. 2012; Carreira et al. 2012) is one of the most fundamental challenges
in computer version. This task consists of two parts, image
segmentation and superpixel annotation (see Figure 1), that
is, grouping pixels into superpixels and then assigning each
superpixel to one of the predeﬁned classes. In fact, the solutions of these two subproblem can boost each other. On one
hand, we can extract the features of superpixels and train
a classiﬁer to predict superpixel-level labels. On the other
hand, the segmentation results can be upgraded using the
results of superpixel annotation, since superpixels with the
same label can be assembled into a complete region.
Recently, some methods have shown promising results in
image semantic segmentation (Shotton et al. 2006; Yang,
Meer, and Foran 2007; Kohli, Torr, and others 2009; Russell et al. 2009; Ladicky et al. 2010; Lucchi et al. 2012;
Tighe and Lazebnik 2010; Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015; George 2015). Most of these works concentrate on the
fully supervised setting, where each pixel in the training images need to be annotated in advance. However, it is hard to
widely apply fully supervised methods in real-world applications because collecting pixel-level labels costs enormous

time and labour. For this reason, recent works start to focus
on the weakly supervised setting, where only image-level
labels are available for training (Verbeek and Triggs 2007;
Vezhnevets and Buhmann 2010; Vezhnevets, Ferrari, and
Buhmann 2011; 2012; Liu et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2013).
Since lots of users share their photos with tags on social
websites (e.g., Flickr), collecting plenty of images along
with image-level labels can be made automatic for weakly
supervised methods.
Although extracting weak supervision form social images
is less time-consuming, image-level labels provided by social users may be incorrect or incomplete (Tang et al. 2009).
Hence, semantic segmentation with noisy labels becomes
challenging, which has been rarely considered by most of
weakly supervised methods. Some latest works (Li et al.
2015; Niu et al. 2015) start to focus on this challenging problem and achieve promising results. Although we also focus
on semantic segmentation with noisy labels, our later experimental results show that our approach obviously outperforms (Li et al. 2015; Niu et al. 2015).
In this paper, we focus on proposing a novel framework
for semantic segmentation, which is motivated from two evidences. Firstly, each superpixel can be represented as a lin-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1474

