Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Heterogeneous Dictionary Pair with Feature Projection
Matrix for Pedestrian Video Retrieval via Single Query Image
Xiaoke Zhu,1,6 Xiao-Yuan Jing,∗,1,2 Fei Wu,2 Yunhong Wang,3 Wangmeng Zuo,4 Wei-Shi Zheng5
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Engineering, School of Computer, Wuhan University, China
2
College of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
5
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
6
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Henan University, China. ∗ Corresponding author.
Abstract

Pedestrian videos

Query image

Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) plays an important role in
video surveillance and forensics applications. In many cases,
person re-id needs to be conducted between image and video
clip, e.g., re-identifying a suspect from large quantities of
pedestrian videos given a single image of him. We call reid in this scenario as image to video person re-id (IVPR). In
practice, image and video are usually represented with different features, and there usually exist large variations between
frames within each video. These factors make matching between image and video become a very challenging task. In
this paper, we propose a joint feature projection matrix and
heterogeneous dictionary pair learning (PHDL) approach for
IVPR. Speciﬁcally, PHDL jointly learns an intra-video projection matrix and a pair of heterogeneous image and video
dictionaries. With the learned projection matrix, the inﬂuence
of variations within each video to the matching can be reduced. With the learned dictionary pair, the heterogeneous
image and video features can be transformed into coding coefﬁcients with the same dimension, such that the matching
can be conducted using coding coefﬁcients. Furthermore, to
ensure that the obtained coding coefﬁcients have favorable
discriminability, PHDL designs a point-to-set coefﬁcient discriminant term. Experiments on the public iLIDS-VID and
PRID 2011 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

How to
match ?

The features of image and video
are heterogeneous.
Feature of a walking cycle

Image feature

Video feature

Figure 1: Problem of image to video person re-id.

be roughly divided into two categories: image-based and
video-based person re-id methods. The former focuses on
the matching between image and image, and most of existing methods belong to this category (Ma, Yuen, and Li 2013;
Liu et al. 2013; Qiu, Ni, and Chellappa 2014; Ahmed,
Jones, and Marks 2015; Chen et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2014;
Jing et al. 2015; Li, Shao, and Fu 2015; Zheng et al. 2015a;
Karanam, Li, and Radke 2015). Different from image-based
methods, video-based person re-id methods focus on the
matching between video and video (Wang et al. 2014; 2016;
Liu et al. 2015; Zhu et al. 2016; McLaughlin, Martinez del
Rincon, and Miller 2016; You et al. 2016). In both kinds of
methods, the two objects to be matched are homogeneous.
In many practical cases, person re-id needs to be conducted between image and video. One instance is rapid locating and tracking suspects from masses of city surveillance videos according to an image of the criminal suspect
(e.g., Boston marathon bombings event). Another instance
is that, an old man who suffers from Alzheimer’s disease
lost his way in the city, given an image of the old man, the
re-id system should retrieve the surveillance video clips containing him. We call re-identiﬁcation under this scenario as
image to video person re-id (IVPR). Figure 1 illustrates the
problem of IVPR.
In IVPR, there exist two aspects of difﬁculties: (1) Image
and video are usually represented with different features. In
particular, both the visual appearance features and spatialtemporal features can be extracted from a pedestrian video,
while only visual appearance features can be extracted from

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) (Li et al. 2014; Zheng et
al. 2015c; Li et al. 2015; Tao et al. 2013; Zhang et al.
2015) has been widely studied in computer vision and
pattern recognition communities due to its importance in
many safety-critical applications, such as automated video
surveillance and forensics. Given an image/video of a person captured from one camera, person re-id is the process of identifying the person from images/videos taken
from a different camera (Zheng, Gong, and Xiang 2015;
Ma, Yang, and Tao 2014; Zheng et al. 2015b; Su et al. 2015;
Shi, Hospedales, and Xiang 2015). According to the scenarios of re-identiﬁcation, existing person re-id works can
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4341

