Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Combining Satellite Imagery and Open Data to Map Road Safety
Alameen Najjar, Shun’ichi Kaneko, Yoshikazu Miyanaga
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Hokkaido University, Japan
najjar@hce.ist.hokudai.ac.jp, {kaneko, miya}@ist.hokudai.ac.jp

Abstract
Improving road safety is critical for the sustainable development of cities. A road safety map is a powerful tool that can
help prevent future trafﬁc accidents. However, accurate mapping requires accurate data collection, which is both expensive and labor intensive. Satellite imagery is increasingly becoming abundant, higher in resolution and affordable. Given
the recent successes deep learning has achieved in the visual
recognition ﬁeld, we are interested in investigating whether
it is possible to use deep learning to accurately predict road
safety directly from raw satellite imagery. To this end, we
propose a deep learning-based mapping approach that leverages open data to learn from raw satellite imagery robust deep
models able to predict accurate city-scale road safety maps at
an affordable cost. To empirically validate the proposed approach, we trained a deep model on satellite images obtained
from over 647 thousand trafﬁc-accident reports collected over
a period of four years by the New York city Police Department. The best model predicted road safety from raw satellite imagery with an accuracy of 78%. We also used the New
York city model to predict for the city of Denver a city-scale
map indicating road safety in three levels. Compared to a map
made from three years’ worth of data collected by the Denver
city Police Department, the map predicted from raw satellite
imagery has an accuracy of 73%.

Figure 1: City-scale road safety mapping from satellite imagery via deep learning.

Introduction
In a recent report (World Health Organization 2015), the
World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that road
trafﬁc accidents are the number one cause of mortality
among people aged between 15 and 29 years, killing more
than 1.2 million people worldwide each year. Most of road
deaths are in low- and middle-income countries where infrastructure development and policy change have not kept
pace with the increase in motorization accompanying the
rapid economic growth. Poor road safety causes developing
countries an approximate economic loss of 3% of GDP making it not only a major public health issue but also a developmental one. In the face of this grim reality, the world’s nations have recently adopted the 2030 agenda of Sustainable
Development which sets the goal of cutting road injuries and
deaths in half by 2020 (United Nations 2015).

Mapping trafﬁc accidents is an established practice used
to gain insights on where and what interventions are needed
to improve road safety (Miaou, Song, and Mallick 2003). A
map made from manually collected reports of previous accidents visualizes where within the city road safety suffers.
Maintaining and improving infrastructure around these spots
helps prevent future trafﬁc accidents.
However, accurate mapping requires accurate data collection, which is both expensive and labor intensive. While
high-income countries are ﬂooded with data, most low- and
middle-income countries suffer from a data drought (Leidig, Teeuw, and Gibson 2016). The reason is that accurate
data collection requires transparency, technology, skills and
other resources extremely scarce in these parts of the world.
Therefore, an automatic approach to road safety mapping
that does not require data collection is highly needed.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4524

