Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Coordinating Human and Agent Behavior in Collective-Risk Scenarios
Elias Fernández Domingos,1,2,3 Juan Carlos Burguillo,3 Ann Nowé,1 and Tom Lenaerts1,2
1

AI lab, Computer Science Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
2
MLG, Département d’Informatique, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Boulevard du Triomphe CP212, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
3
Department of Telematic Engineering. University of Vigo. 36310-Vigo, Spain
Corresponding: eliferna@vub.ac.be and tlenaert@ulb.ac.be

mental disaster is perceived to be low, individuals, or countries in this case, will be more likely to act to maximize their
welfare over that of the collective. Only in high-risk situations will they be persuaded to make sufﬁcient investments
to ensure that the disaster is avoided. This situation has been
operationalized in game theory as the collective risk game
(Milinski et al. 2008). In this game participants are each
given an endowment and they need to decide whether to
contribute or not, up to a predeﬁned amount, to the common
good for a ﬁxed number of rounds. If the joint contributions
of all the participants over those rounds is above a certain
threshold, which is achieved when everyone gives half or
more of the predeﬁned amount, then the disaster is adverted
and they receive as a reward the remainder of the endowment
(hence the dilemma). Yet, when the target is not reached the
disaster can occur (meaning that they lose the remainder of
the endowment) with a certain probability, which is deﬁned
by a risk parameter. The experiments show that people only
tend to contribute to avoid the disaster if they perceive the
risk to be high (Milinski et al. 2008).
Peer-to-peer energy markets or cloud-computing architectures are technology related examples of such collectiverisk scenarios, with less disastrous outcomes. In those situations, it would be a tragedy when the energy-market fails to
achieve the beneﬁts of cooperation, leading to its demise, or
the loss/over-consumption of computing-resources leads to a
period of unavailability for the many users of the system. In
addition, in complex societies deﬁned by autonomous multiagent systems, where non-human agents need to deal with
uncertain situations, similar problems can arise, as was discussed before (Artikis and Pitt 2001).
In order to guide both humans and agents in the previous
examples towards an outcome beneﬁcial for the collective,
we need to have a clear understanding of the mechanisms
that deﬁne individual behavior at the micro-level, and how
these behaviors may aggregate into the dynamics one can
observe at the macroscopic level. To achieve this goal, we
can either focus on performing data analysis, when sufﬁcient quantities of information are publicly available, or we
can construct theoretical models that can be veriﬁed and improved through behavioral experiments. Data analysis in itself is limited in providing causal dynamic insights without
having a model that can show that the knowledge extracted
from the data can indeed lead to the observed macroscopic

Abstract
Various social situations entail a collective risk. A wellknown example is climate change, wherein the risk of a future environmental disaster clashes with the immediate economic interest of developed and developing countries. The
collective-risk game operationalizes this kind of situations.
The decision process of the participants is determined by how
good they are in evaluating the probability of future risk as
well as their ability to anticipate the actions of the opponents.
Anticipatory behavior contrasts with the reactive theories often used to analyze social dilemmas. Our initial work can already show that anticipative agents are a better model to human behavior than reactive ones. All the agents we studied
used a recurrent neural network, however, only the ones that
used it to predict future outcomes (anticipative agents) were
able to account for changes in the context of games, a behavior also observed in experiments with humans. This extended
abstract aims to explain how we wish to investigate anticipation within the context of the collective-risk game and the
relevance these results may have for the ﬁeld of hybrid sociotechnical systems.

Many real situations, wherein humans interact among themselves or through technologies in hybrid socio-technical systems (Hamann et al. 2016), resemble social dilemmas. In
particular, scenarios in which individuals have to decide between short-term personal proﬁts and long-term social beneﬁts are determined by the risk that this future collective gain
entails. Therefore, the behavioral outcome in those dilemmas is very much dependent on how successful the participants are in calculating the risk associated to the uncertainty
of future rewards and on anticipating the opponents’ choices
(Pezzulo et al. 2008).
Take for instance the question of climate change. Alleviating (or even reverting) this severe phenomenon requires
the cooperation of several countries with different ideologies, customs, and economical perspectives for their industries, which are in many cases still very dependent on fossil
energy. Measures that need to be taken will have a high impact on industrialized countries as well as the so-called new
economies. However, if the transition to renewable sources
of energy keeps being postponed, the consequences are most
certainly terrible. As long as the risk of a climate or environc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4919

