Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Algorithms for Max-Min Share Fair Allocation of Indivisible Chores
Haris Aziz

Gerhard Rauchecker

Data61 and UNSW
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
haris.aziz@data61.csiro.au

University of Regensburg
93053 Regensburg, Germany
gerhard.rauchecker@ur.de

Guido Schryen

Toby Walsh

University of Regensburg
93053 Regensburg, Germany
guido.schryen@ur.de

UNSW, Data61 and TU Berlin
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
toby.walsh@data61.csiro.au
In order to identify fair allocations, one needs to formalize
what fairness means. A compelling fairness concept called
Max-min Share (MmS) was recently introduced which holds
more often than traditional fairness concepts such as envyfreeness and proportionality (Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre 2016;
Budish 2011). An agent’s MmS is the “most preferred bundle he could guarantee himself as a divider in divide-andchoose against adversarial opponents” (Budish 2011). The
main idea is that an agent partitions the items into N sets
in a way that maximizes the utility of the least preferred
set in the partition. The utility of the least preferred set is
called the MmS guarantee of the agent. An allocation satisﬁes MmS fairness if each agent gets at least as much utility
as her MmS guarantee. We refer to such an allocation as
MmS allocation.1
Although MmS is a highly attractive fairness concept and a natural relaxation of proportionality and envyfreeness (Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre 2016), Procaccia and
Wang (2014) showed that an MmS allocation of goods does
not exist in general. This fact initiated research on approximate MmS allocations of goods in which each agent gets
some fraction of her MmS guarantee. On the positive side,
MmS allocations of goods often exist (Kurokawa, Procaccia,
and Wang 2016) and there also exists a polynomial-time algorithm that returns 2/3-approximate MmS allocations (Procaccia and Wang 2014; Amanatidis et al. 2015). Algorithms
for computing approximate MmS allocations of goods are
being used in practice for fair division in real-world problems (Goldman and Procaccia 2014).
In this paper, we turn to MmS allocations of chores, a
subject which has not been studied previously. Even in
the more general domain of fair allocation, there has been
less research on chore allocation compared to goods despite there being many settings where we have chores but
not goods (Brams and Taylor 1996). However, the problem
of allocation of chores cannot in general be simply transformed into a problem of allocation of goods (Caragiannis
et al. 2012). The difference in the two settings can also
be judged from the fact that for divisible goods, utilities

Abstract
We consider Max-min Share (MmS) fair allocations of indivisible chores (items with negative utilities). We show that
allocation of chores and classical allocation of goods (items
with positive utilities) have some fundamental connections
but also differences which prevent a straightforward application of algorithms for goods in the chores setting and viceversa. We prove that an MmS allocation does not need to
exist for chores and computing an MmS allocation - if it exists - is strongly NP-hard. In view of these non-existence
and complexity results, we present a polynomial-time 2approximation algorithm for MmS fairness for chores. We
then introduce a new fairness concept called optimal MmS
that represents the best possible allocation in terms of MmS
that is guaranteed to exist. We use connections to parallel
machine scheduling to give (1) a polynomial-time approximation scheme for computing an optimal MmS allocation
when the number of agents is ﬁxed and (2) an effective and
efﬁcient heuristic with an ex-post worst-case analysis.

Introduction
Fair allocation of indivisible items is a central problem in
economics, computer science, and operations research (Aziz
et al. 2015; Brams and Taylor 1996; Bouveret, Chevaleyre,
and Maudet 2015; Lipton et al. 2004). We focus on the setting in which we have a set of N agents and a set of items
with each agent expressing utilities over the items. The goal
is to allocate the items among the agents in a fair manner
without allowing transfer of money. If all agents have positive utilities for the items, we can view the items as goods.
On the other hand, if all agents have negative utilities for
the items, we can view the items as chores. In this paper
we focus on fair allocation of indivisible chores. Although
multi-agent resource allocation has been extensively studied, mostly the resources considered are goods, i.e., they
yield positive utility. On the other hand, several important
problems require the items to be allocated to yield negative
utility. This is particularly so when the items in question are
project tasks, house-hold chores, or climate change actions
to be handled by different countries.

1

Bouveret and Lemaı̂tre (2016) and Budish (2011) also formalized a fairness concept called min-Max fairness that is stronger than
Max-min fairness.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

335

