Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Anytime Best+Depth-First Search for Bounding Marginal MAP
Radu Marinescu

Junkyu Lee, Alexander Ihler, Rina Dechter

IBM Research – Ireland
tradu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
{junkyul,ihler,dechter}@ics.uci.edu

Current state-of-the-art schemes focus on solvers that are
based on either depth-ﬁrst or best-ﬁrst search over AND/OR
search spaces (Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2014; 2015;
Lee et al. 2016) and were shown to dominate the earlier
generation of search-based MMAP algorithms (Park and
Darwiche 2003; Yuan and Hansen 2009). Since the problem
is inherently hard, recent focus has been on anytime schemes
that can hopefully ﬁnd a suboptimal solution quickly and
then improve it if more time/memory is available.
Our focus here is on advancing anytime schemes so that
they will produce, not only a solution, but also an upper and
a lower bound on the optimal MMAP value that get tighter
when provided more time. The idea is that the depth-ﬁrst
branch and bound scheme is inherently anytime and provides
a lower bound on the optimal solution. Best-ﬁrst schemes, on
the other hand, can be viewed as anytime methods for generating an upper bound. Therefore, a hybrid of best+depth-ﬁrst
search can facilitate both. In addition, depth-ﬁrst search is
memory efﬁcient, while best-ﬁrst is memory expensive but
has superior performance, therefore a best+depth hybrid may
yield a cost-effective tradeoff between time, memory and
accuracy, improving with more time.
One of the most effective anytime MMAP search schemes
to date, which we will compare against, is based on the
well known idea of weighted-heuristic in best-ﬁrst search
(Pohl 1970), which transforms best-ﬁrst search into an anytime scheme. This class of best-ﬁrst search algorithms
were shown to be particularly attractive for MMAP (because it minimizes the number of conditional summations
during search), yielding an algorithm called WRBFAOO
(Lee et al. 2016). Most signiﬁcantly, they yield a bound
on the solution accuracy using the weight value. Another, successful anytime AND/OR depth-ﬁrst search scheme
which was shown to particularly handle memory effectively for MMAP is BRAOBB (Otten and Dechter 2011;
Lee et al. 2016), against which we will also compare. The
only other competing approach to anytime MMAP that produces both upper and lower bounds is the factor set elimination introduced recently by (Maua and Campos 2012).

Abstract
We introduce new anytime search algorithms that combine
best-ﬁrst with depth-ﬁrst search into hybrid schemes for
Marginal MAP inference in graphical models. The main goal
is to facilitate the generation of upper bounds (via the bestﬁrst part) alongside the lower bounds of solutions (via the
depth-ﬁrst part) in an anytime fashion. We compare against
two of the best current state-of-the-art schemes and show
that our best+depth search scheme produces higher quality
solutions faster while also producing a bound on their accuracy, which can be used to measure solution quality during
search. An extensive empirical evaluation demonstrates the
effectiveness of our new methods which enjoy the strength
of best-ﬁrst (optimality of search) and of depth-ﬁrst (memory
robustness), leading to solutions for difﬁcult instances where
previous solvers were unable to ﬁnd even a single solution.

Introduction
Graphical models provide a powerful framework for reasoning about conditional dependency structures over many
variables. The Maximum a Posteriori Probability (MAP)
query over probabilistic graphical models, asks for the mode
of the joint probability distribution, while the Marginal MAP
(MMAP) generalizes MAP by allowing a subset of the variables to be marginalized. MMAP is known to be notoriously challenging, having complexity NPPP -complete (Park
2002). MMAP distinguishes between maximization variables (called MAP variables) and summation variables, and
it is more difﬁcult than either max- or sum- inference tasks
alone primarily because summation and maximization operations do not commute, forcing processing along constrained
variable orderings that may have signiﬁcantly higher induced widths (Dechter 1999; 2013). This implies larger
search spaces (when using search algorithms) or larger messages (when using message-passing schemes). In particular,
MMAP can be NP-hard even on tree structured graphs (Park
2002). Still, MMAP is often the appropriate task where there
exist hidden variables or uncertain parameters. It can be
also treated as a special case of the more complicated frameworks of decision networks (Howard and Matheson 2005;
Liu and Ihler 2013).

Contribution In this paper we will present several
best+depth-ﬁrst search hybrids for MMAP and show that
they can be more competitive against the current state-ofthe-art in yielding both superior anytime performance and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3775

