Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Hindsight Optimization for Hybrid State and Action MDPs
Aswin Raghavan,1 Scott Sanner,2 Roni Khardon,3 Prasad Tadepalli,1 Alan Fern1

1

School of EECS, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. {nadamuna,tadepall,afern}@eecs.orst.edu
2
Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca
3
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA. roni@cs.tufts.edu

2005; Sanner, Delgado, and de Barros 2011; Zamani et al.
2012) and phase-type transition approximations (Marecki,
Koenig, and Tambe 2007). Later work introduced realtime dynamic programming extensions yielding more compact value functions (Meuleau et al. 2009; Vianna, De Barros, and Sanner 2015). Sample average approximations
(SAA) (Kleywegt, Shapiro, and Homem-de Mello 2002) of
dynamic programming can be used for value approximation in an initial state (Mercier and Van Hentenryck 2008).
Unfortunately, all these dynamic programming approaches
for HSA-MDPs are either too restrictive or computationally
intractable for the state-action dependent stochastic, 100dimensional hybrid state, 50-dimensional hybrid action, and
moderate horizon domains we experiment with in this paper.
A different line of research directly optimizes a restricted
class of value functions or policies. For value approximation, such methods are exempliﬁed by Hybrid Approximate Linear Programming (HALP) (Kveton, Hauskrecht,
and Guestrin 2006), which sought to approximate expressive HSA-MDP value functions via a weighted basis function representation. On the policy approximation side, approaches like Pegasus (Ng and Jordan 2000) sought to optimize restricted parameterized policy classes subject to trajectories sampled in an SAA setting. All of these methods
assume a priori knowledge of a good value or policy representation, which is typically difﬁcult to have in advance.
In this work, we explore a qualitatively different approach
to solving a wide class of HSA-MDPs that does not require
domain-speciﬁc assumptions on the value function or policy representation. Our approach is based on developing the
framework of hindsight optimization (HOP) (Chang, Givan,
and Chong 2000; Chong, Givan, and Chang 2000) for HSAMDPs. HOP provides an upper bound on the ﬁnite-horizon
action values in the current state, which can be used for action selection. But the challenge is to compute this bound
efﬁciently.
In particular our contributions are as follows: (i) We develop a generic linear space and time compilation of an expressive fragment of the RDDL (Sanner 2010) HSA-MDP
representation to a mixed integer linear program (MILP).
This compilation is augmented with action constraints to
yield different algorithmic variations. (ii) Our main contribution is the hindsight optimization variant. This generalizes
previous work on HOP (Issakkimuthu et al. 2015) to handle

Abstract
Hybrid (mixed discrete and continuous) state and action
Markov Decision Processes (HSA-MDPs) provide an expressive formalism for modeling stochastic and concurrent
sequential decision-making problems. Existing solvers for
HSA-MDPs are either limited to very restricted transition
distributions, require knowledge of domain-speciﬁc basis
functions to achieve good approximations, or do not scale.
We explore a domain-independent approach based on the
framework of hindsight optimization (HOP) for HSA-MDPs,
which uses an upper bound on the ﬁnite-horizon action values for action selection. Our main contribution is a linear
time reduction to a Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP)
that encodes the HOP objective, when the dynamics are speciﬁed as location-scale probability distributions parametrized
by Piecewise Linear (PWL) functions of states and actions.
In addition, we show how to use the same machinery to select actions based on a lower-bound generated by straight line
plans. Our empirical results show that the HSA-HOP approach effectively scales to high-dimensional problems and
outperforms baselines that are capable of scaling to such large
hybrid MDPs.

Introduction and Related Work
Many real-world decision-theoretic planning problems are
naturally modeled using concurrent, hybrid (discrete and
continuous) state and action (HSA) MDPs. Examples include reservoir control under rainfall uncertainty (Reyes et
al. 2015) and the unit commitment problem of power generation subject to demand uncertainty (Nikovski and Zhang
2010). Existing approaches to solving expressive HSAMDPs largely fall into two categories: dynamic programming for special restricted classes of HSA-MDPs, and approximate optimization of restricted value function or policy representations. Unfortunately, each category has critical limitations discussed next.
For the case of exact or bounded approximate solutions,
numerous (symbolic) dynamic programming approaches
have been proposed for restricted classes of HSA-MDPs
ranging from the univariate continuous state setting for timedependent MDPs (Boyan and Littman 2001) to piecewise
value representations (Feng et al. 2004; Li and Littman
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3790

