Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Human-Like Spatial Reasoning Formalisms
Przemysław Andrzej Wał˛ega
Institute of Philosophy, University of Warsaw, Poland

Introduction
My work on the PhD thesis concerns human-like reasoning about relations between spatial objects and the way
they change in time. In particular, my research is focused
on logic-based reasoning systems that model human spatial
reasoning methods and may enable better understanding of
humans reasoning mechanisms in future. Importantly, such
formalisms are also interested from the practical point of
view – they have a number of potential applications, e.g.,
in robotics, architecture design, databases, among others.
The work I have accomplished so far consists of two parts.
The ﬁrst part amounts to constructing ASPMT(QS) – a general framework for spatial reasoning within the paradigm of
Answer Set Programming Modulo Theories. ASPMT(QS)
constitutes the only existing spatial reasoning system capable of supporting the key non-monotonic spatial reasoning
features (e.g., spatial inertia, ramiﬁcation) in the context of
ASP, and integrating geometrical and qualitative spatial information. As a result, our system enables conterfactual reasoning, explanation and diagnosis, as well as belief revision
about spatial objects and their change in time. The later part
consists of constructing HS2,@,i
horn – a hybrid version of a Horn
fragment of the well-known Halpern-Shoham (HS in short)
logic which is a logic for reasoning about relations between
intervals (Halpern and Shoham 1991). HS2,@,i
horn logic provides referentiality (see the next part of this abstract), which
is a crucial construct in knowledge representation but not
available in sub-propositional HS fragments investigated in
the literature (Bresolin et al. 2016). My main complexity result is that HS2,@,i
horn is decidable (NP-complete) over reﬂexive, and irreﬂexive and dense time frames.

Answer Set Programming Modulo Theories
with Qualitative Space
This joint work with Mehul Bhatt and Carl Schultz was
accomplished during my research scholarship in Germany funded by DAAD and published in the best paper
award with narrower logic programming focus paper during LPNMR’15 conference (Wał˛ega, Bhatt, and Schultz
2015), and in an extended version as a TPLP journal paper (Wał˛ega, Bhatt, and Schultz 2016). The approach we
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

use in ASPMT(QS) is based on Answer Set Programming
Modulo Theories (Bartholomew and Lee 2014) extended to
spatial domains. Spatial reasoning is performed in an analytic manner, i.e., relations are encoded as polynomial constraints. The main reasoning task, i.e., determining whether a
spatial conﬁguration is consistent, is equivalent to determining whether a particular system of polynomial constraints is
satisﬁable. The reasoning method uses Satisﬁability Modulo
Theories (SMT) with real nonlinear arithmetic, and can be
performed in a sound and complete manner. Moreover, this
approach enables us to express a number of relations from
the well-known qualitative approaches, as we have proved
in (Wał˛ega, Bhatt, and Schultz 2016):
Proposition 1 Each relation of Interval Algebra, Rectangle
Algebra, Left-Right Algebra, Region Connection Calculus–
5 in the domain of convex polygons with a ﬁnite number of
vertices and Cardinal Direction Calculus may be deﬁned in
ASPMT(QS).
We have built ASPMT(QS) implementation upon the system
ASPMT 2 SMT (Bartholomew and Lee 2014) – a compiler that
translates a tight fragment of ASPMT into SMT instances.
Then, SMT solver is used to compute spatially consistent
answer sets and ﬁnally every (spatially consistent) answer
set is used to generate a qualitatively distinct, 3D model as
presented in the following pipeline graph.
ASPMT(QS)
Clasp

Domain
Model

ASPMT2SMT

Spatially
Consistent
Answer Sets

Gringo
Spatial
Library
SMT
Solver

Geometric
Constraint
Solver

3D Mesh
Operator

3D
Model

Parametric
Diagrams

We have presented a number of possible applications
of ASPMT(QS), e.g., in architecture design, spatiotemporal reasoning, abductive reasoning, and people
tracking. A minimal prototypical implementation of
ASPMT(QS) is available online publicly from Docker Hub:
https://hub.docker.com/r/spatialreasoning/aspmtqs/. It
contains the core system, minimal working examples, short
description and installation instructions.

