Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Exclusion Method for Finding Nash Equilibrium in Multiplayer Games
Kimmo Berg

Tuomas Sandholm

Aalto University School of Science
Dept. of Mathematics and Systems Analysis
kimmo.berg@aalto.ﬁ

Carnegie Mellon University
Computer Science Department
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

PPAD-complete (Chen, Deng, and Teng 2009; Daskalakis
2013; Rubinstein 2015; 2016). Furthermore, the multiplayer
games are FIXP-complete (Etessami and Yannakakis 2010)
and the query complexity has been examined in Babichenko
(2014). In contrast, a correlated equilibrium can be computed efﬁciently (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2005;
Jiang and Leyton-Brown 2011). In larger games, it is not
only the computation time that matters but also the memory
requirements of storing the players’ payoffs, which grow exponentially in the number of players in normal-form games;
classes of games have been introduced where the payoffs can
be compactly represented (Jiang, Leyton-Brown, and Bhat
2011). Two-player zero-sum games can be solved in polynomial time.
Multiplayer games differ signiﬁcantly from two-player
games. In a two-player game, the set of equilibria can
be deﬁned by, and found using, linear equations (with
binary and continuous variables (Sandholm, Gilpin, and
Conitzer 2005)). In contrast, modeling equilibria in multiplayer games involves nonlinear polynomial equations.
Finding a Nash equilibrium in multiplayer games is
known to be more challenging in practice than in two-player
games. It has also received much less attention. That said,
several techniques have been proposed:

Abstract
We present a complete algorithm for ﬁnding an -Nash equilibrium, for arbitrarily small , in games with more than two
players. The method improves the best-known upper bound
with respect to the number of players n, and it is the ﬁrst
implemented algorithm, to our knowledge, that manages to
solve all instances. The main components of our tree-searchbased method are a node-selection strategy, an exclusion oracle, and a subdivision scheme. The node-selection strategy
determines the next region (of the strategy proﬁle probability vector space) to be explored—based on the region’s size
and an estimate of whether the region contains an equilibrium. The exclusion oracle provides a provably correct sufﬁcient condition for there not to exist an equilibrium in the
region. The subdivision scheme determines how the region
is split if it cannot be excluded. Unlike the well-known incomplete methods, our method does not need to proceed locally, which avoids it getting stuck in a local minimum—in
the space of players’ regrets—that may be far from any actual equilibrium. The run time grows rapidly with the game
size; this reﬂects the dimensionality of this difﬁcult problem.
That suggests a hybrid scheme where one of the relatively
fast prior incomplete algorithms is run, and if it fails to ﬁnd
an equilibrium, then our method is used.

Introduction

• Homotopy (path-following) methods (Herings and
van den Elzen 2002; Govindan and Wilson 2003; 2004;
McKelvey and Palfrey 1995; Turocy 2005) ﬁnd an equilibrium in an easy artiﬁcial game ﬁrst and then transform
that problem continuously to the original problem while
tracking how the equilibrium changes during this process.
The transformation means that a nonlinear homotopy
path is traced numerically.

Unlike in single-agent settings, in games, the best action for
a player may depend on what actions the other player(s)
choose. Solution concepts from noncooperative game theory
are sound deﬁnitions of rationality in such settings. However, to operationalize those concepts, one needs to develop
algorithms for ﬁnding solutions that satisfy the deﬁnition of
the concept.
The seminal solution concept in noncooperative game
theory is Nash equilibrium (Nash 1950). It plays an important role in analyzing game-theoretic situations, and has
transformed economics and other ﬁelds of science.
Finding a Nash equilibrium is an important, interesting, and well-studied problem (Herings and Peeters 2010;
Daskalakis, Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009). Finding (even an approximate) Nash equilibrium in a twoplayer general-sum game or in a multiplayer game is

• Polynomial equation solving and support enumeration
methods (Porter, Nudelman, and Shoham 2008; Lipton
and Markakis 2004) are based on solving a system of nonlinear polynomial equations that deﬁne the equilibrium,
and may enumerate and go through all the possible supports of the players’ mixed strategies.
• Function minimization methods (Sandholm, Gilpin, and
Conitzer 2005; Chatterjee 2009; Boryczka and Juszczuk
2013; Buttler and Akchurina 2013) provide optimization
formulations and algorithms for ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium. The methods may use a mixed-integer programming

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

383

