Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Neural Machine Translation Advised
by Statistical Machine Translation
Xing Wang,† Zhengdong Lu,‡ Zhaopeng Tu,‡ Hang Li,‡ Deyi Xiong,†∗ Min Zhang†
†
Soochow University, Suzhou
xingwsuda@gmail.com, {dyxiong, minzhang}@suda.edu.cn
‡
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Hong Kong
{lu.zhengdong, tu.zhaopeng, hangli.hl}@huawei.com

1. Coverage problem (Tu et al. 2016b; Cohn et al. 2016):
NMT lacks of a mechanism to record the source words
that have been translated or need to be translated, resulting
in either “over-translation” or “under-translation” (Tu et
al. 2016b).
2. Imprecise translation problem (Arthur, Neubig, and
Nakamura 2016): NMT is prone to generate words that
seem to be natural in the target sentence, but do not reﬂect the original meaning of the source sentence.
3. UNK problem (Jean et al. 2015; Luong et al. 2015): NMT
uses a ﬁxed modest-sized vocabulary to represent most
frequent words and replaces other words with an UNK
word. Experimental results show that translation quality
degrades rapidly with the number of UNK words increasing (Cho et al. 2014a).
Instead of employing different models which individually
focus on the above NMT problems, in this work, we try to
address the problems together in a single approach. Our approach is based on the observation that SMT models have
desirable properties that can properly deal with the above
problems:
1. SMT has a mechanism to guarantee that every source
word is translated.
2. SMT treats words as discrete symbols, which ensures that
a source word will be translated into a target word which
has been observed at least once in the training data.
3. SMT explicitly memorizes all the translations, including
translations of rare words that are taken as UNK in NMT.
It is natural to leverage the advantages of the two sorts of
models for better translations. Recently, several researchers
proposed to improve NMT with SMT features or outputs.
For example, He et al. (2016) integrated SMT features with
the NMT model under the log-linear framework in the beam
search on the development or test set. Stahlberg et al. (2016)
extended the beam search decoding by expanding the search
space of NMTs with translation hypotheses produced by a
syntactic SMT model. In the above work, NMT was treated
as a black-box and the combinations were carried out only
in the testing phase.
In this work, we move a step forward along the same direction by incorporating the SMT model into the training
phase of NMT. This enables NMT to effectively learn to

Abstract
Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is a new approach to machine translation that has made great progress in recent years.
However, recent studies show that NMT generally produces
ﬂuent but inadequate translations (Tu et al. 2016b; 2016a;
He et al. 2016; Tu et al. 2017). This is in contrast to conventional Statistical Machine Translation (SMT), which usually yields adequate but non-ﬂuent translations. It is natural, therefore, to leverage the advantages of both models for
better translations, and in this work we propose to incorporate SMT model into NMT framework. More speciﬁcally,
at each decoding step, SMT offers additional recommendations of generated words based on the decoding information
from NMT (e.g., the generated partial translation and attention history). Then we employ an auxiliary classiﬁer to score
the SMT recommendations and a gating function to combine
the SMT recommendations with NMT generations, both of
which are jointly trained within the NMT architecture in an
end-to-end manner. Experimental results on Chinese-English
translation show that the proposed approach achieves signiﬁcant and consistent improvements over state-of-the-art NMT
and SMT systems on multiple NIST test sets.

Introduction
Neural machine translation has been receiving considerable
attention in recent years (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom 2013;
Cho et al. 2014b; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). Compared with the conventional SMT (Brown et al. 1993; Koehn, Och, and Marcu
2003; Chiang 2005), one great advantage of NMT is that the
translation system can be completely constructed by learning from data without human involvement (cf., feature engineering in SMT). Another major advantage of NMT is that
the gating (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and attention
(Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) techniques prove to be
effective in modeling long-distance dependencies and complicated alignment relations in the translation process, which
poses a serious challenge for SMT.
Despite these beneﬁts, recent studies show that NMT generally produces ﬂuent yet sometimes inaccurate translations,
mainly due to:
∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3330

