Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Continuous Conditional Dependency Network for Structured Regression
Chao Han
Center for Data Analytics and Biomedical
Informatics, Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA
chao.han@temple.edu

Mohamed Ghalwash

Zoran Obradovic

Center for Computational Health Center for Data Analytics and Biomedical
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Informatics, Temple University
Cambridge, MA, USA
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA
Temple University, PA, USA
zoran.obradovic@temple.edu
Ain Shams University, Egypt, Cairo
mohamed.ghalwash@temple.edu
model. This approach is efﬁcient but it does not utilize the
structure among nodes.
Sparse inverse covariance estimation (Banerjee,
El Ghaoui, and d’Aspremont 2008), known as Graphical Lasso (Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2008),
learns a sparse inverse covariance matrix of residuals by modeling the joint distribution of response
variables as a multivariate Gaussian distribution. However, this generative model is not applicable to regression. This limitation is addressed by Gaussian
Conditional Random Fields (GCRF) (Qin et al. 2009;
Radosavljevic, Vucetic, and Obradovic 2010), which
enables structured regression on graphs by modeling the
conditional distribution of response variables given node
attributes as a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Neural
GCRF(NGCRF) (Baltrušaitis, Robinson, and Morency
2014; Radosavljevic, Vucetic, and Obradovic 2014) models
nonlinear relationships between inputs and response variables by learning hidden variables via neural network. Both
GCRF and NGCRF incorporate prior knowledge about
graph structure in terms of a symmetric similarity matrix
and, therefore, do not learn the graph structure.
Sparse Gaussian Conditional Random Fields (SGCRF)
(Sohn and Kim 2012; Wytock and Kolter 2013; Yuan and
Zhang 2014), as a discriminative variant of Graphical Lasso,
is capable of conducting regression and learning sparse precision matrix simultaneously. SGCRF assumes that the relation between attributes and response variables are linear. This assumption has been relaxed in a recently developed model called Representation Learning based Structured Regression (RLSR) (Han et al. 2016), which iteratively
learns the precision matrix and representation over attributes
jointly to model complex relations between attributes and
response. Although both SGCRF and RSLR can learn structure among response variables, they are suffering from demanding computational cost and are not able to incorporate
any prior knowledge.
The dependency network, which is modeled as a cyclic
Bayesian network (Heckerman et al. 2001), approximates
the joint distribution of response variables as a product of
multiple local conditional distributions. This allows directed
graph learning and approximating local distributions separately. Unlike the Bayesian network, the graphical structure
in dependency network models is not required to be a di-

Abstract
Structured regression on graphs aims to predict response variables from multiple nodes by discovering and exploiting the
dependency structure among response variables. This problem is challenging since dependencies among response variables are always unknown, and the associated prior knowledge is non-symmetric. In previous studies, various promising solutions were proposed to improve structured regression by utilizing symmetric prior knowledge, learning sparse
dependency structure among response variables, or learning representations of attributes of multiple nodes. However, none of them are capable of efﬁciently learning dependency structure while incorporating non-symmetric prior
knowledge. To achieve these objectives, we proposed Continuous Conditional Dependency Network (CCDN) for structured regression. The intuitive idea behind this model is that
each response variable is not only dependent on attributes
from the same node, but also on response variables from all
other nodes. This results in a joint modeling of local conditional probabilities. The parameter learning is formulated
as a convex optimization problem and an effective sampling
algorithm is proposed for inference. CCDN is ﬂexible in absorbing non-symmetric prior knowledge. The performance of
CCDN on multiple datasets provides evidence of its structure
recovery ability and superior effectiveness and efﬁciency as
compared to the state-of-the-art alternatives.

Introduction
In many applications, like climate science and power engineering, multiple continuous variables are observed over
time, which can be regarded as many independent observations of graph instances.Structured regression is proposed to
predict the values of response variables of multiple nodes
given their attributes, where it has been shown that discovering and exploiting the graph structure do improve the prediction. However, this problem is challenging due to the fact
that the dependency among nodes is unknown, and the prior
knowledge about structure is non-symmetric.
Many works have been proposed to improve regression
on graphs. A simple approach is to solve regression problem
for each response variable independently, where each regression problem can be solved using either linear or nonlinear
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1962

