Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Lifted Inference for Convex Quadratic Programs
Martin Mladenov

Leonard Kleinhans

Kristian Kersting

TU Dortmund University, Germany
martin.mladenov@cs.tu-dortmund.de

TU Dortmund University, Germany
leonard.kleinhans@cs.tu-dortmund.de

TU Dortmund University, Germany
kristian.kersting@cs.tu-dortmund.de

(ground) model they produce might often contain redundancies in terms of symmetries. Lifted probabilistic inference
approaches (Poole 2003) exploit these symmetries to perform
very efﬁcient inference in highly-connected (and hence otherwise often intractable for traditional inference approach)
but symmetric models. Intuitively, one infers which variables
are indistinguishable in the ground model (if possible without actually grounding) and solves the model treating the
indistinguishable variables as groups instead of individuals to
reduce the dimensionality of the model. Unfortunately, SRL
does not support convex quadratic programs.
Here, we demonstrate that the core idea of SRL can be
transferred to convex quadratic programming. As our main
contribution, we formalize the notion of symmetries of convex quadratic programs (QPs). Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst show
that unlike for graphical models, where the notion of indistinguishability of variables is that of exact symmetry (automorphisms of the factor graph), QPs admit a weaker (partitions
of indistinguishable variables which are at least as coarse) notion of indistinguishability called a fractional automorphism
(FA) resp. equitable partition (EP) computable in quasi-linear
time. This implies that more general lifted inference rules for
QPs can be designed. This is surprising, as it was believed
that FAs apply only to linear equations. Second, we investigate geometrically how FAs of quadratic forms arise. The
existing theory of symmetry in convex quadratic forms states
that an automorphism of xT Qx corresponds to a rotational
symmetry of the semideﬁnite factors of Q. We generalize this
in that FA of xT Qx can be related not only to rotations, but
also to certain scalings. This then results in the ﬁrst approximate FA approach based on standard clustering techniques
and whitening. Finally, we tackle the question to which extend kernels might preserve fractional symmetry. All this is
embedded in the ﬁrst relational QP language as illustrated in
Fig. 1(left), which is not discussed due to space limitations.
In doing so, the present work is the ﬁrst that introduces
relational convex QPs and studies their symmetries. Indeed,
there are symmetry-breaking branch-and-bound approaches
for (mixed–)integer programming (Margot 2010) that are also
featured by commercial solvers. QPs, however, do not feature
branch-and-bound solvers. For the special fragment of LPs,
(Kersting, Mladenov, and Tokmakov 2015) have introduced a
relational language and shown how to exploit fractional symmetries. (Relaxed) graph automorphisms and variants have

Abstract
Symmetry is the essential element of lifted inference that has
recently demonstrated the possibility to perform very efﬁcient
inference in highly-connected, but symmetric probabilistic
models. This raises the question, whether this holds for optimization problems in general. Here we show that for a large
class of optimization methods this is actually the case. Specifically, we introduce the concept of fractional symmetries of
convex quadratic programs (QPs), which lie at the heart of
many AI and machine learning approaches, and exploit it to
lift, i.e., to compress QPs. These lifted QPs can then be tackled
with the usual optimization toolbox (off-the-shelf solvers, cutting plane algorithms, stochastic gradients etc.). If the original
QP exhibits symmetry, then the lifted one will generally be
more compact, and hence more efﬁcient to solve.

Introduction
Convex optimization is arguably one of the main motors
behind Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) as it enables inference
and learning in a wide variety of AI models, such as SVMs,
LASSO and efﬁcient approximations (e.g. variational approaches, convex NMF) to hard inference tasks. The language in which convex optimization problems are speciﬁed
includes inequalities, matrix and tensor algebra, and software
packages for convex optimization such as CVXPY (Diamond,
Chu, and Boyd 2014) recreate this language as an interface
between the user and the solver. Unfortunately, a pure algebraic language has one shortcoming: it is difﬁcult—if not
impossible—for the non-expert to directly make use of the
discrete, combinatorial structure often underlying convex programs; pixels depend only on neighboring pixels; the reward
of placing a cup on a table does not depend on whether the
window in the next room is open. Having a richer representation such as ﬁrst-order logic to express the combinatorial
structure and an automatic way to utilize it in the solver, however, is likely extend the reach and efﬁciency of AI. This has
been demonstrated by statistical relational learning (SRL)
that has argued in favor of ﬁrst-order languages when dealing with complex graphical models, see e.g. (De Raedt et
al. 2016) for a recent overview. Due to the high-level nature of the relational probabilistic languages, the low-level
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2350

