Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Transfer Reinforcement
Learning with Shared Dynamics
Romain Laroche

Merwan Barlier

Orange Labs at Châtillon, France
Maluuba at Montréal, Canada
romain.laroche@m4x.org

Orange Labs at Châtillon, France
Univ. Lille 1, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, France
merwan.barlier@orange.com

sparse, only a mean estimation is required, R tends to be
less stochastic than P , and ﬁnally it is frequently possible
for the designer to inject expert knowledge: for instance, an
adequate state space representation for R, the uniqueness of
the state with a positive reward, its determinism or stochastic
property, and/or the existence of R bounds: Rmin and Rmax .
Discovering (directly or indirectly) P and R requires collecting trajectories. In real world problems, trajectory collection is resource consuming (time, money), and Transfer
Learning for RL (Taylor and Stone 2009; Lazaric 2012),
through reuse of knowledge acquired from similar tasks, has
proven useful in many RL domains: Atari games (Romoff,
Bengio, and Pineau 2016), robotics (Taylor, Stone, and Liu
2007), or dialogue (Genevay and Laroche 2016). In this article, we address the problem of Transfer Reinforcement
Learning with Shared Dynamics (TRLSD), i.e. the transfer
problem when P is constant over tasks τ ∈ T , which thus
only differ from each other by their reward functions Rτ . We
include the Multi-Task RL variation of this problem under
this denomination, i.e. when learning is made in parallel on
several tasks. This family of problems may be encountered
for instance in robotics, where the robot agent has to understand the complex shared environment dynamics in order to
perform high level tasks that rely on this understanding.
In this article, we advocate that experience gathered on
a task can be indirectly and directly reused on another task
and that transfer can be made at the transition sample level.
Additionally, the optimism in the face of uncertainty principle allows to guide the exploration efﬁciently on a new
task, thanks to the dynamics knowledge transferred from the
other tasks. The combination of those two principles allows
us to deﬁne a general algorithm for TRLSD, on a continuous state space, enabling the injection of task related expert
knowledge.
Section 2 offers an overview of the known studies related
to TRLSD, and introduces the principles of transition sample
sharing between tasks. Then, Section 3 recalls the optimism
in the face of uncertainty principle, explains how to apply it to
our setting, and explores different ways of computing this optimism, inspired from the UCRL algorithm. Finally, Section
4 presents various experiments illustrating and demonstrating the functioning of our algorithms in Transfer RL and
Multi-Task RL experiments. The experimental results demonstrate the signiﬁcant improvement brought by our approach,

Abstract
This article addresses a particular Transfer Reinforcement
Learning (RL) problem: when dynamics do not change from
one task to another, and only the reward function does. Our
method relies on two ideas, the ﬁrst one is that transition samples obtained from a task can be reused to learn on any other
task: an immediate reward estimator is learnt in a supervised
fashion and for each sample, the reward entry is changed by
its reward estimate. The second idea consists in adopting the
optimism in the face of uncertainty principle and to use upper
bound reward estimates. Our method is tested on a navigation
task, under four Transfer RL experimental settings: with a
known reward function, with strong and weak expert knowledge on the reward function, and with a completely unknown
reward function. It is also evaluated in a Multi-Task RL experiment and compared with the state-of-the-art algorithms.
Results reveal that this method constitutes a major improvement for transfer/multi-task problems that share dynamics.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL, (Sutton and Barto 1998)) is
a framework for optimising an agent behaviour in an environment. It is generally formalised as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP): S, A, R, P, γ where S the state space, and
A the action space are known by the agent. P : S × A → S,
the Markovian transition stochastic function, deﬁnes the unknown dynamics of the environment. R : S → R, the immediate reward stochastic function, deﬁnes the goal(s)1 . In
some settings such as dialogue systems (Laroche et al. 2009;
Lemon and Pietquin 2012) or board games (Tesauro 1995;
Silver et al. 2016), R can be inferred directly from the state by
the agent, and in some others such as in robotics and in Atari
games (Mnih et al. 2013; 2015), R is generally unknown.
Finally, γ ∈ [0, 1) the discount factor is a parameter given to
the RL optimisation algorithm favouring short-term rewards.
As a consequence, the RL problem consists in (directly or
indirectly) discovering P , sometimes R, and planning.
Even when R is unknown, R is often simpler to learn
than P : its deﬁnition is less combinatorial, R is generally
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
In this article, reward functions are deﬁned on state representation S, but all the results can be straightforwardly transposed to
rewards received after performing an action in a given state, i.e. to
reward function deﬁned on S × A.

2147

