Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Greedy Best-First Search by
Removing Unintended Search Bias (Extended Abstract)∗
Masataro Asai

Alex Fukunaga

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo, Japan, +81-3-5454-6306
guicho2.71828 α
 gmail.com

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

to search depth (distance from the start / goal / plateau entrance), so the bias among the set of nodes with the same
search depth is not removed. In this abstract, we brieﬂy introduce two modes of exploration (diversiﬁcation), which work
inter-(across) and intra-(within) plateau as well as our new
diversiﬁcation scheme, IP-diversiﬁcation, a method combining Minimum Spanning Tree and randomization, which addresses “breadth”-bias instead of the “depth”-bias addressed
by the existing methods.
We ﬁrst deﬁne some notation used in the paper. First,
h(n), g(n), f (n) for node n follows the standard terminology (heuristic cost to goal, cost from the initial state, g + h).
A sorting strategy for a best ﬁrst search algorithm tries to
select a single node from the open list (OPEN). Each sorting
strategy is denoted as a vector of several sorting criteria, such
as [criterion1 , criterion2 , . . ., criterionk ], which means: First,
select a set of nodes from OPEN using criterion1 . If there
are still multiple nodes remaining in the set, then break ties
using criterion2 and so on, until a single node is selected. A∗
which breaks ties according to h value is denoted as [f, h],
and GBFS is denoted as [h].
In A∗ , those strategies have a signiﬁcant effect on the performance (Asai and Fukunaga 2016). Traditional strategies
such as [f, h, ﬁfo] or [f, h, lifo] have a strong bias to either
the regions of smaller (ﬁfo) or larger (lifo) search depth of
the plateau, which delays the search process. They proposed
a notion of depth and diversiﬁed the search over different
depths within a plateau. A depth d(n) of a node n is the
step-wise distance from the entrance of the plateau (the most
recent state which entered the plateau, along the path from
the initial state).
DBFS, -GBFS and Type-GBFS are the algorithms which
try to escape the local minima by relaxing the (h-based)
best-ﬁrst order and introduce exploration (diversity) to the
search process. For example, Type-GBFS alternates GBFS
and Type-based expansion, which selects a random node in a
random bucket, where nodes are put in buckets indexed by
h-value and g-value.

Abstract
Recent enhancements to greedy best-ﬁrst search (GBFS) improve performance by occasionally adopting a non-greedy
node expansion policy, resulting in more exploratory behavior.
However, previous exploratory mechanisms do not address
exploration within the space sharing the same heuristic estimate (plateau) and the search bias in a breadth direction. In
this abstract, we brieﬂy describe two modes of exploration
(diversiﬁcation), which work inter-(across) and intra-(within)
plateau, and also introduce IP-diversiﬁcation, a method combining Minimum Spanning Tree and randomization, which
addresses “breadth”-bias instead of the “depth”-bias addressed
by the existing methods.

1

Introduction

Many search problems in AI are too difﬁcult to solve optimally, and ﬁnding even one satisﬁcing solution is challenging. Although GBFS ignores solution optimality, it has been
shown to be quite useful when it is necessary to ﬁnd some
satisﬁcing solution quickly, and GBFS has been the basis
for state-of-the-art domain-independent planners (Helmert
2006). Despite the ubiquitous use of GBFS for satisﬁcing
search, previous work has shown that GBFS is susceptible
to being easily trapped by undetected dead ends and huge
search plateaus. These pathological behaviors are caused by
the strong dependendency of search behavior of GBFS on
the quality of the heuristic function.
Recently, several approaches have been proposed for alleviating this problem, e.g., DBFS (Imai and Kishimoto 2011),
-GBFS (Valenzano et al. 2014) and Type-GBFS (Xie et al.
2014). They improve the search performance by occasionally expanding nodes which do not have the lowest h-value,
i.e., diversifying the search. These diversiﬁed algorithms provides an opportunity to expand nodes that are mistakenly
overlooked due to errors made by the heuristic functions.
Existing methods for diversiﬁcation have two issues: First,
previous methods all employ h-based diversiﬁcation as part
of their algorithms in order to avoid the bias toward the nodes
with smaller estimates. However, h-based diversiﬁcation cannot detect the bias among nodes with the same h-cost. Second,
as we see later, they are based on diversiﬁcation with respect

2

Intra- and Inter-plateau Diversiﬁcation

Previous work on exploration for GBFS address the problem
of heuristic errors by occasionally expanding nodes with high
h. Since this type of diversiﬁcation operates across different
search plateaus, we refer to these as inter-plateau exploration.

∗

More at: guicho271828.github.io/publications/gbfs17.pdf
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4903

