Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Factorization Bandits
for Interactive Recommendation
Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Hongning Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia, Charlottesville VA, 22904 USA
{hw7ww,qw2ky,hw5x}@virginia.edu

Periodically repeating model estimation to update latent factors is inept to handle the interactions between a system and
its users on the ﬂy, because not only does it overly exploit
the learnt model that is biased towards previously frequently
recommended items, but it is also prohibitively expensive to
afford in terms of computational complexity.
Some preliminary attempts have been made to perform
online matrix factorization for collaborative ﬁltering. Basically, multi-armed bandit algorithms (Auer et al. 1995;
Auer 2002) are employed to control the exploration of currently less promising recommendations for user feedback,
and factorization is applied over the incrementally constructed user-item matrix on the ﬂy. However, these two
components are integrated in an ad-hoc manner: both contextual and context-free bandits have been explored on top of
various factorization methods (Zhao, Zhang, and Wang 2013;
Nakamura 2014; Kawale et al. 2015), given they only provide an index of candidate items for feedback acquisition.
As a result, little is known about whether such combinations
would lead to a converging recommendation performance
nor would it ensure long-term optimality in theory, i.e., regret
bound analysis.
We address the aforementioned challenges via performing
online interactive recommendation by placing a factorizationbased bandit algorithm on each user in the system. Low-rank
matrix completion is performed over an incrementally constructed user-item preference matrix, where an upper conﬁdence bound (UCB) based item selection strategy is developed to balance the exploit/explore trade-off during online
learning. To better conquer cold-start in recommendation,
two special treatments are devised. First, observable contextual features are integrated with the estimated latent factors
during matrix factorization. This improves recommendation
when the number of candidate items is large, but the payoffs
are interrelated, i.e., context-aware. Second, the dependence
among users (e.g., social inﬂuence) is introduced to our bandit algorithm through a collaborative reward generation assumption (Wu et al. 2016). It enables information sharing
among the neighboring users in online learning, so as to help
reduce the overall regret.
More importantly, we rigorously prove that with high probability the developed algorithm achieves a sublinear upper
regret bound for interactive recommendation, i.e., the average
number of suboptimal recommendations made in our algo-

Abstract
We perform online interactive recommendation via a
factorization-based bandit algorithm. Low-rank matrix completion is performed over an incrementally constructed useritem preference matrix, where an upper conﬁdence bound
based item selection strategy is developed to balance the exploit/explore trade-off during online learning. Observable contextual features and dependency among users (e.g., social
inﬂuence) are leveraged to improve the algorithm’s convergence rate and help conquer cold-start in recommendation. A
high probability sublinear upper regret bound is proved for
the developed algorithm, where considerable regret reduction
is achieved on both user and item sides. Extensive experimentations on both simulations and large-scale real-world
datasets conﬁrmed the advantages of the proposed algorithm
compared with several state-of-the-art factorization-based and
bandit-based collaborative ﬁltering methods.

Introduction
Matrix factorization based collaborative ﬁltering has become
a standard practice in recommender systems (Koren, Bell,
and Volinsky 2009; Koren 2008; Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009).
The basic idea of such solutions is to characterize both
recommendation items and users by vectors of latent factors inferred from historical user-item preference patterns
via low-rank matrix completion (Candès and Recht 2009;
Candès and Tao 2010), with an assumption that only a few
factors contribute to an individual’s choice (Koren, Bell, and
Volinsky 2009).
Despite a few recent advances in speciﬁc factorization
techniques (Agarwal and Chen 2009; Rendle 2012), recommendation remains a challenging problem for at least two
reasons. First, a modern recommender system faces emerging new users and ever changing pools of recommendation
candidates. The classical ofﬂine training and online testing
paradigm for factorization models becomes incompetent to
handle the dynamics of users’ preferences, known as coldstart (Schein et al. 2002). Second, it is nutritiously difﬁcult
to perform online interactive recommendation, because the
need to focus on items that raise users’ interest and, simultaneously, the need to explore new items for improving users’
satisfaction in the long run create an explore-exploit dilemma.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2695

