Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

CLARE: A Joint Approach to Label
Classiﬁcation and Tag Recommendation
Yilin Wang,1 Suhang Wang,1 Jiliang Tang,2 Guojun Qi,3 Huan Liu,1 Baoxin Li1
1

Arizona State University
Michigan State University
3
University of Central Florida
{yilinwang,suhang.wang,huan.liu,baoxin.li}@asu.edu,tangjili@msu.edu,guojun.qi@ucf.edu
2

and Van Zwol 2008; Wang et al. 2015a; Zhang et al. 2014;
Wang et al. 2015b; Lian et al. 2015). For social media posts,
labels in classiﬁcation often capture their high-level content, while tags in tag recommendation are likely to describe their attributes such as objects in images, actions in
videos and keywords in blogs. Therefore classiﬁcation and
tag recommendation are generally considered as two independent tasks and the majority of efforts are made to study
them separately. However, these two tasks should be connected since labels and tags of social media posts are often related(Wang, Blei, and Li 2009). For example, posts
annotated with NCAA, stadium, pac12 are likely to be labeled as football, while posts with the class label of president campaign are likely to be tagged with election, polling,
democratic and republic. In other words, tags could provide evidence for class labels, which could in turn serve as
useful contextual information for tags. However, in (Wang,
Blei, and Li 2009), there is no explicit relations between
tags and labels, which results a relative poor performance on
each task. Aforementioned intuitions motivate us to develop
a more robust joint classiﬁcation and tag recommendation
framework for social media posts.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of predicting
class labels and tags simultaneously for social media posts
by exploiting the relations between labels and tags. The
differences between traditional methods and the proposed
method are illustrated in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1(a),
traditional methods treat these two problems separately –
classiﬁcation uses data and its labels to learn a classiﬁer (or
a label predictor), while tag recommendation uses data and
its tags to learn a tag predictor. In contrast, the proposed
framework performs classiﬁcation and tag recommendation
jointly by leveraging data, labels, tags and relations between
labels and tags as demonstrated in Figure 1(b). Since the
current methods cannot take advantage of relations between
labels and tags, we proceed to study two fundamental problems: (1) how to capture relations between labels and tags
mathematically; and (2) how to make use of it for joint classiﬁcation and tag recommendation. These two problems are
tackled by the proposed framework CLARE and our contributions are summarized as follows:

Abstract
Data classiﬁcation and tag recommendation are both important and challenging tasks in social media. These two tasks
are often considered independently and most efforts have
been made to tackle them separately. However, labels in data
classiﬁcation and tags in tag recommendation are inherently
related. For example, a Youtube video annotated with NCAA,
stadium, pac12 is likely to be labeled as football, while a
video/image with the class label of coast is likely to be tagged
with beach, sea, water and sand. The existence of relations
between labels and tags motivates us to jointly perform classiﬁcation and tag recommendation for social media data in
this paper. In particular, we provide a principled way to capture the relations between labels and tags, and propose a novel
framework CLARE, which fuses data CLAssiﬁcation and tag
REcommendation into a coherent model. With experiments
on three social media datasets, we demonstrate that the proposed framework CLARE achieves superior performance on
both tasks compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
The increasing popularity of social media generates massive data at an unprecedented rate. For example, on average for every minute, 300 hours of video are uploaded
to YouTube 1 , 54.9 million posts are shared on Reddit2
and 30 billion photos are posted on Instagram 3 . Therefore
many techniques (or tasks) have been proposed to help organize and access social media data, among which classiﬁcation and tag recommendation are two popular ones. For
social media posts4 , classiﬁcation is to assign them class
labels (Kaplan and Haenlein 2010; Agichtein et al. 2008;
Li and Zaiane 2015), while tag recommendation aims to suggest tags to annotate them automatically (Wang et al. 2016;
Sigurbjörnsson and Van Zwol 2008).
For each task of classiﬁcation and tag recommendation,
we have witnessed a large body of literature in recent
years (Chen, Zheng, and Weinberger 2013; Sigurbjörnsson
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html
2
www.redditblog.com/2014 12 01 archive.html
3
https://instagram.com/press/
4
In this paper, we use posts in a loose sense to cover blogs,
microblogs, images and videos.

• We provide a principled approach to model relations between labels and tags, which bridges the tasks of classiﬁcation and recommendation;

210

