Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Efﬁcient Approach to Model-Based
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Zhuoru Li,†∗ Akshay Narayan,† Tze-Yun Leong†‡

School of Computing, National University of Singapore†
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University‡
lizhuoru@google.com, {anarayan, leongty}@comp.nus.edu.sg, leongty@smu.edu.sg

robot ﬁrst needs to navigate to the television location, which
usually cannot be pre-speciﬁed. Second, multiple, similar
subtasks have to be learned separately. For example, in Figure 3, there are multiple, independent navigation subtasks,
one for each destination. The transition model learned for
one subtask cannot be used on the others.
We propose a new framework called context-sensitive reinforcement learning (CSRL), that exploits common knowledge in the subtasks1 to efﬁciently learn the transition dynamics. A main idea is to actively evaluate the different subtasks
as execution choices based on simulation. CSRL is sample
efﬁcient and tolerates uncertain or incomplete speciﬁcation
of the task hierarchy; it can solve complex, multi-task problems with more than one million states. In practice, CSRL
assumes the relevant features for each task are given, as in
the MAXQ (Dietterich 1998) safe state abstraction: a state
feature is considered to be irrelevant if it neither affects the
transition of relevant features nor the reward received. CSRL
can learn both the transition and reward functions; this paper
focuses on learning transition functions.

Abstract
We propose a model-based approach to hierarchical reinforcement learning that exploits shared knowledge and selective
execution at different levels of abstraction, to efﬁciently solve
large, complex problems. Our framework adopts a new transition dynamics learning algorithm that identiﬁes the common
action-feature combinations of the subtasks, and evaluates the
subtask execution choices through simulation. The framework
is sample efﬁcient, and tolerates uncertain and incomplete
problem characterization of the subtasks. We test the framework on common benchmark problems and complex simulated
robotic environments. It compares favorably against the stateof-the-art algorithms, and scales well in very large problems.

Introduction
In hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL), an agent solves
large, complex problems by recursively decomposing the root
problem into smaller tasks, and systematically solving the
subtasks at different levels of abstraction. Existing HRL
methods, such as options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999),
hierarchical abstract machines (HAMs) (Parr and Russell
1997), and MAXQ-based (Dietterich 1998) methods that
include a pre-deﬁned task hierarchy, assume different amount
of prior domain knowledge in a task (or action) structure to
speedup the search for good policies or solutions. The taskspeciﬁc features or relevant state abstraction information
must be given, through manual speciﬁcation or automated
learning, for all the methods to work effectively.
Existing HRL methods cannot efﬁciently solve many realworld problems involving multiple tasks, changing subgoals,
and uncertain subtask speciﬁcations. For example, consider
the duties of a household robot as shown in Figure 1. The
robot performs different tasks at different locations: In the
living room, switch off the television and light, and clean
the table; in the yard, fetch mail and deliver it indoor, etc.
Figure 2 shows a complex hierarchy of the robot’s tasks.
We introduce a new model-based approach to HRL that addresses two major limitations of the MAXQ-based methods:
First, the full set of tasks, including minor subtasks lower in
the hierarchy, has to be clearly speciﬁed, which may be infeasible in real life. For example, to switch off the television, the

Background: The mathematical model underlying all the
HRL methods is the semi-Markov decision process (SMDP).
Recall that a Markov decision process (MDP) is a tuple
S, A, P, R where S is the set of states, A is the set of
actions, P is the transition function that describes the probability of transiting to the next state, and R(s, a) is the reward
function for executing action a in s. In factored representation, a state s is speciﬁed as a list of state variables/features.
For problems with inﬁnite horizons, a discounted factor γ
is introduced to bound the accumulated reward. An SMDP
extends an MDP, such that each action may take multiple
time steps to complete (Puterman 1994), i.e. P (s , τ |s, a) is
the probability of transiting to a state s in τ steps, after executing action a in
s. The transition function can be computed
by P (s |s, a) = j P (s , τ = j|s, a)γ j .
A reinforcement learning (RL) (Kaelbling, Littman, and
Moore 1996; Sutton and Barto 1998) agent plans and acts in
an unknown environment modeled as an MDP to maximize
the cumulative reward. We adopt the common R-MAX (Brafman and Tennenholtz 2003) directed exploration approach to
balance exploration and exploitation.

∗

Currently afﬁliated with Google Korea, LLC
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Through contextual independence of state variables conditioned
on the action executed in the underlying model, hence the name.

3583

