Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Learning for Fixed Model Reuse∗
Yang Yang, De-Chuan Zhan, Ying Fan, Yuan Jiang and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
{yangy, zhandc, fany, jiangy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

other tasks, rather than building a model from scratch. This
offers a great potential to reduce the required amount of
training examples and training time cost, because the exploitation of existing models may help set a good basis for
the training of a new model. An example has been shown
in (Li, Tsang, and Zhou 2013), where a model aims to optimizing AUC can be obtained with much less effort by
reusing a model optimizing accuracy. Note that model reuse
also reduces the requirement of expertise in training the
models, because the user can start from a good model generated by experts, and thus, an expert-level new model can
be obtained though the user him/herself is not an expert.
In the deep learning community, there are several pieces
of studies trying to reuse the convolution layers in deep
structures, e.g., by initializing a network with weights from
pre-trained networks (Yosinski et al. 2014); by proposing
a new network architecture to transfer features from pretrained networks (Long and Wang 2015). These models are
generally based on the strategies of re-training on dataset B
with trained deep networks on dataset A, i.e., they mainly
focus on the transfer of information of the latent weights
in deep networks, neglecting the existence of ﬁxed models
which might not be deep models, and ﬁxed features which
might not be deep features.
In this paper, we propose the FMR (Fixed Model
Reuse) approach. This is a more thorough model reuse
scheme, which arranges the convolution layers and the
model/features used in general tasks in parallel, and fully
connecting to the output layer nodes. A knockdown strategy is also proposed for reducing the dependencies between
the “ﬁxed” model/features and the output layer nodes gradually and eventually makes the whole model independent to
the original ﬁxed model/features. As a consequence, only
the raw features are required in testing phase, though the
helpful information in the ﬁxed model/features have already
been incorporated into the deep structure.
The rest of this paper starts from introduction of related
work. Then we propose our approach, followed by experiments and conclusion.

Abstract
Model reuse attempts to construct a model by utilizing existing available models, mostly trained for other tasks, rather
than building a model from scratch. It is helpful to reduce the
time cost, data amount, and expertise required. Deep learning
has achieved great success in various tasks involving images,
voices and videos. There are several studies have the sense of
model reuse, by trying to reuse pre-trained deep networks architectures or deep model features to train a new deep model.
They, however, neglect the fact that there are many other ﬁxed
models or features available. In this paper, we propose a more
thorough model reuse scheme, FMR (Fixed Model Reuse).
FMR utilizes the learning power of deep models to implicitly grab the useful discriminative information from ﬁxed
model/features that have been widely used in general tasks.
We ﬁrstly arrange the convolution layers of a deep network
and the provided ﬁxed model/features in parallel, fully connecting to the output layer nodes. Then, the dependencies between the output layer nodes and the ﬁxed model/features are
knockdown such that only the raw feature inputs are needed
when the model is being used for testing, though the helpful
information in the ﬁxed model/features have already been incorporated into the model. On one hand, by the FMR scheme,
the required amount of training data can be signiﬁcantly reduced because of the reuse of ﬁxed model/features. On the
other hand, the ﬁxed model/features are not explicitly used
in testing, and thus, the scheme can be quite useful in applications where the ﬁxed model/features are protected by
patents or commercial secrets. Experiments on ﬁve real-world
datasets validate the effectiveness of FMR compared with
state-of-the-art deep methods.

Introduction
Machine learning methods including deep learning techniques have achieved great success in many ﬁelds. However,
there are some obvious deﬁciencies, e.g., lots of demands
on training consumptions including both computational expenses and labeled examples. Besides, lacking of adaptability in current learning techniques also narrows the range of
application for learning techniques.
Model reuse (Zhou 2016) attempts to construct a model
by utilizing existing available models, mostly trained for

Related Work
Deep networks are able to learn nonlinear feature representations that nest high-level abstractions behind data and have
achieved great success in many scenarios (Tian et al. 2014;

∗

This work was supported by NSFC (61333014, 61673201).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2831

