Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Boosting Complementary Hash Tables for
Fast Nearest Neighbor Search
†

Xianglong Liu,† Cheng Deng,‡ Yadong Mu,§ Zhujin Li†
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
‡
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, Shaanxi, China
§
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100080, China
xlliu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

myd@pku.edu.cn

lizhujin@outlook.com

quality. Instead of the random and data-independent way,
a number of following hashing studies have been proposed
to learn informative hash functions that can achieve satisfying performance using compact hash codes. These methods place great efforts in how to capture the neighboring relationships among the data, by exploiting different
techniques including supervised learning (Xia et al. 2014;
Lin, Shen, and van den Hengel 2015; Zhu et al. 2016;
Kang, Li, and Zhou 2016), nonlinear mapping (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008; Liu et al. 2011; Liong et al. 2015;
Li et al. 2016), discrete optimization (Gong et al. 2012;
Liu et al. 2014a; Shen et al. 2015; Song, Liu, and Meyer
2016), structural information embedding (Yu et al. 2014;
Wang, Si, and Shen 2015; Mu et al. 2016), multi-bit quantization (Kong and Li 2012; Mu et al. 2012; Deng et al. 2015;
Li et al. 2016) etc.
Even encoding massive data into compact binary codes
achieves compressed storage and efﬁcient computations, it
may be still beyond the requirement for balanced search performance in many practical tasks. To address this issues, in
the literature LSH-based multiple table indexing is usually
adopted to independently build a set of hash tables using
LSH functions, which can faithfully improve the recall performance (Lv et al. 2007; Norouzi, Punjani, and Fleet 2012;
Xia et al. 2013; Cheng et al. 2014). However, without eliminating the table redundancy it often requires a huge number
of tables, at the cost of signiﬁcantly sacriﬁcing precision. To
maximally cover the nearest neighbors using as few as possible tables, complementary multi-table methods have been
studied to leverage the mutual beneﬁts between tables. Xu
et al. proposed a sequential learning method to build complementary hash tables, and obtained the promising performance with much fewer tables. Liu, He, and Lang studied
a general multi-table construction strategy using bit selection over existing hashing algorithms. To further improve
the search performance, Liu et al. introduced an exemplarbased feature fusion and reweighting strategy that can lead
to discriminative and complementary hash tables accounting
for input data with multiple views.
Although existing complementary multi-table methods
can reach promising balanced search performance using a
small number of tables, they still suffer from the table redundancy caused by both the heuristic updating scheme without a strong complementarity guarantee and the inefﬁcient

Abstract
Hashing has been proven a promising technique for fast nearest neighbor search over massive databases. In many practical
tasks it usually builds multiple hash tables for a desired level
of recall performance. However, existing multi-table hashing methods suffer from the heavy table redundancy, without
strong table complementarity and effective hash code learning. To address the problem, this paper proposes a multitable learning method which pursues a speciﬁed number of
complementary and informative hash tables from a perspective of ensemble learning. By regarding each hash table as
a neighbor prediction model, the multi-table search procedure boils down to a linear assembly of predictions stemming from multiple tables. Therefore, a sequential updating
and learning framework is naturally established in a boosting
mechanism, theoretically guaranteeing the table complementarity and algorithmic convergence. Furthermore, each boosting round pursues the discriminative hash functions for each
table by a discrete optimization in the binary code space. Extensive experiments carried out on two popular tasks including Euclidean and semantic nearest neighbor search demonstrate that the proposed boosted complementary hash-tables
method enjoys the strong table complementarity and signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
The past decades have witnessed the explosive growth of big
data, especially visual data like images, videos, etc., which
brings great challenges to scalable nearest neighbor search.
Recently, hashing techniques have become one of the most
promising solutions, owing to its attractive performance in
a variety of applications including large-scale visual search
(He et al. 2012; Song, Liu, and Meyer 2016), query-byhumming (Liu et al. 2016a), classiﬁcation (Mu et al. 2014;
Liu et al. 2016b) and recommendation (Liu et al. 2014b).
As the pioneering work, Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
ﬁrst studied how to index similar data samples via representing them as adjacent hash codes (Datar et al. 2004),
promising fast nearest neighbor search at the cost of sublinear time. The conventional LSH generates hash functions randomly and independently, and thus requires relatively long hash codes to meet the speciﬁc level of search
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4183

