Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Addressing Imbalance in Multi-Label
Classiﬁcation Using Structured Hellinger Forests
Zachary A. Daniels, Dimitris N. Metaxas
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
zad7@cs.rutgers.edu, dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

forest model for structured prediction problems. Structured
prediction involves predicting multiple labels by exploiting
some structure between labels, e.g. detecting semantic edges
(represented as a grid of pixels) in images. Learning multilabel classiﬁers can be challenging because of the exponentially large label space when considering all possible label
combinations. To make learning such classiﬁers tractable,
we assume that labels are correlated with one another: a.) for
multiple object recognition, we can exploit co-occurrence
relationships between objects, b.) for gene prediction, we
can make use of the fact that speciﬁc genes often activate
(or deactivate) at the same time as other genes, and c.) for
document classiﬁcation, we can utilize topic context, e.g. articles about sports might be more closely related to articles
about entertainment than world politics. These correlations
represent a special ‘structure’. Structured forests effectively
learn how to identify and utilize these correlations.
Our model, Sparse Oblique Structured Hellinger Forests
(SOSHF), extends structured forests by explicitly addressing imbalanced data. First, we incorporate cost-sensitivity
into the clustering step, and second, we learn splits using
a criterion based on the Hellinger distance which has been
shown experimentally and theoretically to be more robust to
class imbalance than standard criteria such as information
gain (Cieslak et al. 2012). We found that SOSHF signiﬁcantly outperforms simple baseline structured forest models
as well as state-of-the-art multi-label methods in terms of
well-accepted metrics on benchmark datasets across a wide
span of domains.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we offer a brief
overview of existing multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms
and structured forests. Then, we discuss the technical details
of our proposed work. Finally, we empirically evaluate our
method against a number of existing methods on benchmark
datasets and discuss some of the strengths and weaknesses
of our model.

Abstract
The multi-label classiﬁcation problem involves ﬁnding a
model that maps a set of input features to more than one
output label. Class imbalance is a serious issue in multilabel classiﬁcation. We introduce an extension of structured
forests, a type of random forest used for structured prediction,
called Sparse Oblique Structured Hellinger Forests (SOSHF).
We explore using structured forests in the general multi-label
setting and propose a new imbalance-aware formulation by
altering how the splitting functions are learned in two ways.
First, we account for cost-sensitivity when converting the
multi-label problem to a single-label problem at each node
in the tree. Second, we introduce a new objective function for
determining oblique splits based on the Hellinger distance, a
splitting criterion that has been shown to be robust to class imbalance. We empirically validate our method on a number of
benchmarks against standard and state-of-the-art multi-label
classiﬁcation algorithms with improved results.

Multi-label classiﬁcation is an important unsolved problem
in artiﬁcial intelligence encountered often in a wide range
of domains including tag prediction for images and audio,
multiple object recognition in images, predicting gene expression, and classifying documents into predetermined topics. Binary multi-label classiﬁcation is a special case that involves ﬁnding a model that maps a set of input features X ∈
R1×m to more than one binary output label Y ∈ {0, 1}1×n .
Class imbalance is a common and challenging problem
in multi-label classiﬁcation. We can view imbalance from
two perspectives: imbalance between labels (i.e. label 1’s
positive class appears ten times more frequently than label
2’s) and imbalance within labels (i.e. label 1 has ten times
more positive examples than negative examples). Imbalance
is well-studied for single label classiﬁcation; however, traditional methods for correcting imbalance such as underand oversampling do not easily generalize to the multi-label
domain due to imbalance between labels. Imbalance is typically addressed by using specialized imbalance-aware algorithms or by incorporating cost-sensitivity into existing
methods.
We propose a new algorithm for addressing imbalance
in binary multi-label classiﬁcation based on the structured
decision forest model (Dollár and Zitnick 2013), a random

Related Work
Multi-label classiﬁcation is an area of active research.
Tsoumakas et al. divide the set of algorithms for multi-label
classiﬁcation into two sets: those that transform the problem and those that adapt existing algorithms (Tsoumakas,
Katakis, and Vlahavas 2009). We ﬁrst discuss multi-label
classiﬁcation algorithms that transform the problem. Bi-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1826

