Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Analysis of Monte Carlo Tree Search
Steven James,∗ George Konidaris,† Benjamin Rosman∗‡
∗

University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
†
Brown University, Providence RI 02912, USA
‡
Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Pretoria, South Africa
steven.james@students.wits.ac.za, gdk@cs.brown.edu, brosman@csir.co.za

UCT calls for rollouts to be performed by randomly selecting actions until a terminal state is reached. The outcome
of the simulation is then propagated to the root of the tree.
Averaging these results over many iterations performs remarkably well, despite the fact that actions during the simulation are executed completely at random. As the outcome
of the simulations directly affects the entire algorithm, one
might expect that the manner in which they are performed
has a major effect on the overall strength of the algorithm.
A natural assumption to make is that completely random
simulations are not ideal, since they do not map to realistic
actions. A different approach is that of so-called heavy rollouts, where moves are intelligently selected using domainspeciﬁc rules or knowledge. Counterintuitively, some results
indicate that using these stronger rollouts can actually result
in a decrease in overall performance (Gelly and Silver 2007).
We propose that the key aspect of a rollout policy is the
way in which it ranks the available actions. We demonstrate
that under certain smoothness conditions, a uniformly random rollout policy preserves the optimal action ranking,
which in turn allows UCT to select the correct action at the
root of the tree.
We also investigate the effect of heavy rollouts. Given that
both heavy and uniformly random policies are suboptimal,
we are interested in the reason these objectively stronger
rollouts can often negatively affect the performance of UCT.
We show that heavy rollouts can indeed improve performance, but identify low-variance policies as potentially dangerous choices, which can lead to worse performance.
There are a number of conﬂating factors that make
analysing UCT in the context of games difﬁcult, especially in the multi-agent case: the strength of our opponents,
whether they adapt their policies in response to our own,
and the requirement of rollout policies for multiple players. Aside from Silver and Tesauro (2009) who propose the
concept of simulation balancing to learn a Go rollout policy that is weak but “fair” to both players, there is little
to indicate how best to simulate our opponents. Furthermore, the vagaries of the domain itself can often add to the
complexity—Nau (1983) demonstrates how making better
decisions throughout a game does not necessarily result in
the expected increase in winning rate. Given all of the above,
we simplify matters by restricting our investigation to the
single-agent case.

Abstract
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a family of directed
search algorithms that has gained widespread attention in recent years. Despite the vast amount of research into MCTS,
the effect of modiﬁcations on the algorithm, as well as the
manner in which it performs in various domains, is still not
yet fully known. In particular, the effect of using knowledgeheavy rollouts in MCTS still remains poorly understood, with
surprising results demonstrating that better-informed rollouts
often result in worse-performing agents. We present experimental evidence suggesting that, under certain smoothness
conditions, uniformly random simulation policies preserve
the ordering over action preferences. This explains the success of MCTS despite its common use of these rollouts to
evaluate states. We further analyse non-uniformly random
rollout policies and describe conditions under which they offer improved performance.

Introduction
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a general-purpose planning algorithm that has found great success in a number
of seemingly unrelated applications, ranging from Bayesian
reinforcement learning (Guez, Silver, and Dayan 2013)
to General-Game Playing (Finnsson and Björnsson 2008).
Originally developed to tackle the game of Go (Coulom
2007), it is often applied to domains where it is difﬁcult
to incorporate expert knowledge. MCTS combines a tree
search approach with Monte Carlo simulations (also known
as rollouts), and uses the outcome of these simulations to
evaluate states in a lookahead tree. It has also shown itself to
be a ﬂexible planner, recently combining with deep neural
networks to achieve superhuman performance in Go (Silver
et al. 2016).
While many variants of MCTS exist, the Upper Conﬁdence bound applied to Trees (UCT) algorithm (Kocsis and
Szepesvári 2006) is widely used in practice, despite its shortcomings (Domshlak and Feldman 2013). A great deal of
analysis on UCT revolves around the tree-building phase of
the algorithm, which provides theoretical convergence guarantees and upper-bounds on the regret (Coquelin and Munos
2007). Less, however, is understood about the simulation
phase.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3576

