Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Learning High Dimensional Structured Single Index Models
Ravi Ganti,1 Nikhil Rao,2∗ Laura Balzano,3 Rebecca Willett,4 Robert Nowak4
1

Walmart Labs, San Bruno, CA
gmravi2003@gmail.com
2
Technicolor Research and Innovation, Los Altos, CA
3
EECS, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
4
ECE, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI

Ichimura 1993; Horowitz 2009), and have since become popular in statistical machine learning applications as well. Recently, computationally and statistically efﬁcient algorithms
have been provided for learning SIMs (Kalai and Sastry 2009;
Kakade et al. 2011) in low-dimensional settings where the
number of samples/observations n is much larger than the
ambient dimension d. However, many problems in modern
machine learning, signal processing and computational biology are high dimensional, i.e. the number of parameters to
learn, d far exceeds the number of data points n. For example,
in genetics, one has to infer activation weights for thousands
of genes with hundreds of measurements.

Abstract
Single Index Models (SIMs) are simple yet ﬂexible semiparametric models for machine learning, where the response
variable is modeled as a monotonic function of a linear combination of features. Estimation in this context requires learning
both the feature weights and the nonlinear function that relates
features to observations. While methods have been described
to learn SIMs in the low dimensional regime, a method that can
efﬁciently learn SIMs in high dimensions, and under general
structural assumptions, has not been forthcoming. In this paper, we propose computationally efﬁcient algorithms for SIM
inference in high dimensions with structural constraints. Our
general approach specializes to sparsity, group sparsity, and
low-rank assumptions among others. Experiments show that
the proposed method enjoys superior predictive performance
when compared to generalized linear models, and achieves
results comparable to or better than single layer feedforward
neural networks with signiﬁcantly less computational cost.

In this paper, motivated by high-dimensional data analysis
problems, we consider learning SIM in high dimensions. This
is a hard learning problem because (i) statistical inference
is ill-posed, and indeed impossible in the high-dimensional
setup without making additional structural assumptions and
(ii) unlike GLMs the transfer function itself is unknown and
also needs to be learned from the data. To handle these problems we impose additional structure on the unknown weight
vector w which is elegantly captured by the concept of
small atomic cardinality (Chandrasekaran et al. 2012) and
make smoothness assumptions on the transfer function g .
The concept of small atomic cardinality generalizes commonly imposed structure in high-dimensional statistics such
as sparsity, group sparsity, low-rank, and allows us to design
a single algorithm that can learn a SIM with various structural
assumptions.

Introduction
High-dimensional machine learning is often tackled using
generalized linear models, where a response variable Y ∈ R
is related to a feature vector X ∈ Rd via
E[Y |X = x] = g (w x)
(1)
for some unknown weight vector w ∈ Rd and some smooth
transfer function g . Typical examples of g are the logit and
probit functions for classiﬁcation, and the linear function
for regression. High dimensional parameter estimation for
GLMs has been widely studied, both from a theoretical and
algorithmic point of view (Van de Geer 2008; Negahban et
al. 2012; Park and Hastie 2007). While classical work on
generalized linear models (GLMs) assumes g is known, this
function is often unknown in real-world datasets, and hence
we need methods that can simultaneously learn both g and
w .
The model in (1) with g unknown is called a Single Index
Model (SIM) and is a powerful semi-parametric generalization of a GLM. SIMs were ﬁrst introduced in the econometrics and statistics literature (Horowitz and Härdle 1996;

We provide an efﬁcient algorithm called CSI (Calibrated
Single Index) that can be used to learn SIMs in high dimensions. The algorithm is an optimization procedure that
minimizes a loss function that is calibrated to the unknown
SIM, for both w and g . CSI alternates between a projected
gradient descent step to update its estimate of w and a function learning procedure called LPAV to learn a monotonic,
Lipschitz function. We provide extensive experimental evidence that demonstrates the effectiveness of CSI in a variety
of high dimensional machine learning scenarios. Moreover
we also show that we are able to obtain competitive, and
often better, results when compared to a single layer neural
network, with signiﬁcantly less computational cost.

∗

The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this paper.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1898

