Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Predicting User Roles from Computer Logs
Using Recurrent Neural Networks
Aaron Tuor,∗ Samuel Kaplan, Brian Hutchinson
Western Washington University
Bellingham, WA

Nicole Nichols and Sean Robinson
Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory
Seattle, WA

Introduction

Model

Network and other computer administrators typically have
access to a rich set of logs tracking actions by users. However, they often lack metadata such as user role, age, and
gender that can provide valuable context for users’ actions.
Inferring user attributes automatically has wide ranging implications; among others, for customization (anticipating
user needs and priorities), for managing resources (anticipating demand) and for security (interpreting anomalous behavior).
User attribute proﬁling has been most widely explored in
the context of social media, using lexical and social graph
data. Ikeda et al. (2013) use a hybrid system which predicts
user demographic information by a clustering of the user’s
followers/followees in conjunction with a support vector
machine which analyzes the tweet history of a user. Oentaryo et al. (2016) use a generalization of logistic regression
with social network relationship data in order to predict user
attributes such as age, sex, and religion.
Other researchers have considered user attribute proﬁling in network and cybersecurity domains. Iglesias (2012)
presents an unsupervised rule based classiﬁer that proﬁles
users into learned and adaptive categories based on sequences of Unix shell commands. Meng et al. (2008) learn a
mixture model over behavior templates for sequences of network activity. Panda and Patra (2008) explore the effectiveness of several decision tree classiﬁers and Naive Bayes at
classifying a network intrusion from sequences of network
events. Udoeyop (2010) uses kmeans and kernel density estimation to detect normal and abnormal user proﬁles from
ﬁne-grained user network activities, including processes,
process times, and ﬁle reads, writes and opens.
In the ongoing work described in this abstract, we predict
the role of users from computer logs, although our method
trivially generalizes to predict other categorical attributes.
We use recurrent neural networks to make increasingly reﬁned predictions over time, achieving a 30% relative reduction in role classiﬁcation error over our baseline.

Our model takes as input a series of T feature vectors xu1 , xu2 , . . . , xuT (one vector per day) for a user u
and produces as output a series of T probability vectors
pu1 , pu2 , . . . , puT , giving the distribution over roles for this
user. Because we use recurrent neural networks to produce
the probabilities, put is a function of all feature vectors up
to and including time t. In contrast to a model where put
depends only on xut , this approach offers two major advantages: ﬁrst, it allows us to capture any temporal patterns that
may exist in user behavior across days, and second, it allows
us to build conﬁdence in our predictions having accumulated
evidence over a series of days.
Speciﬁcally, our model is a stacked LSTM (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997). Let hut and cut denote the hidden
state and (long-term memory) cell state, respectively. For an
LSTM with C classes and a single hidden layer, put is calculated as follows:
u

eht,k

put,k

=

C

hut
cut

=
=

ftu

=

iut
out
gtu

=

out  tanh(cut )
ftu  cut−1 + iut  gtu , and


σ Wf,x xut + Wf,h hut−1 + bf


σ Wi,x xut + Wi,h hut−1 + bi


σ Wo,x xut + Wo,h hut−1 + bo


tanh Wg,x xut + Wg,h hut−1 + bg

=
=

j=1 e

hu
t,j

, where

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Here  denotes element-wise multiplication, and σ denotes the logistic sigmoid function. The model parameters
are the eight weight matrices W and the four bias vectors
b, and are shared among all users. For a stacked LSTM with
more than one hidden layer between xut and put , the inputs
to the th layer are the hidden states of the ( − 1)th layer.
In order to accommodate the streaming nature of the network user role classiﬁcation task, we train on multiple user
action sequences concurrently. This is accomplished by saving LSTM hidden and cell states for a ﬁxed number of time
steps for each user of the network.

∗
Email: tuora@wwu.edu. Phone: 360-650-6134. Address: 516
High Street, Bellingham, WA 98229.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4993

