Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Weakly Supervised Learning of Part Selection Model with
Spatial Constraints for Fine-Grained Image Classiﬁcation
Xiangteng He, Yuxin Peng∗
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

and aircraft models (Maji et al. 2013) etc. An inexperienced
person can easily recognize basic-level categories such as
birds, horses and dogs, since they vary a lot in appearance.
He may know several kinds of birds, but it would be very
difﬁcult to recognize 200 or even more sub-categories. For
example, it is extremely hard for an inexperienced person
to distinguish between Herring Gull and Slaty-backed Gull
whose appearance are very similar, as both of them have the
gray back and pink legs. These subordinate classes share the
same global appearance, and are often distinguished by the
subtle differences in their parts (e.g. Herring Gull and Slatybacked Gull are distinguished by the color of the back, the
latter’s is deeper). Therefore, the object and its salient parts
are crucial for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation.

Abstract
Fine-grained image classiﬁcation is challenging due to the
large intra-class variance and small inter-class variance, aiming at recognizing hundreds of sub-categories belonging
to the same basic-level category. Since two different subcategories is distinguished only by the subtle differences in
some speciﬁc parts, semantic part localization is crucial for
ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation. Most previous works improve the accuracy by looking for the semantic parts, but rely
heavily upon the use of the object or part annotations of images whose labeling are costly. Recently, some researchers
begin to focus on recognizing sub-categories via weakly supervised part detection instead of using the expensive annotations. However, these works ignore the spatial relationship
between the object and its parts as well as the interaction of
the parts, both of them are helpful to promote part selection.
Therefore, this paper proposes a weakly supervised part selection method with spatial constraints for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation, which is free of using any bounding box or
part annotations. We ﬁrst learn a whole-object detector automatically to localize the object through jointly using saliency
extraction and co-segmentation. Then two spatial constraints
are proposed to select the distinguished parts. The ﬁrst spatial constraint, called box constraint, deﬁnes the relationship
between the object and its parts, and aims to ensure that the
selected parts are deﬁnitely located in the object region, and
have the largest overlap with the object region. The second
spatial constraint, called parts constraint, deﬁnes the relationship of the object’s parts, is to reduce the parts’ overlap with
each other to avoid the information redundancy and ensure
the selected parts are the most distinguishing parts from other
categories. Combining two spatial constraints promotes parts
selection signiﬁcantly as well as achieves a notable improvement on ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation. Experimental results on CUB-200-2011 dataset demonstrate the superiority
of our method even compared with those methods using expensive annotations.

Since the discriminative features are mainly localized on
the object and its parts, most existing works follow the
pipeline: localizing the object or its parts ﬁrstly, and then extracting discriminative features for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation. As the ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation datasets
(e.g. CUB-200-2011 (Wah et al. 2011)) mostly have the
detailed annotations like bounding box and part locations,
early works directly use the detailed annotations at both
training and testing stage. The works of (Chai, Lempitsky,
and Zisserman 2013; Yang et al. 2012) use the provided
bounding box to learn part detectors in a unsupervised or
latent manner. Several methods even use the part annotations (Berg and Belhumeur 2013; Xie et al. 2013). Since
the annotations of the testing image are not available in the
practical applications, some works use the object or part annotations only at training stage and no knowledge of annotations at testing stage. Bounding box and Part annotations
are directly used in training phase to learn a strongly supervised deformable part-based model (Zhang et al. 2013;
Azizpour and Laptev 2012) or directly used to ﬁne-tune the
pre-trained Convolutional Neural Net (CNN) (Branson et al.
2014). Further more, Krause et al. (Krause et al. 2015) only
uses bounding box at training stage to learn the part detectors, then localize the parts automatically in the testing
stage. Recently, there are some promising works attempting
to learn the part detectors under the weakly supervised condition, i.e. the bounding box and part annotations are not
used at training or testing stage. These works make it possible to put the ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation into practical
applications. Neural Activation Constellations Part Model

Introduction
Fine-grained image classiﬁcation is an extremely challenging task, which aims to distinguish the objects in subordinate
classes, such as bird types (Wah et al. 2011), dog species
(Khosla et al. 2011), plant breeds (Angelova and Zhu 2013)
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4075

