Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Neural Programming by Example
Chengxun Shu

Hongyu Zhang

Beihang University
Beijing 100191, China
shuchengxun@163.com

The University of Newcastle
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia
hongyu.zhang@newcastle.edu.au

of strings. Given a new email address jacob@test.com, the
program will output the string jacob.
Lau et al. (2003) applied version space algebra to search
for possible programs. More recent PBE methods (Gulwani
2011) mainly adopt search technique to ﬁnd a composition
of predeﬁned functions (such as string Split and Concatenation) that satisﬁes the input-output examples. These methods
create a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) and search through
the sequences of functions that can generate the output string
from a given input state. These methods can generate complex string manipulation programs effectively, but require
the design of complex program synthesis algorithms.
In this paper, we propose a Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
based approach to Programming by Example. We train neural networks to automatically infer programs from inputoutput examples. During the past few years, research on
DNN has achieved signiﬁcant results in a variety of ﬁelds
such as computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), speech recognition (Mohamed, Dahl, and Hinton
2012), natural language processing (Collobert et al. 2011),
and API learning (Gu et al. 2016). Recently, researchers
have explored the feasibility of applying DNN to solve
programming and computation related problems (Neelakantan, Le, and Sutskever 2015; Reed and de Freitas 2015;
Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014; Kurach, Andrychowicz, and Sutskever 2015). Our work is based on the similar
idea of applying DNN to infer and execute computer programs. Different from the existing work, we target at the
PBE problem and train a neural PBE model with triples of
input, output and program.
Our approach, called NPBE (Neural Programming by Example), teaches DNN to compose a set of predeﬁned atomic
operations for string manipulation. Given an input-output
string pair, the NPBE model is trained to synthesize a program - a sequence of functions and corresponding arguments
that transform the input string to the output string. The program is generated from the atomic functions and one function may use the execution results of previous functions.
Thus the model is able to compose complex programs using only several predeﬁned operations.
We have experimentally evaluated NPBE on a large number of input-output strings for 45 string manipulation tasks
and the results are encouraging. We ﬁnd that our model can
generalize beyond the training input/output strings and the

Abstract
Programming by Example (PBE) targets at automatically inferring a computer program for accomplishing a certain task
from sample input and output. In this paper, we propose a
deep neural networks (DNN) based PBE model called Neural Programming by Example (NPBE), which can learn from
input-output strings and induce programs that solve the string
manipulation problems. Our NPBE model has four neural
network based components: a string encoder, an input-output
analyzer, a program generator, and a symbol selector. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of NPBE by training it end-toend to solve some common string manipulation problems in
spreadsheet systems. The results show that our model can induce string manipulation programs effectively. Our work is
one step towards teaching DNN to generate computer programs.

Introduction
Programming by Example (PBE, also called programming
by demonstration, or inductive synthesis) (Lieberman 2001;
Cypher and Halbert 1993; Gulwani 2011) gives machines
the ability to reason and generate new programs without
substantial amount of human supervision. In PBE systems,
users (often non-professional programmers) provide a machine with input-output examples of a task they would like to
perform and the machine automatically infers a program to
accomplish the task. The concept of PBE has been successfully used for string manipulation in spreadsheet systems
such as Microsoft Excel (Gulwani et al. 2015), computeraided education (Gulwani 2014) and data extracting systems
(Le and Gulwani 2014).
As an example, if a user provides the following input and
output examples:
john@example.com ⇒ john
james@company.com ⇒ james
A PBE system should understand that the user would like to
extract the user name from the email address. It will automatically synthesize a program Select(Split(x, @), 0), where
x is the input string, Split is to split a string according to a
delimiter, and Select is to select a substring from an array
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1539

