Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

When Does Bounded-Optimal
Metareasoning Favor Few Cognitive Systems?
Smitha Milli

Falk Lieder

Thomas L. Grifﬁths

EECS Department
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
smilli@berkeley.edu

Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
falk.lieder@berkeley.edu

Department of Psychology
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
tom grifﬁths@berkeley.edu

determining the exact amount of computation that should
be done. This kind of approximation is a generalization
of dual-process accounts of human cognition (Evans 2008;
Kahneman 2011), which posit the existence of two types of
cognitive systems, one that is slow and accurate and another
that is fast but error-prone.
The postulated existence of distinct cognitive systems
raises two interesting questions. First, how many systems
should an agent have? Second, what characteristics should
those systems have? These questions are important for understanding what the existence of multiple cognitive systems
entails for human rationality (Evans 2008; Stanovich 2011)
as well as for designing bounded-optimal AI systems (Russell and Subramanian 1995) that can metareason efﬁciently.
We investigate these questions in two settings. The ﬁrst
setting is a simple two-alternative forced choice task where
the agent samples from a posterior distribution to infer
which of two options is better. In this case, metareasoning selects how many samples to draw before taking an
action (Vul et al. 2014). The second setting involves planning under uncertainty in a Markov decision process (MDP)
(Lin et al. 2015). In this case, metareasoning determines the
number of rollouts to perform to approximate the solution
to the MDP with bounded real-time dynamic programming
(BRTDP; McMahan, Likhachev, and Gordan, 2005).
Our experiments show that the optimal number of systems increases with the variability of the environment but
decreases with the costliness of metareasoning. In addition,
when it is optimal to have two systems, then the difference
in their speed-accuracy tradeoffs increases with the variability of the environment. In variable environments, this results
in one system that is accurate but costly to use and another
system that is fast but error-prone. These predictions mirror
the assertions of dual-process accounts of cognition (Evans
2008; Kahneman 2011) suggesting that bounded optimality
might provide a rational reinterpretation of those theories.

Abstract
While optimal metareasoning is notoriously intractable,
humans are nonetheless able to adaptively allocate their
computational resources. A possible approximation that
humans may use to do this is to only metareason over
a ﬁnite set of cognitive systems that perform variable
amounts of computation. The highly inﬂuential “dualprocess” accounts of human cognition, which postulate
the coexistence of a slow accurate system with a fast
error-prone system, can be seen as a special case of this
approximation. This raises two questions: how many
cognitive systems should a bounded optimal agent be
equipped with and what characteristics should those
systems have? We investigate these questions in two settings: a one-shot decision between two alternatives, and
planning under uncertainty in a Markov decision process. We ﬁnd that the optimal number of systems depends on the variability of the environment and the costliness of metareasoning. Consistent with dual-process
theories, we also ﬁnd that when having two systems is
optimal, then the ﬁrst system is fast but error-prone and
the second system is slow but accurate.

Introduction
An agent should not think long about what to do when it is
about to get hit by a car, but should deﬁnitely do so before
declaring war. The optimal amount to think before making
a decision is dependent on the setting, involving a trade-off
between the cost of thinking and the cost of making an error.
Thus, in order for an agent to be optimal across different
settings it must metareason to adaptively choose the correct
amount to think (Russell and Wefald 1991a).
Optimal metareasoning is generally computationally intractable (Russell and Wefald 1991a; Lin et al. 2015). Despite this, humans are still able to adaptively allocate their
computational resources in inference and decision-making
(Vul et al. 2014; Grifﬁths, Lieder, and Goodman 2015;
Gershman, Horvitz, and Tenenbaum 2015). One method
by which humans may perform approximate metareasoning is to choose between a discrete set of cognitive systems that perform variable amounts of computation (Lieder
et al. 2014; Lieder and Grifﬁths 2015), rather than directly

Background
We draw on the idea that the mind is composed of multiple cognitive systems, as instantiated in dual-process theories of human cognition, and the ideas of bounded optimality and rational metareasoning developed in artiﬁcial intelligence research. We review these ideas in turn.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4422

