Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Quantifying and Detecting Collective Motion by Manifold Learning
1

Qi Wang,1∗ Mulin Chen,1 Xuelong Li2
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
2
Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Xi’an Institute of Optics and Precision Mechanics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi’an, 710119, Shaanxi, P. R. China
crabwq@gmail.com, chenmulin001@gmail.com, xuelong li@opt.ac.cn
Abstract
D

The analysis of collective motion has attracted many researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence. Though plenty of works
have been done on this topic, the achieved performance is
still unsatisfying due to the complex nature of collective motions. By investigating the similarity of individuals, this paper proposes a novel framework for both quantifying and detecting collective motions. Our main contributions are threefold: (1) the time-varying dynamics of individuals are deeply
investigated to better characterize the individual motion; (2)
a structure-based collectiveness measurement is designed to
precisely quantify both individual-level and scene-level properties of collective motions; (3) a multi-stage clustering strategy is presented to discover a more comprehensive understanding of the crowd scenes, containing both local and global
collective motions. Extensive experimental results on real
world data sets show that our method is capable of handling crowd scenes with complicated structures and various
dynamics, and demonstrate its superior performance against
state-of-the-art competitors.

E
+LJK

F

0HGLXP

/RZ

/RFDO
FRQVLVWHQF\
*OREDO
FRQVLVWHQF\

Figure 1: (a) Collective motion in pedestrians, ﬁsh shoal and
bison herd. (b) Crowd scenes with varying collectiveness.
(c) Local and Global consistency in crowd scenes.

Introduction

an individual’s consistency with others, and scene-level
collectiveness measures the degree of individuals’ actions
as an entirety in a crowd scene, as shown in Fig. 1(B).
As a comprehensive feature, collectiveness is practical to
quantify collective motions, and has demonstrated its merit
in crowd behavior analysis (Shao, Loy, and Wang 2014;
Li, Chen, and Wang 2016). Though many efforts have been
spent on the quantitative calculation of collectiveness, the
achieved performance is still far from ideal. This is because
existing works are either limited to utilize temporal information or unable to handle collective motions with complicated
spatial structures.
The detection of collective motions is also a hot but challenging issue in the realm of artiﬁcial intelligence. Generally speaking, the objective of collective motion detection is to ﬁnd individuals with high behavior consistency
from their time-series observations (Zhou, Tang, and Wang
2012), and the difﬁculty comes from two aspects. First,
because of occlusion and tracking noise, it’s not easy to
get the accurate time-series observations of individuals. To
avoid this problem, some works (Wu, Ye, and Zhao 2015;
Zhou et al. 2014) detect collective motions on each frame
separately, leading to an inadequate utilization of tempo-

Collective motion, which is pervasive in crowd systems, has
been extensively studied in many disciplines, such as psychology (Wheelan 2005), biologic (Ballerini 2008), physics
(Hughes 2003). It exists widely in natural and social scenarios (e.g. Fig. 1(A)), and contains a lot of information about
the crowd phenomenon. In the artiﬁcial intelligence, collective motion is primarily about human crowds, and involves a
lot of applications such as multi-agent navigation (Godoy
et al. 2016), crowd tracking (Zhu, Wang, and Yu 2014;
Wang, Fang, and Yuan 2014; Fang, Wang, and Yuan 2014),
and crowd monitoring (Zhang et al. 2015). However, both
the quantiﬁcation and detection of collective motions are
still difﬁcult tasks because of the complex structures and
time-varying dynamics in crowd scenes.
Collectiveness is a fundamental descriptor of collective
motions ﬁrstly proposed by (Zhou et al. 2014) as a quantiﬁcation measure. Individual-level collectiveness indicates
∗
Qi Wang is the corresponding authors. This work is supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61379094 and Natural Science Foundation Research Project of
Shaanxi Province under Grant 2015JM6264.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4292

