Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Causal Effect Identiﬁcation by Adjustment under
Confounding and Selection Biases
Juan D. Correa

Elias Bareinboim

Purdue University
correagr@purdue.edu

Purdue University
eb@purdue.edu

a treatment (e.g., taking or not a drug), Y represents an outcome (health status), and Z is a factor (e.g., gender, age) that
affects both the propensity of being treated and the outcome.
The edges (Z, X) and (Z, Y ) may encode the facts ”gender
affects how the drug is being prescribed” and ”gender affects recovery” respectively – for example, females may be
more health conscious, so they seek for treatment more frequently than their male counterparts and at the same time
are less likely to develop large complications for the particular disease. Intuitively, the causal effect represents the
variations of X that bring about change in Y regardless of
the inﬂuence of Z on X, which is graphically represented
in Fig. 1(b). Mutilation is the graphical operation of removing arrows representing a decision made by an autonomous
agent of setting a variable to a certain value. The mathematical counterpart of mutilation is the do() operator and the
average causal effect of X on Y is usually written in terms
of the do-distribution P (y | do(x)) (Pearl 2000, Ch. 1).
The gold standard for obtaining the do-distribution is
through the use of randomization, where the treatment assignment is selected by a randomized device (e.g., a coin
ﬂip) regardless of any other set of covariates (Z). In fact,
this operation physically transforms the reality of the underlying population (Fig. 1(a)) into the corresponding mutilated world (Fig. 1(b)). The effect of Z on X is neutralized once randomization is applied. Despite its effectiveness, randomized studies can be prohibitively expensive, and
even unattainable in certain cases, either for technical, ethical, or technical reasons – e.g., one cannot randomize the
cholesterol level of a patient and record if it causes the heart
to stops, when trying to assess the effect of cholesterol level
on cardiac failure.
An alternative way of computing causal effects is
trying to relate non-experimentally collected samples
(drawn from P (z, x, y)) with the experimental distribution
(P (y | do(x))). Non-experimental (often called observational) data relates to the model in Fig. 1(a) where subjects decide by themselves to take or not the drug (X)
while inﬂuenced by other factors (Z). There are a number of techniques developed for this task, where the most
general one is known as do-calculus (Pearl 1995). In practice, one particular strategy from do-calculus called adjustment is used the most. It consists of averaging the effect of X on Y over the different levels of Z, isolating

Abstract
Controlling for selection and confounding biases are two of
the most challenging problems in the empirical sciences as
well as in artiﬁcial intelligence tasks. Covariate adjustment
(or, Backdoor Adjustment) is the most pervasive technique
used for controlling confounding bias, but the same is oblivious to issues of sampling selection. In this paper, we introduce a generalized version of covariate adjustment that simultaneously controls for both confounding and selection biases.
We ﬁrst derive a sufﬁcient and necessary condition for recovering causal effects using covariate adjustment from an observational distribution collected under preferential selection.
We then relax this setting to consider cases when additional,
unbiased measurements over a set of covariates are available
for use (e.g., the age and gender distribution obtained from
census data). Finally, we present a complete algorithm with
polynomial delay to ﬁnd all sets of admissible covariates for
adjustment when confounding and selection biases are simultaneously present and unbiased data is available.

Introduction
One of the central challenges in data-driven ﬁelds is to compute the effect of interventions – for instance, how increasing the educational budget will affect violence rates in a city,
whether treating patients with a certain drug will help their
recovery, or how increasing the product price will change
monthly sales? These questions are commonly referred as
the problem of identiﬁcation of causal effects. There are
two types of systematic bias that pose obstacles to this kind
of inference, namely confounding bias and selection bias.
The former refers to the presence of a set of factors that affect both the action (also known as treatment) and the outcome (Pearl 1993), while the latter arises when the action,
outcome, or other factors differentially affect the inclusion
of subjects in the data sample (Bareinboim and Pearl 2016).
The goal of our analysis is to produce an unbiased estimand of the causal effect, speciﬁcally, the probability distribution of the outcome when an action is performed by an
autonomous agent (e.g., FDA, robot), regardless of how the
decision would naturally occur (Pearl 2000, Ch. 1). For example, consider the graph in Fig. 1(a) in which X represents
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3740

