Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

AI Projects for Computer
Science Capstone Classes (Extended Abstract)
Matthew E. Taylor, Sakire Arslan Ay

{taylorm,arslanay}@eecs.wsu.edu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Washington State University

Introduction

Projects are judged in a multi-level competition on originality, compliance with software engineering principles, completion, and their successful deployment.

Capstone senior design projects provide students with a collaborative software design and development experience to
reinforce learned material while allowing students latitude
in developing real-world applications. Our two-semester
capstone classes are required for all computer science majors. Students must have completed a software engineering
course — capstone classes are typically taken during their
last two semesters. Project proposals come from a variety of
sources, including industry, WSU faculty (from our own and
other departments), local agencies, and entrepreneurs. We
have recently targeted projects in AI — although students
typically have little background, they ﬁnd the ideas and
methods compelling. This paper outlines our instructional
approach and reports our experiences with three projects.

Assessment
Student performance is assessed on multiple graded items.
Writing assignments are graded per team. Teams present
their progress weekly to the instructor and project mentor.
Meetings are highly effective in enforcing the agile methodology and keep projects on track. At the end of the course,
each team prepares and presents a poster. Project posters are
judged based on the quality, content, design, and presentation. During the poster session, the teams interact with several different audiences including industry representatives,
faculty, and students. This is a valuable experience for students: they must pitch their project in multiple ways and
they receive a substantial amount of feedback. During the
poster session, the instructor assesses the students’ soft skills
in presenting their work and their interactions with various
audiences. Lastly, students also provide formal peer review,
in accordance with cooperative learning principles.

Course Description
Several weeks before the start of the semester, the instructor
solicits project topics and mentors, favoring projects that 1)
involve large scale software development, 2) encourage students to learn about new areas, and 3) are interdisciplinary.
Ideally, the project will have an industry mentor.
Initiation (2 weeks): Matching students with projects is done
during the ﬁrst week of the semester and takes into account
student preferences, prior coursework, and experience.
Planning (3 weeks): Teams follow an agile software development blended with certain aspects of linear Waterfall
model. Software development starts with a short planning
phase followed by 2–3 week-long sprints (similar to Scrum),
where each sprint encompasses all of the typical stages of
software development for a small set of software features.
Development (20 weeks): Teams meet weekly with the instructor and the mentors. Each sprint typically involves
some planning, design, implementation, integration, and
testing. At the end of each sprint, the teams provide brief
demos. The prototypes are demonstrated at the end of the
ﬁrst semester and the middle of the second semester.
Termination (3 weeks): The project terminates with a ﬁnal
report and demonstrations of ﬁnal prototype to team mentors
and to the public in the form of a poster/demo presentation.

Example Projects
The Gamiﬁcation in Classroom Settings project built a multiplayer game targeted for educational use. The main novelty of the project was to produce a content independent
game — rather than customizing the game to a particular
set of skills or class, build a game that could run alongside
multiple classes with minimal changes. The team worked
with a graduate student to explore multiple ways to leverage games to improve student engagement in introductory
classes, giving players in-game bonuses for homework submission, grade improvement, attendance, etc. The team
helped to deploy the game in a large introductory computer
science class while collecting statistics. The game is currently being improved by a new group of students. Data
mining techniques are used to better understand the trends
and player preferences associated with the game. The students are incorporating sub-games from genres into the overall framework — goal is to predict which types of games will
be played most by different types of students. The collected
data will assist with a PhD student’s dissertation (Cain et al.
2016). Based on the current analysis, there was not a signiﬁ-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4819

