Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Dependency-Guided Named Entity Recognition
Zhanming Jie, Aldrian Obaja Muis, Wei Lu
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore, 487372
zhanming jie@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {aldrian muis,luwei}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Named entity recognition (NER), which focuses on the extraction of semantically meaningful named entities and their
semantic classes from text, serves as an indispensable component for several down-stream natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as relation extraction and event extraction. Dependency trees, on the other hand, also convey
crucial semantic-level information. It has been shown previously that such information can be used to improve the performance of NER (Sasano and Kurohashi 2008; Ling and Weld
2012). In this work, we investigate on how to better utilize the
structured information conveyed by dependency trees to improve the performance of NER. Speciﬁcally, unlike existing
approaches which only exploit dependency information for
designing local features, we show that certain global structured information of the dependency trees can be exploited
when building NER models where such information can provide guided learning and inference. Through extensive experiments, we show that our proposed novel dependency-guided
NER model performs competitively with models based on
conventional semi-Markov conditional random ﬁelds, while
requiring signiﬁcantly less running time.

Foreign Minister Shlomo Ben
NNP
O

NNP
O

The

House

-

NNP
HYPH
NNP
B - PER I - PER I - PER

of

NNP
DT
IN
B - ORG I - ORG I - ORG

Ami

gave a talk

NNP
I - PER

VBD DT
O
O

Representatives votes
NNPS
I - ORG

VB
O

NN
O

on the measure
IN
O

DT
O

NN
O

Figure 1: Two sentences annotated with both dependency
and named entity information. The edges on top of words
represent the dependencies and the labels with IOB encoding are the entity types.

Ling and Weld 2012; Cucchiarelli and Velardi 2001). Figure
1 shows two example phrases annotated with both dependency and named entity information. The local features are
usually the head word and its part-of-speech tag at current
position. For example, “Shlomo” with entity tag B - PER in the
ﬁrst sentence has two local dependency features, head word
“Ami” and head tag “NNP”. However, such a simple treatment of dependency structures largely ignores the global
structured information conveyed by the dependency trees,
which can be potentially useful in building NER models.
One key observation we can make in Figure 1 is that
named entities are often covered by a single or multiple consecutive dependency arcs. In the ﬁrst example, the named
entity “Shlomo Ben - Ami” of type PER (person) is completely covered by the single dependency arc from “Ami” to
“Shlomo”. Similarly, the named entity “The House of Representatives” of type ORG (organization) in the second example is covered by multiple arcs which are adjacent to each
other. Such information can potentially be the global features we can obtain from the dependency trees. This leads
to the following questions: 1) can such global structured information conveyed by dependency trees be exploited for
improved NER, and 2) if so, how to build new NER models
where such information can be explicitly incorporated?
With these two questions, in this paper we perform some
investigations on how to better utilize the structured infor-

Introduction
Named entity recognition (NER) is one of the most important tasks in the ﬁeld of natural language processing
(NLP). The task focuses on the extraction of named entities
together with their semantic classes (such as organization
or person) from text. The extracted named entity information has been shown to be useful in various NLP tasks, including coreference resolution, question answering and relation extraction (Lao and Cohen 2010; Lee et al. 2012;
Krishnamurthy and Mitchell 2015).
Dependency trees, on the other hand, were shown to be
useful in several semantic processing tasks in NLP such as
semantic parsing and question answering (Poon and Domingos 2009; Liang, Jordan, and Klein 2013). The dependency structures convey semantic-level information which
was shown to be useful for the NER task. Existing research
efforts have exploited such dependency structured information by designing dependency-related local features that can
be used in the NER models (Sasano and Kurohashi 2008;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3457

