Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Enabling Dark Energy Science with Deep Generative Models of Galaxy Images
Siamak Ravanbakhsh,1 François Lanusse,2 Rachel Mandelbaum,2
Jeff Schneider,1 Barnabás Póczos1
1. School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
2. McWilliams Center for Cosmology, Department of Physics,
Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

become distinguishable.
However, the quality of this analysis hinges on the accuracy of the shape measurement algorithms tasked with estimating the ellipticities of the galaxies in the survey. This
point is particularly crucial to the success of these missions,
as any unaccounted for measurement biases in their ensemble averages would impact the ﬁnal cosmological analysis
and potentially lead to false conclusions. In order to detect
and/or calibrate any such biases, future surveys will heavily
rely on image simulations, closely mimicking real observations but with a known ground truth lensing signal.

Abstract
Understanding the nature of dark energy, the mysterious force
driving the accelerated expansion of the Universe, is a major
challenge of modern cosmology. The next generation of cosmological surveys, speciﬁcally designed to address this issue, rely on accurate measurements of the apparent shapes of
distant galaxies. However, shape measurement methods suffer from various unavoidable biases and therefore will rely
on a precise calibration to meet the accuracy requirements
of the science analysis. This calibration process remains an
open challenge as it requires large sets of high quality galaxy
images. To this end, we study the application of deep conditional generative models in generating realistic galaxy images. In particular we consider variations on conditional variational autoencoder and introduce a new adversarial objective
for training of conditional generative networks. Our results
suggest a reliable alternative to the acquisition of expensive
high quality observations for generating the calibration data
needed by the next generation of cosmological surveys.

Stars
(blurred)

(pixellated)

Propagation through the Earth’s
atmosphere and telescope optics
Realisation on detector

Galaxies

Propagation through the Universe

The last two decades have greatly clariﬁed the contents of
the Universe, while leaving several large mysteries in our
cosmological model. We now have compelling evidence that
the expansion rate of the Universe is accelerating, suggesting that the vast majority of the total energy content of the
Universe is the so-called dark energy. Yet we lack an understanding of what dark energy actually is, which provides one
of the main motivations behind the next generation of cosmological surveys such as LSST (LSST Science Collaboration et al. 2009), Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011) and WFIRST
(Green et al. 2012). These billion dollar projects are speciﬁcally designed to shed light on the nature of dark energy by
probing the Universe through the weak gravitational lensing
effect –i.e., the minute deﬂection of the light from distant objects by the intervening massive large scale structures of the
Universe. On cosmological scales, this lensing effect causes
very small but coherent deformations of background galaxy
images, which appear slightly sheared, providing a way to
statistically map the matter distribution in the Universe. To
measure the lensing signal, future surveys will image and
measure the shapes of billions of galaxies, signiﬁcantly driving down statistical errors compared to the current generation of surveys, to the level where dark energy models may

(sheared)

(blurred)

(pixellated)

Figure 1: Illustration of the processes involved in the measurement of weak gravitational lensing. The light from distant galaxies is deﬂected by the matter in the Universe, causing a shearing of the galaxy images, which are then further
blurred by the atmosphere and the telescope optics and ﬁnally pixelated into a noisy image by the imaging sensor. Image credit: Mandelbaum et al. (2014), adapted from Kitching
et al. (2010).
Producing these image simulations, however, is challenging in itself as they require high quality galaxy images as the
input of the simulation pipeline. Such observations can only
be obtained by extremely expensive space-based imaging
surveys, which will remain a scarce resource for the foreseeable future. The largest current survey being used for image
simulation purposes is the COSMOS survey (Scoville et al.
2007), carried out using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST).
Despite being the largest available dataset, COSMOS is relatively small, and there is great interest in increasing the size
of our galaxy image samples to improve the quality of this
crucial calibration process.
In this work, we propose an alternative to the expensive acquisition of more high quality calibration data using

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1488

