Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Small Representations of Big Kidney Exchange Graphs
John P. Dickerson,∗,+ Aleksandr M. Kazachkov,+ Ariel Procaccia,+ Tuomas Sandholm+
University of Maryland∗
Carnegie Mellon University+
john@cs.umd.edu, {arielpro,sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu, akazachk@cmu.edu

A central aspect of kidney exchange is the clearing problem, that is, determining the “best” set of cyclic and chainbased swaps to perform in a given compatibility graph,
which consists of all participating patients, donors, and
their potential feasible transactions. For even simple (but
realistic) models of kidney exchange, the clearing problem is N P-hard (Abraham, Blum, and Sandholm 2007;
Biró, Manlove, and Rizzi 2009) and also extremely difﬁcult
to solve in practice (Glorie, van de Klundert, and Wagelmans
2014; Anderson et al. 2015; Dickerson et al. 2016).
In this paper, we tackle the complexity of the clearing
problem via the introduction of a novel model for kidney exchange that explicitly takes into account all attributes of the
participating patients and donors. Under the assumption that
real kidney exchange graphs can be represented using a constant number of attributes, we show that our model permits
polynomial-time solutions to central N P-hard problems in
general kidney exchange. Inspired by classical results from
intersection graph theory, we give conditions on the representation of arbitrary graphs in our model, and generalize to
the case where participants are allowed to have a thresholded
number of negative interactions between attributes. Noting
that real-life kidney exchange graphs are not arbitrary, we
show on actual data from the United Network for Organ
Sharing (UNOS) US-wide kidney exchange that our model
permits lossless representation of true graphs with far fewer
attributes than the worst-case theoretical results require.

Abstract
Kidney exchanges are organized markets where patients swap
willing but incompatible donors. In the last decade, kidney exchanges grew from small and regional to large and
national—and soon, international. This growth results in
more lives saved, but exacerbates the empirical hardness of
the N P-complete problem of optimally matching patients
to donors. State-of-the-art matching engines use integer programming techniques to clear ﬁelded kidney exchanges, but
these methods must be tailored to speciﬁc models and objective functions, and may fail to scale to larger exchanges. In
this paper, we observe that if the kidney exchange compatibility graph can be encoded by a constant number of patient
and donor attributes, the clearing problem is solvable in polynomial time. We give necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for
losslessly shrinking the representation of an arbitrary compatibility graph. Then, using real compatibility graphs from
the UNOS US-wide kidney exchange, we show how many
attributes are needed to encode real graphs. The experiments
show that, indeed, small numbers of attributes sufﬁce.

1

Introduction

There are over 100,000 needy patients waiting for a kidney transplant in the United States, with similar—and
increasing—demand worldwide.1 Complementing potential
cadaveric transplantation via the deceased donor waiting
list, a recent innovation—kidney exchange (Rapaport 1986;
Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004)—allows patients with willing living donors to participate in cyclic donor swaps or
altruist-initiated donation chains to receive a life-saving organ. Kidney exchange now accounts for over 10% of living
donation in the US, with that percentage increasing annually.
In reality, participating patients and donors are endowed
with a set of attributes: blood type, tissue type, age, insurance, home transplant center, willingness to travel, and myriad other measurements of health, personal preference, and
logistical constraints. While some of these features can, at a
cost, be temporarily or permanently changed, the attributes
determine the feasibility of a potential donation from each
donor to each patient. For example, a donor with blood type
AB can only give to a patient with that blood type.

2

In this section, we formalize our model of kidney exchange.
We prove that under this model certain well-known N Phard problems in general kidney exchange are solvable in
polynomial time. We also show that, given a compatibility
graph, determining the best set of attributes to change (at
some cost) is solvable in polynomial time.

2.1

Notation & Preliminaries

A kidney exchange can be represented by a directed compatibility graph G = (V, E). Each patient-donor pair, or
unpaired altruistic donor, forms a vertex v ∈ V , and a directed edge exists from one vertex to another if the donor at
the former can give to the patient at the latter, i.e., are compatible (Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver 2004; 2005).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1

A New Model for Kidney Exchange

https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/converge/data/

487

