Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Preference Elicitation for Participatory Budgeting
Gerdus Benade

Swaprava Nath

Carnegie Mellon University
jbenade@andrew.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University
swapravn@cs.cmu.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia

Nisarg Shah

Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Harvard University
nisarg@g.harvard.edu
In the ﬁrst approach, the input format — the way in which
each voter’s preferences are elicited — is knapsack votes:
Each voter reports his individual solution to the knapsack
problem, that is, the set of projects that maximizes his overall value (assuming an additive valuation function), subject
to the budget constraint. The second component of the approach is the aggregation rule; in this case, each voter is
seen as approving all the projects in his knapsack, and then
projects are ordered by the number of approval votes and
greedily selected for execution, until the budget runs out.
The second approach uses value-for-money comparisons as
the input format — it asks voters to compare pairs of projects
by the ratio between value and cost. These comparisons are
aggregated using variants of classic voting rules, including
the Borda count rule and the Kemeny rule.
In a sense, Goel et al. (2016) take a bottom-up approach:
They deﬁne novel, intuitive input formats that encourage
voters to take cost — not just value — into account, and
justify them after the fact. By contrast, we wish to take a topdown approach, by specifying an overarching optimization
goal, and using it to compare different methods for participatory budgeting.

Abstract
Participatory budgeting enables the allocation of public funds
by collecting and aggregating individual preferences; it has
already had a sizable real-world impact. But making the most
of this new paradigm requires a rethinking of some of the basics of computational social choice, including the very way
in which individuals express their preferences. We analytically compare four preference elicitation methods — knapsack votes, rankings by value or value for money, and threshold approval votes — through the lens of implicit utilitarian
voting, and ﬁnd that threshold approval votes are qualitatively
superior. This conclusion is supported by experiments using
data from real participatory budgeting elections.

1

Introduction

One of the most well-studied problems in computational
social choice (Brandt et al. 2016) deals with aggregating individual preferences over alternatives — expressed as
rankings — into a collective choice of a subset of alternatives (Procaccia, Reddi, and Shah 2012; Skowron, Faliszewski, and Lang 2015; Caragiannis et al. 2016). Nascent
social choice applications, though, have given rise to the
harder, richer problem of budgeted social choice (Lu and
Boutilier 2011), where alternatives have associated costs,
and the selected subset is subject to a budget constraint.
Our interest in budgeted social choice stems from the
striking real-world impact of the participatory budgeting
paradigm (Cabannes 2004), which allows local governments
to allocate public funds by eliciting and aggregating the preferences of residents over potential projects. Indeed, in just a
few years, the Participatory Budgeting Project1 has helped
allocate more than $170 million dollars of public money
for more than 500 local projects, primarily in the US and
Canada (including New York City, Chicago, Boston, and
San Francisco).
In pioneering work, Goel et al. (2016) — who have facilitated a number of participatory budgeting elections as part
of the Stanford Crowdsourced Democracy Team2 — propose and evaluate two participatory budgeting approaches.

1.1

Our Approach and Results

Let us deﬁne the participatory budgeting problem a bit more
formally, following Goel et al. (2016). A set N of n voters
are voting over a set A of m alternatives (projects), where
each alternative a has cost ca . The utility voter i has for alternative a is denoted vi (a). Moreover, utility functions are
additive, that is, the
 utility of a voter for a set of alternatives A ⊆ A is a∈A vi (a). Our goal is to choose a set
W ⊆ A of winning alternatives that maximizes the (utilitarian) social welfare, subject to the total cost not exceeding
the budget B:
 
vi (a).
(1)
arg
max

W ⊆A :

a∈W ca ⩽B

i∈N a∈W

We make essentially3 no assumptions about the utility
functions. Nevertheless, solving (1) would be easy if we

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://www.participatorybudgeting.org
2
http://voxpopuli.stanford.edu

3
Other than a standard normalization assumption that we discuss later.

376

