Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Event Reconstruction Tool for Conﬂict Monitoring Using Social Media
Junwei Liang, Desai Fan, Han Lu, Poyao Huang, Jia Chen, Lu Jiang, Alexander Hauptmann
Carnegie Mellon University
{junweil, dfan, hlu2, poyaoh, jiac, lujiang, alex}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
What happened during the Boston Marathon in 2013? Nowadays, at any major event, lots of people take videos and share
them on social media. To fully understand exactly what happened in these major events, researchers and analysts often
have to examine thousands of these videos manually. To reduce this manual effort, we present an investigative system
that automatically synchronizes these videos to a global timeline and localizes them on a map. In addition to alignment
in time and space, our system combines various functions
for analysis, including gunshot detection, crowd size estimation, 3D reconstruction and person tracking. To our best
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time a uniﬁed framework has been
built for comprehensive event reconstruction for social media
videos.

Figure 1: The workﬂow of Our Event Reconstruction Tool

Introduction

shaky to see things clearly. Useful information about the
event may spread across different time segments of different videos. To enable accurate common video analysis tasks
such as person tracking and scene reconstruction, we ﬁrst
solve the two basic and essential tasks, synchronization and
localization of videos.
In contrast to previous work, we consider the video inthe-wild paradigm. Our system synchronizes and localizes
videos from a large unorganized collection. Based on the
time and location meta data, our system combines advanced
analysis tools of gunshot detection, crowd size estimation,
3D scene reconstruction and person tracking.

A tremendous amount of videos is being uploaded to social
network sites every minute, documenting every aspect of our
lives and events all over the world. When an event happens,
especially for those involving a large crowd of people, multiple videos would be taken, recording the same event at different moments, from different angles, and at different positions. For example, events like New Year’s Eve at NYC,
Carnival in Brazil, and Boston Marathon bombing all have
hundreds of or even thousands of attendees uploading videos
of the event. The collection of these user-generated recordings not only enables new applications such as free-view
video (Collet et al. 2015) and 3D-reconstruction (Zhang et
al. 2015), but it may also help our society achieve a more
unbiased understanding of the event truth (Aronson, Xu, and
Hauptmann 2015). Such information would be particularly
important for conﬂict or violence events, in which the truth
is critical to the general public and for law enforcement to
take action.
Unlike videos captured by ﬁxed, calibrated surveillance
cameras, consumer videos are captured “in the wild” (i.e.,
at various time, location, perspectives, with different devices
such as smart phones, watches or camcorders.) These videos
are sometimes noisy and have low quality. For example, in
an unexpected violent event, people are often scared and the
videos taken under that situation may thus be too blurry or

System Framework
Our system takes a video collection from a major event as
input and then puts all videos into a global timeline by synchronization and onto a map by localization, as shown in
Figure 1. Give the synchronization and location result, users
can utilize our powerful tool for various kinds of event information retrieval, including gunshot detection, crowd size
estimation, 3D reconstruction and person tracking.

Video Synchronization and Localization
Our video synchronization system operates in two stages.
The ﬁrst stage is pairwise video synchronization. Our system
ﬁnds the best synchronization for each video to the others.
Then in the second stage, our system ﬁnd the best global
synchronization among all the videos based on the pairwise

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5097

