Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Music: Towards Musical Dialogue
Mason Bretan

Sageev Oore, Jesse Engel
Douglas Eck, Larry Heck

Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

Google Research
Mountain View, CA

1. The ability to interpret and understand the higher level
semantics of the humans input.
2. The knowledge to derive an appropriate response (i.e. describe the relationship between call and response pairs in
the musical dialogue) and generate the response in realtime.
3. The ability to accommodate for the timing deviations inherent to human performance (as opposed to pure musical
score representations).

Abstract
Computer dialogue systems are designed with the intention
of supporting meaningful interactions with humans. Common
modes of communication include speech, text, and physical
gestures. In this work we explore a communication paradigm
in which the input and output channels consist of music.
Speciﬁcally, we examine the musical interaction scenario of
call and response. We present a system that utilizes a deep
autoencoder to learn semantic embeddings of musical input.
The system learns to transform these embeddings in a manner
such that reconstructing from these transformation vectors
produces appropriate musical responses. In order to generate
a response the system employs a combination of generation
and unit selection. Selection is based on a nearest neighbor
search within the embedding space and for real-time application the search space is pruned using vector quantization. The
live demo consists of a person playing a midi keyboard and
the computer generating a response that is played through a
loudspeaker.

Learning a Deep Music Model
In order for the dialogue to be successful the computer generated responses must be semantically relevant to what the
human is playing. To determine semantic relevance we use
a method similar to those used in language (word2vec, skipgram, DSSM) and learn to predict the surrounding context
of the music (Mikolov et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2013). The
model consists of stacking encoders beginning at the level
of a single “beat” and ending with an encoding of four beats
(see Figure 1).
Each network in the stack is trained using cosine similarity.
T 
 ,Y
 )= X ·Y
sim(X
(1)
 ||Y
|
|X

Introduction
We present an interactive music system in which a person plays music with a computer system in a turn-taking
paradigm. Unlike previous n-gram based interactive systems
(Pachet 2003; Weinberg, Raman, and Mallikarjuna 2009),
this system generates its responses based on a deep neural
architecture that can be used to generate music at the note
level or perform unit selection on a database comprised of
human composed music where each unit consists of four
beats worth of music.
The main premise for the interaction comes from musical
“call and response” in which, in its basic form, one musician
plays a phrase and a second musician plays a phrase in response. Continued interaction in this fashion creates a type
of dialogue between the two musicians. In our system, the
computer generated responses are derived from a weighted
combination of the person’s immediate input and its own
previous outputs.
There are three important attributes a computational system must possess in order to achieve a successful interaction:

Negative examples are included in a softmax function to
 Q)
 where R
 is the reconstructed vector and
compute P (R|
 is the input vector.
Q
 R))

exp(sim(Q,
 d ))
exp(sim(Q,


 Q)
 =
P (R|

(2)

dD

The network learns the parameters by minimizing the following loss function using gradient descent:

 Q).

P (R|
(3)
−log
(Q,R)

Measure level (four beat) units are chosen by selecting the
unit in the library with the minimum distance to the four-beat
encoded vector. Unit selection is a powerful method because
the model does not need to learn how to re-create all of the
musical structure (in both the rhythmic and pitch space) and
the information within each unit is guaranteed to be valid.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5081

