Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

On Markov Games Played by Bayesian and Boundedly-Rational Players
Muthukumaran Chandrasekaran

Yingke Chen

Prashant Doshi

THINC Lab, University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
mkran@uga.edu

Sichuan University
Chengdu, China
yke.chen@gmail.com

THINC Lab, University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
pdoshi@cs.uga.edu

game (Littman 1994; Maskin and Tirole 2001). These sophisticated games are ﬁnding appeal as a theoretical framework for situating pragmatic interactions such as impromptu
or ad hoc teamwork (Albrecht and Ramamoorthy 2013).
Each player in our framework may have one of many types
– explicitly deﬁned unlike the abstract ones in the Harsanyi
framework – and which induces a belief hierarchy of ﬁnite depth. Contextual to such ﬁnite-level types in this new
framework of Bayesian Markov games (BMG) with explicit
types, we formally deﬁne a Markov-perfect ﬁnite-level equilibrium, establish conditions for its existence, and present a
method for obtaining this equilibrium. We formulate ﬁnding equilibrium in a BMG as a constraint satisfaction problem. For this, we generalize the constraint satisfaction algorithm introduced by Soni et al. (2007) for ﬁnding BNE
in Bayesian graphical games. Key challenges for the generalization are that the space of types is continuous and the
beliefs in each type must be updated based on the observed
actions of others. This makes the types dynamic. Because
strategies may be mixed and standard constraint satisfaction
algorithms do not operate on continuous domains, we discretize the continuous space of mixed strategies analogously
to Soni et al. (2007). Finally, motivated by behavioral equivalence (Zeng and Doshi 2012), we use equivalence between
types for speed up.
In addition to presenting a new framework and discussing
its properties, we demonstrate it on two cooperative tasks.
Equilibrium has traditionally served as an important baseline behavior for agents engaged in cooperation, providing
a locally-optimal solution (Nair et al. 2003; Roth, Simmons,
and Veloso 2006). BMGs with explicit types are particularly
well suited toward analyzing interactions between agents
that are boundedly rational and are uncertain about each
other’s type.

Abstract
We present a new game-theoretic framework in which
Bayesian players with bounded rationality engage in a
Markov game and each has private but incomplete information regarding other players’ types. Instead of utilizing
Harsanyi’s abstract types and a common prior, we construct
intentional player types whose structure is explicit and induces a ﬁnite-level belief hierarchy. We characterize an equilibrium in this game and establish the conditions for existence
of the equilibrium. The computation of ﬁnding such equilibria is formalized as a constraint satisfaction problem and its
effectiveness is demonstrated on two cooperative domains.

Introduction
A plethora of empirical ﬁndings in strategic games (Stahl
and Wilson 1995; Hedden and Zhang 2002; Wright and
Leyton-Brown 2010; Goodie, Doshi, and Young 2012)
strongly suggest that humans reason about others’ beliefs
to ﬁnite and often low depths. In part, this explains why a
signiﬁcant proportion of participants do not play Nash equilibrium proﬁles of games (Camerer 2003) because reasoning
about Nash play requires thinking about the other player’s
beliefs and actions, and her reasoning about other’s, and so
on ad inﬁnitum. Such reasoning is generally beyond the cognitive capacity of humans. This has motivated models of
ﬁnitely-nested reasoning such as the cognitive hierarchy and
others (Ho and Su 2013).
Are there characterizations of equilibrium between players engaging in ﬁnite levels of inter-personal reasoning?
Aumann (1999) introduced the information partition as a basic element for representing a player’s knowledge. Recently,
Kets (2014) elegantly generalized the standard Harsanyi
framework for single-stage games of incomplete information to allow for players’ partitions that lead to ﬁnite-level
beliefs. Any found equilibrium in this framework is also a
Bayes-Nash equilibrium (BNE) in a Harsanyi framework.
However, as we may expect, not every BNE for the game is
also an equilibrium between players with ﬁnite-level beliefs
because some BNE necessitate inﬁnite-level beliefs.
We generalize the single-stage framework of Kets to allow
Bayesian players to play an incomplete-information Markov

Background
Inspired by the real-world transport logistics domain, we
motivate our framework using the level-based foraging problem (Albrecht and Ramamoorthy 2013). Consider a 2-player
single-stage foraging problem illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Robot
i and human j must load food found in adjacent cells. Players can load if the sum of their powers is greater than or
equal to the power of the food. Thus, i or j individually cannot load the food in the bottom-left corner, but they can co-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

437

