Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization of Deep
Learning Algorithms Using Deterministic RBF Surrogates
Ilija Ilievski

Taimoor Akhtar

Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering
National University of Singapore
ilija.ilievski@u.nus.edu

Industrial and Systems Engineering
National University of Singapore
erita@nus.edu.sg

Jiashi Feng

Christine Annette Shoemaker

Electrical and Computer Engineering
National University of Singapore
elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Industrial and Systems Engineering
National University of Singapore
isesca@nus.edu.sg

however is a frustratingly difﬁcult task. As a result, automatic optimization of hyperparameters for deep learning algorithms has been attracting much research effort (Bergstra
et al. 2011; Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012; Bergstra,
Yamins, and Cox 2013; Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2014;
Snoek et al. 2015).
Hyperparameter optimization is a global optimization of
a black-box error function f whose evaluation is expensive — the function f maps a hyperparameter choice x of D
conﬁgurable hyperparameters to validation error of a deep
learning algorithm with learned parameters θ. Optimizing f
as follows gives a way to automatically search for optimal
hyperparameters:

Abstract
Automatically searching for optimal hyperparameter conﬁgurations is of crucial importance for applying deep learning
algorithms in practice. Recently, Bayesian optimization has
been proposed for optimizing hyperparameters of various machine learning algorithms. Those methods adopt probabilistic surrogate models like Gaussian processes to approximate
and minimize the validation error function of hyperparameter values. However, probabilistic surrogates require accurate
estimates of sufﬁcient statistics (e.g., covariance) of the error
distribution and thus need many function evaluations with a
sizeable number of hyperparameters. This makes them inefﬁcient for optimizing hyperparameters of deep learning algorithms, which are highly expensive to evaluate. In this work,
we propose a new deterministic and efﬁcient hyperparameter
optimization method that employs radial basis functions as error surrogates. The proposed mixed integer algorithm, called
HORD, searches the surrogate for the most promising hyperparameter values through dynamic coordinate search and
requires many fewer function evaluations. HORD does well
in low dimensions but it is exceptionally better in higher dimensions. Extensive evaluations on MNIST and CIFAR-10
for four deep neural networks demonstrate HORD signiﬁcantly outperforms the well-established Bayesian optimization methods such as GP, SMAC and TPE. For instance, on
average, HORD is more than 6 times faster than GP-EI in
obtaining the best conﬁguration of 19 hyperparameters.

min

f (x, θ; Zval ),

s.t.

θ = arg min f (x, θ; Ztrain )

x∈RD

(1)

θ

Here Ztrain and Zval denote the training and validation
datasets respectively, θ is learned through minimizing the
training error and x is in a bounded set. In the following, we
omit (in the notation only) the dependency of f on θ and Z,
and denote it as f (x) for short.
Solving the problem in Eq. (1) is very challenging due
to high complexity of the function f . A popular solution
is to employ Bayesian optimization algorithms — which
use a cheap probabilistic surrogate model to approximate
the expensive error function (Mockus, Tiesis, and Zilinskas
1978), such as Gaussian process (GP) (Snoek, Larochelle,
and Adams 2012) and Tree-structured Parzen Estimator
(TPE) (Bergstra et al. 2011).
In this work, we propose a new deterministic-surrogate
based hyperparameter optimization method that we show requires considerably fewer function evaluations for the optimization. The proposed algorithm uses radial basis function
(RBF) as surrogate to approximate the error function of hyperparameters, and avoids the expensive computation of covariance statistics needed in GP methods. The proposed algorithm searches the surrogate via dynamic hyperparameter

Introduction
Deep learning algorithms have been extensively used for
various artiﬁcial intelligence related problems in recent
years. However, their adoption is severely hampered by the
many hyperparameter choices one must make, e.g., architectures of the deep neural networks, forms of the activation
functions and learning rates. Determining appropriate values of these hyperparameters is of crucial importance which
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

822

