Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Model AI Assignments 2017
Todd W. Neller

Joshua Eckroth

Sravana Reddy

Gettysburg College
tneller@gettysburg.edu

Stetson University
jeckroth@stetson.edu

Wellesley College
sravana.reddy@wellesley.edu

Joshua Ziegler, Jason Bindewald, Gilbert Peterson
Air Force Institute of Technology
{joshua.ziegler, jason.bindewald, gilbert.peterson}@aﬁt.edu

Thomas Way, Paula Matuszek, Lillian Cassel, Mary-Angela Papalaskari, Carol Weiss
Villanova University
{thomas.way, paula.matuszek, lillian.cassel, map, cweiss}@villanova.edu

Ariel Anders and Sertac Karaman
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
aanders@csail.mit.edu, sertac@mit.edu
the third of these uses of MC techniques: Bayesian network
reasoning with Gibbs Sampling, a Markov Chain Monte
Carlo method. Through these exercises, we hope that the
student gains a deeper understanding of the strengths and
weaknesses of these techniques, is able to add such techniques to their problem-solving repertoire, and can discern
appropriate applications.

Abstract
The Model AI Assignments session seeks to gather and
disseminate the best assignment designs of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) Education community. Recognizing that assignments form the core of student learning
experience, we here present abstracts of six AI assignments from the 2017 session that are easily adoptable,
playfully engaging, and ﬂexible for a variety of instructor needs. Assignment speciﬁcations and supporting resources may be found at http://modelai.gettysburg.edu.

Git Planner
Joshua Eckroth
This assignment is a novel application of classical planning to the widely-used Git distributed version control system. Students are asked to author a planning “domain” ﬁle
in PDDL format (Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language) to
represent a variety of common tasks supported by Git. The
end result is a tool that is capable of producing a series of
Git commands that transform a given Git repository into a
speciﬁed goal state. For example, a repository may contain
a ﬁle that was accidentally deleted, and the planner would be
capable of producing a series of commands that recover the
ﬁle. A list of required “predicates” and “actions” are provided; students are asked to implement the actions by deﬁning each action’s parameters, preconditions, and effects. To
do so, students must learn how various the Git commands
make use of the workspace, repository, and staging index.
They must also learn how to represent this knowledge in a
declarative form to match the semantics of PDDL.

An Introduction to Monte Carlo Techniques in
AI - Part II
Todd W. Neller
Monte Carlo (MC) techniques have become important and
pervasive in the work of AI practitioners. In general, they
provide a relatively easy means of providing deep understanding of complex systems as long as important events are
not infrequent.
Consider this non-exhaustive list of areas of work with
relevant MC techniques:
General: Monte Carlo simulation for probabilistic estimation
Machine Learning: Monte Carlo reinforcement learning
Uncertain Reasoning: Bayesian network reasoning with
Gibbs Sampling, a Markov Chain Monte Carlo method
Robotics: Monte Carlo localization

Implementing a Hidden Markov Model
Toolkit

Search: Monte Carlo tree search
Game Theory: MC regret-based techniques

Sravana Reddy

In these exercises, we will recommend readings and provide novel exercises to support the experiential learning of

Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are a backbone of speech
and natural language processing (NLP) and computational
biology. They are a great way to teach general concepts such
as dynamic programming, data-driven learning and infer-

c 2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4822

