Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Complexity of Stable Matchings under Substitutable Preferences
Yuan Deng, Debmalya Panigrahi

Bo Waggoner

Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{ericdy,debmalya}@cs.duke.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
bwag@seas.upenn.edu

violinists looking to form duets. Each agent has a preference relation over a subset of the other instrument’s players and prefers to stay unmatched rather than be matched
with an agent outside this subset. An algorithm takes every
agent’s preference list as input and outputs a matching. A
matching generated by the algorithm is stable if no pair of
agents prefer to match with each other over their designated
partners and no matched agent prefers being unmatched.
Gale and Shapley (1962) proposed the deferred-acceptance
or “Gale-Shapley” algorithm to compute a stable matching
in quadratic time. The algorithm (violinist-proposing version) proceeds in multiple rounds. In each round, each violinist makes a proposal to her favorite pianist who has not
rejected her yet; and each pianist keeps her favorite proposal
and rejects all others. The algorithm iterates until no further
proposal can be made.
A more complex setting is many-to-one matching such
as in hospital-doctor matching markets (Roth and Peranson
1997; Roth and Xing 1997; Niederle and Roth 2005). Here,
there is a set of hospitals and a set of doctors. Each hospital has a preference list over the subsets of doctors while
each doctor has a preference list over the set of hospitals. A
matching is stable if for each hospital, there exists no subset
of doctors that the hospital prefers over its currently allocated subset such that all those doctors prefer to move to
that hospital over their assigned one. Unlike in one-to-one
settings, the existence of a stable matching is not generally
guaranteed in a many-to-one scenario. Substitutable preferences, introduced by Roth (1984), have been shown to be a
necessary and sufﬁcient condition to guarantee the existence
of a stable outcome in many-to-one settings (Roth 1984;
Hatﬁeld and Kojima 2008; Hatﬁeld and Kominers 2011).
Substitutes, intuitively, imply that each doctor can become
only less desirable when more choices become available.
It is a natural assumption when, for instance, doctors have
overlapping skill sets. Substitutability has also been studied
extensively in consumer theory (Hanemann 1984) and auction theory (Milgrom and Strulovici 2009).

Abstract
In various matching market settings, such as hospital-doctor
matching markets (Hatﬁeld and Milgrom 2005), the existence
of stable outcomes depends on substitutability of preferences.
But can these stable matchings be computed efﬁciently, as in
the one-to-one matching case? The algorithm of (Hatﬁeld and
Milgrom 2005) requires efﬁcient implementation of a choice
function over substitutable preferences. We show that even
given efﬁcient access to a value oracle or preference relation
satisfying substitutability, exponentially many queries may be
required in the worst case to implement a choice function. Indeed, this extends to examples where a stable matching requires exponential time to compute.
We characterize the computational complexity of stable
matchings by showing that efﬁcient computation of a choice
function is equivalent to efﬁcient veriﬁcation—determining
whether or not, for a given set, the most preferred subset is
the entire set itself. Clearly, veriﬁcation is necessary for computation, but we show that it is also sufﬁcient: speciﬁcally,
given a veriﬁer, we design a polynomial-time algorithm for
computing a choice function, implying an efﬁcient algorithm
for stable matching. We then show that a veriﬁer can be implemented efﬁciently for various classes of functions, such as
submodular functions, implying efﬁcient stable matching algorithms for a broad range of settings. We also investigate the
effect of ties in the preference order, which causes complications both in deﬁning substitutes and in computation. In this
case, we tightly connect the computational complexity of the
choice function to a measure on the number of ties.

Introduction
Ever since the seminal work of (Gale and Shapley 1962), stable matching has been intensively studied in both economics
and algorithms. Applications have ranged from school
matching (Abdulkadiroglu and Sönmez 2003; Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth 2005; Gale and Shapley 1962),
hospital-resident matching (Irving and Manlove 2009; Irving, Manlove, and Scott 2000; Roth 1996), to kidney exchange programs (Abraham, Blum, and Sandholm 2007;
Roth, Sonmez, and Unver 2003; Roth, Sönmez, and Ünver
2005).
In the standard one-to-one stable matching model (Gale
and Shapley 1962), there is a set of pianists and a set of

Choice functions and many-to-one matchings. Under substitutable preferences, Hatﬁeld and Milgrom (2005) designed a generalized Gale-Shapley algorithm to compute a
stable many-to-one matching and proved the induced mechanism is incentive-compatible for doctors in the doctorproposing version of the algorithm.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

480

