Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Systematic Practice of Judging the Success of a
Robotic Grasp Using Convolutional Neural Network
Hengshuang Liu, Pengcheng Ai, Junling Chen

2 u
softmax with
cross entropy

stride 2
3x3 max pool

64 filters

stride 1
3x3 conv + relu

stride 2
3x3 max pool

stride 1
5x5 conv + relu + norm
fc + relu + dropout

n it s
4 u

( for test )

n it s

yes or no

64 filters

64 filters

64 filters

102

240

stride 2
3x3 max pool

3 channels

In this abstract, we present a novel method using the deep
convolutional neural network combined with traditional mechanical control techniques to solve the problem of determining whether a robotic grasp is successful or not. To ﬁnish the
task, we construct a data acquisition platform capable of robot
arm grasping and photo capturing, and collect a diversity of
pictures by adjusting the shape and posture of the objects
and controlling the robot arm to move randomly. For the purpose of validating the generalization capability, we adopt a
stochastic sampling method based on cross validation to test
our model. The experiment shows that, with an increasing
number of shapes of objects involved in training, the network
can identify new samples in a more accurate and steadier way.
The accuracy rises from 89.2% when we use only one category of shape for training to above 99.7% when we use 17
categories for training.

fc

Abstract

240
stride 4
11x11 conv + relu + norm

College of Physical Science and Technology, Central China Normal University
NO.152 Luoyu Road, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R.China 430079
{hengshuangliu, pengcheng.ai, cjl1213}@mails.ccnu.edu.cn

( for training )

64 filters

64 filters

Figure 1: The structure of the convolutional neural network
test, we compare the expected results from the model to the
ground-truth results to get the statistics of the accuracy.
Our approach collects pictures which have slightly different features by changing the shape and posture of the objects. Meanwhile, we control the robot arm to move randomly in a limited space, which results in pictures with
changing backgrounds. Pictures are collected in a similar
way when the robot arm has no load.

Introduction
In the domain of robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence, grasping an object by mechanical devices is an important issue for scientists. Sergey Levine et al. in Google presented
a method in their paper about hand-eye coordination for
robotic grasping, which used a combination of sensors and
traditional image identiﬁcation techniques (Levine et al.
2016) to properly function. In tradition, specialized mechanical structures and man-made criteria are needed for prompt
sensing and accurate judgment (Farrow and Correll 2015;
Konstantinova, Stilli, and Althoefer 2015). However, if we
can simplify utilities and make the system reliable, it will
contribute to the popularity of robot arms considerably.
In recent years, deep learning has achieved excellent results in image classiﬁcation tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; Szegedy et al. 2015). Similarly, we consider using deep learning in the problem of judging the success of a robotic grasp. The model we use is the convolutional neural network, which has an input layer of a single picture taken from a camera. In the model, convolution layers and full-connected layers are built to extract features from the original picture. When training, labels are set
and cross entropy is computed for back propagation. In the

Modeling Method
Our model is motivated by commonly used neural network models, such as LeNet, AlexNet and GoogleNet. From
Figure 1, we can see that the size of the input picture is
240 × 240, with 3 different color channels, and the hidden
layers include 3 convolution layers and 2 full-connected layers. The core operation in the model is convolution, which is
designed to utilize the property of translation invariance in
computer vision.
There are some intricate factors involved in the implementation of the network. In the initialization process, the
weights are initialized to Gaussian distribution with 0 mean
and a small deviation, while the bias is initialized to 0 or a
small value. To augment our dataset with limited samples
(Gan et al. 2015), we randomly crop a 240 × 240 region
from an original 240 × 320 picture and send it into our network for training. The dropout ratio is adjustable. We set it
to 0.5, which is recommended to be used with a hidden layer.
When implementing our network, all the convolution layers
and Max Pool layers use a round down strategy implicitly

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4959

