Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Heavy-Tailed Analogues of the Covariance Matrix for ICA
Joseph Anderson

Navin Goyal

The Ohio State University
andejose@cse.ohio-state.edu

Microsoft Research
navingo@microsoft.com

Anupama Nandi

Luis Rademacher

The Ohio State University
nandi.10@osu.edu

University of California, Davis
lrademac@ucdavis.edu
remarks), ICA has been thoroughly studied and a vast literature exists (e.g. (Hyvarinen, Karhunen, and Oja 2001;
Comon and Jutten 2010)). The theory is well-developed and
practical algorithms—e.g., FastICA (Hyvarinen 1999), JADE
(Cardoso and Souloumiac 1993)—are now available along
with implementations, e.g. (Cichocki et al. ). However, to
our knowledge, rigorous complexity analyses of these assume that the fourth moment of each component is ﬁnite:
E(Si4 ) < ∞. If at least one of the independent components
does not satisfy this assumption we will say that the input is
in the heavy-tailed regime. Many ICA algorithms ﬁrst preprocess the data to convert the given ICA model into another
one where the mixing matrix A has orthogonal columns;
this step is often called whitening. We will instead call it orthogonalization, as this describes more precisely the desired
outcome. Traditional whitening is a second order method
that may not make sense in the heavy-tailed regime. In this
regime, it is not clear how the existing algorithms would
perform, because they depend on empirical estimation of
various statistics of the data such as the covariance matrix
or the fourth cumulant tensor, which diverge in general for
heavy-tailed data. For example, for the covariance matrix in
the mean-0 case this is done by taking the empirical average
N
(1/N ) i=1 x(i)x(i)T where the {x(i)} are i.i.d. samples
of X. ICA in the heavy-tailed regime is of considerable interest, directly (e.g., (Kidmose 2001b; 2001a; Shereshevski,
Yeredor, and Messer 2001; Chen and Bickel 2004; 2005;
Sahmoudi et al. 2005; Wang, Kuruoglu, and Zhang 2009;
J. Eriksson and Koivunen 2001; Clemencon and Slim 2007;
Bermond and Cardoso 1999)) and indirectly (e.g., (Bickson and Guestrin 2010; Gael, Teh, and Ghahramani 2009;
Welling, Osindero, and Hinton 2002)) and has applications
in speech and ﬁnance. We also mention an informal connection with robust statistics: Algorithms solving heavy-tailed
ICA might work by focusing on samples in a small (but high
probability) region to get reliable statistics about the data and
avoid the instability of the tail. Thus, if the data has outliers,
the outliers are less likely to affect such an algorithm.
Recent theoretical work (Anderson et al. 2015) proposed a
polynomial time algorithm for ICA that works in the regime
where each component Si has ﬁnite (1 + γ)-moment for
γ > 0. This algorithm follows the two phases of several ICA
algorithms: (i) Orthogonalize the independent components.
The purpose of this step is to apply an afﬁne transformation

Abstract
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) is the problem of
learning a square matrix A, given samples of X = AS, where
S is a random vector with independent coordinates. Most
existing algorithms are provably efﬁcient only when each Si
has ﬁnite and moderately valued fourth moment. However,
there are practical applications where this assumption need
not be true, such as speech and ﬁnance. Algorithms have been
proposed for heavy-tailed ICA, but they are not practical, using
random walks and the full power of the ellipsoid algorithm
multiple times. The main contributions of this paper are:
(1) A practical algorithm for heavy-tailed ICA that we call
HTICA. We provide theoretical guarantees and show that it
outperforms other algorithms in some heavy-tailed regimes,
both on real and synthetic data. Like the current state-of-theart, the new algorithm is based on the centroid body (a ﬁrst
moment analogue of the covariance matrix). Unlike the stateof-the-art, our algorithm is practically efﬁcient. To achieve
this, we use explicit analytic representations of the centroid
body, which bypasses the use of the ellipsoid method and
random walks.
(2) We study how heavy tails affect different ICA algorithms,
including HTICA. Somewhat surprisingly, we show that some
algorithms that use the covariance matrix or higher moments
can successfully solve a range of ICA instances with inﬁnite
second moment. We study this theoretically and experimentally, with both synthetic and real-world heavy-tailed data.

1

Introduction

Independent component analysis (ICA) is a computational
and statistical technique with applications in areas ranging
from signal processing to machine learning and more. Formally, if S is an n-dimensional random vector with independent coordinates and A ∈ Rn×n is invertible, then the
ICA problem is to estimate A given access to i.i.d. samples
of the mixed signals X = AS. We say that X is generated
by an ICA model X = AS. The recovery of A (the mixing matrix) is possible only up to scaling and permutation
of the columns. Moreover, for the recovery to be possible,
the distributions of the random variables Si must not be
Gaussian (except possibly one of them). Since its inception
in the eighties (see (Comon and Jutten 2010) for historical
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1712

