Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Binary Embedding with
Additive Homogeneous Kernels
Saehoon Kim, Seungjin Choi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology
77 Cheongam-ro, Nam-gu, Pohang 37673, Korea
{kshkawa,seungjin}@postech.ac.kr

Binary embedding (BE) refers to the methods that transform examples in Rd into the vertices of Hamming space,
i.e., {0, 1}k , in which the normalized Hamming distance between binary codes preserves a particular distance
measure, including angular distance (Charikar 2002) and
kernel-induced distance (Kulis and Grauman 2009) (Li,
Samorodnitsky, and Hopcroft 2012) (Raginsky and Lazebnik 2009). Most notably, random hyperplane binary embedding (Charikar 2002) involves random projection followed

by binary quantization, which aims to preserve angular distance between two vectors.
Randomized binary embedding (RBE) seeks to develop
an embedding function without requiring any training data
points. Contrary to RBE, data-dependent binary embedding
(DBE) makes use of a training set to construct compact binary codes (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2008), (Gong and
Lazebnik 2011), (Li et al. 2014). We observe that DBE performs poorly in the case that the query and training data
points are generated from different distributions. Recently,
online DBE (Huang, Yang, and Zhang 2013) (Leng et al.
2015) sequentially learns an embedding function for largescale or streaming data. However, it still incurs overhead to
re-compute all binary codes as a new point arrives. Therefore, it is necessary to develop RBE with different types
of streaming data. For example, χ2 and intersection kernels have been frequently used as a distance metric for histograms, which makes it necessary to develop RBE with
such kernels.
Binary embedding with Mercer kernels (BE-MK) (Kulis
and Grauman 2009) (Raginsky and Lazebnik 2009) (Mu et
al. 2014) (Jiang, Que, and Kulis 2015) employs feature maps
(kernel PCA or Nyström approximation) followed by RBE,
such that the normalized Hamming distance between codes
preserves Mercer kernels. Since it requires training examples to build the feature map, we observe that it might not
be adequate for streaming environment. For example, kernelized locality-sensitive hashing (KLSH) (Jiang, Que, and
Kulis 2015), which is one of the representative example of
BE-MK, employs KPCA for the feature map, which requires
a set of training data points to compute the leading eigenvector of Gram matrix. If the data distribution changes over
time, the performance of KLSH is steadily degraded over
time.
In this paper, we propose a completely randomized binary
embedding with additive homogeneous kernels, referred to
as RBE-AHK, where data points are embedded onto Rm by
the explicit feature map for additive homogeneous kernels
(Vedaldi and Zisserman 2012) and then are transformed into
the vertices of Hamming space by the random hyperplane
binary embedding. The contribution of this paper is summarized below.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a RBE algorithm for additive homogeneous
kernels and conduct the numerical experiments to show

Abstract
Binary embedding transforms vectors in Euclidean space into
the vertices of Hamming space such that Hamming distance
between binary codes reﬂects a particular distance metric. In
machine learning, the similarity metrics induced by Mercer
kernels are frequently used, leading to the development of
binary embedding with Mercer kernels (BE-MK) where the
approximate nearest neighbor search is performed in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Kernelized localitysensitive hashing (KLSH), which is one of the representative BE-MK, uses kernel PCA to embed data points into a
Euclidean space, followed by the random hyperplane binary
embedding. In general, it works well when the query and
data points in the database follow the same probability distribution. The streaming data environment, however, continuously requires KLSH to update the leading eigenvectors of
the Gram matrix, which can be costly or hard to carry out in
practice. In this paper we present a completely randomized
binary embedding to work with a family of additive homogeneous kernels, referred to as BE-AHK. The proposed algorithm is easy to implement, built on Vedaldi and Zisserman’s
work on explicit feature maps for additive homogeneous kernels. We show that our BE-AHK is able to preserve kernel
values by developing an upper- and lower-bound on its Hamming distance, which guarantees to solve approximate nearest
neighbor search efﬁciently. Numerical experiments demonstrate that BE-AHK actually yields similarity-preserving binary codes in terms of additive homogeneous kernels and is
superior to existing methods in case that training data and
queries are generated from different distributions. Moreover,
in cases where a large code size is allowed, the performance
of BE-AHK is comparable to that of KLSH in general cases.

Introduction

2094

