Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

ProjE: Embedding Projection
for Knowledge Graph Completion
Baoxu Shi and Tim Weninger
University of Notre Dame
Email: {bshi, tweninge}@nd.edu

The KGC task can be divided into two non-mutually exclusive sub-tasks: (i) entity prediction and (ii) relationship
prediction. The entity prediction task takes a partial triple
h, r, ? as input and produces a ranked list of candidate
entities as output:
Deﬁnition 1. (Entity Ranking Problem) Given a Knowledge
Graph G = {E, R} and an input triple h, r, ?, the entity
ranking problem attempts to ﬁnd the optimal ordered list
such that ∀ej ∀ei ((ej ∈ E− ∧ ei ∈ E+ ) → ei ≺ ej ), where
E+ = {e ∈ {e1 , e2 , . . . , el }|h, r, e ∈ G} and E− = {e ∈
{el+1 , el+2 , . . . , e|E| }|h, r, e ∈
/ G}.
Distinguishing between head and tail-entities is usually
arbitrary, so we can easily substitute h, r, ? for ?, r, t.
The relationship prediction task aims to ﬁnd a ranked list of
relationships that connect a head-entity with a tail-entity, i.e.,
h, ?, t. When discussing the details of the present work, we
focus speciﬁcally on the entity prediction task; however, it is
straightforward to adapt the methodology to the relationship
prediction task by changing the input.
A number of KGC algorithms have been developed in recent years, and the most successful models all have one thing
in common: they use low-dimensional embedding vectors to
represent entities and relationships. Many embedding models, e.g., Unstructured (Bordes et al. 2012), TransE (Bordes
et al. 2013), TransH (Wang et al. 2014), and TransR (Lin et
al. 2015), use a margin-based pairwise ranking loss function,
which measures the score of each possible result as the Ln distance between h + r and t. In these models the loss functions are all the same, so models differ in how they transform
the entity embeddings h and t with respect to the relationship embeddings r. Instead of simply adding h + r, more
expressive combination operators are learned by Knowledge
Vault (Dong et al. 2014) and HolE (Nickel, Rosasco, and
Tomaso 2016) in order to predict the existence of h, r, t in
the KG.
Other models, such as the Neural Tensor Network
(NTN) (Socher et al. 2013) and the Compositional Vector
Space Model (CVSM) (Neelakantan, Roth, and McCallum
2015), incorporate a multilayer neural network solution into
the existing models. Unfortunately, due to their extremely
large parameter size, these models either (i) do not scale well
or (2) consider only a single relationship at a time (GarcíaDurán, Bordes, and Usunier 2015) thereby limiting their
usefulness on large, real-world KGs.

Abstract
With the large volume of new information created every day,
determining the validity of information in a knowledge graph
and ﬁlling in its missing parts are crucial tasks for many researchers and practitioners. To address this challenge, a number of knowledge graph completion methods have been developed using low-dimensional graph embeddings. Although
researchers continue to improve these models using an increasingly complex feature space, we show that simple changes
in the architecture of the underlying model can outperform
state-of-the-art models without the need for complex feature
engineering. In this work, we present a shared variable neural
network model called ProjE that ﬁlls-in missing information
in a knowledge graph by learning joint embeddings of the
knowledge graph’s entities and edges, and through subtle, but
important, changes to the standard loss function. In doing
so, ProjE has a parameter size that is smaller than 11 out of
15 existing methods while performing 37% better than the
current-best method on standard datasets. We also show, via
a new fact checking task, that ProjE is capable of accurately
determining the veracity of many declarative statements.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) have become a crucial resource
for many tasks in machine learning, data mining, and artiﬁcial intelligence applications including question answering (Unger et al. 2012), entity disambiguation (Cucerzan
2007), named entity linking (Hachey et al. 2013), fact checking (Shi and Weninger 2016), and link prediction (Nickel et
al. 2015) to name a few. In our view, KGs are an example
of a heterogeneous information network containing entitynodes and relationship-edges corresponding to RDF-style
triples h, r, t where h represents a head entity, and r is a
relationship that connects h to a tail entity t.
KGs are widely used for many practical tasks, however,
their correctness and completeness are not guaranteed. Therefore, it is necessary to develop knowledge graph completion
(KGC) methods to ﬁnd missing or errant relationships with
the goal of improving the general quality of KGs, which, in
turn, can be used to improve or create interesting downstream
applications.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1236

