Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Winner Determination in Huge Elections with MapReduce
Theresa Csar,1 Martin Lackner,2 Reinhard Pichler,1 Emanuel Sallinger2
1
TU Wien, Austria
University of Oxford, UK
{csar, pichler}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at
{martin.lackner, emanuel.sallinger}@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

The reason for the huge size of preference datasets may
vary, sometimes stemming from a huge number of candidates (such as in the case of search engines) or a huge number of votes (such as in the case of preferences generated
by sensors). A growth in either dimension poses challenges
to the design of parallel algorithms; sequential algorithms
and systems for winner determination cannot be expected to
handle huge preference datasets of this sort.
The most successful framework to design algorithms for
handling huge amounts of data is the MapReduce framework (Dean and Ghemawat 2008), originally introduced by
Google and since then adopted by many other companies
and projects for processing “big data” in parallel – in clusters
or in the cloud. The standout characteristic of the MapReduce framework is that it is both widely deployed in practice,
but also well-studied in terms of its theoretical properties.
The goal of this paper is to design and analyse algorithms
for winner determination that are able to deal with huge
datasets. To this end, we shall adopt the MapReduce framework as the foundation of our algorithms.
Organization and main results. We start with brief introductions to the MapReduce framework and to computational
social choice in Sections 2 and 3, respectively. Our main
contributions, given mainly in Sections 4 – 6, are:
• We present MapReduce algorithms for four concrete voting rules (scoring rules, Schwartz, Smith, and Copeland)
and investigate their theoretical properties.
• The most involved of our MapReduce algorithms (namely
the one for computing the Schwartz set) has been implemented and evaluated using the Amazon Elastic MapReduce (EMR) platform. We report on these results.
• Finally, we also show limits of parallelizability, by proving that determining whether a given candidate wins an
election subject to the single-transferable voting (STV)
rule is P-complete. Thus, it is unlikely that there exists
a highly parallelizable algorithm for this problem.
With this work, we demonstrate the potential of the MapReduce framework for designing efﬁcient, highly parallel algorithms for a central computational problem in social choice.

Abstract
In computational social choice, we are concerned with the development of methods for joint decision making. A central
problem in this ﬁeld is the winner determination problem,
which aims at identifying the most preferred alternative(s).
With the rise of modern e-business platforms, processing of
huge amounts of preference data has become an issue. In this
work, we apply the MapReduce framework – which has been
speciﬁcally designed for dealing with big data – to various
versions of the winner determination problem. We obtain efﬁcient and highly parallel algorithms and provide a theoretical
analysis and experimental evaluation.

1

Introduction

Winner determination is a central problem in social choice.
In recent years, developing algorithms for winner determination has become an active research topic in the AI community, in particular in computational social choice. For
many of the voting rules and scenarios important in the
area, efﬁcient algorithms have been devised (Dwork et al.
2001; Sandholm 2002; Betzler, Guo, and Niedermeier 2010;
Bachrach, Betzler, and Faliszewski 2010; Lang et al. 2012;
Caragiannis et al. 2014).
The classical example of a winner determination problem
is a political election. For political elections, the number of
votes may be large, but the number of candidates is typically small. Yet, we are facing ever increasing volumes of
preference data coming from different sources: Whether a
user watches or rates a movie on Netﬂix, buys or reviews a
book at Amazon or clicks a link in a listing of search results,
preferences of some alternatives over others are constantly
expressed throughout a user’s digital presence.
Unlike voting in a political election where ballots are cast,
preference data in a digital environment may be generated
without the user’s knowledge: For example, when using a
typical e-commerce site, the choice of clicking on a particular product in a list of search results is often interpreted as
a preference for that product relative to the others the user
did not access. The increasing use of sensors (e.g. through a
user’s “smart” phone or watch) further facilitates the collection of data that can be interpreted as preferences.

2

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Basic Principles of MapReduce

MapReduce, originally developed at Google (Dean and Ghemawat 2008), has evolved into a popular framework for large

451

