Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

GLOMA: Embedding Global Information in Local Matrix
Approximation Models for Collaborative Filtering
Chao Chen,1 Dongsheng Li,1 * Qin Lv,2 Junchi Yan,31 Li Shang,2 Stephen M. Chu1
1

IBM Research – China, Shanghai, P.R. China, 201203
Univeristy of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA, 80309
3
East China Normal University, Shanghai, P.R. China, 200062
chench.resch@gmail.com, {ldsli, schu}@cn.ibm.com, {qin.lv, li.shang}@colorado.edu, jcyan@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
2

Therefore, it is desirable to consider local associations to enhance model accuracy.
To this end, many clustering-based ensemble methods
have been proposed (Zhang et al. 2013; Lee et al. 2013;
Chen et al. 2015), in which clustering methods are ﬁrst
applied to discover strong local associations and then MA
methods can be applied in parallel on the submatrices corresponding to the clustering-based partitions. Utilizing the
parallelism of modern many-core and distributed architectures, the running time can be largely reduced. However, the
prediction quality of local models based on submatrices is
generally low, because 1) local models may easily overﬁt
due to insufﬁcient training data in clusters and 2) the overall associations shared among all users/items are not captured. To address the above issues, clustering methods have
to be run many times in order to produce different approximated matrices containing different types of information,
and then ensemble methods are used to improve recommendation quality. However, ensemble learning leads to another
problem: the overall computation overhead is usually very
high, e.g., WEMAREC (Chen et al. 2015) required 8× more
overall computation than RSVD (Paterek 2007).
In this paper, we propose GLOMA, a scalable and accurate MA-based method which can capture both localized
relationships in submatrices and global structure among all
users and items. Similar to existing clustering-based ensemble methods, GLOMA adopts clustering method to explore
the localized relationships. However, instead of relying on
ensemble techniques, GLOMA attempts to embed a global
MA model, which contains the global information, into the
learning process of local MA models. With the help of this
embedded model, every local model can be trained on data
which includes all the ratings corresponding to users and
items in the same cluster, such that the overall structures
can be obtained and the insufﬁcient data issue can be alleviated. By leveraging multi-task feature learning techniques,
GLOMA can capture more abundant and diverse features
than standard MA methods, and has the potential to achieve
better recommendation accuracy. To further improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of GLOMA, a new clustering method
following the idea from (Chen et al. 2015) is proposed, in
which every user or item is characterized by its rating distribution. Then, the dimension of the data space can be largely
reduced, resulting in the reduction of running time. The pro-

Abstract
Recommender systems have achieved great success in recent
years, and matrix approximation (MA) is one of the most popular techniques for collaborative ﬁltering (CF) based recommendation. However, a major issue is that MA methods perform poorly at detecting strong localized associations among
closely related users and items. Recently, some MA-based
CF methods adopt clustering methods to discover meaningful user-item subgroups and perform ensemble on different
clusterings to improve the recommendation accuracy. However, ensemble learning suffers from lower efﬁciency due to
the increased overall computation overhead.
In this paper, we propose GLOMA, a new clustering-based
matrix approximation method, which can embed global information in local matrix approximation models to improve
recommendation accuracy. In GLOMA, a MA model is ﬁrst
trained on the entire data to capture global information. The
global MA model is then utilized to guide the training of
cluster-based local MA models, such that the local models
can detect strong localized associations shared within clusters and at the same time preserve global associations shared
among all users/items. Evaluation results using MovieLens
and Netﬂix datasets demonstrate that, by integrating global
information in local models, GLOMA can outperform ﬁve
state-of-the-art MA-based CF methods in recommendation
accuracy while achieving descent efﬁciency.

Introduction
In today’s recommender systems, matrix approximation
(MA) is one of the most commonly-used collaborative ﬁltering (CF) methods. The goal is to predict users’ missing
ratings on targeted items. More formally, given partially observed user-item rating matrix M with low-rank, user i and
item j are characterized by vectors of latent factors Ui∗ and
V∗j , respectively, then the unknown rating Mi,j can be predicted by the dot product of Ui∗ and V∗j (Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009). Although MA-based CF methods have achieved
good success, Koren et al. (2008) pointed out that MA models can effectively estimate overall structures that relate simultaneously to most or all items, but they perform poorly
at detecting strong associations among a small set of items.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1295

