Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Approximate Conditional Gradient
Descent on Multi-Class Classiﬁcation
Zhuanghua Liu, Ivor Tsang
Centre for Artiﬁcal Intelligence
University of Technology Sydney
liuzhuanghua1991@gmail.com Ivor.Tsang@uts.edu.au

In this work, we propose a novel method of approximating
Frank-Wolfe on multi-class classiﬁcation problem on largescale datasets. The method employs both the advantage of
stochastic Frank-Wolfe and full Frank-Wolfe. We give the
deﬁnition of multi-class classiﬁcation problem below:
Given a set of n training data (xi , yi ), here xi ∈ Rd is a
vector of feature and yi ∈ {1, . . . , h} is the label. Previous
work (Dudı́k, Harchaoui, and Malick 2012)(Zhang, Yu, and
Schuurmans 2012) found that the multi-class classiﬁcation
problem can be cast as minimizing the objective (1) with fi
deﬁned as:

Abstract
Conditional gradient descent, aka the Frank-Wolfe algorithm,
regains popularity in recent years. The key advantage of
Frank-Wolfe is that at each step the expensive projection
is replaced with a much more efﬁcient linear optimization
step. Similar to gradient descent, the loss function of FrankWolfe scales with the data size. Training on big data poses
a challenge for researchers. Recently, stochastic Frank-Wolfe
methods have been proposed to solve the problem, but they
do not perform well in practice. In this work, we study the
problem of approximating the Frank-Wolfe algorithm on the
large-scale multi-class classiﬁcation problem which is a typical application of the Frank-Wolfe algorithm. We present a
simple but effective method employing internal structure of
data to approximate Frank-Wolfe on the large-scale multiclass classiﬁcation problem. Empirical results verify that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art stochastic projectionfree methods.

fi (w) = log(1 +

n

w∈M

(2)

on the constrained convex set M = {w ∈ Rh×m : w∗ ≤
τ } where  · ∗ is the nuclear norm.
When optimizing a multi-class classiﬁcation problem on
large-scale datasets, the cost of computation at each step is
proportional to the size of dataset. Thus our method uses a
subset of data points as the surrogates of the whole dataset
at each iteration. Unlike the stochastic optimization methods
using random data points at each step, we pick up surrogate
data points by taking the internal structure of data into consideration. Speciﬁcally, inspired by the Locality-Sensitive
Hashing (Indyk and Motwani 1998)(Datar et al. 2004)(Kulis
and Grauman 2012) that close data points collide in the same
bin, we consider using low cost hash method to map training
data from each class into bins, and select one surrogate data
point from each bin as the approximation of data points collide in the same bin. We gradually divide more bins to select
more surrogates to obtain a better approximation as iteration
proceeds.
The convergence rate of our algorithm is proved to be sublinear on multi-class classiﬁcation objective, the same as the
full Frank-Wolfe. Experiments verify that our method converge fast as stochastic Frank-Wolfe methods while better
and more stable objective values are attained.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the background of Frank-Wolfe and its extensions,
we present our algorithm and analysis in detail in Section 3,
followed by the experiments in Section 4. We conclude our
work in Section 5.

Introduction

1
fi (w)
n i=1

exp(wlT xi − wyTi xi ))

l=yi

The Frank-Wolfe (FW) optimization algorithm (Frank and
Wolfe 1956)(Jaggi 2013) is a popular ﬁrst-order method to
solve the optimization problem in the form of:
min F (w) =



(1)

where F is a continuously differentiable function over the
domain M which is convex and compact. Frank-Wolfe resurges in recent years thanks to the cheap linear optimization step when applied on the problem with complex structure(Lacoste-Julien et al. 2013)(Osokin et al. 2016). Multiclass classiﬁcation with bounded matrix trace-norm is one
typical application which Frank-Wolfe can be applied on,
detailed discussion can be viewed from (Jaggi 2013).
When faced with large-scale optimization problem, similar to batch gradient descent, gradient calculation and linear
optimization step of Frank-Wolfe are prohibitively expensive. Recently, stochastic Frank-Wolfe optimization methods(Hazan and Kale 2012)(Lan and Zhou 2016)(Hazan and
Luo 2016) have been proposed to conquer the big data challenge. Extensive experiments show that stochastic FrankWolfe optimization methods do not perform as desired.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2301

