Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Improved Algorithm for Learning to
Perform Exception-Tolerant Abduction
Mengxue Zhang, Tushar Mathew, and Brendan Juba
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO, 63130 USA
mengxuezhang@wustl.edu, tusharmathew@gmail.com, bjuba@wustl.edu
us to generate new theories. Abductive reasoning can be applied in diverse problems, such as image understanding (Cox
and Pietrzykowski 1986; Poole 1990), natural language understanding (Hobbs et al. 1990), plan recognition (Charniak
and McDermott 1985), and so on.
Although most early work on abduction relied on explicit
knowledge engineering to capture the domains in which
such inference was to be performed, much knowledge engineering has been replaced by machine learning. The reasons
can be explained roughly as follows: the main lessons of the
CYC project (Lenat 1995) were that (i) the scope of knowledge needed to support ordinary human inferences is vast,
and would take many decades to formalize in its entirety
and (ii) such a large knowledge engineering effort seems to
inevitably suffer from semantic drift and consequently, brittleness. Machine learning is a means to circumvent both of
these problems. The price of using learned knowledge is that
its semantics are inevitably weaker than those of classical
knowledge. So, while these weaker semantics may grant us
some additional robustness (as has been argued, for example, by Valiant (2000a; 2000b)), they also require us to reconsider the foundations of the various tasks we wish to perform. A surprising beneﬁt of this exercise is that it turns out
that a combined learning and reasoning task may be easier
than either of its constituent parts: Khardon and Roth (1997)
demonstrated that algorithms for such combined tasks may
efﬁciently learn and reason with representations that would
be intractable to learn or reason about using standalone algorithms. Motivated by these advantages, we will likewise
consider a combined learning and abductive reasoning task.
In particular, we focus on a new formulation of abductive reasoning introduced by Juba (2016) based on PAClearning (Valiant 1984). In this model, learning is accomplished using examples that consist of settings of each of
the various Boolean attributes. For example, if our domain
is reasoning about people, then our attributes may include
“female” (yes or no), “male” (yes or no), “brown hair” (yes
or no), “taller than 1.5m” (yes or no) and so on. Each example corresponds to a person, and consists of a setting of all
of these attributes. All of the examples contain the same attributes, but they may be set differently. In the model, these
examples are drawn from an arbitrary distribution D over
{0, 1}n (for our n attributes). The abduction task is then,
given a condition that we wish to explain, that is captured

Abstract
Inference from an observed or hypothesized condition to a
plausible cause or explanation for this condition is known as
abduction. For many tasks, the acquisition of the necessary
knowledge by machine learning has been widely found to be
highly effective. However, the semantics of learned knowledge are weaker than the usual classical semantics, and this
necessitates new formulations of many tasks. We focus on
a recently introduced formulation of the abductive inference
task that is thus adapted to the semantics of machine learning. A key problem is that we cannot expect that our causes
or explanations will be perfect, and they must tolerate some
error due to the world being more complicated than our formalization allows. This is a version of the qualiﬁcation problem, and in machine learning, this is known as agnostic learning. In the work by Juba that introduced the task of learning
to make abductive inferences, an algorithm is given for producing k-DNF explanations that tolerates such exceptions: if
the best possible k-DNF explanation fails to justify the condition with probability , then the algorithm is promised to
ﬁnd a k-DNF explanation that fails to justify the condition
with probability at most O(nk ), where n is the number of
propositional attributes used to describe the domain. Here, we
present an improved algorithm for this task. When the best kDNF fails with probability , our algorithm
ﬁnds a k-DNF
√
that fails with probability at most Õ( nk ) (i.e., suppressing logarithmic factors in n and 1/). We also examine the
empirical advantage of this new algorithm over the previous
algorithm in two test domains, one of explaining conditions
generated by a “noisy” k-DNF rule, and another of explaining conditions that are actually generated by a linear threshold
rule.

Introduction
Abductive reasoning is the process of inferring a reasonable
explanation for an observation or hypothetical situation. For
example, suppose a man walks into a hotel and his clothing
is wet. We may naturally assume that it is raining outside.
This might not be true, and his clothing may have gotten wet
some other way, but it is the most reasonable explanation
of the given facts. Abduction is powerful—in enabling us
to ﬁnd hidden explanation of events, it furthermore enables
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1257

