Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Constrained Pure Nash Equilibria in Polymatrix Games
Sunil Simon∗

Dominik Wojtczak†

IIT Kanpur
Kanpur, India

University of Liverpool
Liverpool, U.K.

player games he plays against every other player. Polymatrix games are well-studied in the literature. They include
game classes with good computational properties like the
two-player zero-sum games. They also have applications in
areas such as artiﬁcial neural networks (Miller and Zucker
1991) and machine learning (Erdem and Pelillo 2012).
In terms of tractability, the restriction to pairwise interactions does not immediately ensure the existence of efﬁcient algorithms. Computing a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium remains PPAD-complete (Cai and Daskalakis 2011)
and checking for the existence of a pure NE is NP-complete
in general. This motivates the need to further analyse the
type of pairwise interactions that would ensure tractability.
In this paper, we argue that another important factor which
inﬂuences tractability is the structure of the underlying interaction graph and presence of individual preferences (that
we call bonuses).
The main restriction that we impose on polymatrix games
is that each pairwise interaction forms a coordination game.
Henceforth, we will refer to these games simply as coordination games on graphs. Coordination games are often
used in game theory to model situations where players attain maximum payoff when they agree on a common strategy. The game model that we study, extends coordination
games to the network setting where payoffs need not always
be symmetric and players coordinate within a certain local
neighbourhood. The neighbourhood structure is speciﬁed by
a ﬁnite directed graph whose nodes correspond to the players. Each player chooses a colour from a set of available
colours. The payoff of a player is the sum of weights on the
edges from players who choose the same colour and a ﬁxed
bonus for picking that particular colour. This game model
is closely related to various well-studied classes of games.
For instance, coordination games on graphs are graphical games (Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2001) and they are
also related to hedonic games (Dreze and Greenberg 1980;
Bogomolnaia and Jackson 2002). In hedonic games, the payoff of each player depends solely on the set of players that
selected the same strategy. The coalition formation property inherent to coordination games on graphs make the
game model relevant to cluster analysis. The problem of
clustering has been studied from a game theoretic perspective for instance in (Feldman, Lewin-Eytan, and Naor 2012;
Pelillo and Buló 2014).

Abstract
We study the problem of checking for the existence of
constrained pure Nash equilibria in a subclass of polymatrix games deﬁned on weighted directed graphs. The payoff of a player is deﬁned as the sum of nonnegative rational weights on incoming edges from players who picked the
same strategy augmented by a ﬁxed integer bonus for picking a given strategy. These games capture the idea of coordination within a local neighbourhood in the absence of globally common strategies. We study the decision problem of
checking whether a given set of strategy choices for a subset of the players is consistent with some pure Nash equilibrium or, alternatively, with all pure Nash equilibria. We
identify the most natural tractable cases and show NP or
coNP-completness of these problems already for unweighted
DAGs.

1

Introduction

Identifying subclasses of games where equilibria is tractable
is an important problem in algorithmic analysis of multiplayer games. Pure Nash equilibria (NEs) may not exist in
games and checking whether a game has a pure NE is in
general a hard problem. Even for subclasses of games in
which a pure NE is guaranteed to exists (for instance, potential games) computing one remains PLS-hard (Fabrikant,
Papadimitriou, and Talwar 2004). Although, Nash’s theorem guarantees the existence of mixed strategy NE in all
ﬁnite games, computing one is still a hard problem. Therefore, identifying restricted classes of games where equilibrium computation is tractable and also precisely identifying
the borderline between tractability and hardness in such restricted classes is of obvious interest. In this paper, we study
the borderline of tractability in a natural subclass of games
where the utilities of players are restricted to be pairwise
separable. These are called polymatrix games (Janovskaya
1968) and they form an abstract model that is useful to analyse strategic behaviour of players in games formed via pairwise interactions. In polymatrix games, the payoff for each
player is the sum of the payoffs he gets from individual two
∗
Supported by the Research-I Foundation, IIT Kanpur and the
Liverpool-India fellowship, University of Liverpool.
†
Supported by EPSRC grant EP/M027651/1.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

691

