Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Associate Latent Encodings in
Learning from Demonstrations
Hang Yin,1,2 Francisco S. Melo,1 Aude Billard,2 Ana Paiva1

1

2

GAIPS, INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa
Learning Algorithms and Systems Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
{hang.yin, aude.billard}@epﬂ.ch
{fmelo, ana.paiva}@inesc-id.pt

Abstract
We contribute a learning from demonstration approach for
robots to acquire skills from multi-modal high-dimensional
data. Both latent representations and associations of different modalities are proposed to be jointly learned through
an adapted variational auto-encoder. The implementation and
results are demonstrated in a robotic handwriting scenario,
where the visual sensory input and the arm joint writing motion are learned and coupled. We show the latent representations successfully construct a task manifold for the observed
sensor modalities. Moreover, the learned associations can be
exploited to directly synthesize arm joint handwriting motion
from an image input in an end-to-end manner. The advantages of learning associative latent encodings are further highlighted with the examples of inferring upon incomplete input
images. A comparison with alternative methods demonstrates
the superiority of the present approach in these challenging
tasks.

Figure 1: Learning representations for multiple sensory
perceptions (vision and motion) and associating them in
the latent space for the underlying task. The desired sensory/motor state, e.g., joint motion command, can be efﬁciently derived from incomplete or novel input e.g., symbol
images.

Learning from demonstrations (LfD) is promising for an effective transfer of robotic skills from humans to robots. Traditional LfD approaches often learn with hand-crafted features (e.g., the poses of labeled objects) in a low dimensional
space (e.g., robot operational space) (Khansari, Kronander,
and Billard 2014)(Calinon 2015). This is limited for broader
LfD applications in a more practical context, where high dimensional raw sensory data is pervasive. The desideratum of
learning from high dimensional demonstrations solicits LfD
to automate the extraction of task relevant features alongside
learning the underlying task constraints. Such a representation learning has the potential to free human users, from the
domain feature design as well as the restriction of sensor
selection, thus substantially improving the applicability and
the empirical value of the LfD framework.
Another often-overlooked aspect in LfD is learning from
multi-modal demonstrations. Previous LfD works tend to
focus on modeling data of a single sensor modality, even
though there is nothing preventing the task demonstrations
being observed through the lens of various robot sensors. On
the other hand, human beings are quite proﬁcient in learning
and fusing the knowledge or experience gathered from different sensing systems. For instance, humans can perceive
the shape of an object through both vision and tactile sensa-

tions. Such a redundant and associative description is beneﬁcial when only partial information is presented to the agents
in the task reproduction: humans can still effortlessly infer
the shape of an object with a hand exploration in darkness.
Therefore, by learning from multi-modal demonstrations,
the robots are enabled to gain a more complete task description, a natural mechanism to estimate what is unknown from
what is known, and as such, a capacity of robustly executing
the task in face of uncertainty.
In this paper, motivated by the above challenges, we
present an approach that allows robots to learn demonstrated
skills from high dimensional and multi-modal demonstration data. Among different LfD variants, we consider the
problem of inverse optimal control (IOC) which extracts and
represents task constraints as cost functions. We propose to
learn the task cost function as well as its features by integrating a representation learning framework into LfD. Moreover, constrains in the latent space are imposed and jointly
learned, by exploiting the fact that the multi-modal data is
a redundant description for the underlying task to model.
To this end, we can obtain succinct task manifolds and representations, which can be leveraged for efﬁcient motion
derivation from the raw sensory input (Figure 1). The main
contributions of this paper are:

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• An approach which enables an agent to learn from high
dimensional raw demonstration data, with an adaptation

3848

