Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning to Avoid Dominated Action Sequences in
Planning for Black-Box Domains (Extended Abstract)
Yuu Jinnai, Alex Fukunaga
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

budget, and (2) execute an action. Because this setting poses
a series of related planning episodes, there is an opportunity
to improve planner performance over time by learning a
duplicate avoidance strategy.
Speciﬁcally, we seek to eliminate actions (and sequences
of actions) which are dominated by others (and lead to duplicate states). For example, in the ALE, 18 actions are always
available (the joystick has 9 states – up/down/left/right/4 diagonals/“neutral”, and the “ﬁre” button has 2 states, 9x2=18).
Previous work in search-based planning for the ALE treats all
18 actions as applicable at every state (Lipovetzky, Ramirez,
and Geffner 2015; Shleyfman, Tuisov, and Domshlak 2016).
However, in any particular game, many of these 18 actions
are dominated (“useless”): First, some actions are trivially
dominated because they are completely ignored, or the program always treats them as being equivalent to other actions
(e.g., in some games, the state of the “ﬁre” button is irrelevant). Second, some actions are conditionally dominated
because, in a given context, the action results in the same
state as another action (e.g., in a maze-based game, if the
agent is stuck against a wall to the left, then the “left” action
is useless because (in some games) it results in the same state
as “no action”). More generally, sequences of actions can
be useless. For example, some actions can have cooldown
periods, i.e, after action a is used, executing a again has no
effect for the next t seconds (e.g. ﬁring missiles in shooting
games).
In this paper, we propose two methods to detect dominated
action sequences and reduce the amount of applying such sequences. Unlike the standard method proposed by Taylor and
Korf (1993), our method is applicable to black-box planning.

Abstract
Black-box domains where the successor states generated by
applying an action are generated by a completely opaque simulator pose a challenge for domain-independent planning. The
main computational bottleneck in search-based planning for
such domains is the number of calls to the black-box simulation. We propose a method for signiﬁcantly reducing the
number of calls to the simulator by the search algorithm by detecting and pruning sequences of actions which are dominated
by others. We apply our pruning method to Iterated Width and
breadth-ﬁrst search in domain-independent black-box planning for Atari 2600 games, adding our pruning method signiﬁcantly improves upon the baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recently, planning in black-box domains with much more
opaque domain models has attracted attention, spurred by
interest in developing a game-independent AI playing algorithm for video games (Bellemare et al. 2013). In blackbox planning, a state vector and a set of actions are available, as well as an objective function for evaluating states.
However, the only way to compute the successor state s
resulting from applying an action a to state s is to execute
s = Simulate(s, a), a black-box simulation function for
which the internal dynamics are inaccessible.
Such black-box domains present a challenge for searchbased planning, because the pruning techniques which enabled effective search in domains with transparent domain
models are not applicable, leaving us only with brute-force
methods such as breadth-ﬁrst search. However, it was recently shown that Iterative Width (IW) (Lipovetzky and
Geffner 2012), a search strategy which prunes the search
space by focusing only on states which are “novel” compared
to previously expanded nodes, can be used as the basis for
a successful, search-based planner for black-box planning
(Lipovetzky, Ramirez, and Geffner 2015).
In this paper, we investigate duplicate avoidance in on-line
planning settings for black-box domains, as exempliﬁed by
the on-line planning for the ALE (Bellemare et al. 2013),
where an agent plays video games by repeating the loop:
(1) solving a planning problem with a very limited resource

2

Dominated Action Sequence Pruning
(DASP)

To improve the performance of planning episodes (Step 3)
of the online black-box planning, we propose Dominated
Action Sequence Pruning (DASP), a method to eliminate
dominated action sequences in black-box planning.
DASP ﬁnds a set of action sequences AL using Algorithm
1, based on the search tree explored in previous planning
episodes.
Algorithm 1. [Find minimal action sequence set]
1. Initialize AL
min to the set of all action sequences which

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4943

