Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Grounded Action Transformation for Robot Learning in Simulation
Josiah P. Hanna and Peter Stone
{jphanna,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, TX 78712 USA

actions, τ := S0 , A0 , ..., SL , AL . The cost function, c, assigns a scalar cost to each (s, a) pair.
π,
The value of policy,

L
is deﬁned as J(π) := Eτ ∼P r(·|π)
c(S
,
A
)
where
t
t
t=0
P r(τ |π) is the probability of τ when selecting actions according to π. The policy π is parameterized by a vector θ.
Since θ determines the policy distribution we overload notation and refer to πθ as θ. Given initial parameters θ 0 , the goal
of policy improvement is to ﬁnd θ  such that J(θ  ) < J(θ 0 ).
In this paper, learning takes place in a simulator, Esim , that
models E. Speciﬁcally Esim has the same state-action space
as E but inevitably a different dynamics distribution, Psim .
The different dynamics distribution mean that for any policy,
θ, J(θ) = Jsim (θ) since θ induces a different trajectory
distribution in E than in Esim . Thus θ  with Jsim (θ  ) <
Jsim (θ 0 ) does not imply J(θ  ) < J(θ 0 ) – in fact J(θ  ) could
even be worse than J(θ 0 ). This paper explores methods for
learning in Esim that lower expected cost.

Abstract
Robot learning in simulation is a promising alternative to
the prohibitive sample cost of learning in the physical world.
Unfortunately, policies learned in simulation often perform
worse than hand-coded policies when applied on the physical
robot. This paper proposes a new algorithm for learning in
simulation – Grounded Action Transformation – and applies
it to learning of humanoid bipedal locomotion. Our approach
results in a 43.27% improvement in forward walk velocity
compared to a state-of-the art hand-coded walk.1

Introduction
An alternative to learning robotic skills directly on the physical robot is learning in simulation and transferring the learned
skills. However, the value of simulation learning is limited by
the inherent inaccuracy of simulators in modeling the dynamics of the physical world. As a result, learning that takes place
in a simulator is unlikely to increase real world performance.
Grounded Simulation Learning (GSL) is a framework for
modifying a simulator such that learning transfers to the
physical robot (Farchy et al. 2013). We introduce a new
GSL algorithm – Grounded Action Transformation ( GAT )
for simulation-transfer. The algorithm is evaluated on the
task of bipedal robotic walking. Our evaluation of GAT starts
from a state-of-the-art walk engine as the base policy and
improves the walk velocity by over 43%, leading to what
may be the fastest known walk on the SoftBank NAO robot.

Grounded Action Transformation
The Grounded Simulation Learning (GSL) framework (Farchy
et al. 2013) improves robot learning in simulation by using state transition data from the physical system to ground
Esim such that it is a better model of E. The GSL framework assumes there is an imperfect simulator, Esim =
S, A, Psim , c, that models E. Furthermore, Esim must be
modiﬁable. A modiﬁable simulator has parameterized transition probabilities Pφ (·|s, a) := Psim (·|s, a; φ) where the
vector φ can be changed to produce, in effect, a different
simulator.

GSL grounds Esim by ﬁnding φ such that:

Problem Statement
At discrete time-step t the robot takes action At ∼ π(·|St )
according to π which is a distribution over actions, At ∈ A,
conditioned on the current state, St ∈ S. The environment,
E, responds with St+1 ∼ P (·|St , At ) according to the dynamics, P : S ×A×S → R≥0 which is a probability density
function over next states conditioned on the current state and
action. A trajectory of length L is a sequence of states and

φ = argmin
φ



d (P r(τ |θ), P rsim (τ |θ, φ))

(1)

τ ∈D

where P r(τ |θ) is the probability of observing trajectory
τ in E, P rsim (τ |θ, φ) is the probability of τ in Esim with
dynamics parameterized by φ, d is a measure of similarity
between these probabilities, and D is a data set of trajectories
recorded on the physical robot. When a policy improvement
method is used to optimize θ in Esim with φ the improved
policy, θ  is expected to perform better on the physical robot.
Our principle algorithmic contribution, GSL with
Grounded Action Transformation (GAT) improves grounding by correcting differences in the effects of actions between

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An extended version of this work is published in
AAAI 2017. Videos of learned walk policies can be found
at https://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/AustinVilla/?p=research/real
and sim walk learning.

4931

