Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Coactive Critiquing: Elicitation of Preferences and Features
Stefano Teso

Paolo Dragone

Andrea Passerini

stefano.teso@unitn.it
University of Trento
Via Sommarive 9, Povo
Trento, Italy

paolo.dragone@unitn.it
University of Trento
TIM-SKIL
Via Sommarive 9, Povo
Trento, Italy

andrea.passerini@unitn.it
University of Trento
Via Sommarive 9, Povo
Trento, Italy

the set of features that the utility is deﬁned by is assumed
given and ﬁxed. This is not always a realistic assumption. When faced with a complex decision, users may not
be fully aware of their own quality criteria, especially in
large, unfamiliar decision domains (Chen and Pu 2012;
Pu and Faltings 2000). Even more so in constructive settings, where the option catalogue is exponentially (possibly inﬁnitely) large and generated on-the-ﬂy. Crucially, the
user may become aware of novel preference criteria, in a
context-speciﬁc fashion, while exploring the decision domain (Payne, Bettman, and Johnson 1993; Slovic 1995).
One way to tackle this problem is to enumerate all potential user criteria in advance, by combining a ﬁxed set of
features with one or more operators (e.g. multiplication or
logical conjunction). This solution however has drawbacks.
First, the number of feature combinations suffers from combinatorial explosion, making learning harder and more computationally demanding. Most importantly, entirely novel
and unanticipated user criteria can not be added to the feature space.
Example critiquing (or conversational) recommendation
systems (Tou et al. 1982; McGinty and Reilly 2011; Chen
and Pu 2012) provide an alternative solution. In this setting,
preferences are stated in term of critiques to suggested conﬁgurations. Upon receiving one or more proposals, the user
is free to reply with statements such as “this trip is too expensive” or “I dislike crowded places”. Critiques are integrated
into the learner as auxiliary constraints or penalties (Faltings
et al. 2004). Options presented at later iterations are chosen based on the collected feedback, focusing the search on
more promising items. Example critiquing is explicitly designed to address the above difﬁculty: by being confronted
with a set of concrete items, the user has a chance to realize that she cares about features that she was previously
unaware of (Chen and Pu 2012). Unfortunately, typical conversational systems do not support numerical modelling of
user preferences (e.g. weights), and often assume noiseless
critiquing feedback.
In this paper we present a new algorithm, Coactive Critiquing (CC), that uniﬁes coactive learning and example critiquing, harnessing the strengths of both strategies. Coactive Critiquing builds on the coactive learning framework
by further allowing critique feedback. We view critiques as
arbitrarily articulated explanations for the user-provided im-

Abstract
When faced with complex choices, users reﬁne their own
preference criteria as they explore the catalogue of options.
In this paper we propose an approach to preference elicitation suited for this scenario. We extend Coactive Learning,
which iteratively collects manipulative feedback, to optionally query example critiques. User critiques are integrated
into the learning model by dynamically extending the feature
space. Our formulation natively supports constructive learning tasks, where the option catalogue is generated on-the-ﬂy.
We present an upper bound on the average regret suffered by
the learner. Our empirical analysis highlights the promise of
our approach.

Introduction
Preference elicitation (Goldsmith and Junker 2009) is the
task of interactively inferring preferences of users and it is
a key component of personalized recommendation and decision support systems. The typical approach consists of asking the user to rank alternative solutions (Chajewska, Koller,
and Parr 2000; Boutilier et al. 2006; Guo and Sanner 2010;
Viappiani and Boutilier 2010) and use the resulting feedback to learn a (possibly approximately) consistent user utility function. These algorithms rely on a ﬁxed pool of solutions from which to choose both candidates for feedback and
ﬁnal recommendations. However, when thinking of an interaction between a user and a salesman, one imagines a more
active role by the user, who could suggest modiﬁcations
to candidates. For instance, in a trip planning application,
when commenting a candidate trip to New York, the user
may reply: “I’d rather visit the MoMA than Central Park”.
This is especially true when considering fully constructive
scenarios (Teso, Passerini, and Viappiani 2016), where the
task is synthesizing entirely novel objects, like the furniture arrangement of an apartment or a novel recipe for vegan tiramisù. Coactive Learning (Shivaswamy and Joachims
2012) is a recent interactive learning paradigm which allows
the user to provide corrected versions of the candidates she
is presented with.
While Coactive Learning approaches adapt the preference model based on user-provided option improvements,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2639

