Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Moral Decision Making Frameworks for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Vincent Conitzer, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, Jana Schaich Borg, Yuan Deng, Max Kramer
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
{vincent.conitzer,walter.sinnott-armstrong,
jana.schaich.borg,yuan.deng,max.kramer}@duke.edu

two or even ﬁve other patients. Research in ethics and moral
psychology elucidates our moral intuitions in such examples
by distinguishing between doing and allowing, emphasizing
the role of intent, applying general rules about kinds of actions (such as “Don’t kill”), and referring to rights (such as
the patient’s) and roles (such as the doctor’s). Incorporating
these morally relevant factors among others could enable AI
to make moral decisions that are safer, more robust, more
beneﬁcial, and acceptable to a wider range of people.1
To be useful in the development of AI, our moral theories
must provide more than vague, general criteria. They must
also provide an operationalizable, and presumably quantitative, theory that speciﬁes which particular actions are
morally right or wrong in a wide range of situations. This, of
course, also requires the agent to have a language in which to
represent the structure of the actions being judged (Mikhail
2007) and the morally relevant features of actions (Gert
2004) along with rules about how these features interact and
affect moral judgments. Moral theory and AI need to work
together in this endeavor.
Multiple approaches can be taken to arrive at generalpurpose procedures for automatically making moral decisions. One approach is to use game theory. Game-theoretic
formalisms are widely used by artiﬁcial intelligence researchers to represent multiagent decision scenarios, but, as
we will argue below, its solution concepts and possibly even
its basic representation schemes need to be extended in order
to provide guidance on moral behavior. Another approach
is to use machine learning. We can use the moral philosophy and psychology literatures to identify features of moral
dilemmas that are relevant to the moral status of possible
actions described in the dilemmas. Human subjects can be
asked to make moral judgments about a set of moral dilemmas in order to obtain a labeled data set. Then, we can train
classiﬁers based on this data set and the identiﬁed features.
(Compare also the top-down vs. bottom-up distinction in automated moral decision making, as described by (Wallach
and Allen 2008).) We will discuss these two approaches in
turn.

Abstract
The generality of decision and game theory has enabled
domain-independent progress in AI research. For example,
a better algorithm for ﬁnding good policies in (PO)MDPs can
be instantly used in a variety of applications. But such a general theory is lacking when it comes to moral decision making. For AI applications with a moral component, are we then
forced to build systems based on many ad-hoc rules? In this
paper we discuss possible ways to avoid this conclusion.

Introduction
As deployed AI systems become more autonomous, they
increasingly face moral dilemmas. An often-used example
is that of a self-driving car that faces an unavoidable accident, but has several options how to act, with different effects on its passengers and others in the scenario. (See, for
example, (Bonnefon, Shariff, and Rahwan 2016).) But there
are other examples where AI is already used to make decisions with life-or-death consequences. Consider, for example, kidney exchanges. These cater to patients in need of a
kidney that have a willing live donor whose kidney the patient’s body would reject. In this situation, the patient may
be able to swap donors with another patient in the same situation. (More complex arrangements are possible as well.)
For these exchanges, algorithms developed in the AI community are already used to determine which patients receive
which kidneys (see, e.g., (Dickerson and Sandholm 2015)).
While it may be possible to ﬁnd special-purpose solutions
for moral decision making in these domains, in the long run
there is a need for a general framework that an AI agent can
use to make moral decisions in a wider variety of contexts.
In this paper, we lay out some possible roadmaps for arriving
at such a framework.

Motivation
Most AI research is conducted within straightforward utilitarian or consequentialist frameworks, but these simple approaches can lead to counterintuitive judgments from an ethical perspective. For example, most people consider it immoral to harvest a healthy patient’s organs to save the lives of

1

The point that, as advanced AI acquires more autonomy, it is
essential to bring moral reasoning into it has been made previously
by others—e.g., (Moor 2006).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4831

