Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Predicting Soccer Highlights from
Spatio-Temporal Match Event Streams
Tom Decroos, Vladimir Dzyuba, Jan Van Haaren, Jesse Davis
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
{tom.decroos, vladimir.dzyuba, jan.vanhaaren, jesse.davis}@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Sports broadcasters are continuously seeking to make their
live coverages of soccer matches more attractive. A recent
innovation is the “highlight channel,” which shows the most
interesting events from multiple matches played at the same
time. However, switching between matches at the right time
is challenging in fast-paced sports like soccer, where interesting situations often evolve as quickly as they disappear again.
This paper presents the POGBA algorithm for automatically
predicting highlights in soccer matches, which is an important task that has not yet been addressed. POGBA leverages
spatio-temporal event streams collected during matches to
predict the probability that a particular game state will lead to
a goal. An empirical evaluation on a real-world dataset shows
that POGBA outperforms the baseline algorithms in terms of
both precision and recall.

Figure 1: Our proposed POGBA algorithm predicts highlights in soccer matches from spatio-temporal match data.

states often emerge and disappear extremely quickly. Typically, highlight channels only switch to a match after a goal
has been scored, but ideally they would switch several seconds earlier. For that to happen, sports broadcasters need a
predictive model telling them when an interesting game situation is about to arise.
This paper addresses the novel but important task of predicting the probability that a game situation will lead to a
goal in the near future. Although this task could most naturally be modeled as a conditional probability estimation
problem, several factors make this a challenging problem.
First, very few goals are scored in a soccer match. Second,
no two game states are identical as players can freely move
around the pitch. Third, a game can evolve into many different ways depending on the actions of the players.
To address this task, we propose the POGBA (Prediction
of Goals by Assessing Phases) algorithm for automatically predicting highlights in soccer matches from spatiotemporal match data. More speciﬁcally, our algorithm predicts the probability that a given game state will lead to a
goal. Instead of directly modeling the conditional probability, POGBA exploits the insight that goals are preceded by
goal attempts, which are much more frequent than goals.
Viewing the available spatio-temporal data as one long
stream of events, POGBA ﬁrst estimates the probability that
a game state will lead to an attempt, and then estimates the
probability that the attempt will lead to a goal. An empirical
evaluation for predicting highlights on a real-world dataset
comprising 69 soccer matches shows that POGBA outperforms several baseline approaches in terms of F1 score.

Introduction
Recent technological advances have enabled the large-scale
collection of soccer data. Companies like Prozone1 and
Opta2 rely on optical tracking systems and human annotators to gather high volumes of data during matches in major soccer competitions such as the Champions League. The
tracking systems automatically record the locations of the
players and the ball at a high frequency, while teams of annotators enrich the dataset by annotating the notable events
that happen on the pitch. The data are collected live allowing
broadcasters to show interesting statistics and visualizations.
With the increasing competition from mobile sports apps
and social media, sports broadcasters are continuously seeking to improve their live coverages. A recent innovation is
the “highlight channel”, which shows live action from multiple matches played simultaneously. FOX Sports’ MultiMatch 90-channel, for instance, switches from one Champions League match to another depending on which match
is currently the most interesting to watch.
The challenge for broadcasters is to switch between
matches at the right time. This task is especially challenging in fast-paced sports like soccer, where interesting game
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://prozonesports.stats.com
2
http://www.optasports.com

1302

