Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sparse Deep Transfer Learning for
Convolutional Neural Network
1

Jiaming Liu,∗1 Yali Wang,∗1 Yu Qiao†1,2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
jiaming.liu@email.ucr.edu, {yl.wang, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

In this paper, we introduce a novel sparse deep transfer
learning to handle this difﬁculty, by taking advantage of
both deep model compression and knowledge transferring.
Speciﬁcally, we make three main contributions as follows.
First, we introduce a Sparse-SourceNet by pruning CNN in
the source domain. This allows to reduce the redundancy of
CNN in the source domain, and subsequently alleviate the
risk of overﬁtting in the next transferring process. Second,
we propose a Hybrid-TransferNet in which an extra branch
is incorporated into the modiﬁed Sparse-SourceNet. With
this extra branch, our Hybrid-TransferNet can effectively exploit implicit source-domain knowledge during transferring.
More importantly, due to the model sparsity and the implicit knowledge, our Hybrid-TransferNet can improve the
generalization ability and the prediction accuracy of transfer learning. Third, we develop a Sparse-TargetNet, by further pruning our Hybrid-TransferNet in the target domain.
This design helps to reduce the redundancy of the transferred model to obtain a highly-compact, source-knowledgeintegrated CNN for the target domain. To show effectiveness, we perform our sparse deep transfer learning approach
on a number of challenging transfer learning tasks for the famous AlexNet and VGGNet, namely, transferring AlexNet
from object recognition with ImageNet to scene recognition with MIT Indoor67 or ﬁne-grained ﬂower recognition
with Flower102, and transferring VGGNet for human action
recognition in videos, from UCF101 to HMDB51. All results demonstrate that, compared to the standard ﬁne-tuning
approach, our approach achieves a signiﬁcant pruning rate
on CNN while improves accuracy of transfer learning.

Abstract
Extensive studies have demonstrated that the representations
of convolutional neural networks (CNN), which are learned
from a large-scale data set in the source domain, can be effectively transferred to a new target domain. However, compared
to the source domain, the target domain often has limited data
in practice. In this case, overﬁtting may signiﬁcantly depress
transferability, due to the model redundancy of the intensive
CNN structures. To deal with this difﬁculty, we propose a
novel sparse deep transfer learning approach for CNN. There
are three main contributions in this work. First, we introduce a
Sparse-SourceNet to reduce the redundancy in the source domain. Second, we introduce a Hybrid-TransferNet to improve
the generalization ability and the prediction accuracy of transfer learning, by taking advantage of both model sparsity and
implicit knowledge. Third, we introduce a Sparse-TargetNet,
where we prune our Hybrid-TransferNet to obtain a highlycompact, source-knowledge-integrated CNN in the target domain. To examine the effectiveness of our methods, we perform our sparse deep transfer learning approach on a number
of benchmark transfer learning tasks. The results show that,
compared to the standard ﬁne-tuning approach, our proposed
approach achieves a signiﬁcant pruning rate on CNN while
improves the accuracy of transfer learning.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, convolutional neural networks
(CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014b; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2015)
have achieved remarkable successes in a number of largescale computer vision tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012; Sun et al. 2014; Zhou et al. 2014; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014a). Extensive studies have shown that
the representations of CNN, which are learned from a largescale data set in the source domain, can be effectively
transferred to a new target domain (Yosinski et al. 2014;
Sharif Razavian et al. 2014; Donahue et al. 2014; Azizpour
et al. 2015). However, compared to the source domain, the
target domain often has limited data in practice. In this case,
the transferring process may suffer from overﬁtting, due to
the model redundancy of the intensive CNN structures.

2

Related Works

Transfer Learning for CNN: Transfer learning has been
widely used for CNN, since CNN which is trained on a
large-scale source data set, can be applied to a new target
data set (Yosinski et al. 2014; Sharif Razavian et al. 2014;
Donahue et al. 2014; Azizpour et al. 2015). One approach is
to extract features of the target data directly from the sourcedata-pretrained CNN, and then use these features to train a
linear classiﬁer (such as SVM) for prediction (Sharif Razavian et al. 2014; Donahue et al. 2014). However, the performance of this approach is often restricted, due to the domain
difference between source and target. Alternatively, ﬁnetuning the source-data-pretrained CNN with the target data

∗

Equally-contributed ﬁrst authors
Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2245

