Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cleaning the Null Space:
A Privacy Mechanism for Predictors
Ke Xu,∗ Tongyi Cao,† Swair Shah,∗
Crystal Maung,∗ Haim Schweitzer∗
{ke.xu5,swair,hschweitzer}@utdallas.edu,
tcao@umass.edu,
Crystal.Maung@gmail.com

In this paper we propose a privacy mechanism to minimize the exposure of conﬁdential information that the client
may wish to keep private even from the company. We show
how to “clean” the data before sending it to the company in
such a way that allows its usage for predicting the desired information. At the same time the accuracy of predicting conﬁdential information from the cleaned data is signiﬁcantly
reduced.
The main idea behind our approach can be easily understood in terms of feature selection. Clearly, it makes no sense
to provide the company data that is not needed for predicting the desired information. Unfortunately, if accurate prediction of desired labels is necessary, the removal of an entire feature may not be appropriate. Even “mostly irrelevant”
features may contribute “something” to the prediction. Instead, we show how to remove unnecessary feature components.
Our idea is to use knowledge about the predictor of desired information to help hide conﬁdential information. In
particular, if the predictor has a linear operator in the ﬁrst
stage then there is a transformation of the data that reveals
feature components not needed for the prediction. Speciﬁcally, combinations of features that lie in the operator null
space do not affect the prediction and need not be provided.
Removing this information is what we call cleaning.

Abstract
In standard machine learning and regression setting feature
values are used to predict some desired information. The privacy challenge considered here is to prevent an adversary
from using available feature values to predict conﬁdential information that one wishes to keep secret. We show that this
can sometimes be achieved with almost no effect on the quality of predicting desired information. We describe two algorithms aimed at providing such privacy when the predictors
have a linear operator in the ﬁrst stage. The desired effect can
be achieved by zeroing out feature components in the approximate null space of the linear operator.

Introduction
Consider a company that develops technology for predicting
desired information from raw data. As a trivial example the
raw data may be the height, weight, and sex of a child, with
the desired information being the child’s age. The company
may obtain the data from a client, use it to predict the desired
information, and send that information back to the client.
The privacy concern we address is the potential inappropriate use of the client data to predict conﬁdential information that the client does not wish to expose. In our trivial
example such information may be the child weight (which
is part of the data), or whether or not the child is obese.
It appears that the current approach in similar situations is
to encrypt the raw data sent to the company so that it requires
a secret password to be accessed. This, however, does not
provide signiﬁcantly improved privacy. Someone who works
at the company and knows the password may still access
the data, and an adversary may still gain access to both the
encrypted data and the password.
Another possible solution is to provide the client with the
software that computes the desired information, so that the
raw data need not be sent to the company. This solution is
sometimes inappropriate because of the following two reasons. First, the software may be too big and require special
hardware. Secondly, giving the program away may allow the
client to use it in cases not agreed upon by the company.
Similar arguments are made in (Tramèr et al. 2016).

Problem statement
The problem we consider involves three entities: the
cleaner, the ally, and the adversary. In the example discussed earlier the cleaner is the client and the ally is the
company. The cleaner has a single feature vector denoted by
x. In addition to x the cleaner has knowledge of the linear
operator of the predictor used by the ally. The cleaner cleans
x and produces x̃. We write the computation performed by
the cleaner as:
x̃ = clean(x)
(1)
The ally has a predictor fd that can predict desired information, denoted by yd , from the uncleaned data x. This can be
expressed as: yd = fd (x). The ally receives the cleaned feature vector x̃ from the cleaner without knowledge of whether
or not it was cleaned, or how it was cleaned. The computation performed by the ally is always the same, applying the

∗

Department of Computer Science, Univ. of Texas at Dallas.
CICS, UMass Amherst.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2789

