Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Detecting Review Spammer Groups
Min Yang

Ziyu Lu

Xiaojun Chen

Fei Xu∗

University of Hong Kong
myang@cs.hku.hk

University of Hong Kong
zylu@cs.hku.hk

Shenzhen University
xjchen@szu.edu.cn

Chinese Academy of Sciences
xufei@iie.ac.cn

gories API1 to retrieve each review’s parent node. If a user
review the products that belong to the same parent node
within a small time window (e.g., 1 days) but make different
comments, it is likely that this reviewer is a review spammer.

Abstract
With an increasing number of paid writers posting fake reviews to promote or demote some target entities through Internet, review spammer detection has become a crucial and
challenging task. In this paper, we propose a three-phase
method to address the problem of identifying review spammer groups and individual spammers, who get paid for posting fake comments. We evaluate the effectiveness and performance of the approach on a real-life online shopping review
dataset from amazon.com. The experimental result shows
that our model achieved comparable or better performance
than previous work on spammer detection.

Related work
Recently, various methods have been proposed to detect deceptive opinion spam (Fei et al. 2013; Jindal and Liu 2008;
Mukherjee, Liu, and Glance 2012). On the other hand, as
author’s interests showing increasing importance for the development of personalized and user-centric applications, variety of LDA (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003; Yang, Cui, and Tu
2015) extensions have been proposed to incorporate authorship information into the text (Rosen-Zvi et al. 2004).

Introduction
For the purpose of proﬁt or fame, people try to write fake reviews to promote or demote some target entities (e.g. events,
services or products). This kind of problem has already been
widely reported by the media.
Review spams usually look perfectly normal until one
compares them with other reviews of the same products or
compares them with other reviews written by the same user.
Detecting review spam is a challenging task. In this paper,
we focus on discovering review spammer groups as well as
individual spammers. Since actual users behind different ids
could be a single person with multiple ids (also known as
sockpuppet), multiple people or combination of both, we do
not distinguish them in our work.
In this paper, we propose a three-phase method to address
the problem of identifying review spammer groups and individual spammers. We ﬁrst identify duplicate or near duplicate reviews. Secondly, each user’s interest entities (or
topics) can be presented by a word distribution. With the
generated user interest distribution, the similarities between
different reviewers can be computed by consin similarity (or
KL distance) based on interests vector. This step has the
potential to detect the spammers who can manipulate their
behaviors to act just like genuine reviewers (do not copy
each other). Thirdly, there are some individual spammers
that cannot be detected by the ﬁrst two steps. To deal with
these spammers, we use Amazon Webstore Browse Cate-

Model Description
Duplicate and near duplicate reviews detection
Identifying whether a review is a spam is very difﬁcult by
manually reading the review separately. However, the reviews which contain the following types of duplicates (here,
we assume the duplicates include near duplicates) are almost
certainly opinion spam (Jindal and Liu 2008): a) Duplicates
from different user ids on the same entity; b) Duplicates
from the same user ids on the different entities; c) Duplicates from different user ids on different entities.
We don’t treat the duplicates from the same user on the
same product as spams because they could be due to clicking the submit button more than once. These duplicate reviews can be detected using the shingle method in (Broder
1997). The reviews with similarity score of at least ρ are
regarded as duplicates. Here, ρ is a threshold deﬁned as a
hyper-parameter. On the other hand, for the duplicates from
the same userids on the same entity, we only keep the last
copy and remove the rest.
Recognizing such duplicate and near duplicate reviews
help us identifying potential spammers. Thus, we treat these
reviewers who write duplicate reviews as spam reviewers.

Reviewers interest similarity
The method used in the last subsection identiﬁes certain
types of spammers, i.e., those who post many similar reviews about one or more target entities. However, in reality,

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5011

http://aws.amazon.com/asl/

