Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Simultaneous Maze Solving Problem
Stefan Funke and André Nusser

Sabine Storandt

Universität Stuttgart
Institut für Formale Methoden der Informatik
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
{funke,nusser}@fmi.uni-stuttgart.de

Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
Institut für Informatik
97072 Würzburg, Germany
storandt@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Deﬁnition 2 Given a set M of feasible mazes, the Simultaneous Maze Solving Problem (S IMASOP) demands to ﬁnd
the shortest solving sequence for all mazes in M.

Abstract
A grid maze is a binary matrix where ﬁelds containing a 0 are
accessible while ﬁelds containing a 1 are blocked. A movement sequence consists of relative movements up, down, left,
right – moving to a blocked ﬁeld results in non-movement.
The simultaneous maze solving problem asks for the shortest movement sequence starting in the upper left corner and
visiting the lower right corner for all mazes of size n × m
(for which a path from the upper left to the lower right corner exists at all). We present a theoretical problem analysis,
including hardness results and a cubic upper bound on the sequence length. In addition, we describe several approaches
to practically compute solving sequences and lower bounds
despite the high combinatorial complexity of the problem.

If for a solving sequence the ﬁnal position in all mazes is
the goal state, we call it a perfect solving sequence. Figure 2
illustrates these concepts for 3 × 2 mazes.
Finding a solving sequence in practice incurs subproblems interesting on their own, like the enumeration of all
feasible n × m mazes. There are already more than 9 trillion 7 × 7 mazes, so just verifying a movement sequence
becomes a real challenge.

Related Work
The simultaneous maze solving problem can be seen as an
instance of conformant planning, where the goal is to synthesize a plan under the assumption that there is no sensing
capability during plan execution (Smith and Weld 1998),
(Hoffmann and Brafman 2006). In fact, a solution for
AS IMASOP could be interpreted as en emergency protocol
for a robot whose sensors fail, that allows to reach the exit
of a room despite having no knowledge about the number
and positions of potential obstacles.
Furthermore, S IMASOP and AS IMASOP can be formulated as instances of the problem of ﬁnding a synchronizing
sequence (Hennine 1964) for a graph. A synchronizing sequence of a labeled graph is a traversal that ends up in one
and the same state for every starting state. We can transform
our problem to the synchronizing sequence problem by constructing a graph for the union of all mazes in M and adding
one further state q to which all the goal states are connected
via all possible labels. The state q then also has a loop edge
to itself; hence we stay in this state once entered. A synchronizing sequence for this graph without the last symbol/move
is a solving sequence for M. As synchronizing sequences
allow arbitrary start states (and not only the upper left corner), they might be signiﬁcantly longer than shortest solving
sequences. Furthermore, applying any algorithm for constructing synchronizing sequences seems doomed by the exponential growth of |M| for AS IMASOP which implies exponential growth of the respective graph.
There is also a close connection of our problem to universal traversal sequences (UTS) (Aleliunas et al. 1979) for labeled d-regular graphs. A d-regular graph is called labeled

Introduction
We consider the problem of ﬁnding a short movement sequence that solves a set of n × m mazes simultaneously.
Here, a maze is a binary matrix with 1s indicating obstacles
and 0s obstacle-free ﬁelds, see Figure 1 for an example. Allowed moves in the maze are up, down, left, and right. If
a move leads to a blocked ﬁeld, no movement takes place.
The goal is to ﬁnd a sequence of moves s ∈ {u, d, l, r}∗ such
that, starting in the upper left corner (’the start’) of the maze
and following the sequence s, the lower right corner (’the
goal’) is visited (not necessarily by the last move). In this
case, we call s a solving sequence. For a single maze, this is
an easy problem as the optimal sequence can be computed
via a shortest path algorithm in polynomial time interpreting
the maze as a graph. But we are interested in solving a set
of mazes simultaneously. We differentiate two problem versions depending whether we want to solve all feasible mazes
for given n, m or only a subset. Here we call a maze feasible
if there exists an obstacle-free path from the start to the goal.
Deﬁnition 1 Given n, m the All Simultaneous Maze Solving Problem (AS IMASOP) asks for the shortest solving sequence for all feasible mazes of size n × m.
Note that for AS IMASOP, we require unary encoding of n
and m as otherwise already the output has exponential size
in the input.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

808

