Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Active Learning with Cross-Class Similarity Transfer∗
†

Yuchen Guo,† Guiguang Ding,† Yue Gao,† Jungong Han‡

Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
‡
Northumbria University, Newcastle, NE1 8ST, UK
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com, {dinggg,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn,jungong.han@northumbria.ac.uk

like in the ﬁne-grained bird recognition (Wah et al. 2011).
Under these circumstances, it is always expected to train effective classiﬁers with as few labeled samples as possible.
Therefore, saving efforts for labeling data in a supervised
learning is an important topic in the machine learning community. Two strategies are widely adopted. The ﬁrst is active
learning (AL) (Settles 2009) which selects the most informative samples for expert labeling. In fact, the information in
each sample is different. Therefore, if the most representative/informative samples are selected and labeled, even a few
labeled samples can provide sufﬁcient knowledge to construct effective classiﬁers. The second is transfer learning
(TL) (Pan and Yang 2010) which transfers knowledge from
related auxiliary source domains to the target domain. By using the knowledge from auxiliary domains, we can save the
labeling efforts paid to the target domain. On the top of them,
transfer active learning (T-AL) (Chattopadhyay et al. 2013;
Li et al. 2013), which attempts to simultaneously transfer
knowledge from auxiliary domains and actively selects samples for expert labeling in the target domain, has gained increasing attention and achieved promising results recently.
The current T-AL approaches mostly focus on the intraclass transfer where the source domain and the target domain share the same class labels but have different marginal
and conditional distributions. However, sometimes it is difﬁcult to collect a fully labeled source domain that has exactly
the same classes as the target domain, especially when the
target domain contains uncommon or newly deﬁned classes
such as images of the Tesla’s Model S. On the other hand,
collecting labeled samples from some different but related
common classes is much easier in many cases (Zhu et al.
2011). Therefore, if we can extend T-AL into the inter-class
transfer setting where the knowledge is transferred across
classes, T-AL can be applied to more practical situations.

Abstract
How to save labeling efforts for training supervised classiﬁers is an important research topic in machine learning community. Active learning (AL) and transfer learning (TL) are
two useful tools to achieve this goal, and their combination,
i.e., transfer active learning (T-AL) has also attracted considerable research interest. However, existing T-AL approaches
consider to transfer knowledge from a source/auxiliary domain which has the same class labels as the target domain, but
ignore the relationship among classes. In this paper, we investigate a more practical setting where the classes in source
domain are related/similar to but different from the target
domain classes. Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel cross-class
T-AL approach to simultaneously transfer knowledge from
source domain and actively annotate the most informative
samples in target domain so that we can train satisfactory
classiﬁers with as few labeled samples as possible. In particular, based on the class-class similarity and sample-sample
similarity, we adopt a similarity propagation to ﬁnd the source
domain samples that can well capture the characteristics of
a target class and then transfer the similar samples as the
(pseudo) labeled data for the target class. In turn, the labeled
and transferred samples are used to train classiﬁers and actively select new samples for annotation. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach outperforms signiﬁcantly the state-of-the-art related
approaches.

Introduction
When training supervised classiﬁers, we always expect that
there are sufﬁcient labeled samples available for the target
classes (Bishop and others 2006). However, this requirement
seems too demanding in some real-world applications. For
example, many objects “in the wild” follow a long-tailed
distribution such that they do not occur frequently enough
to collect and label a large set of representative exemplars
to build the corresponding recognizers (Changpinyo et al.
2016). In addition, the labeling effort for many objects can
be very expensive because the expert knowledge is required,

Motivation and Contribution
The reason why existing T-AL approaches fail to transfer
knowledge across classes is because they treat each class independently without taking the relationship between classes
into account, thus giving rise to the fact that only the same
class can build correspondence. In reality, the classes in
many real-world applications, such as object recognition,
are strongly or weakly related to each other. For example,
class “dolphin” is strongly related to “shark” but weakly to

∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61571269 and 61671267) and the
Royal Society Newton Mobility Grant (IE150997). Corresponding
author: Guiguang Ding.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1338

