Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The State of the AIIDE Conference in 2017
Nathan R. Sturtevant

Brian Magerko

Computer Science Department
University of Denver
sturtevant@cs.du.edu

School of Literature, Communication and Culture
Georgia Institute of Technology
magerko@gatech.edu

Abstract

The current community is vibrant, using a broad range of
AI techniques to solve traditional problems and ﬁnd creative
new solutions for novel games and experiences developed
and designed by members of the AIIDE community.

This abstract looks at the state of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference (AIIDE),
describing some of the changes in the ﬁeld and areas of focus
for current work.

Overview
The Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment conference has been running for twelve years. During
this time there have been signiﬁcant shifts in the conference
and the focus of the work published.
Looking back at 2005 we see two interesting trends from
the conference. First, it was common for research papers to
observe deﬁciencies in current video game AI and to propose solutions for solving these problems. In this way, many
of the problems motivating work at the conference came directly from the games industry. Second, there was considerable involvement from the games industry in AIIDE, including research papers by members of the games industry.
Stepping forward to 2016 we see different trends. First,
game AI techniques from the game industry have improved
signiﬁcantly. There is a much larger toolbox of techniques
in use by game developers that are often quite sophisticated. These techniques are documented at industry-speciﬁc
venues such as the AI Summit at the Game Developer Conference (GDC) or the Game AI Pro series of books. AIIDE
often brings invited speakers from GDC, encouraging crossfertilization between academia and industry.
Today there is a broader spectrum of research published
at AIIDE, including more work on problems such as procedural content generation, narrative and storytelling, player
modeling, design, and artistic or other creative applications of AI. Researchers are creating their own experimental
games, showcased in the playable experience track or at the
Experimental AI in Games workshop. Members of the AIIDE community are moving into and continuing their work
from within industry, and other notable collaborations between industry and academia can be found at AIIDE. Alongside this, there is still traditional work on improving game
AI, particular in real-time strategy games such as Starcraft,
or in pathﬁnding or other core technologies used in games.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5079

