Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

LPMLN Weak Constraints, and P-log
Joohyung Lee and Zhun Yang
School of Computing, Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, USA
{joolee, zyang90}@asu.edu

of the stable model semantics but has turned out to be useful in many practical applications. Weak constraints are part
of the ASP Core 2 language (Calimeri et al. 2013), and are
implemented in standard ASP solvers, such as CLINGO and
DLV .
P-log is a probabilistic extension of answer set programs.
In contrast to weak constraints, it is highly structured and has
quite a sophisticated semantics. One of its distinct features is
probabilistic nonmonotonicity (the ability of the reasoner to
change his probabilistic model as a result of new information) whereas, in most other probabilistic logic languages,
new information can only cause the reasoner to abandon
some of his possible worlds, making the effect of an update
monotonic.
This paper reveals interesting relationships between
LPMLN and these two extensions of answer set programs.
It shows how different weight schemes of LPMLN and weak
constraints are related, and how the probabilistic reasoning
in P-log can be expressed in LPMLN . The result helps us
understand these languages better as well as other related
languages, and also provides new, effective computational
methods based on the translations.
It is shown in (Lee and Wang 2016) that programs with
weak constraints can be easily viewed as a special case of
LPMLN programs. In the ﬁrst part of this paper, we show
that an inverse translation is also possible under certain conditions, i.e., an LPMLN program can be turned into a usual
ASP program with weak constraints so that the most probable stable models of the LPMLN program are exactly the
optimal stable models of the program with weak constraints.
The result allows for using ASP solvers for computing Maximum A Posteriori probability (MAP) estimates of LPMLN
programs. Interestingly, the translation is quite simple so it
can be easily applied in practice. Further, the result implies
that MAP inference in other probabilistic logic languages,
such as Markov Logic, ProbLog, and Pearl’s Causal Models, can be computed by standard ASP solvers because they
are known to be embeddable in LPMLN , thereby allowing us
to apply combinatorial optimization in standard ASP solvers
to MAP inference in these languages.
In the second part of the paper, we show how P-log can be
completely characterized in LPMLN . Unlike the translation
in (Lee and Wang 2016), which was limited to a subset of

Abstract
LPMLN is a recently introduced formalism that extends answer set programs by adopting the log-linear weight scheme
of Markov Logic. This paper investigates the relationships
between LPMLN and two other extensions of answer set programs: weak constraints to express a quantitative preference
among answer sets, and P-log to incorporate probabilistic uncertainty. We present a translation of LPMLN into programs
with weak constraints and a translation of P-log into LPMLN ,
which complement the existing translations in the opposite
directions. The ﬁrst translation allows us to compute the most
probable stable models (i.e., MAP estimates) of LPMLN programs using standard ASP solvers. This result can be extended to other formalisms, such as Markov Logic, ProbLog,
and Pearl’s Causal Models, that are shown to be translatable
into LPMLN . The second translation tells us how probabilistic nonmonotonicity (the ability of the reasoner to change his
probabilistic model as a result of new information) of P-log
can be represented in LPMLN , which yields a way to compute
P-log using standard ASP solvers and MLN solvers.

Introduction
MLN

LP
(Lee and Wang 2016) is a recently introduced probabilistic logic programming language that extends answer
set programs (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) with the concept of weighted rules, whose weight scheme is adopted
from that of Markov Logic (Richardson and Domingos
2006). It is shown in (Lee and Wang 2016; Lee, Meng,
and Wang 2015) that LPMLN is expressive enough to embed Markov Logic and several other probabilistic logic languages, such as ProbLog (De Raedt, Kimmig, and Toivonen
2007), Pearls’ Causal Models (Pearl 2000), and a fragment
of P-log (Baral, Gelfond, and Rushton 2009).
Among several extensions of answer set programs to overcome the deterministic nature of the stable model semantics,
LPMLN is one of the few languages that incorporate the concept of weights into the semantics. Another one is weak
constraints (Buccafurri, Leone, and Rullo 2000), which are
to assign a quantitative preference over the stable models of
non-weak constraint rules: weak constraints cannot be used
for deriving stable models. It is relatively a simple extension
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1170

