Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Event Causality Recognition with Multiple Background Knowledge
Sources Using Multi-Column Convolutional Neural Networks
Canasai Kruengkrai, Kentaro Torisawa, Chikara Hashimoto,
Julien Kloetzer, Jong-Hoon Oh, Masahiro Tanaka
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{canasai, torisawa, ch, julien, rovellia, mtnk}@nict.go.jp

keizaikankyou-ga akkasuru → shijoukinri-ga gerakusuru
(“economic environment deteriorates” → “markets decline”)

Abstract
We propose a method for recognizing such event causalities
as “smoke cigarettes” → “die of lung cancer” using background knowledge taken from web texts as well as original
sentences from which candidates for the causalities were extracted. We retrieve texts related to our event causality candidates from four billion web pages by three distinct methods,
including a why-question answering system, and feed them
to our multi-column convolutional neural networks. This allows us to identify the useful background knowledge scattered in web texts and effectively exploit the identiﬁed knowledge to recognize event causalities. We empirically show that
the combination of our neural network architecture and background knowledge signiﬁcantly improves average precision,
while the previous state-of-the-art method gains just a small
beneﬁt from such background knowledge.

1

bukka-wa gerakusuru → defure-ni naru
(“prices of commodities decline” → “become deﬂation”)
kubi-ni naru → sitsugyouhoken-o morau
(“get ﬁred” → “get unemployment insurance”)
chiyuryoku-o takameru → atopii-o kokufukusu
(“enhance healing power” → “defeat atopic syndrome”)
bitamin-ga fusokusuru → koukakuen-ni naru
(“lack vitamin” → “cause angular cheilitis”)

Table 1: Japanese examples of event causalities successfully
recognized by our proposed method

Introduction

This work develops a method that recognizes event
causalities from sentences regardless whether they have
such explicit clues as “because.” The novelty of this work
lies in that we exploit a wide range of background knowledge
(written in web texts) using convolutional neural networks.
In other words, given an event causality candidate, our neural network analyzes descriptions in web texts that are somehow related to the given causality candidate and judges
whether the candidate is a proper causality. The web texts
are retrieved by three distinct methods from our 4-billionpage web archive. We target such event causalities as “global
warming worsens” → “typhoons strengthen,” in which each
cause phrase (“global warming worsens”) and effect phrase
(“typhoons strengthen”) consists of a noun (“global warming”) and a verb (“worsens”). Our experimental results
showed that our neural network-based method outperforms
the state-of-the-art method based on SVMs (Hashimoto et
al. 2014) and its variants augmented with the background
knowledge sources introduced in this work. This suggests
that our neural network architecture is more suitable for
dealing with background knowledge. Table 1 shows examples of event causalities successfully recognized by our
method but not by Hashimoto et al.’s method.
As one method to extract background knowledge from
web archives, we use a why-question answering (why-QA)
system following (Oh et al. 2013) that retrieves sevensentence passages as answers to a given why-type ques-

Event causality, such as “smoke cigarettes” → “die of lung
cancer,” is critical knowledge for many NLP applications,
including machine reading and comprehension (Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw 2013; Berant et al. 2014), process extraction (Scaria et al. 2013), and future event/scenario
prediction (Radinsky, Davidovich, and Markovitch 2012;
Hashimoto et al. 2014). However, the state-of-the-art methods for event causality recognition still suffer from low precision and coverage because event causality is expressed in
a wide range of forms that often lack explicit clues indicating the existence of event causality. Consider the following
sentences:
1. Typhoons have strengthened because global warming has
worsened.
2. Global warming worsened, and typhoons strengthened.
The ﬁrst sentence includes “because,” which explicitly indicates the event causality between effect “typhoons
strengthen” and cause “global warming worsens.” On the
other hand, the second sentence has no such clues. Nonetheless, many people would infer that this sentence expresses
the same event causality as that in the ﬁrst sentence. This is
possible because people have background knowledge about
“typhoons” and “global warming.”
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3466

