Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Abstraction in Situation Calculus Action Theories
Bita Banihashemi

Giuseppe De Giacomo

Yves Lespérance

York University
Toronto, Canada
bita@cse.yorku.ca

Sapienza Università di Roma
Roma, Italy
degiacomo@dis.uniroma1.it

York University
Toronto, Canada
lesperan@cse.yorku.ca

each high-level primitive action to a (possibly nondeterministic) ConGolog program deﬁned over the low-level action
theory that “implements it”. Moreover, it maps each highlevel ﬂuent to a state formula in the low-level language that
characterizes the concrete conditions under which it holds.

Abstract
We develop a general framework for agent abstraction based
on the situation calculus and the ConGolog agent programming language. We assume that we have a high-level speciﬁcation and a low-level speciﬁcation of the agent, both represented as basic action theories. A reﬁnement mapping speciﬁes how each high-level action is implemented by a lowlevel ConGolog program and how each high-level ﬂuent can
be translated into a low-level formula. We deﬁne a notion of
sound abstraction between such action theories in terms of
the existence of a suitable bisimulation between their respective models. Sound abstractions have many useful properties
that ensure that we can reason about the agent’s actions (e.g.,
executability, projection, and planning) at the abstract level,
and reﬁne and concretely execute them at the low level. We
also characterize the notion of complete abstraction where all
actions (including exogenous ones) that the high level thinks
can happen can in fact occur at the low level.

1

In this setting, we deﬁne a notion of a high-level theory being a sound abstraction of a low-level theory under
a given reﬁnement mapping. The formalization involves the
existence of a suitable bisimulation relation (Milner 1971;
1989) between models of the low-level and high-level theories. With a sound abstraction, whenever the high-level
theory entails that a sequence of actions is executable and
achieves a certain condition, then the low level must also entail that there exist an executable reﬁnement of the sequence
such that the “translated” condition holds afterwards. Moreover, whenever the low level thinks that a reﬁnement of a
high-level action (perhaps involving exogenous actions) can
occur (i.e., its executability is satisﬁable), then the high level
does also. Thus, sound abstractions can be used to perform
effectively several forms of reasoning about action, such as
planning, agent monitoring, and generating high-level explanations of low-level behavior. We also provide a prooftheoretic characterization that gives us the basis for automatically verifying that we have a sound abstraction.

Introduction

Intelligent agents often operate in complex domains and
have complex behaviors. Reasoning about such agents and
even describing their behavior can be difﬁcult. One way to
cope with this is to use abstraction (Saitta and Zucker 2013).
In essence, this involves developing an abstract model of
the agent/domain that suppresses less important details. The
abstract model allows us to reason more easily about the
agent’s possible behaviors and to provide high-level explanations of the agent’s behavior. To efﬁciently solve a complex reasoning problem, e.g. planning, one may ﬁrst try to
ﬁnd a solution in the abstract model, and then use this abstract solution as a template to guide the search for a solution
in the concrete model. Systems developed using abstractions
are typically more robust to change, as adjustments to more
detailed levels may leave the abstract levels unchanged.
In this paper, we develop a general framework for agent
abstraction based on the situation calculus (SitCalc) (McCarthy and Hayes 1969; Reiter 2001) and the ConGolog (De
Giacomo, Lespérance, and Levesque 2000) agent programming language. We assume that one has a high-level/abstract
action theory, a low-level/concrete action theory, and a reﬁnement mapping between the two. The mapping associates

In addition, we deﬁne a dual notion of complete abstraction where whenever the low-level theory entails that some
reﬁnement of a sequence of high-level actions is executable
and achieves a “translated” high-level condition, then the
high level also entails that the action sequence is executable
and the condition holds afterwards. Moreover, whenever the
high level thinks that an action can occur (i.e., its executability is satisﬁable), then there exists a reﬁnement of the action
that the low level thinks can happen as well.
Many different approaches to abstraction have been proposed in a variety of settings such as planning (Sacerdoti
1974), automated reasoning (Giunchiglia and Walsh 1992),
model checking (Clarke, Grumberg, and Long 1994), and
data integration (Lenzerini 2002). Most of these do not deal
with dynamic domains. Previous work on hierarchical planning generally makes major simplifying assumptions (Nau,
Ghallab, and Traverso 2016). In contrast, our approach deals
with agents represented in an expressive ﬁrst-order framework. We later discuss related work in more details.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1048

