Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Asymmetric Discrete Graph Hashing
Xiaoshuang Shi, Fuyong Xing,
Kaidi Xu, Manish Sapkota, Lin Yang
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611, USA
xsshi2015@uﬂ.edu

methods, which utilizes simple random projections to generate binary codes, thereby requiring long binary codes to
achieve good retrieval accuracy. To learn compact binary
codes, an increasing number of methods focus on learning data-dependent hashing functions with available training data. Based on whether utilizing the semantic (label) information, data-dependent methods can be further classiﬁed
into unsupervised and supervised hashing. Unsupervised
hashing methods, such as spectral hashing (SH) (Weiss,
Torralba, and Fergus 2009), anchor graph hashing (AGH)
(Liu et al. 2011) and iterative quantization (ITQ) (Gong
et al. 2013), try to explore intrinsic features of data to
learn binary codes without any supervision. By contrast,
supervised hashing methods, including linear discriminant
analysis hashing (LDAH) (Strecha et al. 2012), minimal
loss hashing (MLH) (Norouzi and Blei 2011) and semisupervised hashing (SSH) (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012),
leverage semantic information to map the high-dimensional
data into a low-dimensional binary space. Recently, supervised hashing has attracted increasing interest, since unsupervised hashing methods are not able to guarantee desired
retrieval accuracy via semantic distances due to the semantic gap (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012). Meanwhile, compared to linear hashing methods, kernel-based hashing methods like binary reconstruction embedding (BRE) (Kulis and
Darrell 2009), random maximum margin hashing (RMMH)
(Joly and Buisson 2011), kernel supervised hashing (KSH)
(Liu et al. 2012) and kernel supervised discrete hashing
(KSDH) (Shi et al. 2016b) usually achieve better retrieval
performance because they can capture the non-linear manifold structure hidden in the data.

Abstract
Recently, many graph based hashing methods have been
emerged to tackle large-scale problems. However, there exists
two major bottlenecks: (1) directly learning discrete hashing
codes is an NP-hard optimization problem; (2) the complexity of both storage and computational time to build a graph
with n data points is O(n2 ). To address these two problems,
in this paper, we propose a novel yet simple supervised graph
based hashing method, asymmetric discrete graph hashing,
by preserving the asymmetric discrete constraint and building
an asymmetric afﬁnity matrix to learn compact binary codes.
Speciﬁcally, we utilize two different instead of identical discrete matrices to better preserve the similarity of the graph
with short binary codes.We generate the asymmetric afﬁnity
matrix using m (m << n) selected anchors to approximate
the similarity among all training data so that computational
time and storage requirement can be signiﬁcantly improved.
In addition, the proposed method jointly learns discrete binary codes and a low-dimensional projection matrix to further improve the retrieval accuracy. Extensive experiments on
three benchmark large-scale databases demonstrate its superior performance over the recent state of the arts with lower
training time costs.

Introduction
Hashing techniques have attracted considerable attention for
tackling a variety of large-scale tasks in computer vision
and machine learning. The core idea of hashing is to map
high-dimensional data into a low-dimensional binary (Hamming) space with preserving the similarity among neighbors (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012). Hence the highdimensional data can be represented by a set of compact binary codes, which lead to signiﬁcant gains in both storage
and query speed (Liu et al. 2014).
Over the past decades, various hashing methods (Indyk and Motwani 1998), (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus
2009), (Liu et al. 2011), (Gong et al. 2013), (Strecha et al.
2012), (Norouzi and Blei 2011), (Zhang et al. 2010) have
been proposed. Generally, these methods can be grouped
into two main categories: data-independent and datadependent. Locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) (Indyk and
Motwani 1998) is one of representative data-independent

Most of data-dependent hashing methods are derived
from traditional dimensionality reduction techniques. One
popular dimensionality reduction framework is graph embedding (Yan et al. 2007), on which many hashing methods like SH and AGH have been developed. However, there
are two major bottlenecks for graph based hashing methods:
(1) directly learning the discrete binary codes is an NP-hard
problem; (2) the complexity of both storage and computational time to build a graph with n data points is O(n2 ). To
obtain binary codes, most of graph based hashing methods
utilize the relaxation+rounding schemes, which might generate accumulate quantization errors between hashing and
projection functions, especially for large-scale training data

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2541

