Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Representations for Continuous Learning
David Isele
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
isele@seas.upenn.edu

The initial work of my thesis has been to address the issue
of predicting task models. My previous work (Isele, Rostami, and Eaton 2016) introduced a coupled dictionary that
works with a sparse coding reinforcement learning framework (Bou Ammar, Eaton, and Ruvolo 2014) to learn a dictionary online. Our coupled dictionary learns to model task
descriptions enabling the system to make predictions for
novel tasks.
Moving forward, I plan to look into more expressive models that have a greater focus on time and changing representation. To this end, I am considering two directions: a
hierarchical online learner that can accommodate tasks that
change over time and a non-linear time-varying model that
incorporate exploration into its predictions.
By designing representations that are able to handle the
demands of continuous learning I hope to lay the foundation
for lifelong learning systems that can robustly function in
unstructured environments.

Abstract
Systems deployed in unstructured environments must be able
to adapt to novel situations. This requires the ability to perform in domains that may be vastly different from training
domains. My dissertation focuses on the representations used
in lifelong learning and how these representations enable predictions and knowledge sharing over time, allowing an agent
to continuously learn and adapt in changing environments.
Speciﬁcally, my contributions will enable lifelong learning
systems to efﬁciently accumulate data, use prior knowledge
to predict models for novel tasks, and alter existing models to
account for changes in the environment.

Introduction
Lifelong machine learning (Thrun 1996) is a branch of artiﬁcial intelligence that has developed to handle systems that
can adapt and learn in ever-changing environments. In Lifelong machine learning, there are possibly many source tasks,
and the objective is to optimize the representation and performance for all tasks, as new information arrives. Examples of lifelong learning include methods for constructing
general representations for discrete reinforcement learning
problems (Ring 1998; Rafols and others 2005), bootstrapping learned relations to infer new relations in text understanding (Mitchell and others 2015), and using sparse coding to share information across learned models (Ruvolo and
Eaton 2013).
I am interested in a subclass of lifelong learning, continuous learning, where previous knowledge is immediately
transferred to new tasks, and the learning process is allowed
to continue without relearning already learned knowledge.
My dissertation views the problem of continuous learning as a problem of representation. In order to efﬁciently
represent knowledge over the lifetime of a system, we need
representations that can handle the demands of a continuous
learner. The representations must accumulate knowledge in
an online manner, scale to a large number of diverse tasks,
discover similarities, share knowledge between tasks, adapt
to changes over time, and be able to predict good initializations for novel tasks. The last point of prediction, is of
particular importance to continuous learning, since it allows
the system to run continuously in changing environments.

Past Work: Predicting Policies
A lifelong learning framework that has been shown to be
versatile is the sparse coding method of Ruvolo and Eaton
(2013) which was developed for classiﬁcation and regression and has been extended to handle reinforcement learning
problems with continuous state and action spaces (Bou Ammar, Eaton, and Ruvolo 2014). In this approach, models for
different tasks are represented as sparse combinations of a
shared knowledge repository of basis vectors.
I have shown that this approach can be used on robotic
systems (Isele and others 2016). However a problem with
this approach is that each time a new task is encountered, the
system is halted to gather training data to characterize the
new task. This was addressed in previous work that (Isele,
Rostami, and Eaton 2016) showed already learned knowledge can be used to predict a starting policy.
In order to accomplish this, we add a coupled dictionary
that learns to represent both a description of the task and the
learned policy. Given the description of a new task, a policy
can be predicted without needing to train on the new task.
This approach enables us to predict policies that often outperform the policies learned by a single task policy gradient
learner. Additionally, using the predicted policy as a jump
start allows our lifelong learning system to focus speciﬁcally
on the novel aspects of a new task.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5040

