Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Discovering Conversational Dependencies between Messages in Dialogs
Wenchao Du, Pascal Poupart

Wei Xu

David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
{w8du,ppoupart}@uwaterloo.ca

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Ohio State University
xu.1265@osu.edu

Abstract
We investigate the task of inferring conversational dependencies between messages in one-on-one online chat, which has
become one of the most popular forms of customer service.
We propose a novel probabilistic classiﬁer that leverages conversational, lexical and semantic information. The approach
is evaluated empirically on a set of customer service chat logs
from a Chinese e-commerce website. It outperforms heuristic
baselines.

Introduction

Figure 1: Example of the conversational structure between a
customer and a customer service representative (solid arrow
is a sure link; dotted arrow is a loose connection)

Exposing conversational structure (Shen et al. 2006; Elsner
and Charniak 2010) is a key step towards organizing the information in dialogues and is very useful for many applications, such as automatic response generation (Ritter, Cherry,
and Dolan 2010; Sordoni et al. 2015) and discourse parsing (Afantenos et al. 2015). There has been a signiﬁcant rise
of interest in conversational response generation using statistical and neural machine translation. These approaches typically require a large number of message-response pairs or
context-message-response triples as training data, and such
data is usually obtained from human annotations. What remains a challenge is identifying coherent threads of discussion in conversations automatically, which is the goal of this
paper. For question answering, ﬁnding the relevant context
of questions through dependency modelling can help choosing the answer; for text generation, dependency modelling
provides an effective way to annotate the suitable contextmessage-response triples for training.
In online text messaging, one party may send two questions successively, and the other party may answer these
questions in any order. In another scenario, one may send
a message that does not respond to any of the other party’s
messages, but elaborate on oneself. These situations complicate the understanding of conversations. Fig. 1 illustrates
a typical online chat where the correspondence between utterances is crucial for the understanding of conversations.
When annotating the chats, each message is linked to the
most relevant message and the candidates comprise of its
previous messages and itself. As a result, each chat admits
a structure of 1-regular directed graph, which has no cycle

except self loops. The fact that the annotation structure is a
forest and the number of trees in the forest is not known beforehand eliminates the possibility of applying standard decoding algorithms for discourse parsing such as maximum
spanning tree and min-cut.

Data
We use the customer service logs from a Chinese ecommerce website. Customers mostly ask about products,
promotions, delivery, and sometimes make bargains with
agents. Customers also ask for refund after products are delivered. It is not uncommon that text messages from customers are ungrammatical and have spelling errors, which
makes using state-of-the-art tagging and dependency parsing tools difﬁcult. Our dataset comprises 9000 chats of 5 to
60 utterances each. We randomly annotated 800 chats of 10
to 35 utterances with an exchange ratio (percentage of consecutive messages by different speakers) between 0.4 and
0.6. We preprocessed the text with an open source word segmenter, python jieba, and replaced non-character lexicons
and rare words by their type (e.g., links, emoticons, and geographical names). We only used the most frequent 5,400
words in our training. Annotation is carried out by 6 annotators who are native speakers. Each annotator is shown 3-5
example chats for training purpose. Each chat is annotated
by 3 different people. Annotators were asked to link each
message to a previous one with strongest coherence relation
in the form of message-response pair, response-continuation

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4917

