Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

KONT: Computing Tradeoffs in Normative Multiagent Systems
Özgür Kafalı, Nirav Ajmeri, and Munindar P. Singh
Department of Computer Science
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8206, USA
Email: {rkafali,najmeri,singh}@ncsu.edu

lating privacy to save a patient’s life (liveness) is better than
preserving the patient’s privacy (safety). Moreover, tradeoffs
might occur among liveness (or safety) properties when limited resources prevent agents from fulﬁlling multiple tasks.
Modern information systems can partially implement
such tradeoffs via dynamic access control policies between
agents and software (Marinovic, Dulay, and Sloman 2014),
e.g., relaxing privacy decisions in emergencies by allowing physicians to access patients’ EHRs without consent.
However, they cannot handle agent autonomy, e.g., how
should a physician consult a colleague regarding a patient’s
PHI to protect the patient’s privacy? Therefore, comparing nMASs based on how well they satisfy liveness and
safety requirements in various operating modes (e.g., regular practice and medical emergency) is crucial. Norms
have been widely studied (Kafalı, Ajmeri, and Singh 2016;
Sergot 2013; Singh 2013), in particular, for compliance veriﬁcation, monitoring, and revision (Alechina, Dastani, and
Logan 2013; Aştefănoaei et al. 2009; Chesani et al. 2013;
Criado and Such 2016). However, little attention has focused
on comparing norms to understand tradeoffs between them.
Accordingly, we propose KONT (stands for computing
normative tradeoffs). KONT presents an approach for comparing nMASs. We ﬁrst develop a strength relation to compare norms using their formally stated properties, and determine which norm would provide greater liveness or safety.
For example, a norm that prohibits physicians from disclosing patients’ PHI to outsiders or sharing it with colleagues
is stronger than a norm that only prohibits physicians from
disclosing patients’ PHI to outsiders. That is, the latter can
be replaced with the former to provide greater safety. We
then generalize the strength relation to sets of norms, and
compare nMASs with respect to liveness and safety. Following the above example, KONT would determine whether an
nMAS with the stronger prohibition is safer than an nMAS
with the weaker one if the other norms are unchanged.
Our contributions are as follows: First, we formalize
tradeoffs between liveness and safety using nMAS elements
(Sections 2 and 3). Second, we develop an approach for
comparing nMASs (Section 4) and propose patterns to guide
the design of an nMAS (Section 5). Third, we propose
heuristic metrics for measuring to what extent an nMAS provides liveness and safety in an emergency healthcare application (Section 6).

Abstract
We propose KONT, a formal framework for comparing normative multiagent systems (nMASs) by computing tradeoffs
among liveness (something good happens) and safety (nothing bad happens). Safety-focused nMASs restrict agents’ actions to avoid undesired enactments. However, such restrictions hinder liveness, particularly in situations such as medical emergencies. We formalize tradeoffs using norms, and develop an approach for understanding to what extent an nMAS
promotes liveness or safety. We propose patterns to guide
the design of an nMAS with respect to liveness and safety,
and prove their correctness. We further quantify liveness and
safety using heuristic metrics for an emergency healthcare application. We show that the results of the application corroborate our theoretical development.

1

Introduction

Normative multiagent systems (nMASs) consist of norms
that regulate how autonomous agents interact with each
other as well as control how agents access nonautonomous
components. An important problem in such settings is to
characterize how well an nMAS addresses liveness and
safety. Traditionally, liveness means that something good
will eventually happen on every enactment and safety means
that nothing bad ever happens on any enactment. When the
parties are autonomous, we can never ensure traditional liveness or safety. Therefore, we adopt these working deﬁnitions: Liveness means that something good will eventually
be done on every enactment unless someone is held to account for some infraction. Safety means that nothing bad
ever happens on any enactment without someone being held
to account for some infraction. An example liveness requirement is to provide guaranteed service for users: physicians are always be able to access patients’ electronic health
records (EHRs). Otherwise, network administrators are accountable for any downtime. An example safety requirement
is preserving privacy: patients’ protected health information
(PHI) is not disclosed. Otherwise, the hospital administration is accountable for any disclosure.
Tradeoffs often arise between liveness and safety in
healthcare. For example, we may choose whether to preserve privacy or act upon private data, and decide that vioCopyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3006

