Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Extracting Highly Effective Features for Supervised
Learning via Simultaneous Tensor Factorization
†

Sunny Verma,† Wei Liu,† Chen Wang,‡ Liming Zhu‡

Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Data61, Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Sydney, Australia
Sunny.Verma@student.uts.edu.au, Wei.Liu@uts.edu.au, Chen.Wang@data61.csiro.au, Liming.Zhu@data61.csiro.au
‡

Factorization (CUTF). The proposed technique simultaneously extracts common and unique features from multiple labeled tensor sequences. Furthermore, the extracted features
are ordered by their singular value signiﬁcance, enabling
feature re-utilization in several machine learning tasks.

Abstract
Real world data is usually generated over multiple time periods associated with multiple labels, which can be represented
as multiple labeled tensor sequences. These sequences are
linked together, sharing some common features while exhibiting their own unique features. Conventional tensor factorization techniques are limited to extract either common or unique
features, but not both simultaneously. However, both types of
these features are important in many machine learning systems as they inherently affect the systems’ performance. In
this paper, we propose a novel supervised tensor factorization technique which simultaneously extracts ordered common and unique features. Classiﬁcation results using features
extracted by our method on CIFAR-10 database achieves signiﬁcantly better performance over other factorization methods, illustrating the effectiveness of the proposed technique.

Related Work and Tensor Notations
Tensors are higher order generalizations of matrices denoted
in this paper by boldface Euler script letters X,Y,Z. An N
mode (dimensions in matrix) tensor X ∈ RI1 ×I2 ...×IN can
be rearranged as a matrix in any chosen mode n, denoted in
boldface capital letter X(n) . For a detailed review on tensors
and related factorization literature, refer to Kolda and Bader.
Acar, Kolda, and Dunlavy were the ﬁrst to propose extraction of common features shared among multiple data
sources. In their work, the authors proposed joint factorization of a tensor with a matrix sharing common features on
a single identical mode - coupled matrix and tensor factorization (CMTF). However, in their work, the authors did
not addressed these two issues: 1) how to extract common
features from more than one identical mode, and more importantly 2) how to extract unique features from the same
shared identical mode. These challenging issues are addressed by our method introduced in the next section, which
demonstrates the power of having unique discriminative features (Ristanoski, Liu, and Bailey 2013).

Introduction and Motivation
In the real world, data is often acquired as a sequence of
matrices rather than a single matrix. These matrices can be
represented as multiple labeled tensor (multidimensional arrays) sequences (Lahat, Adali, and Jutten 2015). Due to the
underlying data generation mechanism, these sequences are
naturally linked together and share some common features.
While at the same time, they also exhibit their own unique
features. When one is faced with the scenario of extracting features from these multiple labeled tensors sequences,
two common approaches are followed: a) concatenate all
tensor instances and factorize them together, or b) factorize each tensor instance individually. However, both these
approaches suffer information loss. The former approach
is limited to extract common features, suffering the loss of
unique features. While, the latter approach is limited to extract unique features, suffering the loss of common features.
This is because conventional tensor factorization techniques
are unsupervised i.e., tensor instances are factorized without
considering its label (category). Hence, one is only able to
extract either common or unique features, but not both simultaneously from multiple labeled tensor sequences.
To reduce this information loss in conventional factorization techniques, we propose a novel supervised tensor
factorization technique called Common and Unique Tensor

Proposed CUTF
CUTF is developed using Higher-Order Orthogonal Iteration (HOOI) technique (Liu et al. 2015). HOOI is a
generalization of matrix SVD technique and is developed
for factorizing single tensors. It decomposes tensor X ≈
G; A(1) , A(2) , ..., A(N ) , mathematically G ×1 A(1) ×2
A(2) ... ×N A(N ) representing sequential multiplication of
a tensor with a matrix in ith -mode (1 ≤ i ≤ N ). Here,
G can be thought as compressed version of X and A(i)s
represents low-rank factor matrices of ith -mode in tensor
X. HOOI guarantees best rank-(R1 , R2 , ..., RN ) approximation of tensor X ∈ RI1 ×I2 ...×IN (Liu et al. 2014).
Without loss of generality, we focus on two 3-mode tensors X and Y ∈ Class [+1, −1], sharing common features in their ﬁrst mode. Denote W as the common features shared among tensors in their ﬁrst mode and, denote

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4995

