Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-Path Feedback Recurrent Neural Networks for Scene Parsing
Xiaojie Jin,1 Yunpeng Chen,2 Zequn Jie,2 Jiashi Feng,2 Shuicheng Yan3,2
1

NUS Graduate School for Integrative Science and Engineering, NUS
2
3
Department of ECE, NUS
360 AI Institute
{xiaojie.jin, chenyunpeng, jiezequn, elefjia}@u.nus.edu, yanshuicheng@360.cn

all architecture of our proposed MPF-RNN is illustrated
in Figure 2. It has following two appealing characteristics. Firstly, MPF-RNN establishes recurrent connections
to propagate downwards the outputs of the top layer to
multiple bottom layers so as to fully exploit the context in
the training process of different layers. Beneﬁted from the
enhanced context modeling capability, MPF-RNN gains a
strong discriminative capability. Note that compared with
previous RNN-based methods (Pinheiro and Collobert 2013;
Liang, Hu, and Zhang 2015) which use only one feedback
connection from the output layer to the input layer and
the layer-wise self-feedback connections, respectively, MPFRNN is superior by using a better architecture, i.e. explicitly
incorporating context information into the training process
of multiple hidden layers, which learns concepts with different abstractness. Secondly, MPF-RNN effectively fuses
the output features across different time steps for classiﬁcation or a more concrete parsing purpose. We empirically
demonstrate that such multi-step fusion greatly boosts the
ﬁnal performance of MPF-RNN.
To verify the effectiveness of MPF-RNN, we have conducted extensive experiments over ﬁve popular and challenging scene parsing datasets, including SiftFlow (Liu, Yuen,
and Torralba 2009), Barcelona (Tighe and Lazebnik 2010),
CamVid (Brostow et al. 2008), Stanford Background (Gould,
Fulton, and Koller 2009) and recently released large-scale
ADE20K (Zhou et al. 2016) and demonstrated that MPFRNN is capable of greatly enhancing the discriminative
power of per-pixel feature representations.

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the scene parsing problem and propose a novel Multi-Path Feedback recurrent neural network
(MPF-RNN) for parsing scene images. MPF-RNN can enhance the capability of RNNs in modeling long-range context
information at multiple levels and better distinguish pixels
that are easy to confuse. Different from feedforward CNNs
and RNNs with only single feedback, MPF-RNN propagates
the contextual features learned at top layer through multiple
weighted recurrent connections to learn bottom features. For
better training MPF-RNN, we propose a new strategy that considers accumulative loss at multiple recurrent steps to improve
performance of the MPF-RNN on parsing small objects. With
these two novel components, MPF-RNN has achieved signiﬁcant improvement over strong baselines (VGG16 and Res101)
on ﬁve challenging scene parsing benchmarks, including traditional SiftFlow, Barcelona, CamVid, Stanford Background as
well as the recently released large-scale ADE20K.

Introduction
Scene parsing has drawn increasing research interestdue to its
wide applications in many attractive areas like autonomous
vehicles, robot navigation and virtual reality. However, it
remains a challenging problem since it requires solving segmentation, classiﬁcation and detection simultaneously.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
widely used for learning image representations and applied
for scene parsing. However, CNNs can only capture highlevel context information learned at top layers that have large
receptive ﬁelds (RFs). The bottom layers are not exposed
to valuable context information when they learn features. In
addition, several recent works have demonstrated that even
the top layers in a very deep model e.g. VGG16 (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014) have limited RFs and receive limited
context information (Liu, Rabinovich, and Berg 2015) in
fact. Therefore, CNNs usually encounter difﬁculties in distinguishing pixels that are easy to confuse locally and high-level
context information is necessary. For example, in Figure 1,
without the information of global context, the “ﬁeld” pixels
and “building” pixels are categorized incorrectly.
To address this challenge, we propose a novel multi-path
feedback recurrent neural network (MPF-RNN). The over-

Related Work
Image Context Modeling One type of context modeling approaches for scene parsing is to use the probability graphical models (PGM) (e.g. CRF) to improve parsing results. In (Chen et al. 2015; Zhang and Chen 2012;
Roy and Todorovic 2014; Zheng et al. 2015; Schwing and
Urtasun 2015), CNN features are combined with a fully connected CRF to get more accurate parsing results. Compared
to MPF-RNN, such methods usually suffer from intense calculation in inference due to their used time consuming mean
ﬁeld inference, which hinders their application in real-time
scenario. Farabet et al. (Farabet et al. 2013) encoded context
information through surrounding contextual windows from
multi-scale images. (Socher et al. 2011) proposed a recursive

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4096

