Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Complexity of the Stable Invitations Problem
Hooyeon Lee, Virginia Vassilevska Williams
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
{haden.lee,virgi}@cs.stanford.edu

many computational complexity results for SIP under various restrictions on agent preferences – for instance, when
agents only have a small number of friends and/or enemies.
These hardness results essentially argue that it is hard to
ﬁnd a largest invitation (subject to rationality or stability).
Suppose, however, that we are satisﬁed with a small solution of size k that satisﬁes our rationality criteria. We can try
a brute-force solution: try all possible k-subsets of n agents,
and then check whether the desired criterion is satisﬁed. This
brute-force solution runs in O(nk ) time, which is polynomial for any ﬁxed k but is not desirable. A much better running time would be one of the form O(f (k) · n) - such a
runtime would be linear, regardless of the constant k and
the function f . More generally, on input size n, one would
like an algorithm with runtime f (k) · nc , where c is independent of k. Such an algorithm is known as ﬁxed parameter
tractable (FPT). Developing FPT algorithms, especially linear time ones, greatly mitigates the NP-hardness of problems
as it shows that these problems are actually quite tractable.
The ﬁeld of parameterized complexity strives to classify
NP-hard problems on a ﬁner scale by analyzing time complexity in terms of both the input size and an additional parameter. The FPT problems are viewed as the most tractable
problems in NP (of course, all polytime problems are in
FPT). The W-hierarchy represents a hierarchy of complexity
classes under parameterization, including FPT, W[1], W[2],
etc. Hierarchy theorems show that FPT is contained in W[1]
which is contained in W[2], and so on (Downey and Fellows
2012). Further, it is believed that FPT = W[1] and W[2] =
W[1], so that the NP-hard parameterized problems in W[2]
are believed to be harder than those in W[1] that are themselves believed to be harder than the FPT problems. Popular
hardness assumptions such as the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) of Impagliazzo and Paturi (1999) can often be
used to show that particular W[1]-hard problems cannot be
solved in N o(k) time, giving concrete runtime lower bounds.
This work investigates how different solution concepts
and different restrictions on inputs inﬂuence the difﬁculty
of SIP under parameterization. We consider the cases
where the number of friends and enemies each agent has is
bounded above by some constant, as well as the cases where
friend-and-enemy relationship is symmetric. Our classiﬁcation is complete, as shown in Tables 1 (for non-symmetric
cases) and 2 (for symmetric cases) in Section 3.

Abstract
We study the Stable Invitations Problem (SIP) in which an
event organizer is to invite a subset of agents (from a group
of agents) to an event, subject to certain rationality criteria. In
SIP, the agents have friends, enemies, and preferences on the
number of attendees at the event; an agent is willing to attend
the event if all friends of the agent attend, no enemy of the
agent attends, and the number of attendees is acceptable to
the agent. We consider two solution concepts: (1) individual
rationality (everyone who is invited is willing to attend) and
(2) (Nash) stability (no agent wants to deviate from the given
invitation). It is known that ﬁnding an invitation of given size
for either concept is NP-complete. In this work, we study the
complexity of SIP on a ﬁner scale, through the lense of parameterized complexity. For the two solution concepts and
the special cases where the number of friends and/or enemies
is bounded above by a constant, we show that the problems
belong to different complexity classes when parameterized
by the size of solutions. For instance ﬁnding an individually
rational invitation of size k is W[1]-complete, yet ﬁnding a
stable invitation is W[2]-complete. Moreover, when all friend
and enemy relations are symmetric, ﬁnding a solution of either of the concepts becomes ﬁxed-parameter tractable unless
agents have unbounded number(s) of enemies.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Imagine an event organizer who is convening an event for
a group of agents who may have friends and/or enemies.
Naturally, agents wish to attend with their friends and prefer that their enemies do not attend the same event. Some
agents may have preferences on the number of attendees as
well – some may like the event be crowded while others may
prefer a small number of attendees. Given this information,
the organizer wishes to invite as many agents to the event as
possible, subject to certain rationality and/or stability conditions. The ﬁrst condition is individual rationality, which
requires that everyone who is invited be willing to attend. In
addition to individual rationality, the organizer may want to
ensure that agents who are not invited will not wish to attend without permission (Nash stability). To model this setting, Lee and Shoham (2015) studied the Stable Invitations
Problem (SIP) for different solution concepts including individual rationality and (Nash) stability. They also provided
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

579

