Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Latent Discriminant Analysis with
Representative Feature Discovery
Gang Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineer
SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260
gangchen@buffalo.edu

gene expression data analysis. Moreover, LDA was shown to
compare favorably with other supervised dimensionality reduction methods through extensive experiments (Sugiyama
et al. 2010).
However, as a supervised approach, LDA expects manually annotated training sets, e.g., instance/label pairs. As
we known, it is labor-intensive and time-consuming to label
each instance, which is surprisingly prohibitive especially
for large scale data. Correspondently, it is reasonable to extend supervised LDA into a semi-supervised method, and
many approaches (Joachims 1999; Cai, He, and Han 2007;
Zhang and Yeung 2008; Sugiyama et al. 2010) have been
proposed. Unfortunately, most of these methods still need
instance/label pairs, i.e. training a classiﬁer with a few labeled instances. In practice, many real applications require
bag-level labels (Andrews, Tsochantaridis, and Hofmann
2002), such as molecule activity (Maron and Lozano-Prez
1998), image classiﬁcation (Maron and Ratan 1998) and
event detection (Perera et al. 2011). Recently, MI-SVM or
latent SVM (Andrews, Tsochantaridis, and Hofmann 2002;
Felzenszwalb et al. 2010) has been widely used for classiﬁcation tasks, such as object detection. In a sense, MI-SVM
can learn discriminative features effectively under maximum margin framework. However, MI-SVM does not consider data distribution while inferring latent variables. On
the contrary, LDA leverages data distribution by computing
between-class and within-class covariances to learn a discriminant projection. Thus it is possible to incorporate the
data driven prior into LDA to discover both representative
and discriminative features.
In this paper, we propose a Latent Fisher Discriminant
Analysis model (or LFDA in short) with representative feature discovery. On the one hand, we hope our model can handle semi-supervised learning problems. On the other hand,
we can generalize discriminative FDA to select representative features as well. More speciﬁcally, our method uniﬁes
the discriminative nature of FDA with a data driven Gaussian mixture prior over the training data under the Bayesian
framework. By combining these two terms into one model,
we infer latent variables and learn projection matrix in an
alternative manner until convergence. To further leverage
the compactness of each component with Gaussian mixture model, we assume that all instances in each component
have the same label. Thus, our model relaxes the instance

Abstract
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is a well-known method
for dimension reduction and classiﬁcation with focus on discriminative feature selection. However, how to discover discriminative as well as representative features in LDA model
has not been explored. In this paper, we propose a latent
Fisher discriminant model with representative feature discovery in an semi-supervised manner. Speciﬁcally, our model
leverages advantages of both discriminative and generative
models by generalizing LDA with data-driven prior over the
latent variables. Thus, our method combines multi-class, latent variables and dimension reduction in an uniﬁed Bayesian
framework. We test our method on MUSK and Corel datasets
and yield competitive results compared to baselines. We
also demonstrate its capacity on the challenging TRECVID
MED11 dataset for semantic keyframe extraction and conduct a human-factors ranking-based experimental evaluation,
which clearly demonstrates our proposed method consistently
extracts more semantically meaningful keyframes than challenging baselines.

Introduction
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) (Fisher 1936) is a powerful tool for dimensionality reduction and classiﬁcation that
projects high dimensional data into a low-dimensional space
where the data achieves maximum class separability (Duda,
Hart, and Stork 2000; Fukunaga 1990; Wu, Wipf, and Yun
2015). The basic idea in classical LDA, known as Fisher
Linear Discriminant Analysis (FDA) is to obtain the projection matrix by minimizing the within-class distance and
maximizing the between-class distance simultaneously to
yield the maximum class discrimination. It has been proved
analytically that the optimal transformation is readily computed by solving a generalized eigenvalue problem (Fukunaga 1990). In order to deal with multi-class scenarios (Rao
1948; Duda, Hart, and Stork 2000), LDA can be easily extended from binary case to multi-class problems, which ﬁnds
a subspace with d − 1 dimensions, where d is the number of classes in the training dataset. Because of its effectiveness and computational efﬁciency, it has been applied
successfully in many applications, such as face recognition
(Belhumeur, Hepanha, and Kriegman 1997) and microarray
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1791

