Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Evolutionary Algorithm Based Framework
for Task Allocation in Multi-Robot Teams
Muhammad Usman Arif
Faculty of Computer Science,
Institute of Business Administration, Karachi, Pakistan.
musman@iba.edu.pk

Abstract

tasks (SR) vs Multi-robot tasks (MR), and (c) Task Arrival
(in time): Instantaneous arrival (IA) vs Time extended
(TE).

Multi-Robot Task Allocation (MRTA) has no formal
framework which could provide solutions covering different
domains within the MRTA taxonomy without changing the
optimization scheme. This research aims to develop a novel
framework using evolutionary computing. The study proposes a modular approach towards developing this framework in which individual problem types of the MRTA taxonomy are solved one at a time. The performance of the
framework will be evaluated against the popular approaches
suggested for each problem type.

Problem Statement
Most of the work done towards solving MRTA has addressed either one or at most two isolated problem scenarios. For real life scenarios, however, an intelligent agent
should be able to switch between different situations without having the optimization architecture changed. The current literature has no effective framework which can take a
team of robots through multiple cases of the MRTA taxonomy. Thus, there is a need for a framework which could
work across multiple scenarios while keeping the team
more autonomous, efficient and effective.

Introduction
Efficient planning is one of the main skills required to accomplish a complex task by a team of agents. Multi-Robot
Task Allocation (MRTA) is the problem of determining the
optimal assignment of a group of tasks to a team of robots
for efficient completion of the job at hand. With increasing
affordability of mobile robots and human reliance on them,
the need for effective task allocation has increased.
The first and the most fundamental question, in this
case, is; which agent performs what task? To answer this
question, some optimization strategy needs to be executed.
The strategy should keep all the spatial, temporal, and
physical constraints of the team in check while providing
an optimal plan. This research intends to use evolutionary
algorithms (EA) for this purpose. The reason for using EA
is that they have proved to be more flexible in real-life
dynamic environments compared to other optimization
techniques.
MRTA was classified by (Gerkey and Mataric, 2004) on
a widely accepted 3 axes taxonomy. The taxonomy distinguishes among (a) Robot Type: Single task robots (ST) vs
Multiple task robots (MT), (b) Task type: Single robot

Methodology
The first stage of the framework deals with the simplest
problem of the MRTA taxonomy, that is, ST-SR-IA. A
simple optimization scenario for a team of robots is solved
using EA. The task is provided in the form of the x and y
coordinates of the jobs where a robot has to reach. The
fitness is judged on the basis of the total distance traveled
for job execution by the team.
Figure 1(a) gives the chromosome representation for a
12 job, 3 robot, ST-SR-IA problem. The chromosome has a
two part representation; the first part determines the order
of job execution while the second part assigns jobs from
part 1 to each robot. Considering the example of Figure
1(a), jobs 1, 9, 12, 3, and 4 are to be done by robot1, jobs
7, 8, 5, and 11 are to be attempted by robot 2 and jobs 2, 6,
and 10 are to be accomplished by robot 3. Crossover and
mutation operators are designed in alignment with the rep-

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5032

