Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Validating Domains and Plans for Temporal Planning
via Encoding into Inﬁnite-State Linear Temporal Logic
Alessandro Cimatti

Andrea Micheli

Marco Roveri

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
cimatti@fbk.eu

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
amicheli@fbk.eu

Fondazione Bruno Kessler
Trento, 38123, Italy
roveri@fbk.eu

related to the concurrency, may cause common errors, such
as forgetting necessary conditions, or imposing overly restrictive constraints. Similarly, temporal plans are very hard
to understand and to inspect manually.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of validation in the
setting of Temporal Planning, making the following contributions. First, we formally deﬁne a semantics for the
temporal fragment of ANML. ANML is equipped with a
continuous-time semantics, and it natively offers a very intuitive syntax and support for advanced features such as timed
goals, conditions and effects at arbitrary times during actions. Interestingly, ANML is able to capture the temporal
fragment (level 3, without instantaneous actions) of PDDL
2.1, for which a translation into ANML exists. Second,
we propose an encoding of the behaviors associated to the
ANML temporal domain and goal in a corresponding formulation into Linear Temporal Logic (Pnueli 1977) modulo
Rational Arithmetic (LT LRA ). This is an extension of the
classical LTL, where it is possible to reason about rationalvalued variables. We use the rational variables from LT LRA
to represent time points and temporal expressions from the
continuous-time semantics of the ANML language. Third,
we formalize as queries in LT LRA several structural properties of planning problems, that are intended to pinpoint
the most common ﬂaws in temporal domain descriptions.
Queries of interest include checks for action executability
and mutual exclusion, plan validation and plan completion.
The proposed queries are made practical by leveraging recent, efﬁcient inﬁnite-state veriﬁcation techniques and tools
based on Satisﬁability Modulo Theory (Barrett et al. 2009).

Abstract
Temporal planning is an active research area of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence because of its many applications ranging from
robotics to logistics and beyond. Traditionally, authors focused on the automatic synthesis of plans given a formal representation of the domain and of the problem. However, the
effectiveness of such techniques is limited by the complexity
of the modeling phase: it is hard to produce a correct model
for the planning problem at hand.
In this paper, we present a technique to simplify the creation
of correct models by leveraging formal-veriﬁcation tools for
automatic validation. We start by using the ANML language,
a very expressive language for temporal planning problems
that has been recently presented. We chose ANML because
of its usability and readability. Then, we present a soundand-complete, formal encoding of the language into Linear
Temporal Logic over predicates with inﬁnite-state variables.
Thanks to this reduction, we enable the formal veriﬁcation of
several relevant properties over the planning problem, providing useful feedback to the modeler.

Introduction
Automated planning aims at synthesizing a course of actions suitable to achieve a desired objective, given a domain
model describing the effect of the actions. Planning is a mature research ﬁeld, that has known an impressive period of
improvement. Several tools and techniques able to handle
increasingly larger problems exist (Vallati et al. 2015).
Planners rely on the quality of the domain model (e.g.
how an exploration rover responds to internal commands
and external stimuli) to produce useful plans (e.g. to collect an interesting sample and transmit suitable information within daylight). Planning domains are described by
means of general-purpose action description languages. For
the case of temporal planning, where actions have durations,
and temporal constraints are involved, we mention PDDL2.1
(Fox and Long 2003) and the Action Notation Modeling
Language (ANML) (Smith, Frank, and Cushing 2008).
Unfortunately, writing planning domains is known to be
a hard and error-prone task (Long, Fox, and Howey 2009).
This is particularly relevant in temporal planning: the complexity of temporal constraints, continuous time, and issues

Related Work
The difﬁculty of writing domain descriptions is clearly recognized in the planning community. In fact, there has been a
line of research focusing on the development of knowledgebased approaches to support the formalization of planning
domains and problems (Simpson, Kitchin, and McCluskey
2007; Jilani et al. 2014). Several Integrated Development
Environment tools have been developed, that provide substantial features like domain visualization and plan animation. These works are primarily oriented to classical planning, and provide virtually no support for temporal aspects.
Furthermore, the approaches concentrate on supporting the
conversion of informal knowledge into domain models. This

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3547

