Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Natural Language Person Retrieval
Tao Zhou

Jie Yu

University of California, Los Angeles
taozhou@cs.ucla.edu

SAIC Innovation Center
jerry.j.yu@gmail.com

Abstract

avoid small persons, bounding box size larger than 5000
are selected for further annotation via Amazon Mechanical
Turk (AMT). Given a person inside a bounding box, the
AMT workers need to describe the person and select attributes best matching the appearance.
The region proposal network (RPN) in Faster R-CNN
(Ren et al. 2015) is adopted to generate dozens bounding
boxes with different confidence which might contain a
person. The higher the confidence, the more likely it is for
the bounding box to contain a person (Figure 1A). Since
most bounding boxes with low confidence do not include a
person’s entire body, the bounding boxes are filtered by
setting the threshold of the confidence to 0.5. Additionally,
the minimum size of the bounding box is set to 5,000 in
order to avoid small persons (Figure 1B). Due to the limited number of persons, the dataset is augmented for training purposes by randomly selecting 3 shifted region proposals whose IOU with ground truth bounding boxes are
larger than 0.5 (Figure 1C). The region proposals without
augmentation (Figure 1B) and a description “An elderly
man on the right riding a bike” are provided as input to the
model for person retrieval (green region proposal, Figure
1D, E). The ground truth bounding box is shown in red.

Following the recent progress in image classification and image
captioning using deep learning, we developed a novel person
retrieval system using natural language, which to our knowledge
is first of its kind. Our system employs a state-of-the-art deep
learning based natural language object retrieval framework to
detect and retrieve people in images. Quantitative experimental
results show significant improvement over state-of-the-art methods for generic object retrieval. This line of research provides
great advantages for searching large amounts of video surveillance footage and it can also be utilized in other domains, such as
human-robot interaction.
1

Video surveillance cameras are everywhere—in small
stores and apartments for indoor scenario and in parking
lots and traffic lanes for wide-area observation. With increasingly ubiquitous security cameras, the challenge is not
acquiring surveillance data but automatically recognizing
what is valuable in the video. Understanding content from
video alone, however, is extremely challenging due to factors such as low resolution, deformation, and occlusion.
Therefore, it is highly desirable for a system to match objects of interest with a natural language description sentence. Here we employ a state-of-the-art deep learning
framework (Hu et al. 2016, Hu, Rohrbach, and Darrell
2016) to retrieve people.
The first challenge of our project is the lack of a dataset for natural language person retrieval tasks. We turn to
the Cityscapes dataset (Cordts et al. 2016), a large-scale
benchmark dataset for pixel-level and instance-level semantic labeling. Since the focus of our project is on person
retrieval rather than semantic segmentation, only segmentation masks belonging to ‘person’ and ‘rider’ categories
are transformed into ground truth bounding boxes based on
the masks’ maximum and minimum value of (x, y) coordinates. Specifically, the (xMAX, yMAX) location is treated as
the bottom-right corner of the bounding box while the
(xMIN, yMIN) location is treated as the top-left corner. To

Figure 1. Procedures on region proposals generation and
overview of natural language person retrieval framework.
During the training phase, a positive training instance
is comprised of one region proposal, the spatial configuration, its corresponding description and the label (true)

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5023

