Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Coupled Multi-Layer Attentions
for Co-Extraction of Aspect and Opinion Terms
Wenya Wang,†‡ Sinno Jialin Pan,† Daniel Dahlmeier,‡ Xiaokui Xiao†
†

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
SAP Innovation Center Singapore
†
{wa0001ya, sinnopan, xkxiao}@ntu.edu.sg, ‡ {d.dahlmeier}@sap.com

aspect and opinion terms iteratively with a seed collection as input. For feature-engineering-based approaches, the
idea is to train a classiﬁer with rich, manual-deﬁned features based on linguistic or syntactic information from annotated corpus to predict a label (aspect, opinion, or others) on each token in a sentence (Jin and Ho 2009; Li et
al. 2010). These two categories of approaches are laborintensive for constructing rules or features using linguistic
and syntactic information. To reduce the engineering effort,
deep-learning-based approaches (Liu, Joty, and Meng 2015;
Yin et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016) are proposed to learn highlevel representations for each token, on which a classiﬁer
can be trained. Despite some promising results, most deeplearning approaches still require a parser analyzing the syntactic/dependency structure of the sentence to be encoded
into the deep models. Therefore, the performances of these
approaches rely on the quality of the parsing results.
In practice, the syntactic or dependency structures of
many user-generated texts may not be precise with a computational parser, which may degrade the performances of
existing deep-learning approaches. Moreover, performing
parsing on a long sentence and large dataset can be very
time-consuming. Therefore, we propose to use the attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) with
tensor operators to replace the role of syntactic/dependency
parsers to capture the relations among tokens in a sentence.
Speciﬁcally, we design a couple of attentions, one for aspects extraction and the other for opinions extraction. They
are learned interactively such that label information can be
dually propagated among aspect terms and opinion terms by
exploiting their relations. Moreover, we use multiple layers of the coupled attentions to extract inconspicuous aspect/opinion terms. Our motivation is similar to (Qiu et al.
2011; Wang et al. 2016) for exploiting aspect-opinion relations. The difference is that our model automatically learns
these relations without any parsers or linguistic resources.
In summary, our contributions are two-fold: 1) We propose an end-to-end deep learning model for aspect and
opinion terms co-extraction without requiring any syntactic/dependency parsers or linguistic resources to generate
additional information as input. 2) We conduct extensive
experiments on three benchmark datasets to verify that our
model achieves state-of-the-art performance for aspect and
opinion terms co-extraction.

Abstract
The task of aspect and opinion terms co-extraction aims to
explicitly extract aspect terms describing features of an entity
and opinion terms expressing emotions from user-generated
texts. To achieve this task, one effective approach is to exploit
relations between aspect terms and opinion terms by parsing
syntactic structure for each sentence. However, this approach
requires expensive effort for parsing and highly depends on
the quality of the parsing results. In this paper, we offer a
novel deep learning model, named coupled multi-layer attentions. The proposed model provides an end-to-end solution
and does not require any parsers or other linguistic resources
for preprocessing. Speciﬁcally, the proposed model is a multilayer attention network, where each layer consists of a couple
of attentions with tensor operators. One attention is for extracting aspect terms, while the other is for extracting opinion
terms. They are learned interactively to dually propagate information between aspect terms and opinion terms. Through
multiple layers, the model can further exploit indirect relations between terms for more precise information extraction.
Experimental results on three benchmark datasets in SemEval
Challenge 2014 and 2015 show that our model achieves stateof-the-art performances compared with several baselines.

Introduction
Aspect and opinion terms co-extraction, which aims at identifying aspect terms and opinion terms from texts, is an important task in ﬁne-grained sentiment analysis (Pang and
Lee 2008). An aspect term refers to a word or a phrase (a
sequence of words) describing an attribute or feature of an
entity, e.g., a product. An opinion term refers to the expression carrying subjective emotions. For example, in the review “This little place has a cute interior decor and affordable prices”, interior decor and prices are aspects, with cute
and affordable as their corresponding opinions.
In the literature, there exist many lines of work for aspect and/or opinion terms extraction which can be categorized as rule-based, feature-engineering-based, or deeplearning-based approaches. For rule-based approaches (Hu
and Liu 2004a; 2004b; Qiu et al. 2011), the idea is to
manually design some rules based on syntactic or dependency structure of each sentence to expand the extracted
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3316

