Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SAT Competition 2016: Recent Developments
Tomáš Balyo
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany

Marijn J. H. Heule

Matti Järvisalo

Department of Computer Science
HIIT, Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin, USA
University of Helsinki, Finland

Competition Tracks

Abstract

Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) is one of the great success stories of modern computer science. Despite—and to an extent
in conﬂict with—the traditional view of NP as a true sign
of ‘intractability’, decision procedures for SAT, i.e., SAT
solvers, are today frequently used as the core workhorses
in tackling real-world instances of a wide range of NP-hard
search and optimization problems, from AI applications to
industrial use such as in tools for hardware and software
veriﬁcation. SAT Competitions—the history of which dates
back to early 90s (Buro and Bühning 1993; Johnson and
Trick 1996), variants of which have been yearly organized
since 2002 (Simon, Berre, and Hirsch 2005; Le Berre and
Simon 2004; 2005; Balint et al. 2015; Järvisalo et al. 2012;
Balyo et al. 2016)—have been a driving force of SAT solver
development, to the point that the performance of contemporary SAT solvers is noticeably better than that of those
from one to two decades ago. A further central role of the
SAT Competition series is to provide the research community with systematically constructed benchmark sets on a
yearly basis, which nowadays have become a key ingredient in empirical evaluation of SAT solver techniques in published SAT research.
The 2016 SAT solver competition was the 10th edition organized under the name “SAT Competition”. We give a brief
overview of SAT Competition 2016 (SC 2016), with a speciﬁc aim of pointing out “what’s hot” in SAT solver competitions in 2016, i.e., new developments in the competition series, including new competition tracks and new solver techniques implemented in some of the award-winning solvers.

The 2016 competition featured six tracks. Additionally to
the Main, Parallel, and Random tracks, which have a long
tradition in SAT competitions we had an Incremental Library track (introduced in the 2015 SAT Race (Balyo et al.
2016)) and two new tracks—Agile and No-Limits. In contrast to earlier editions, there were no longer special tracks
for only satisﬁable and only unsatisﬁable benchmarks.
Solvers in all tracks were ranked based on the number
of solved instances within the timeout1 . The Agile track
had a 60-second timeout, while the other tracks used a
5000-second timeout. Satisﬁable benchmarks were considered solved if the solver produced a correct solution, except
for the No-Limit track in which only a claim of satisﬁability
was required. In the Main track, we considered unsatisﬁable
benchmarks solved only if the solver produced a valid DRAT
proof (Heule 2016), which was checked by the DRAT-trim
checker (Wetzler, Heule, and Jr. 2014). In the other tracks,
only a claim of unsatisﬁability was required. Within each
track, claiming satisﬁable on an unsatisﬁable benchmark or
the other way around resulted in disqualiﬁcation in the track.
The Agile track was established for SAT solvers with
low overhead, suitable for rapidly solving large numbers
of not too hard SAT instances. For a wide range of applications, SAT solvers are used as “core NP solvers” that
are called iteratively, potentially thousands or even hundreds of thousands of times, as part of a single execution
of a more complex procedure. Concrete examples of such
use cases of SAT solvers come from Satisﬁability Modulo
Theories (SMT) (De Moura and Bjørner 2011), SAT-based
counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement (Clarke et
al. 2003), hardware model checking (Clarke et al. 2001),
Boolean optimization, etc.
The No-Limits track was introduced to remove all the
restrictions for participation enforced in the other tracks,
such as allowing portfolios and closed source solvers. The
other tracks were restricted to so-called “single-engine” SAT
solvers. Only brand new benchmarks were used in this track
to prevent aggressive over-tuning to known benchmarks. By
removing the source code requirement we wanted to increase non-academic participation, but this was futile.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Except for the Incremental Library track, see the SC 2016
homepage (Balyo, Heule, and Järvisalo 2016a) for more details.

We give an overview of SAT Competition 2016, the 2016
edition of the famous competition for Boolean satisﬁability
(SAT) solvers with over 20 years of history. A key aim is
to point out “what’s hot” in SAT competitions in 2016, i.e.,
new developments in the competition series, including new
competition tracks and new solver techniques implemented
in some of the award-winning solvers.

Introduction

5061

