Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁciently Mining High Quality Phrases from Texts
Bing Li,§† Xiaochun Yang,§† Bin Wang,§† Wei Cui‡

§Key Laboratory of Medical Image Computing of Northeastern University, Ministry of Education
†School of Computer Science and Engineering and ‡College of Information Science and Engineering
Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
{yangxc, binwang}@mail.neu.edu.cn {libing, cuiwei}@stumail.neu.edu.cn

proaches regard each mined phrase as a frequent pattern (Ahonen 1999; Simitsis et al. 2008), where a phrase
is extracted if it has longest consecutive words and its frequency is larger than a given threshold. However, ranking
the word sequences according to the frequency will generate
many false phrases. Recently, a variety of frequency statistical approaches (O’Neil and Sangiovanni-Vincentelli 2014;
El-Kishky et al. 2014; Li et al. 2016a) are developed to
estimate phrase quality and rank candidate phrases. Liu et
al. (2015) consider integrating phrasal segmentation with
phrase quality estimation to further rectify the inaccurate
phrase quality initially estimated, based on local occurrence
context.
These frequency statistical approaches mine quality
phrases from a large collection of documents or a corpus.
A phrase is a sequence of words that appear contiguously
in the text, and serves as a whole (non-composible) semantic unit in certain context of the given documents (Liu et al.
2015). Generally, a high quality phrase should have the following criteria.
• Frequency. This criterion is based on the observation that
a non-frequent phrase is likely to be not important (ElKishky et al. 2014).
• Phraseness. If adjacent phrases co-occur more signiﬁcant than expected under a given statistical signiﬁcant
level, these phrases should be concatenated into a longer
phrase (Wang et al. 2013).
• Completeness. If long frequent phrases satisfy the above
criteria, then their subsets also satisfy these criteria since
the subsets will satisfy the criteria of frequency and
phraseness, yet is clearly a subset of a larger and more
intuitive phrase (El-Kishky et al. 2014).
• Appropriateness. If complete phrases are overlapping,
an appropriate segmentation should ensure the extracted
phrases are disjoint and each of them is semantically independent.
The existing approaches may generate low quality phrases
that do not conform to the above criterions as demonstrated
below.
(i) Order sensitive processing causes incomplete phrases.
The existing frequency statistical approaches could not
guarantee to extract complete phrases since they heuristically concatenate those words into one phrase who has

Abstract
Phrase mining is a key research problem for semantic analysis
and text-based information retrieval. The existing approaches
based on NLP, frequency, and statistics cannot extract high
quality phrases and the processing is also time consuming,
which are not suitable for dynamic on-line applications. In
this paper, we propose an efﬁcient high-quality phrase mining approach (EQPM). To the best of our knowledge, our
work is the ﬁrst effort that considers both intra-cohesion and
inter-isolation in mining phrases, which is able to guarantee appropriateness. We also propose a strategy to eliminate
order sensitiveness, and ensure the completeness of phrases.
We further design efﬁcient algorithms to make the proposed
model and strategy feasible. The empirical evaluations on
four real data sets demonstrate that our approach achieved
a considerable quality improvement and the processing time
was 2.3× ∼ 29× faster than the state-of-the-art works.

Introduction
With the explosive growth of the information, people are
overwhelmed by a large number of unstructured text data.
It is of high value to enhance the power and efﬁciency to facilitate human manipulating and understanding unstructured
text data. Phrase mining could transform text document from
word granularity to phrase granularity by automatically extracting semantically meaningful phrase. Particularly, phrase
mining is an essential step for further semantic analysis or
text-based retrieval in established ﬁelds of information retrieval and natural language processing (NLP). Moreover,
phrase mining is also critical to various tasks in emerging applications. Examples of such applications include topic detection and tracking (Leskovec, Backstrom, and Kleinberg
2009), social event discovery (Li et al. 2016b), and document summarization (He et al. 2012).
The study of phrase mining originates from the natural
language processing (NLP) community, which utilizes a set
of language rules (Witten et al. 1999; Abney 1991; Clahsen
et al. 2006) to derive phrases. Such rule-based approaches
are rigorous and not suitable for the emerging applications,
such as scientiﬁc papers, twitters, and query logs.
Therefore, there have been developed many data-driven
approaches in this area. The raw frequency-based apc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3474

