Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multiresolution Recurrent Neural Networks:
An Application to Dialogue Response Generation
Iulian Vlad Serban∗

Tim Klinger and Gerald Tesauro

University of Montreal
2920 chemin de la Tour,
Montréal, QC, Canada

IBM Research
T. J. Watson Research Center,
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Kartik Talamadupula and Bowen Zhou

Yoshua Bengio† and Aaron Courville

IBM Research
T. J. Watson Research Center,
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

University of Montreal
2920 chemin de la Tour,
Montréal, QC, Canada

Abstract
We introduce a new class of models called multiresolution
recurrent neural networks, which explicitly model natural language generation at multiple levels of abstraction. The models extend the sequence-to-sequence framework to generate
two parallel stochastic processes: a sequence of high-level
coarse tokens, and a sequence of natural language words (e.g.
sentences). The coarse sequences follow a latent stochastic
process with a factorial representation, which helps the models
generalize to new examples. The coarse sequences can also
incorporate task-speciﬁc knowledge, when available. In our
experiments, the coarse sequences are extracted using automatic procedures, which are designed to capture compositional
structure and semantics. These procedures enable training the
multiresolution recurrent neural networks by maximizing the
exact joint log-likelihood over both sequences. We apply the
models to dialogue response generation in the technical support domain and compare them with several competing models. The multiresolution recurrent neural networks outperform
competing models by a substantial margin, achieving stateof-the-art results according to both a human evaluation study
and automatic evaluation metrics. Furthermore, experiments
show the proposed models generate more ﬂuent, relevant and
goal-oriented responses.

Figure 1: Example dialogue with coarse representations,
where arrows indicate turn change in the dialogue.
response generation. In this task, the model must generate an
appropriate response given a dialogue context. Although this
framework differs from the well-established goal-oriented
setting (Gorin, Riccardi, and Wright 1997; Young 2000;
Singh et al. 2002), these models have been applied to several
real-world applications. One example is Microsoft’s system
Xiaolic, which now interacts with millions of users every
day (Markoff and Mozur 2015). Another example is Google’s
Smart Reply system (Kannan et al. 2016). However, in spite
of recent advances, current models cannot effectively take
dialogue context into account and generate meaningful and
diverse on-topic responses (Li et al. 2016).
To overcome these problems, we construct probabilistic
models to represent and reason at several levels of abstraction.
Explicitly representing multiple levels of abstraction should
make it easier for models to remember and reason over longterm context, and to generate appropriate responses with
compositional structure. For example, for technical support
applications, this should help the models identify the user’s
problem and generate response with appropriate, and even
complex, technical instructions. Speciﬁcally, we propose a
new class of models – called multiresolution recurrent neural
networks (MrRNNs) – that generate two parallel stochastic
sequences: a sequence of high-level coarse tokens (coarse sequences), and a sequence of low-level natural language words
(utterances). The coarse sequences follow a latent stochastic

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have recently shown
excellent performance on tasks such as language modelling (Graves 2012; Mikolov and others 2010), machine
translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Cho and others 2014) and speech recognition (Hinton and others 2012).
Inspired by these advances, researchers have started to investigate such models for dialogue applications (Ritter, Cherry,
and Dolan 2011; Lowe et al. 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015b;
Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Li et al. 2016; Serban et al. 2016).
In particular, researchers have proposed several sequence-tosequence (Seq2Seq) encoder-decoder models for dialogue
∗

I. V. S. was at IBM Research when this work was carried out.
Y. B. is a CIFAR Senior Fellow.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3288

