Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Solving Advanced Argumentation Problems
with Answer-Set Programming
Gerhard Brewka
Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany

Martin Diller, Georg Heissenberger, Thomas Linsbichler, and Stefan Woltran
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
DIAMOND relies on static encodings, i.e. the encoding does
not change for different framework instances, this approach
is limited by the data complexity of ASP (which only reaches
the second level of the polynomial hierarchy (Eiter and Gottlob 1995; Eiter, Gottlob, and Mannila 1997)). Therefore,
preferred semantics (which comprise the hardest problems
for ADFs and GRAPPA) need a more complicated treatment
involving two consecutive calls to ASP solvers with a possibly exponential blowup for the input of the second call. A
GRAPPA interface has been added to DIAMOND (Berthold
2016), but we are not aware of any systems for GRAPPA not
requiring a translation to ADFs as intermediate step.
In this paper, we introduce a new method for implementing reasoning tasks related to both ADFs and GRAPPA such
that even the hardest among the problems are treated with
a single call to an ASP solver. The reason for choosing
ASP is that the rich syntax of GRAPPA is much easier captured by ASP than by other formalisms like QBFs. Our approach makes use of the fact that the combined complexity
of ASP for programs with predicates of bounded arity (Eiter
et al. 2007) exactly matches the complexity of ADFs and
GRAPPA. This approach is called dynamic, because the encodings are generated individually for every instance. We
are not aware of any comparable work in argumentation.
More speciﬁcally, we provide encodings for admissible,
complete, and preferred semantics for ADFs and GRAPPA.
Depending on the semantics (and their complexity) the encodings yield normal or, in the case of preferred semantics,
disjunctive programs. We specify the encodings in a modular
way, which makes our approach amenable for extensions to
other semantics. We also provide a preliminary experimental
analysis in order to determine the potential of this method.

Abstract
Powerful formalisms for abstract argumentation have been
proposed. Their complexity is often located beyond NP and
ranges up to the third level of the polynomial hierarchy. The
combined complexity of Answer-Set Programming (ASP) exactly matches this complexity when programs are restricted
to predicates of bounded arity. In this paper, we exploit this
coincidence and present novel efﬁcient translations from abstract dialectical frameworks (ADFs) and GRAPPA to ASP.
We also empirically compare our approach to other systems
for ADF reasoning and report promising results.

Introduction
Argumentation is an active area of research with applications in legal reasoning (Bench-Capon and Dunne 2005),
decision making (Amgoud and Prade 2009), e-governance
(Cartwright and Atkinson 2009) and multi-agent systems
(McBurney, Parsons, and Rahwan 2012). Dung’s argumentation frameworks (Dung 1995), AFs for short, are widely
used in argumentation. They focus entirely on conﬂict resolution among arguments, treating the latter as abstract items
without logical structure. Although AFs are quite popular,
various generalizations aiming for easier and more natural
representations have been proposed, see (Brewka, Polberg,
and Woltran 2014) for an overview.
We focus on two such generalizations, namely ADFs
(Brewka and Woltran 2010; Brewka et al. 2013) and
GRAPPA (Brewka and Woltran 2014), which are expressive
enough to capture many of the other available frameworks.
Reasoning in ADFs spans the ﬁrst three levels of the polynomial hierarchy (Strass and Wallner 2015). These results
carry over to GRAPPA (Brewka and Woltran 2014). ADFs,
in particular, have received increasing attention recently, see
e.g. (Gaggl and Strass 2014; Booth 2015; Al-Abdulkarim,
Atkinson, and Bench-Capon 2016).
Two approaches to implement ADF reasoning have
been proposed in the literature. QADF (Diller, Wallner,
and Woltran 2014; 2015) encodes problems as quantiﬁed
Boolean formulas (QBFs) such that a single call of a
QBF solver delivers the result. DIAMOND (Ellmauthaler and
Strass 2014; 2016), on the other hand, employs ASP. Since

Background
ADFs. An ADF is a directed graph whose set of nodes S
represents statements. The links represent dependencies: the
status of a node s only depends on the status of its parents
(denoted par(s)), that is, the nodes with a direct link to s. In
addition, each node s has an associated acceptance condition
Cs specifying the conditions under which s is acceptable.
It is convenient to represent the acceptance conditions as
a collection C = {ϕs }s∈S of propositional formulas. This
leads to the logical representation of ADFs we will use in
this paper where an ADF D is a pair (S, C) with the set of

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1077

