Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Knowledge Transfer for Deep Reinforcement
Learning with Hierarchical Experience Replay
Haiyan Yin, Sinno Jialin Pan
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{haiyanyin, sinnopan}@ntu.edu.sg

To tackle the stated issue, model compression and multitask learning techniques have been integrated into deep reinforcement learning. The approach that utilizes distillation
technique to conduct knowledge transfer for multi-task reinforcement learning is referred to as policy distillation (Rusu
et al. 2016). The goal is to train a single policy network
that can be used for multiple tasks at the same time. In
general, it can be considered as a transfer learning process
with a student-teacher architecture. The knowledge is ﬁrstly
learned in each single problem domain as teacher policies,
and then it is transferred to a multi-task policy that is known
as student policy. Such knowledge transfer is conducted via
the distillation technique (Bucilu, Caruana, and NiculescuMizil 2006), which uses supervised regression to train a student network to generate the same output distribution as
taught by the teacher networks.
Though some promising results have been shown in (Rusu
et al. 2016; Parisotto, Ba, and Salakhutdinov 2016) recently,
policy distillation for deep reinforcement learning suffers
from the following three challenges. First, the existing architectures involve multiple convolutional and fully-connected
layers with a giant parameter size. This leads to a long training time for the models to converge. Second, for some task
domains, the compressed multi-task student network may
not be able to achieve comparable performances to the corresponding teacher networks, or even performs much worse.
This phenomenon is referred to as negative transfer (Pan and
Yang 2010; Rosenstein et al. 2005). Last but not least, to
learn from multiple teacher policy networks, the multi-task
network needs to learn from a huge amount of data from
each problem domain. Therefore, it is essential to develop an
efﬁcient sampling strategy to select meaningful data to update the network, especially for those domains where even
training a single-task policy network costs a long time.
Our contributions are two-fold. First, a new multi-task
policy distillation architecture is proposed. Instead of assuming all the task domains share the same statistical base
at the pixel level, we adopt task-speciﬁc convolutional features as inputs to construct the multi-task network. It not
only reduces the overall training time, but also demonstrates
performance with considerable tolerance towards negative
transfer. Second, we propose hierarchical prioritized experience replay to enhance the beneﬁt of prioritization by regularizing the distribution of the sampled experiences from

Abstract
The process for transferring knowledge of multiple reinforcement learning policies into a single multi-task policy via distillation technique is known as policy distillation. When policy distillation is under a deep reinforcement learning setting,
due to the giant parameter size and the huge state space for
each task domain, it requires extensive computational efforts
to train the multi-task policy network. In this paper, we propose a new policy distillation architecture for deep reinforcement learning, where we assume that each task uses its taskspeciﬁc high-level convolutional features as the inputs to the
multi-task policy network. Furthermore, we propose a new
sampling framework termed hierarchical prioritized experience replay to selectively choose experiences from the replay
memories of each task domain to perform learning on the network. With the above two attempts, we aim to accelerate the
learning of the multi-task policy network while guaranteeing
a good performance. We use Atari 2600 games as testing environment to demonstrate the efﬁciency and effectiveness of
our proposed solution for policy distillation.

Introduction
Recently, the advances in deep reinforcement learning have
shown that policies can be learned in an end-to-end manner with high-dimensional sensory inputs in many challenging task domains, such as arcade game playing (Mnih et
al. 2015; Van Hasselt, Guez, and Silver 2016), robotic manipulation (Levine et al. 2016; Finn, Levine, and Abbeel
2016), and natural language processing (Zhang et al. 2016;
Li et al. 2016; Guo 2015). As a combination of reinforcement learning with deep neural networks, deep reinforcement learning exploits the ability of deep networks to learn
salient descriptions of raw state inputs, and thus bypasses
the need for human experts to handcraft meaningful state
features, which always requires extensive domain knowledge. One of the successful algorithms is Deep Q-Network
(DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015), which learns game playing policies for Atari 2600 games by receiving only image frames as
inputs. Though DQN can surpass human-expert level across
many Atari games, it takes a long time to fully train a DQN.
Meanwhile, each DQN is speciﬁc to play a single game.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1640

