Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Generalized Stochastic Variational Bayesian Hyperparameter Learning
Framework for Sparse Spectrum Gaussian Process Regression
Quang Minh Hoang,† Trong Nghia Hoang,∗ Kian Hsiang Low†
Department of Computer Science† , Interactive Digital Media Institute∗
National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
{hqminh, lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg† , nghiaht@nus.edu.sg∗

tal sensing (Cao, Low, and Dolan 2013; Dolan et al. 2009;
Ling, Low, and Jaillet 2016; Low, Dolan, and Khosla 2008;
2009; 2011; Low et al. 2012; Podnar et al. 2010; Zhang
et al. 2016), trafﬁc monitoring (Chen et al. 2012; Chen,
Low, and Tan 2013; Chen et al. 2015; Hoang et al. 2014a;
2014b; Low et al. 2014a; 2014b; Ouyang et al. 2014;
Xu et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2012)), (a) distributed (Chen et
al. 2013; Hoang, Hoang, and Low 2016b; Low et al. 2015)
and (b) stochastic (Hensman, Fusi, and Lawrence 2013;
Hoang, Hoang, and Low 2015) implementations of such
models have been developed to, respectively, (a) reduce their
time to train with all the data by a factor close to the number
of machines and (b) train with a small, randomly sampled
subset of data in constant time per iteration of stochastic gradient ascent update and achieve asymptotic convergence to
their predictive distributions.

Abstract
While much research effort has been dedicated to scaling
up sparse Gaussian process (GP) models based on inducing
variables for big data, little attention is afforded to the other
less explored class of low-rank GP approximations that exploit the sparse spectral representation of a GP kernel. This
paper presents such an effort to advance the state of the art
of sparse spectrum GP models to achieve competitive predictive performance for massive datasets. Our generalized
framework of stochastic variational Bayesian sparse spectrum GP (sVBSSGP) models addresses their shortcomings
by adopting a Bayesian treatment of the spectral frequencies
to avoid overﬁtting, modeling these frequencies jointly in its
variational distribution to enable their interaction a posteriori,
and exploiting local data for boosting the predictive performance. However, such structural improvements result in a
variational lower bound that is intractable to be optimized. To
resolve this, we exploit a variational parameterization trick to
make it amenable to stochastic optimization. Interestingly, the
resulting stochastic gradient has a linearly decomposable structure that can be exploited to reﬁne our stochastic optimization
method to incur constant time per iteration while preserving
its property of being an unbiased estimator of the exact gradient of the variational lower bound. Empirical evaluation on
real-world datasets shows that sVBSSGP outperforms stateof-the-art stochastic implementations of sparse GP models.

1

On the other hand, there is a less well-explored, alternative
class of low-rank GP approximations that exploit sparsity in
the spectral representation of a GP kernel (Gal and Turner
2015; Lázaro-Gredilla et al. 2010) for gaining time efﬁciency
and have empirically demonstrated competitive predictive
performance for datasets of up to tens of thousands in size but,
surprisingly, not received as much attention and research effort. In contrast to the above literature, such sparse spectrum
GP regression models do not need to introduce an additional
set of inducing inputs which is computationally challenging to be jointly optimized, especially with a large number
of them that is necessary for accurate predictions. Unfortunately, the sparse spectrum GP (SSGP) model of LázaroGredilla et al. (2010) does not scale well to massive datasets
due to its linear time in the data size and also ﬁnds a point
estimate of the spectral frequencies of its kernel that risks
overﬁtting. The recent variational SSGP (VSSGP) model of
Gal and Turner (2015) has attempted to address both shortcomings of SSGP with a stochastic implementation and a
Bayesian treatment of the spectral frequencies, respectively.
However, VSSGP has imposed the following highly restrictive structural assumptions to facilitate analytical derivations
but potentially compromise its predictive performance: (a)
The spectral frequencies are assumed to be fully independent
a posteriori in its variational distribution, and (b) every test
output assumes a deterministic relationship with the spectral
frequencies in its test conditional and is thus conditionally independent of the training data, including the local data “close”

Introduction

The machine learning community has recently witnessed the
Gaussian process (GP) models gaining considerable traction in the research on kernel methods due to its expressive
power and capability of performing probabilistic non-linear
regression. However, a full-rank GP regression model incurs
cubic time in the size of the data to compute its predictive
distribution, hence limiting its use to small datasets. To lift
this computational curse, a vast literature of sparse GP regression models (Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen 2005;
Titsias 2009) have exploited a structural assumption of conditional independence based on the notion of inducing variables for achieving linear time in the data size. To scale
up these sparse GP regression models further for performing real-time predictions necessary in many time-critical applications and decision support systems (e.g., environmenc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2007

