Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Collective Deep Quantization for
Efﬁcient Cross-Modal Retrieval∗
Yue Cao, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Shichen Liu
KLiss, MOE; TNList; School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{caoyue10,liushichen95}@gmail.com {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

formed by the index of the nearest center, as quantization
(Ge et al. 2014; Zhang, Du, and Wang 2014) has shown more
powerful representation ability than hashing in single-modal
search. It has been widely studied in cross-modal similarity
search with typical solutions based on hashing (Wang et al.
2014a; Bronstein et al. 2010; Kumar and Udupa 2011; Song
et al. 2013), while relatively unexplored in cross-modal
search except only two quantization approaches (Long et al.
2016; Zhang and Wang 2016). However, without learning
deep representations, existing cross-modal quantization approaches cannot close the gap across different modalities.
Recent deep hashing methods (Xia et al. 2014; Lai et al.
2015) show that both feature representation and hash coding can be learned more effectively using deep networks
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Lin, Chen, and
Yan 2014), which can naturally encode nonlinear hashing
functions. Other cross-modal retrieval models via deep
learning (Masci et al. 2014; Jiang and Li 2016; Cao, Long,
and Wang 2016) have shown that deep models can capture nonlinear cross-modal correlations more effectively and
yielded state-of-the-art results on many benchmarks. However, without exploring the quantization techniques, existing
deep hashing methods cannot minimize the quantization error to generate high-quality binary codes. Furthermore, deep
features may not be quantized effectively using post-step
quantization techniques—if deep features do not exhibit a
cluster structure, then they may not be quantized accurately
(Ge et al. 2014). Hence it is important to improve the quantizability of the deep representations in an end-to-end architecture such that they can be quantized more effectively.
This paper presents Collective Deep Quantization (CDQ),
which is the ﬁrst attempt to cross-modal deep quantization.
CDQ jointly learns deep image and text representations tailored to binary coding and formally controls the quantization error, which constitutes four components: (1) an image
network with multiple convolution-pooling layers to extract
good image representations, and a text network with multiple fully-connected layers to extract good text representations; (2) two bottleneck layers for learning quantizable representations, (3) an adaptive cross-entropy loss for capturing cross-modal correlations, and (4) a collective quantization loss for controlling coding quality and the quantizability
of representations. Extensive experiments show that CDQ
yields state of the art cross-modal retrieval performance.

Abstract
Cross-modal similarity retrieval is a problem about designing a retrieval system that supports querying across
content modalities, e.g., using an image to retrieve for
texts. This paper presents a compact coding solution for
efﬁcient cross-modal retrieval, with a focus on the quantization approach which has already shown the superior
performance over the hashing solutions in single-modal
similarity retrieval. We propose a collective deep quantization (CDQ) approach, which is the ﬁrst attempt to
introduce quantization in end-to-end deep architecture
for cross-modal retrieval. The major contribution lies in
jointly learning deep representations and the quantizers
for both modalities using carefully-crafted hybrid networks and well-speciﬁed loss functions. In addition, our
approach simultaneously learns the common quantizer
codebook for both modalities through which the crossmodal correlation can be substantially enhanced. CDQ
enables efﬁcient and effective cross-modal retrieval using inner product distance computed based on the common codebook with fast distance table lookup. Extensive experiments show that CDQ yields state of the art
cross-modal retrieval results on standard benchmarks.

Introduction
While multimedia big data with large volumes and high dimensions are pervasive in search engines and social networks, it has attracted increasing attention to enable approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) search across different media modalities with both computation efﬁciency and search
quality. As relevant data from different modalities (image
and text) may endow semantic correlations, it is important
to support cross-modal retrieval that returns semanticallyrelevant results of one modality in response to a query of
different modality. A promising solution to the cross-modal
retrieval is hashing and quantization (Wang et al. 2014a),
which transform high-dimensional data into compact binary
codes and generate similar binary codes for similar data
items. Due to large volumes and high dimensions, effective
and efﬁcient cross-modal retrieval remains a challenge.
In this paper, we are interested in the cross-modal quantization approach that represents each point by a short code
∗

Corresponding authors: Mingsheng Long and Jianmin Wang.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3974

