Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

VINet: Visual-Inertial Odometry as a
Sequence-to-Sequence Learning Problem
Ronald Clark, Sen Wang, Hongkai Wen, Andrew Markham, Niki Trigoni
Department of Computer Science,University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Traditional

Thresholds

Feature
Matching
Extraction

Cam

In this paper we present an on-manifold sequence-tosequence learning approach to motion estimation using visual and inertial sensors. It is to the best of our
knowledge the ﬁrst end-to-end trainable method for
visual-inertial odometry which performs fusion of the
data at an intermediate feature-representation level. Our
method has numerous advantages over traditional approaches. Speciﬁcally, it eliminates the need for tedious
manual synchronization of the camera and IMU as well
as eliminating the need for manual calibration between
the IMU and camera. A further advantage is that our
model naturally and elegantly incorporates domain speciﬁc information which signiﬁcantly mitigates drift. We
show that our approach is competitive with state-of-theart traditional methods when accurate calibration data is
available and can be trained to outperform them in the
presence of calibration and synchronization errors.

Calibration
Transform

Optical
Flow

Feature detection/
description
algorithm

Tight Clock
Synchronization

IMU

VINet

Flow
Matching
algorithm algorithm

IMU Bias
Optimization
Parameters

Non-linear
Optimization

Pose

Error
Ground-Truth
Pose

Cam

Pose

IMU

Figure 1: Comparison between a standard visual-inertial
odometry framework and our learning-based approach. Elements in blue need to be speciﬁed during setup. The parameters of VINet are hidden from the user and fully learned
from data.

Introduction
A fundamental requirement for mobile robot autonomy is
the ability to be able to accurately navigate where no GPS
signals are available. One of the most promising approaches
to achieving this goal is through the fusion of images from a
monocular camera and inertial measurement unit. This setup
has the advantages of being both cheap and ubiquitous and,
through the complementary nature of the sensors, has the potential to provide pose estimates which are on-par in terms of
accuracy with more expensive stereo and LiDAR setups. As
such monocular visual-inertial odometry (VIO) approaches
have received considerable attention in the robotics community (Gui et al. 2015) and current state-of-the-art approaches
to VIO (Leutenegger et al. 2015) are able to achieve impressive accuracy. However, these approaches still suffer from
strict calibration and synchronization requirements.
Inspired by the recent success of deep-learning models
for processing raw, high-dimensional data, we propose in
this paper a fresh approach to VIO by regarding it as a
sequence-to-sequence regression problem. The resulting approach, VINet, is a fully trainable end-to-end model for performing visual-inertial odometry. Our contributions are as
follows

• We present the ﬁrst system for visual-inertial aided navigation that is fully end-to-end trainable.
• We introduce a novel recurrent network architecture and
training procedure to optimally train the parameters of
model
• This includes a novel differentiable pose concatenation
layer which allows the network’s predictions to conform
to the structure of the SE(3) manifold
• We evaluate our method and the demonstrate its advantages over traditional methods on real-world data

Related work
In this section we brieﬂy outline works strictly focused on
monocular cameras and inertial measurement unit data in
the absence of other sensors such as stereo setups and laser
range ﬁnders.
Visual Odometry: VO algorithms estimate the incremental
ego-motion of a camera. A traditional VO algorithm, illus-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3995

