Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Accelerated Vector Pruning for Optimal POMDP Solvers
Erwin Walraven, Matthijs T. J. Spaan
Delft University of Technology
Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD
Delft, The Netherlands

to check whether a vector is dominated by a set of vectors,
which turns out to be a costly operation. For example, Cassandra, Littman, and Zhang (1997) have shown that linear
programming represents a major part of the total running
time. Existing research focusing on the scalability of the LP
subroutine typically aims to solve fewer LPs and exploits the
POMDP structure to create LPs with fewer constraints (Feng
and Zilberstein 2004). However, existing work does not try to
exploit the structure of the LPs to derive more efﬁcient algorithms to solve the LPs. We demonstrate that such a structure
can be used to derive faster algorithms.
In this paper we show that a more efﬁcient vector pruning method can be obtained by selecting LP constraints in
a smart way. We take the original LP and apply a Benders
decomposition (Benders 1962) to derive an algorithm which
incrementally adds constraints. LP solvers do not automatically apply such a decomposition, and therefore we show
how it can be implemented manually in the context of pruning for POMDPs. The resulting algorithm only needs a small
fraction of the constraints in the original LP. We show that
the algorithm always ﬁnds the optimal LP solution, and we
prove that some constraints will never be added to the LP
formulation. Experiments show that our algorithm improves
the performance of existing pruning methods, and our results show that the accelerated pruning algorithm creates the
fastest variant of incremental pruning for POMDPs.

Abstract
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
are powerful models for planning under uncertainty in partially
observable domains. However, computing optimal solutions
for POMDPs is challenging because of the high computational
requirements of POMDP solution algorithms. Several algorithms use a subroutine to prune dominated vectors in value
functions, which requires a large number of linear programs
(LPs) to be solved and it represents a large part of the total
running time. In this paper we show how the LPs in POMDP
pruning subroutines can be decomposed using a Benders decomposition. The resulting algorithm incrementally adds LP
constraints and uses only a small fraction of the constraints.
Our algorithm signiﬁcantly improves the performance of existing pruning methods and the commonly used incremental
pruning algorithm. Our new variant of incremental pruning is
the fastest optimal pruning-based POMDP algorithm.

Introduction
Dealing with uncertainty and partial observability in planning
problems is a challenging goal in the development of intelligent agents. Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs) have emerged as a successful framework for planning under uncertainty in partially observable domains (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998), and have been used
in several real-world applications such as aircraft collision
avoidance (Bai et al. 2012) and guidance of people with dementia (Boger et al. 2005). A signiﬁcant body of research has
focused on POMDPs in the past, but solving POMDPs to optimality remains difﬁcult. Although several approximate methods for POMDPs exist (Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun 2003;
Spaan and Vlassis 2005), optimal solutions are commonly
used in recent literature (Karmokar, Senthuran, and Anpalagan 2012; Qian et al. 2016; Li and Jayaweera 2015;
Blanco et al. 2015; Roijers, Whiteson, and Oliehoek 2013;
Raphael and Shani 2012). Moreover, an advantage of optimal
solutions is that they are independent of the initial belief.
Incremental pruning (Cassandra, Littman, and Zhang
1997) is a popular method for computing optimal POMDP
solutions. It is based on a subroutine that removes dominated
vectors from value functions, which is known as pruning. The
subroutine solves a large number of LPs during its execution

Background
In this section we introduce Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes and decomposition of linear programs.

Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
A POMDP (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998) consists of a set of states S, a set of actions A and a set of observations O. If action a ∈ A is executed in state s ∈ S, then
the state changes to s ∈ S according to the probability distribution P (s |s, a) and a reward R(s, a) is received. Rather
than observing state s directly, the agent receives an observation o ∈ O according to probability distribution P (o|a, s ).
The agent
aims to maximize the expected discounted re∞
ward E [ t=0 γ t Rt ], where 0 ≤ γ < 1 is the discount rate
and Rt is the reward at time t. The agent maintains a belief b
over states, which can be updated using Bayes’ rule.

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3672

