Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

From Semantic Models to Cognitive Buildings
Joern Ploennigs

Anika Schumann

IBM Research - Dublin
Damastown Industrial Estate, Dublin, Ireland
Joern.Ploennigs@ie.ibm.com

IBM Research - Zurich
Sauemerstr. 4, Rueschlikon, Switzerland
ikh@zurich.ibm.com

Today’s operation of buildings is either based on simple dashboards that are not scalable to thousands of sensor data or
on rules that provide very limited fault information only. In
either case considerable manual effort is required for diagnosing building operation problems related to energy usage
or occupant comfort. We present a Cognitive Building demo
that uses (i) semantic reasoning to model physical relationships of sensors and systems, (ii) machine learning to predict and detect anomalies in energy ﬂow, occupancy and user
comfort, and (iii) speech-enabled Augmented Reality interfaces for immersive interaction with thousands of devices.
Our demo analyzes data from more than 3,300 sensors and
shows how we can automatically diagnose building operation
problems.

data points. In fact, the only step of our approach that is not
fully automatic is the semantic mapping. Once it is captured
what the different data points of the building represent, all
models are build automatically and hence they can also be
updated automatically e. g. when the performance of HVAC
equipment changes. Thus our work enables Cognitive Buildings, i. e. buildings that automatically optimize their operation in view of changes in their environment.
Based on data from the IBM campus Dublin with 3,300
sensors we demonstrate that our work can be used for diagnosing building operation problems and show how speechenabled augmented reality assists technicians in taking the
right actions when repairing the faulty HVAC equipment we
identiﬁed.

Introduction

Approach

Almost 32% of the total energy consumption in industrialized countries is used for electricity, heating, ventilation, and
air-conditioning (HVAC) in buildings. Between 15% and
30% of that energy could be saved if faults in the HVAC
system and its operation could be detected in a timely manner (Zhou, Wang, and Ma 2009). Existing diagnosis approaches are either data driven or model driven (Katipamula
and Brambley 2005). However, data driven statistical methods do not provide detailed fault information and approaches
that require a model of the building behaviour suffer from
a lack of adaptability across buildings, which differ in their
HVAC equipment installed, the building size, layout and material.
The adaptability problem can be tackled using semantic
mapping and the need for it was identiﬁed by several reviews such as (Livingood et al. 2011). Semantic techniques
have already been applied to the diagnosis of buildings (Han,
Jeong, and Lee 2011; Dibowski, Holub, and Rojicek 2016),
but they require manual modelling of the devices and do not
scale well with the size of systems.
We show how the model of a given building can be
generated almost automatically based on (i) the building’s
sensor data, (ii) a generic semantic model characterizing
the relationships among sensors and (iii) a generic physical model characterizing the physical dependencies between

We start by introducing the three inputs needed for our approach:

Abstract

• Building Data: For commercial buildings, the data is
managed and stored in a Building Management System
(BMS) which is commonly available.
• Semantic Model: We use Brick 1.0, the newly developed
metadata schema for buildings which consists of a class
hierarchy of entities describing the various building subsystems and their entities (Balaji et al. 2016). For example, this graph depicts that a HVAC zone has a temperature sensor and controls a room:












   


• Physical Model: We extract the dependencies between entities using the model described in (Wetter 2006). Here we
capture, for example, that the temperature in a room rises
if its heater is on.
The overview of our approach is shown in Figure 1a. It
starts by computing the semantic model of the particular
building. A difﬁculty here is that each BMS has a unique
labelling scheme that often is not even consistent in itself.
This results from the fact that despite some standardization
efforts (ISO16484-3 2005) technicians label data in an adhoc manner when the BMS control strategy is updated for
new equipment additions. Hence, performing the semantic
mapping cannot be done completely automatically, but us-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5105

