Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Invariant Deep Representation
for NIR-VIS Face Recognition
Ran He, Xiang Wu, Zhenan Sun, Tieniu Tan
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
{rhe,znsun,tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, alfredxiangwu@gmail.com
Abstract
Visual versus near infrared (VIS-NIR) face recognition is still
a challenging heterogeneous task due to large appearance difference between VIS and NIR modalities. This paper presents
a deep convolutional network approach that uses only one
network to map both NIR and VIS images to a compact Euclidean space. The low-level layers of this network are trained
only on large-scale VIS data. Each convolutional layer is implemented by the simplest case of maxout operator. The highlevel layer is divided into two orthogonal subspaces that contain modality-invariant identity information and modalityvariant spectrum information respectively. Our joint formulation leads to an alternating minimization approach for deep
representation at the training time and an efﬁcient computation for heterogeneous data at the testing time. Experimental evaluations show that our method achieves 94% veriﬁcation rate at FAR=0.1% on the challenging CASIA NIR-VIS
2.0 face recognition dataset. Compared with state-of-the-art
methods, it reduces the error rate by 58% only with a compact 64-D representation.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of our modality invariant deep representation architecture. Orthogonal constraints and maxout
operator are used to learn invariant representation and avoid
overﬁtting on a small dataset. At the testing time, both NIR
and VIS features are exacted from the shared layer and compared in cosine distance.

Introduction
different spectral domains, they have large appearance difference. Hence, the deep convolutional networks trained on
VIS data do not contain NIR spectral information so that
they fail to deal with NIR images very well. How to utilize large-scale VIS face data to explore modality invariant
representation of NIR and VIS face images is an ongoing issue. Second, beneﬁtting from web data, we can easily collect
millions of VIS face images. However, pair-wised NIR face
images are often unavailable on internet. The collection of
large-scale and pair-wised NIR and VIS face images is still
expensive. How to apply deep learning on a small NIR-VIS
dataset remains a central problem.
Previous NIR-VIS matching methods often use a trick
to alleviate the appearance difference problem by removing
some principal subspaces that are assumed to contain light
spectrum information (Li et al. 2013)(Yi et al. 2015). Observation and results also demonstrate that the appearance of
a face is composed of identity information and variation information (e.g., lightings, poses, and expressions) (Chen et
al. 2012). Inspired by these observations, this paper presents
a deep convolutional network method to learn modality Invariant Deep Representation (IDR) that contains the identity

Active near infrared (NIR) imaging technique provides an
inexpensive and simple means to enhance the performance
of face recognition systems in low light conditions. It has
been proved to be less sensitive to visible (VIS) light illumination variations (Zhu et al. 2014), and has been widely
used in face identiﬁcation or authorization applications, such
as security surveillance and E-passport. In many real-world
applications, face recognition systems almost require individuals to enroll by using their VIS images, which results in
the matching problem between NIR and VIS face images.
This matching problem is also called the NIR-VIS heterogeneous face recognition problem (Li et al. 2013).
Despite recent advances in the ﬁeld of deep learning
based VIS face recognition (Sun et al. 2014; Taigman et
al. 2014; Parkhi, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2015; Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015), implementing NIR-VIS
face recognition efﬁciently presents serious challenges to
current approaches. These challenges may be incurred by
two facts. First, since NIR and VIS images are captured from
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2000

