Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Playing FPS Games with
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Guillaume Lample,∗ Devendra Singh Chaplot∗
{glample,chaplot}@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Advances in deep reinforcement learning have allowed autonomous agents to perform well on Atari games, often outperforming humans, using only raw pixels to make their decisions. However, most of these games take place in 2D environments that are fully observable to the agent. In this paper,
we present the ﬁrst architecture to tackle 3D environments
in ﬁrst-person shooter games, that involve partially observable states. Typically, deep reinforcement learning methods
only utilize visual input for training. We present a method
to augment these models to exploit game feature information
such as the presence of enemies or items, during the training
phase. Our model is trained to simultaneously learn these features along with minimizing a Q-learning objective, which is
shown to dramatically improve the training speed and performance of our agent. Our architecture is also modularized to
allow different models to be independently trained for different phases of the game. We show that the proposed architecture substantially outperforms built-in AI agents of the game
as well as average humans in deathmatch scenarios.

1

Figure 1: A screenshot of Doom.
to play Atari 2600 games. Foerster et al. (2016) consider
a multi-agent scenario where they use deep distributed recurrent neural networks to communicate between different
agent in order to solve riddles. The use of recurrent neural
networks is effective in scenarios with partially observable
states due to its ability to remember information for an arbitrarily long amount of time.
Previous methods have usually been applied to 2D environments that hardly resemble the real world. In this paper,
we tackle the task of playing a First-Person-Shooting (FPS)
game in a 3D environment. This task is much more challenging than playing most Atari games as it involves a wide variety of skills, such as navigating through a map, collecting
items, recognizing and ﬁghting enemies, etc. Furthermore,
states are partially observable, and the agent navigates a 3D
environment in a ﬁrst-person perspective, which makes the
task more suitable for real-world robotics applications.
In this paper, we present an AI-agent for playing deathmatches1 in FPS games using only the pixels on the screen.
Our agent divides the problem into two phases: navigation
(exploring the map to collect items and ﬁnd enemies) and
action (ﬁghting enemies when they are observed), and uses
separate networks for each phase of the game. Furthermore,
the agent infers high-level game information, such as the
presence of enemies on the screen, to decide its current

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has proved to be very successful in mastering human-level control policies in a wide variety of tasks such as object recognition with visual attention (Ba, Mnih, and Kavukcuoglu 2014), high-dimensional
robot control (Levine et al. 2016) and solving physics-based
control problems (Heess et al. 2015). In particular, Deep QNetworks (DQN) are shown to be effective in playing Atari
2600 games (Mnih et al. 2013) and more recently, in defeating world-class Go players (Silver et al. 2016).
However, there is a limitation in all of the above applications in their assumption of having the full knowledge of
the current state of the environment, which is usually not
true in real-world scenarios. In the case of partially observable states, the learning agent needs to remember previous
states in order to select optimal actions. Recently, there have
been attempts to handle partially observable states in deep
reinforcement learning by introducing recurrency in Deep
Q-networks. For example, Hausknecht and Stone (2015) use
a deep recurrent neural network, particularly a Long-ShortTerm-Memory (LSTM) Network, to learn the Q-function
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A deathmatch is a scenario in FPS games where the objective
is to maximize the number of kills by a player/agent.

2140

