Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Parameter Importance
Analysis via Ablation with Surrogates
André Biedenkapp, Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg
{biedenka, lindauer, eggenspk, fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Chris Fawcett, Holger H. Hoos
University of British Columbia
{fawcettc, hoos}@cs.ubc.ca
algorithm conﬁgurators change nearly all parameters (i.e.,
between tens and hundreds of parameters, depending on the
algorithm), as few as 1 to 3 parameter changes can be responsible for nearly all of the performance improvement.
To determine these important parameter changes between
two conﬁgurations, Fawcett and Hoos (2016) proposed an
ablation analysis procedure. However, this analysis is computationally quite expensive and often takes many days of
CPU time, since it requires further algorithm runs to validate
parameter importance. Here, we propose to use a modelbased surrogate instead of expensive algorithm runs to dramatically speed up this ablation analysis.
During algorithm conﬁguration, large amounts of performance data are generated by assessing the performance of
many parameter conﬁgurations on different instances. We
use these data to train a regression model to predict the
performance (e.g., running time) of a parameter conﬁguration on a given instance. Such models are called empirical
performance models (EPMs; Leyton-Brown, Nudelman, and
Shoham; Hutter et al. 2009; 2014b). By using these cheapto-evaluate EPMs as a surrogate, we show in extensive experiments on prominent benchmarks from SAT, MIP, ASP
and AI Planning that we can speed up ablation analysis by
up to 4 orders of magnitude.
We fully integrated our surrogate-based ablation procedure into the prominent, general-purpose algorithm conﬁguration system SMAC (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown
2011b)1 .

Abstract
To achieve peak performance, it is often necessary to adjust
the parameters of a given algorithm to the class of problem instances to be solved; this is known to be the case
for popular solvers for a broad range of AI problems, including AI planning, propositional satisﬁability (SAT) and
answer set programming (ASP). To avoid tedious and often highly sub-optimal manual tuning of such parameters
by means of ad-hoc methods, general-purpose algorithm
conﬁguration procedures can be used to automatically ﬁnd
performance-optimizing parameter settings. While impressive performance gains are often achieved in this manner,
additional, potentially costly parameter importance analysis
is required to gain insights into what parameter changes are
most responsible for those improvements. Here, we show
how the running time cost of ablation analysis, a wellknown general-purpose approach for assessing parameter importance, can be reduced substantially by using regression
models of algorithm performance constructed from data collected during the conﬁguration process. In our experiments,
we demonstrate speed-up factors between 33 and 14 727 for
ablation analysis on various conﬁguration scenarios from AI
planning, SAT, ASP and mixed integer programming (MIP).

Introduction
General-purpose algorithm conﬁguration was used a lot in
the last decade to substantially improve the performance
of algorithms by optimizing their parameter conﬁgurations
for the class of problem instances to be solved. Examples include the conﬁguration of state-of-the-art solvers
from propositional satisﬁability solving (Hutter et al. 2017),
AI planning (Fawcett et al. 2011) and mixed integerprogramming (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2010).
Most users of algorithm conﬁguration procedures are not
only interested in obtaining a well-performing parameter
conﬁguration, but they also want to understand why the performance of their algorithm improved over another conﬁguration. To this end, different techniques have been proposed
that score parameters based on their importance (Hutter,
Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2013; 2014; Siegmund et al. 2015;
Fawcett and Hoos 2016). A common observation for hardcombinatorial problem solvers is that although automated

Related Work
Hutter et al. (2014b) studied different approaches to train
empirical performance models (EPMs). They showed that
EPMs can be effectively used to predict the performance of
algorithm conﬁgurations on a set of problem instances, in
particular for N P-hard problems, such as MIP, SAT and
AI planning. EPMs are often used in modern algorithm
conﬁgurators, such as SMAC (Hutter, Hoos, and LeytonBrown 2011b) and GGA++ (Ansótegui et al. 2015), to guide
the search to promising areas of the conﬁguration space;
a simpliﬁed version without consideration of instances is
also used in hyperparameter optimization tools for machine
learning algorithms based on Bayesian optimization (e.g.,

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

773

In version 3; see http://www.ml4aad.org/smac/

