Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Accelerated Variance Reduced Stochastic ADMM
Yuanyuan Liu, Fanhua Shang,∗ James Cheng
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yyliu, fhshang, jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

complexity of O(nd1 ). As a result, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with per-iteration complexity of O(d1 ) has
witnessed tremendous progress in the recent years. Especially, a number of stochastic variance reduced gradient
methods such as SAG (Roux, Schmidt, and Bach 2012),
SDCA (Shalev-Shwartz and Zhang 2013) and SVRG (Johnson and Zhang 2013) have been proposed to successfully address the problem of high variance of the gradient estimate
in ordinary SGD, resulting in a linear convergence rate (for
strongly convex problems) as opposed to sub-linear rates
of SGD. More recently, the Nesterov’s acceleration technique (Nesterov 2004) was introduced in (Allen-Zhu 2016;
Hien et al. 2016) to further speed up the stochastic variancereduced algorithms, which results in the best known convergence rates for both strongly convex and general convex problems. This motivates us to integrate the momentum acceleration trick into the stochastic alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) below.
When A is a more general matrix, i.e. A = Id1 , the formulation (1) becomes many more complicated problems arising
from machine learning, e.g. graph-guided fuzed Lasso (Kim,
Sohn, and Xing 2009) and generalized Lasso (Tibshirani and
Taylor 2011). To solve this class of composite optimization
problems with an auxiliary variable y = Ax, which are the
special case of the general ADMM form,
f (x) + h(y), s.t. Ax + By = c,
(2)
min

Abstract
Recently, many variance reduced stochastic alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) methods (e.g. SAGADMM, SDCA-ADMM and SVRG-ADMM) have made exciting progress such as linear convergence rates for strongly
convex problems. However, the best known convergence
rate for general convex problems is O(1/T ) as opposed to
O(1/T 2 ) of accelerated batch algorithms, where T is the
number of iterations. Thus, there still remains a gap in convergence rates between existing stochastic ADMM and batch
algorithms. To bridge this gap, we introduce the momentum
acceleration trick for batch optimization into the stochastic
variance reduced gradient based ADMM (SVRG-ADMM),
which leads to an accelerated (ASVRG-ADMM) method.
Then we design two different momentum term update rules
for strongly convex and general convex cases. We prove
that ASVRG-ADMM converges linearly for strongly convex
problems. Besides having a low per-iteration complexity as
existing stochastic ADMM methods, ASVRG-ADMM improves the convergence rate on general convex problems from
O(1/T ) to O(1/T 2 ). Our experimental results show the effectiveness of ASVRG-ADMM.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider a class of composite convex optimization problems
min f (x) + h(Ax),

x∈Rd1
d2 ×d1

is a given matrix, f (x) := n1

x∈Rd1,y∈Rd2

(1)

the ADMM is an effective optimization tool (Boyd et al.
2011), and has shown attractive performance in a wide
range of real-world problems, such as big data classiﬁcation (Nie et al. 2014). To tackle the issue of high periteration complexity of batch (deterministic) ADMM (as a
popular ﬁrst-order optimization method), Wang and Banerjee (2012), Suzuki (2013) and Ouyang et al. (2013) proposed some online or stochastic ADMM algorithms. However, all√these variants only achieve the convergence rate
of O(1/ T ) for general convex problems and O(log T /T )
for strongly convex problems, respectively, as compared
with the O(1/T 2 ) and linear convergence rates of accelerated batch algorithms (Nesterov 1983), e.g. FISTA, where
T is the number of iterations. By now several accelerated
and faster converging versions of stochastic ADMM, which
are all based on variance reduction techniques, have been
proposed, e.g. SAG-ADMM (Zhong and Kwok 2014b),

n

where A ∈ R
i=1 fi (x),
each fi (x) is a convex function, and h(Ax) is convex but
possibly non-smooth. With regard to h(·), we are interested in a sparsity-inducing regularizer, e.g. 1 -norm, group
Lasso and nuclear norm. When A is an identity matrix,
i.e. A = Id1 , the above formulation (1) arises in many
places in machine learning, statistics, and operations research (Bubeck 2015), such as logistic regression, Lasso
and support vector machine (SVM). We mainly focus on
the large sample regime. In this regime, even ﬁrst-order
batch methods, e.g. FISTA (Beck and Teboulle 2009), become computationally burdensome due to their per-iteration
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2287

