Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Asynchronous Mini-Batch Gradient Descent
with Variance Reduction for Non-Convex Optimization
Zhouyuan Huo

Heng Huang

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
zhouyuan.huo@mavs.uta.edu

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
heng@uta.edu
such as SAGA(Defazio, Bach, and Lacoste-Julien 2014),
m2SGD(Konečnỳ et al. 2014), have gained much attention
in stochastic optimization. Through reusing the previously
computed ﬁrst order gradient information, these methods
are able to reduce the variance of gradient approximation
in the optimization and are proved to have linear convergence rate on strongly convex problem. After that, SVRG is
then applied to solve non-convex problem (Allen-Zhu 2016;
Reddi et al. 2016), and it is proved to have a faster sub-linear
convergence rate of O(1/T ). Experiments are conducted on
neural networks and their results also validate that it outperforms SGD method for non-convex optimization.
Serial algorithm is not able to make good use of computation resource. Therefore, parallel algorithms are introduced to further speedup the computation task, including
synchronous optimization and asynchronous optimization.
Because there is no need of synchronization between workers, asynchronous methods often have better performance.
Asynchronous parallelism has been successfully applied to
speedup many state-of-the-art optimization algorithms, such
as SGD (Recht et al. 2011; Lian et al. 2015), stochastic coordinate descent (SCD) (Liu, Wright, and Sridhar 2014), SVRG
(Zhang, Zheng, and Kwok 2015) and DualFreeSDCA (Huo
and Huang 2016). There are mainly two kinds of distributed
architectures, one is distributed-memory architecture on multiple machines (Agarwal and Duchi 2011; Lian et al. 2015;
Zhang and Kwok 2014; Dean et al. 2012; Zhang, Zheng, and
Kwok 2015) and the other one is shared-memory architecture
on a multi-core machine (Recht et al. 2011; Zhao and Li 2016;
Langford, Smola, and Zinkevich 2009). Deep learning is a
typical situation where asynchronous SGD and its variants
have gained great success(LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015;
Dean et al. 2012; Lian et al. 2015; Ngiam et al. 2011). It
is known that deep neural network always has large set of
parameters and trains with large-scale datasets.
Recently, asynchronous SVRG method has been implemented and studied on both distributed-memory architecture
(Zhang, Zheng, and Kwok 2015) and shared-memory architecture (Zhao and Li 2016). It is proved that asynchronous
SVRG method has linear convergence rate on strongly convex
problem. Mini-batch gradient is implemented in the experiments, while it is missing in their proof. Further, there is
no theoretical analysis of convergence rate for asynchronous
SVRG on non-convex problem yet.

Abstract
We provide the ﬁrst theoretical analysis on the convergence
rate of asynchronous mini-batch gradient descent with variance reduction (AsySVRG) for non-convex optimization.
Asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (AsySGD) has been
broadly used for deep learning√optimization, and it is proved
to converge with rate of O(1/ T ) for non-convex optimization. Recently, variance reduction technique is proposed and
it is proved to be able to accelerate the convergence of SGD
greatly. It is shown that asynchronous SGD method with variance reduction technique has linear convergence rate when
problem is strongly convex. However, there is still no work to
analyze the convergence rate of this method for non-convex
problem. In this paper, we consider two asynchronous parallel
implementations of mini-batch gradient descent method with
variance reduction: one is on distributed-memory architecture
and the other is on shared-memory architecture. We prove that
both methods can converge with a rate of O(1/T ) for nonconvex optimization, and linear speedup is accessible when
we increase the number of workers. We evaluate our methods by optimizing multi-layer neural networks on two real
datasets (MNIST and CIFAR-10), and experimental results
demonstrate our theoretical analysis.

Introduction
With the boom of data, training machine learning model
with large-scale datasets becomes a challenging problem.
Basing on batch gradient descent (GD) method, researchers
propose stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method or minibatch gradient descent method to relieve the complexity of
computation in each iteration and reduce the total time complexity for optimization (Nemirovski et al. 2009; Lan 2012;
Ghadimi and Lan 2013; Ghadimi, Lan, and Zhang 2016;
Bottou 2010). Due to efﬁciency, SGD method has been
widely used to solve different kinds of large-scale machine
learning problems, including both convex and non-convex.
However, because we use stochastic gradient to approximate full gradient in the process, a decreasing learning rate
has to be applied to guarantee convergence, or it is very
easy to diverge from the optimal solution. Thus, it leads to
a sub-linear convergence rate of O(1/T ) on strongly convex problem. Recently, stochastic variance reduced gradient (SVRG) (Johnson and Zhang 2013) and its variants,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2043

