Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Coupling Implicit and Explicit
Knowledge for Customer Volume Prediction
Jingyuan Wang,† Yating Lin,† Junjie Wu,‡ * Zhong Wang,† Zhang Xiong†§
† School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, China
§ Research Institute of Beihang University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
Email: {jywang, linyating, wujj, wangzhong, xiongz}@buaa.edu.cn, *Corresponding author

Driven by this motivation, in this paper, we propose a
Geographical Regression and Non-negative Matrix Factorization (GR-NMF) model for high-quality customer volume
prediction. The main contributions of our study are summarized as follows.
First, GR-NMF is able to jointly model implicit knowledge hidden inside customer volumes and explicit knowledge expressed as geographical relations. Speciﬁcally, the
regression model for the explicit knowledge is formulated
as an order-unsymmetrical matrix factorization problem,
which is naturally compatible with the matrix factorization
framework for implicit knowledge mining.
Second, GR-NMF can be regarded as a semi-supervised
learning framework that models unobserved customer volumes as the calibration of implicit knowledge modeling with
explicit knowledge modeling. This turns out to be the coupling item and ﬁts the general matrix factorization framework nicely.
Third, GR-NMF has a uniﬁed probabilistic interpretation,
which makes the model theoretically solid. All the parameters have deﬁnite statistical meanings, which can help users
to understand the relations and contribution weights of implicit and explicit knowledge. Clear guidance to the ﬁne setting of these parameters is carefully given for practical use.
Extensive experiments are conducted on a real-life outpatient dataset obtained from the Shenzhen city of China. The
results show that GR-NMF outperforms competitive baselines consistently in various application scenarios with different sampling rates. In particular, equipped with explicit
geographical knowledge, GR-NMF shows prominent advantages to all baselines in location selection with the cold-start
challenge. The rationale of the approximate method for parameter setting is also testiﬁed empirically.

Abstract
Customer volume prediction, which predicts the volume from
a customer source to a service place, is a very important technique for location selection, market investigation, and other
related applications. Most of traditional methods only make
use of partial information for either supervised or unsupervised modeling, which cannot well integrate overall available
knowledge. In this paper, we propose a method titled GRNMF for jointly modeling both implicit correlations hidden
inside customer volumes and explicit geographical knowledge via an integrated probabilistic framework. The effectiveness of GR-NMF in coupling all-round knowledge is veriﬁed
over a real-life outpatient dataset under different scenarios.
GR-NMF shows particularly evident advantages to all baselines in location selection with the cold-start challenge.

Introduction
Customer volume prediction refers to the problem of predicting customer volumes (footfalls) from customer sources,
e.g., residential zones, to service places, e.g., theaters, shopping malls, schools, and hospitals. It plays a key role in many
business and public affair applications. For example, in location selection applications, customer volume prediction
is utilized to predict potential footfalls to a location candidate (Xu et al. 2016; Hernandez and Bennison 2000). In
business and public investigation applications, it is also utilized to estimate the competitiveness or investment value of
service places (Fu et al. 2014b).
Traditional methods for customer volume prediction usually adopt intuitive information, such as spatial interactions (Athiyaman 2011), road structure (Bafna 2003), and
accessibility (Medda 2012), to predict unknown footfall
from a customer source point to a service place. In recent
years, with the rapid development of data sciences, more and
more researchers turn to data-driven methods (Li et al. 2015;
Karamshuk et al. 2013) and empirical models (Simini et al.
2012; Jensen 2006) for higher-quality prediction. The rich
studies along this line, however, are mostly concerned with
modeling partial information as either a supervised or unsupervised learning problem. Further study is still in great
need to integrate all-round knowledge available for robust
customer volume prediction.

Model and Inference
Throughout the paper, we use lowercase symbols such as
a, b to denote scalars, bold lowercase symbols such as a, b
to denote vectors, bold uppercase symbols such as A, B to
denote matrices, and calligraphy symbols such as A, B, to
denote tensors.
Assume S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sM } contains M service
points, and C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cN } contains N customersource points (or customer points for short). Let x̃ij denote

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1569

