Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Variable Kernel Density Estimation
in High-Dimensional Feature Spaces
Christiaan M. van der Walt a,b Etienne Barnard b
a

Modelling and Digital Science, CSIR, Pretoria, South Africa
cvdwalt@csir.co.za
b
Multilingual Speech Technologies Group, North-West University, Vanderbijlpark, South Africa
etienne.barnard@nwu.ac.za
(Fix and Hodges 1951; Silverman 1986) with the introduction of the naı̈ve estimator. Since then, many approaches
to non-parametric density estimation have been developed,
most notably: kernel density estimators (KDEs) (Whittle
1958), k-nearest-neighbour density estimators (Loftsgaarden and Quesenberry 1965), variable KDEs (Breiman et al.
1977), projection pursuit density estimators (Friedman et
al. 1984), mixture model density estimators (Dempster et
al. 1977; Redner and Walker 1984) and Bayesian networks
(Webb 2003; Heckerman 2008).
Recent advances in machine learning have shown that
maximum-likelihood (ML) kernel density estimation holds
much promise for estimating non-parametric density functions in high-dimensional spaces. Two notable contributions are the Maximum Leave-one-out Likelihood (MLL)
kernel bandwidth estimator (Barnard 2010) and the Maximum Likelihood Leave-One-Out (ML-LOO) kernel bandwidth estimator (Leiva-Murillo and Rodrı́guez 2012). Both
estimators were independently derived from the ML objective function with the only differences being the simplifying
assumptions made in their derivations to limit the complexity of the bandwidth optimisation problem.
In particular, the ML-LOO estimator constrains the number of free parameters that need to be estimated in the bandwidth optimisation problem by estimating an identical fullcovariance or spherical bandwidth matrix for all kernels. The
MLL estimator by Barnard assumes that the density function changes slowly throughout feature space, which limits
the complexity of the objective function being optimised.
Speciﬁcally, when the kernel bandwidth Hi for data point
xi is estimated, it is assumed that the kernel bandwidths of
the remaining N − 1 kernels are equal to Hi . Therefore, the
optimisation of the bandwidth Hi does not require the estimation of the bandwidths of the remaining N-1 kernels.
We address the problem of kernel bandwidth estimation
for kernel density estimation in this work by deriving a kernel bandwidth estimation technique from the ML framework
without the simpliﬁcations imposed by the MLL and MLLOO estimators. This allows us to compare the performance
of this more general ML estimator to the MLL and ML-LOO
estimators on a number of representative machine learning
tasks to gain a better understanding of the practical implications of the simplifying assumptions made in the derivations
of the MLL and ML-LOO estimators on real world (RW)

Abstract
Estimating the joint probability density function of a
dataset is a central task in many machine learning
applications. In this work we address the fundamental problem of kernel bandwidth estimation for variable kernel density estimation in high-dimensional feature spaces. We derive a variable kernel bandwidth estimator by minimizing the leave-one-out entropy objective function and show that this estimator is capable of performing estimation in high-dimensional feature spaces with great success. We compare the performance of this estimator to state-of-the art maximumlikelihood estimators on a number of representative
high-dimensional machine learning tasks and show that
the newly introduced minimum leave-one-out entropy
estimator performs optimally on a number of highdimensional datasets considered.

Introduction
With the advent of the internet and advances in computing
power, the collection of very large high-dimensional datasets
has become feasible – understanding and modelling highdimensional data has thus become a crucial activity, especially in the ﬁeld of machine learning. Since non-parametric
density estimators are data-driven and do not require or
impose a pre-deﬁned probability density function on data,
they are very powerful tools for probabilistic data modelling
and analysis. Conventional non-parametric density estimation methods, however, originated from the ﬁeld of statistics
and were not originally intended to perform density estimation in high-dimensional features spaces - as is often encountered in real-world machine learning tasks. (Scott and
Sain 2005) states, for example, that kernel density estimation of a full density function is only feasible up to six dimensions. We therefore deﬁne density estimation tasks with
dimensionalities of 10 and higher as high-dimensional; and
we address the the fundamental problem of non-parametric
density estimation in high-dimensional feature spaces in this
study.
The ﬁrst notable attempt to free discriminant analysis
from strict distributional assumptions was made in 1951 by
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2674

