Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Attentive Interactive Neural Networks for
Answer Selection in Community Question Answering
1
2

Xiaodong Zhang,1 Sujian Li,1,2 Lei Sha,1 Houfeng Wang1,2
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 221009, China
{zxdcs, lisujian, shalei, wanghf}@pku.edu.cn

question, it does not contain any useful information so that
it is regarded as a bad answer.

Abstract
Answer selection plays a key role in community question answering (CQA). Previous research on answer selection usually ignores the problems of redundancy and noise prevalent
in CQA. In this paper, we propose to treat different text segments differently and design a novel attentive interactive neural network (AI-NN) to focus on those text segments useful to
answer selection. The representations of question and answer
are ﬁrst learned by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or
other neural network architectures. Then AI-NN learns interactions of each paired segments of two texts. Row-wise and
column-wise pooling are used afterwards to collect the interactions. We adopt attention mechanism to measure the importance of each segment and combine the interactions to obtain
ﬁxed-length representations for question and answer. Experimental results on CQA dataset in SemEval-2016 demonstrate
that AI-NN outperforms state-of-the-art method.

Question title

Question body

Answer 1

Answer 2

Introduction
With the rapid development of Internet, community question
answering (CQA) forums, e.g. Quora1 and Stack Overﬂow2 ,
have accumulated a large quantity of questions and corresponding answers. These forums are quite open, and thus
they typically have little restrictions, if any, on who can post
and who can answer a question. As a consequence, it takes
effort to go through all possible answers and to make sense
of them because of the uneven quality of answers (Nakov
et al. 2016). Given a question, answer selection aims to pick
out good answers from a set of candidates. Answer selection
in CQA can contribute to various aspects. For example, it is
beneﬁcial to list good answers ahead of bad ones in CQA
websites, which can save users’ time. Besides, it is a crucial step for automatic question answering based on similar
question matching.
Table 1 lists an example question and its two possible
answers. A question usually includes two parts, that is a
title, which gives a brief summary of the question, and a
body, which describes the question in detail. Answer 1 is a
good answer, because it provides helpful information, such
as “lady siam massage”. Although Answer 2 is a reply to the

Best place for massage
Tell me; where is the best place
to go for a massage? Mind you; I
don’t want to spend 1000QR for it...
(Guys; please don’t come up with
answers that you would gladly do it
yourself; plz...)
“have you try lady siam massage
next to toy ““r”” us al sadd? for
one hour = 120riyal. not bad i must
say Everybody is right Everybody is
wrong; it depend where we stand.”
I have never been for a massage!
Can you believe it? Maybe I should
go and try too! :)

Table 1: An example question and answers in CQA.
Unlike answer selection in other areas, e.g. WIKIQA
(Yang, Yih, and Meek 2015), an obvious characteristic can
be seen from Table 1, that is redundant and noisy. Questions
and answers in CQA generally contains many sentences.
Some sentences are auxiliary and do not provide meaningful information, like the bracketed sentences in the question
body. Furthermore, the text is non-standard. There are quantities of informal language usages, such as abbreviations, typos, emoticons and grammatical mistakes.
In recent years, many researchers have proposed various
deep learning methods that automatically select answers.
These methods usually learn representations of two texts
using neural networks, e.g. convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (Qiu and Huang 2015) or recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) (Wang and Nyberg 2015). Based on the representations, a function is utilized to give the matching score of two
texts. Instead of learning global representation of whole text,
some researchers have proposed models that learn the interaction information of the representations and achieved better
results (Hu et al. 2014). Although interaction is employed,
they are treated equally, thus this method is not suitable for
redundant and noisy text in CQA.
Two main characteristics of our model, as implied by the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.quora.com/
2
http://www.stackoverﬂow.com/

3525

