Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Riemannian Network
for SPD Matrix Learning
Zhiwu Huang, Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{zhiwu.huang, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Applying Euclidean geometry to SPD matrices directly often results in undesirable effects, such as the swelling of
diffusion tensors (Pennec, Fillard, and Ayache 2006). To
address this problem, (Pennec, Fillard, and Ayache 2006;
Arsigny et al. 2007; Sra 2011) introduced Riemannian metrics, e.g., Log-Euclidean metric (Arsigny et al. 2007), to encode Riemannian geometry of SPD manifolds properly.
By employing these well-studied Riemannian metrics, existing SPD matrix learning approaches typically ﬂatten SPD
manifolds via tangent space approximation (Tuzel, Porikli,
and Meer 2008; Tosato et al. 2010; Carreira et al. 2012;
Fathy, Alavi, and Chellappa 2016), or map them into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (Harandi et al. 2012; Wang
et al. 2012; Sanin et al. 2013; Quang, Biagio, and Murino
2014; Faraki, Harandi, and Porikli 2015; Zhang et al. 2015).
To more faithfully respect the original Riemannian geometry, recent methods (Harandi, Salzmann, and Hartley 2014;
Huang et al. 2015b) adopt a geometry-aware SPD matrix
learning scheme to pursue a mapping from the original SPD
manifold to another one with the same SPD structure. However, all the existing methods merely apply shallow learning, with which traditional methods are typically surpassed
by recent popular deep learning methods in many contexts
in artiﬁcial intelligence and visual recognition.
In the light of the successful paradigm of deep neural
networks (e.g., (LeCun et al. 1998; Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012)) to perform non-linear computations with
effective backpropagation training algorithms, we devise a
deep neural network architecture, that receives SPD matrices as inputs and preserves the SPD structure across layers,
for SPD matrix non-linear learning. In other words, we aim
to design a deep learning architecture to non-linearly learn
desirable SPD matrices on Riemannian manifolds. In summary, this paper mainly brings three innovations:

Abstract
Symmetric Positive Deﬁnite (SPD) matrix learning methods
have become popular in many image and video processing
tasks, thanks to their ability to learn appropriate statistical
representations while respecting Riemannian geometry of underlying SPD manifolds. In this paper we build a Riemannian
network architecture to open up a new direction of SPD matrix non-linear learning in a deep model. In particular, we devise bilinear mapping layers to transform input SPD matrices
to more desirable SPD matrices, exploit eigenvalue rectiﬁcation layers to apply a non-linear activation function to the
new SPD matrices, and design an eigenvalue logarithm layer
to perform Riemannian computing on the resulting SPD matrices for regular output layers. For training the proposed deep
network, we exploit a new backpropagation with a variant of
stochastic gradient descent on Stiefel manifolds to update the
structured connection weights and the involved SPD matrix
data. We show through experiments that the proposed SPD
matrix network can be simply trained and outperform existing SPD matrix learning and state-of-the-art methods in three
typical visual classiﬁcation tasks.

Introduction
Symmetric Positive Deﬁnite (SPD) matrices are often encountered and have made great success in a variety of areas.
In medical imaging, they are commonly used in diffusion
tensor magnetic resonance imaging (Pennec, Fillard, and
Ayache 2006; Arsigny et al. 2007; Jayasumana et al. 2013).
In visual recognition, SPD matrix data provide powerful statistical representations for images and videos. Examples include region covariance matrices for pedestrian detection
(Tuzel, Porikli, and Meer 2006; 2008; Tosato et al. 2010),
joint covariance descriptors for action recognition (Harandi,
Salzmann, and Hartley 2014), image set covariance matrices
for face recognition (Wang et al. 2012; Huang et al. 2014;
2015b) and second-order pooling for object classiﬁcation
(Ionescu, Vantzos, and Sminchisescu 2015).
As a consequence, there has been a growing need to carry
out effective computations to interpolate, restore, and classify SPD matrices. However, the computations on SPD matrices often accompany with the challenge of their nonEuclidean data structure that underlies a Riemannian manifold (Pennec, Fillard, and Ayache 2006; Arsigny et al. 2007).

• A novel Riemannian network architecture is introduced
to open a new direction of SPD matrix deep non-linear
learning on Riemannian manifolds.
• This work offers a paradigm of incorporating the Riemannian structures into deep network architectures for compressing both of the data space and the weight space.
• A new backpropagation is derived to train the proposed
network with exploiting a stochastic gradient descent optimization algorithm on Stiefel manifolds.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2036

