Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Soft Video Parsing by Label Distribution Learning
Xin Geng,∗ Miaogen Ling
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{xgeng,mgling}@seu.edu.cn

methods train a classiﬁcation model to seperate the action
and the background. For example, an SVM model (Oneata,
Verbeek, and Schmid 2014; Wang et al. 2015) is trained
to score all the video segments in the sliding widows of
multiple length in the test videos and Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) (Neubeck and Van Gool 2006; Hoai, Lan,
and De la Torre 2011) is adopted to obtain the optimum
global parsing of the videos. However, most methods of this
kind ignore the graduality of the actions and restrict the detected action length within only a few choices of the window
length. Moreover, the inference based methods often utilize
the inner structure of actions to construct the state transition model for video parsing. A semi-Markov model (SMM)
(Shi et al. 2011) is proposed to model the state transition between actions and the viterbi-like dynamic programming algorithm is adopted to solve the inference problem. But no
sub-actions are considered. An HMM method with latent
variables (Tang, Li, and Koller 2012) is proposed to construct a state transition model among the sub-actions and
the maximum posteriori inference is adopted to obtain the
best parsing of the test video. However, it is not clear how
to use it to detect multiple actions in one video. Segmental Regular Grammars (Pirsiavash and Ramanan 2014) proposes a tree structure with segmental regular grammars to
present a video. Each leaf in the tree represents a clip of
sub-action or background, but the procedure of ﬁnding the
worst-offending parsing in the training process of the structured SVM is quite time-consuming. Moreover, it ignores
the ambiguity among the semantic units and uses a single
label to describe a video segment.
It is worth noting that the semantic units are often ordered
and interlaced with each other in an action. For example,
Fig. 1 shows 10 key frames in a video about high jump.
There are generally two sub-actions in the high jump action, i.e., approaching and taking off. The graduality among
the three semantic units (background, approaching and taking off) often makes it hard to locate the exact boundaries
among them. See, for example in Fig. 1, the key frames (b)
and (c) between background and approaching, (e) and (f)
between approaching and taking off, or (h) and (i) between
taking off and background.
Different from previous work assuming hard boundaries
among the semantic units, this paper proposes a video parsing method which assumes ﬂexible soft boundaries among

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of segmenting out a
sequence of actions from videos. The videos contain background and actions which are usually composed of ordered
sub-actions. We refer the sub-actions and the background as
semantic units. Considering the possible overlap between two
adjacent semantic units, we utilize label distributions to annotate the various segments in the video. The label distribution
covers a certain number of semantic unit labels, representing
the degree to which each label describes the video segment.
The mapping from a video segment to its label distribution is
then learned by a Label Distribution Learning (LDL) algorithm. Based on the LDL model, a soft video parsing method
with segmental regular grammars is proposed to construct a
tree structure for the video. Each leaf of the tree stands for a
video clip of background or sub-action. The proposed method
shows promising results on the THUMOS’14 and MSR-II
datasets and its computational complexity is much less than
the state-of-the-art method.

Introduction
Action detection or localization of real-world videos has
been an active research topic due to its extensive application
in video surveillance, human computer interaction, video retrieval, etc. Even under the circumstance that the action category of a video is known, it is still rather difﬁcult to extract
the actions since they could differ greatly in position and duration. In real-world videos, the actions are often composed
of several continuous sub-actions (Pirsiavash and Ramanan
2014). Analogous to the grammar structure of a sentence,
the sub-action, action and background (non-action segment)
could all be regarded as grammar components of a video. In
such case, it is reasonable to facilitate the grammar structure of the action for better action localization. This process
is called video parsing (Pirsiavash and Ramanan 2014). For
convenience of presentation, both the background and the
sub-actions are uniformly called semantic units in the rest of
this paper.
The video parsing algorithms can be roughly grouped into
two families, i.e., the sliding window based method and the
inference based method. Most of the sliding window based
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1331

