Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Low-Rank Factorization of
Determinantal Point Processes
Mike Gartrell∗

Ulrich Paquet†

Noam Koenigstein

Microsoft
mike.gartrell@acm.org

Microsoft
ulripa@microsoft.com

Microsoft
noamko@microsoft.com

is the size of the item catalog. There has been some work focused on learning DPPs from observed data consisting of example subsets (Affandi et al. 2014; Gillenwater et al. 2014;
Kulesza and Taskar 2011b; Mariet and Sra 2015), which is
a challenging learning task that is conjectured to be NPhard (Kulesza and Taskar 2012). Some approaches have involved learning a nonparametric full-rank L matrix (Gillenwater et al. 2014; Mariet and Sra 2015) that does not constrain L to take a particular parametric form. Full-rank DPPs
scale poorly to large item catalogs, since operations such
as sampling, learning, and prediction in a full-rank DPP
costs approximately O(M 3 ). This issue may be resolved
for some operations (learning and/or sampling) by factorizing L as a Kronecker product of multiple smaller kernel matrices (Mariet and Sra 2016b), by approximate sampling techniques (Anari, Oveis Gharan, and Rezaei 2016;
Li, Jegelka, and Sra 2016a; 2016b), or by deﬁning an alternative probabilistic submodular model that scales to large
M , as recently proposed in (Tschiatschek, Djolonga, and
Krause 2016). In contrast, we present a method for learning a simple low-rank factorization of L, which scales much
better than full-rank DPP approaches and in some cases
provides better test log-likelihood. The scalability improvements allow us to train our model on larger datasets that are
infeasible with a full-rank DPP, while also opening the door
to computing online recommendations or predictions as required for many real-world applications. We also show that
a low-rank factorization of L allows us to use a straightforward learning algorithm, such as stochastic gradient ascent,
that is generally not viable for full-rank DPPs due to issues
associated with projected gradient ascent required for fullrank DPP learning (Gillenwater et al. 2014).

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) have garnered attention as an elegant probabilistic model of set diversity. They
are useful for a number of subset selection tasks, including
product recommendation. DPPs are parametrized by a positive semi-deﬁnite kernel matrix. In this work we present a
new method for learning the DPP kernel from observed data
using a low-rank factorization of this kernel. We show that
this low-rank factorization enables a learning algorithm that is
nearly an order of magnitude faster than previous approaches,
while also providing for a method for computing product recommendation predictions that is far faster (up to 20x faster
or more for large item catalogs) than previous techniques that
involve a full-rank DPP kernel. Furthermore, we show that
our method provides equivalent or sometimes better test loglikelihood than prior full-rank DPP approaches.

1

Introduction

Subset selection problems arise in a number of applications,
including recommendation (Gillenwater et al. 2014), document summarization (Kulesza and Taskar 2011b; Lin and
Bilmes 2012), and Web search (Kulesza and Taskar 2011a).
In these domains, we are concerned with selecting a good
subset of high-quality items that are distinct. For example, a
recommended subset of products presented to a user should
have high predicted ratings for that user while also being diverse, so that we increase the chance of capturing the user’s
interest with at least one of the recommended products.
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) offer an attractive
model for such tasks, since they jointly model set diversity
and item quality or popularity, while offering a compact parameterization and efﬁcient algorithms for performing inference. A distribution over sets that encourages diversity is of
particular interest when recommendations are complementary; for example, when a shopping basket contains a laptop
and a carrier bag, a complementary addition to the basket
would typically be a laptop cover, rather than another laptop.
DPPs are probabilistic submodular models can be parameterized by a M ×M positive semi-deﬁnite L matrix, where M

In addition to the applications mentioned above, DPPs
have been used for a variety of machine learning tasks (Affandi, Fox, and Taskar 2013; Affandi et al. 2013; Chao et al.
2015; Gillenwater, Kulesza, and Taskar 2012; Kulesza and
Taskar 2010; 2012; Kwok and Adams 2012; Mariet and Sra
2016a; Snoek, Zemel, and Adams 2013). We focus on the
recommendation task of “basket completion” in this work,
where we compute predictions for the next item that should
be added to a shopping basket, given a set of items already
present in the basket. In Section 2 we provide some background on DPPs, discuss how we implement learning and
regularization, and describe how we efﬁciently compute pre-

∗

Currently at Criteo.
Currently at DeepMind.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1912

