Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Learning of Evolving
Relationships Between Literary Characters
Snigdha Chaturvedi

Mohit Iyyer

Hal Daumé III

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign
snigdha@illinois.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park
miyyer@umiacs.umd.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park
hal@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Understanding inter-character relationships is fundamental
for understanding character intentions and goals in a narrative. This paper addresses unsupervised modeling of relationships between characters. We model relationships as dynamic
phenomenon, represented as evolving sequences of latent
states empirically learned from data. Unlike most previous
work our approach is completely unsupervised. This enables
data-driven inference of inter-character relationship types beyond simple sentiment polarities, by incorporating lexical and
semantic representations, and leveraging large quantities of
raw text. We present three models based on rich sets of linguistic features that capture various cues about relationships.
We compare these models with existing techniques and also
demonstrate that relationship categories learned by our model
are semantically coherent.

1

Figure 1: Left: Excerpts from summary of ‘The House of the
Spirits’. Right: Relationship sequence learned by our model
for Esteban and Ferula. Each colored block represents their
relationship for a short while, with its height proportional to
the duration for which they were in that relationship (relationship deﬁnitions in Table 1).

Shortcomings of such methods are apparent. Fig. 1 shows
excerpts from a novel-summary focusing on Esteban and
Ferula. Their relationship transitions from familial to that of
hostility because of Ferula’s developing intimacy with Esteban’s wife. Clearly, their relationship is complex and cannot
be expressed as simply friendly vs. adversarial. Real-world
relationships are nuanced with facets such as family, romance, formality/informality, etc. and an ideal model would
be able to express these. Also, describing their relationship
by a single category will not explain all of their actions. For
instance, if we assume that they are rivals then we cannot
explain why Ferula initially moves in with Esteban. Thus,
there is a need to model relationships as dynamic variables
that can express these real-world aspects of human relationships and evolve with the progress of the narrative.
In this paper we present a framework for unsupervised
modeling of inter-character relationships from unstructured text. The input to our models is a narrative summary
and a pair of characters appearing in the narrative. We model
relationships by examining the sequence of sentences that
mention both characters, arranged in order of their appearance in the narrative. Each sentence is represented by a
feature-vector, which captures cues about their relationship
in the sentence. Finally, each vector is associated with a
latent state, representing the relationship between the two
characters at that point in the narrative. The sequence of latent states hence represents their (dynamic) relationship over
the course of the narrative. Treating this as an unsupervised

Introduction

Understanding characters in a narrative is essential for Natural Language Understanding. To this end, the ﬁeld of computational narratives studies narratives or stories from the
perspective of characters mentioned in them (Elsner 2012).
Recent attempts at character-centric story understanding
model inter-character relationships (Krishnan and Eisenstein
2015; Chaturvedi 2016). Understanding relationships between characters assists in interpreting and justifying their
actions in a narrative. It is also a step towards human-like
natural language understanding by modeling capabilities of
‘ﬁlling-in-the-gaps’ about what is not explicitly stated in the
text, and building expectations of future events in a narrative. Modeling relationships in unstructured texts can also be
used to analyze large collections of texts in journalism, political science, digital humanities, etc. (Elson, Dames, and
McKeown 2010; Agarwal, Kotalwar, and Rambow 2013).
However, most existing methods for analyzing relationships
are inadequate in three ways: (i) They characterize relationships by coarse sentiment polarities, e.g., friendly vs. adversarial, which conﬂates distinct semantic categories; (ii) They
require expensive and resource-intensive manual annotation;
(iii) They assume a static relationship between characters
within a narrative, represented by a single variable.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3159

