Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Frame-Based Ontology Alignment
Luigi Asprino

Valentina Presutti

DISI, University of Bologna, Italy
luigi.asprino@unibo.it

ISTC-CNR,Italy
valentina.presutti@cnr.it

Aldo Gangemi

Paolo Ciancarini

ISTC-CNR, Italy
aldo.gangemi@cnr.it

DISI, University of Bologna, Italy
paolo.ciancarini@unibo.it
background knowledge (e.g., some examples in this direction are provided by (Giunchiglia, Shvaiko, and Yatskevich ;
Gracia and Asooja )); (ii) they are mostly unable to ﬁnd
correspondences between entities speciﬁed through different logical types (e.g. mapping properties to classes), hence,
they are unable of handling explication mismatches (to the
best of our knowledge (Ritze et al. ; Li et al. 2009) are the
only attempts trying to address this issue).
Frame Semantics can be used as cognitive model for representing the formal meaning of ontology entities thus overcoming the current limits of the current ontology matching
techniques. Frame Semantics (Fillmore 1982) is a formal
theory of meaning based on the idea that human can better understand the meaning of a single word by knowing the
relational knowledge associated to that word. For example,
the meaning of the verb buy can be clariﬁed by knowing
that it is used in a situation of a commercial transfer which
involves individuals playing speciﬁc roles, e.g. a buyer, a
seller, goods, money and so on. In other words, the verb buy
evokes a scene where there are some individuals are playing
speciﬁc roles. Our hypothesis is that the frames evoked by
words 1 associated with an ontological entity can be used to
derive the intended meaning of that entity thus facilitating
the ontology matching task.
In this paper we introduce a novel approach aimed at ﬁnding correspondences between ontology entities according to
the intensional meaning of their models, hence abstracting
from their logical types. We claim that the comparison between ontologies entities should be ﬁrstly made on the basis of natural language associated with them, and then, their
axiomatization can be used to check possible inconsistencies. This strategy allows us to match ontological entities
with respect to their intensional meaning (that we suppose
it is evoked by the natural language associated with them)
instead of their axiomatization, hence to abstract from their
ontological type. In fact, the axiomatization could have been
forced by the choice of certain language for specifying the
ontology, by the personal modeling style of the designer, or,
other requirements (e.g. the compatibility with an existing
ontology) unrelated to the modeled domain. We argue that
this approach may lead to a step ahead in the state of the art
of ontology matching, and positively affect related applica-

Abstract
The need of handling semantic heterogeneity of resources is a
key problem of the Semantic Web. State of the art techniques
for ontology matching are the key technology for addressing
this issue. However, they only partially exploit the natural language descriptions of ontology entities and they are mostly
unable to ﬁnd correspondences between entities having different logical types (e.g. mapping properties to classes). We
introduce a novel approach aimed at ﬁnding correspondences
between ontology entities according to the intensional meaning of their models, hence abstracting from their logical types.
Lexical linked open data and frame semantics play a crucial
role in this proposal. We argue that this approach may lead
to a step ahead in the state of the art of ontology matching,
and positively affect related applications such as question answering and knowledge reconciliation.

Introduction
Ontologies are artifacts enconding a description of a domain
of interest for some purpose. They provide a shared and
common understanding of a domain that can be communicated across people and applications, and support information exchange and discovery. Due to the Web’s open nature,
ontologies can be deﬁned by different people and can vary
in quality, expressiveness, richness, and coverage, hence increasing semantic heterogeneity of the resources made available through the Web of Data. Semantic heterogeneity leads
to the problems of redundancy and ambiguity. These problems hinder the semantic interoperability between information systems and represent an obstacle for the development
of intelligent agents able to exploit, as a source of knowledge, the semantic information available in multiple web
sources.
Among the various semantic technology proposed to handle heterogeneity Ontology Matching (Shvaiko and Euzenat 2013) has proved to be an effective solution to automate integration of distributed information sources. Ontology Matching (OM) ﬁnds correspondences between semantically related entities of ontologies. However, most of
the current ontology matching solutions present two main
limits: (i) they only partially exploit the natural language
descriptions of ontology entities and lexical resources as
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4905

For instance the words contained in labels and comments.

