Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

A Summer Research Experience in Robotics
Cindy M. Grimm, Alicia Lyman-Holt, William D. Smart
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
United States
Email: {cindy.grimm,alicia.lyman-holt,bill.smart}@oregonstate.edu

member of the robotics research community for the duration
of their summer experience.
In this paper, we describe the goals we have for the program and give a brief summary of how well we met them.
We then describe the culture of the robotics group at OSU,
the overall structure of the program, and how these explicitly
interact with each other. We then detail the programmatic
elements that we developed, both project-related and more
general educational elements. Finally, we share some of the
results from our formal evaluation of the program, and discuss some of the lessons we have learned from running the
program for three years.

Abstract
The Robotics Program at Oregon State University has been
running an NSF-funded summer Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site since 2014. Over twenty students
per year (on average) have participated in the site, spending
ten weeks embedded in the OSU Robotics Program. Our main
focus with this REU Site is to give the participants a complete research experience, from problem deﬁnition to the ﬁnal presentation of results, “in miniature”. Our secondary educational objectives are: 1) Teach basic non-technical skills
needed for graduate work, such as time management and literature review, 2) Provide details on how to apply to graduate school and for funding, 3) Clarify what we look for in a
graduate student, and 4) Detail what to expect from the graduate student experience. In this paper, we describe the overall structure of the participants’ summer experience, outline
some of the training materials that we use, describe the motivations for our approach, and discuss the lessons that we have
learned after running the program for a number of years.

Program Goals
Our REU program was designed with multiple goals in
mind. Perhaps the most important was to identify and recruit
high-quality graduate students to the OSU Robotics graduate
program. At the time we started the program in 2014, we had
submitted the paperwork for our M.S. and Ph.D. programs
in Robotics, and were trying to get the word out about our
nascent programs. OSU has not, historically, been associated
strongly with robotics, and we felt that a strong REU summer program was one way to change this. The REU program
gave us an excuse to contact our peers across the country,
asking them to tell their undergraduates about the summer
program, and also letting them know about our graduate degree programs. Also, having students who have participated
in the program return to their undergraduate institutions has
allowed us to spread the word about OSU at the grass-roots
level. To help with this, we have made sure that all of our
participants have concrete products from their work here that
they can show to their peers: posters, papers, videos, etc.
A secondary goal was to give our own graduate students
some experience mentoring undergraduates who are not already part of the group. Often, undergraduate students who
get involved in projects are already known quantities — they
have been volunteering in the group, or have been in our
classes. They already understand the culture of the group,
and are likely familiar with the work we’re doing. New students, from outside of OSU, are different, and require a different skill set to effectively mentor. By explicitly pairing up
our REU students with graduate student mentors, we give
the graduate students some experience of bringing someone
entirely new into a project, supporting them, and making

Introduction
We have been running an NSF-funded summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site, “Robots in the
Real World”1 in the Robotics Program at Oregon State University (OSU) since the summer of 2014. At the time of writing, after the third summer of the program, 65 students have
participated — 34 supported by the site award, and a further
31 supported from other sources.
The Robotics group at OSU comprises eleven faculty with
a variety of backgrounds from computer science to mechanical engineering to applied mathematics, and covers all aspects of robotics from mechanical design to human-robot interaction. The group occupies approximately 18,000 square
feet of space in Graf Hall on the main OSU campus, comprising faculty and graduate student ofﬁces, social areas, and
a large shared laboratory space (ﬁgure 1).
Undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral scholars,
and faculty work in the same spaces, and researchers with
backgrounds in mechanical engineering sit next to computer
scientists and applied mathematicians. Our REU students
are added into this mix, being treated just like any other
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://robotics.oregonstate.edu/reu

4775

