Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Robust Loss Functions under
Label Noise for Deep Neural Networks
Aritra Ghosh

Himanshu Kumar

P. S. Sastry

arghosh@microsoft.com
Microsoft, Bangalore

himanshukr@ee.iisc.ernet.in
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

sastry@ee.iisc.ernet.in
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

which is a popular method for classiﬁer learning. For example, Bayes classiﬁer minimizes risk under 0–1 loss function. The standard backpropagation-based learning of neural
networks is also risk minimization under different loss functions (such as squared error or cross entropy). The robustness of risk minimization depends on the loss function used.
We call a loss function noise-tolerant if minimizer of risk
(under that loss function) with noisy labels would be same
as that with noise-free labels.
In this paper we present some novel analytical results on
noise-tolerance of loss functions in a multiclass classiﬁcation scenario. We derive sufﬁcient conditions on a loss function so that it would be noise-tolerant for different types of
label noise. We then examine some of the popular loss functions used for learning neural networks and show that loss
function based on mean-absolute error (MAE) satisﬁes our
sufﬁcient conditions. Empirical investigations are presented
to compare robustness of learning neural networks under
label noise using different loss functions based on meanabsolute error, mean-square error and categorical cross entropy. The empirical results well demonstrate the utility of
the theoretical results presented here.

Abstract
In many applications of classiﬁer learning, training data suffers from label noise. Deep networks are learned using huge
training data where the problem of noisy labels is particularly
relevant. The current techniques proposed for learning deep
networks under label noise focus on modifying the network
architecture and on algorithms for estimating true labels from
noisy labels. An alternate approach would be to look for loss
functions that are inherently noise-tolerant. For binary classiﬁcation there exist theoretical results on loss functions that
are robust to label noise. In this paper, we provide some sufﬁcient conditions on a loss function so that risk minimization
under that loss function would be inherently tolerant to label noise for multiclass classiﬁcation problems. These results
generalize the existing results on noise-tolerant loss functions
for binary classiﬁcation. We study some of the widely used
loss functions in deep networks and show that the loss function based on mean absolute value of error is inherently robust
to label noise. Thus standard back propagation is enough to
learn the true classiﬁer even under label noise. Through experiments, we illustrate the robustness of risk minimization
with such loss functions for learning neural networks.

Introduction

Related Work
Learning in presence of label noise is a long standing problem in machine learning. A detailed survey is available in
(Frénay and Verleysen 2014).
There are many approaches to learning under label noise.
Data cleaning approaches rely on ﬁnding points which are
corrupted by label noise. Once these points are identiﬁed,
they can be either ﬁltered out or their labels suitably altered.
Several heuristics have been used to guess such noisy points
(Angelova, Abu-Mostafa, and Perona 2005; Brodley and
Friedl 1999; Zhu, Wu, and Chen 2003). There have also been
attempts at (heuristically) modifying existing learning algorithms to make them robust (Khardon and Wachman 2007;
Jin et al. 2003; Battista Biggio and Laskov 2011).
Another prominent approach is to treat the (unknown) true
labels as hidden variables and to estimate a generative or discriminative model. Lawrence and Schölkopf proposed such
a method, based on maximum-likelihood estimation of the
model using the EM algorithm, in the context of ﬁsher linear
discriminant classiﬁer. Similar methods have been proposed
to make logistic regression robust to label noise (Bootkra-

Recently, deep neural networks have exhibited very impressive performance in many classiﬁcation problems. However,
in all such cases one needs very large training data. Labelling the training data patterns and ensuring correctness
of the labels thus becomes a serious challenge in many applications of deep neural networks.
When the class labels in the training data are noisy (i.e.,
may be incorrect) then it is referred to as label noise. Human
labelling errors, measurement errors, subjective biases of labellers are among the reasons for label noise. In many large
scale classiﬁcation problems, labelled data is often obtained
through crowd sourcing or by automatically using information on the web. This is another main reason for unreliability
of labels in the training data.
Robust learning of classiﬁers in the presence of label
noise has been investigated from many viewpoints. In this
paper, we study it in the framework of risk minimization
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1919

