Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-Robot Allocation of Tasks
with Temporal and Ordering Constraints
Maria Gini
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota
200 Union St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455

dress here. We call this class of problems with temporal and
ordering constraints between tasks MRTA/TOC.

Abstract
Task allocation is ubiquitous in computer science and
robotics, yet some problems have received limited attention
in the computer science and AI community. Speciﬁcally, we
will focus on multi-robot task allocation problems when tasks
have time windows or ordering constraints. We will outline
the main lines of research and open problems.

MRTA/TOC: Multi-robot Task Allocation
with Temporal and Ordering Constraints
We assume there is a ﬁnite set of robots and a set of tasks.
A robot may have a location, speed, route, and/or schedule.
A task may have a location, earliest start, latest ﬁnish time,
expected duration, cost, demand, and reward.
Constraints on tasks can be in the form of time windows,
which specify the period of time when a task can be done.
Ordering constraints specify a dependency between pairs
of tasks. They are usually represented as directed acyclic
graphs, where each node in the graph represents a task, and
each edge indicates a precedence constraint. In addition to
precedence constraints, ordering constraints can be synchronization constraints, which specify, for instance, that two
tasks have to start at the same time or that a task has to start
a speciﬁc amount of time after another ﬁnishes.
We use the term synchronization constraints when there
is a speciﬁc time involved and precedence constraints when
there is only an ordering constraint. Those two types of constraints are indicated in the Operation Research literature as
General Precedence Relationship (GPR), i.e., task j has to
start within a given amount of time after the completion of
task i or task j can start any time after the end of task i
(Monma 1981). We prefer to use terms that make explicit
the difference between those two types of constraints. More
details in (Nunes et al. 2017).
The objective is to optimize some function of the cost (or
reward) for doing the tasks for all the robots. Cost can be a
temporal measure, such as the makespan – the time difference between the end of the last task and the start of the ﬁrst
task, a spatial measure, such as distance traveled, a combination of both, or some other measure.

Introduction
Many real-world problems have constraints on when, where,
and in what order tasks need to be executed by robots. However, in the computer science and AI community limited attention has been devoted to allocation of tasks that have to
be completed within a speciﬁed time window or have ordering or synchronization constraints. Other communities have
studied time-window versions of many problems, such as
Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) with Time Windows, and
Team Orienteering Problem (TOP) with Time Windows.
Time windows make task allocation difﬁcult because the
algorithms need to take into account both the spatial and the
temporal relationships among the tasks (Kumar, Cirillo, and
Koenig 2013). Dealing with general time windows in task
allocation remains an open problem (Koenig, Keskinocak,
and Tovey 2010).
The widely accepted taxonomy for multi-robot task allocation (MRTA) problems (Gerkey and Matarić 2004) classiﬁes robots, tasks, and time as follows:
• Single-task robots (ST) vs. multi-task robots (MT): ST
robots can do at most one task at a time, MT robots can
work on multiple tasks simultaneously.
• Single-robot tasks (SR) vs. multi-robot tasks (MR): SR
tasks require exactly one robot to be executed, while multiple robots are needed for MR tasks.
• Instantaneous (IA) vs. time-extended (TA) assignments:
Tasks are allocated as they arrive in IA, and scheduled
over a planning horizon in TA.

Connections with Other Problems

The taxonomy in (Korsah, Stentz, and Dias 2013) focuses
on schedule dependencies in individual robot schedules and
across robot schedules, but does not address different aspects of time-extended assignments, which is what we ad-

Multi-robot task allocation is similar to the vehicle routing
problem (VRP) (Dantzig and Ramser 1959) the team orienteering problem (TOP) (Chao, Golden, and Wasil 1996).
Variants of those problems include time windows, e.g., the
vehicle routing problem with time windows (Kolen, Kan,
and Trienekens 1987; Desrochers et al. 1988; Solomon and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4863

