Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Psychological Forest: Predicting Human Behavior
Ori Plonsky,1 Ido Erev,2 Tamir Hazan,3 Moshe Tennenholtz4
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 3200003, Israel
plonsky@campus.technion.ac.il 2 erev@tx.technion.ac.il 3 tamir.hazan@technion.ac.il 4 moshet@ie.technion.ac.il

relevant features. Then, we allow the computational tools
to decide on the best manner by which these features are
to be integrated to a uniﬁed model (see a similar idea developed independently by Noti et al., 2016). Note this approach differs from work that integrates data science and
psychological theories by assuming or using existing psychological models and then designing computational agents
that respond to these models (Azaria et al. 2012a; 2012b;
De Melo, Gratch, and Carnevale 2014; Prada and Paiva 2009).
We compare the predictive accuracy of our approach with
current practice and show it outperforms the state-of-the-art
for our data.
Additionally, this integrative approach provides beneﬁts
for both social scientists and data scientists. Data scientists
working along a wide array of domains related to choice
behavior may often seek to harness psychological insights
to improve the performance of their predictive tools. Yet,
they face two main challenges. First, psychological theories
abound and it is unclear which one is most suitable for a
speciﬁc task. We take up on this challenge by studying a
domain that is often considered to encapsulate the most basic
tenets of human choice behavior. Therefore, many insights
the study of this domain provides should generalize to other
domains as well. A second challenge is that translation of the
theory to speciﬁc meaningful elements that can be useful for
the development of predictive tools is rarely straightforward.
Here, we engineer clear features that can be seamlessly used
across domains. Importantly, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy
of these features by showing that their use in data science
algorithms signiﬁcantly improves upon best performance
achieved by learning algorithms trained without them.
Social scientists can also be informed from our integrative
approach. Models social scientists develop require making
auxiliary assumptions regarding the exact implementation of
the interactions between the various underlying theoretical
elements. A test of these models is then simultaneously a test
of both the theory and the auxiliary assumptions made. In
contrast, derivation of clear features from the theory allows a
construction of multiple learners based on the theory using
existing data science tools. These, in turn, can be easily tested
and thus an examination of the theoretical building blocks
can be disentangled from that of the auxiliary assumptions
the modeler makes. Moreover, many algorithms also provide
the beneﬁts of discovering which of the underlying features

Abstract
We introduce a synergetic approach incorporating psychological theories and data science in service of predicting human behavior. Our method harnesses psychological theories
to extract rigorous features to a data science algorithm. We
demonstrate that this approach can be extremely powerful in
a fundamental human choice setting. In particular, a random
forest algorithm that makes use of psychological features that
we derive, dubbed psychological forest, leads to prediction
that signiﬁcantly outperforms best practices in a choice prediction competition. Our results also suggest that this integrative
approach is vital for data science tools to perform reasonably
well on the data. Finally, we discuss how social scientists can
learn from using this approach and conclude that integrating
social and data science practices is a highly fruitful path for
future research of human behavior.

1

Introduction

Prominent speech recognition researcher Fred Jelinek is often quoted for saying ”Every time I ﬁre a linguist, the performance of our speech recognition system goes up”. This
saying highlights a common wisdom in data science according to which social scientists - and their theories - are of little
help when it comes to the development of useful data analytic
tools. In sharp contrast with this wisdom, choice prediction
competitions (tournaments aimed for prediction of human
behavior) organized by social scientists (Erev et al. 2010),
show a large advantage of models that build on social science
theories over data-based computational tools.
We believe this apparent inconsistency is a result of improper or insufﬁcient integration between the disciplines. The
main goal of the current paper is to demonstrate the merits
of integrating data science and social science, in the context
of predicting human choice behavior. In this domain, common practices - and the current state-of-the-art - either (a)
focus purely on the data scientiﬁc tools, mostly neglecting
insights from the choice psychology literature; or (b) focus
on the psychological drivers of choice, amalgamating them
only heuristically, rather than rigorously. Our study aims
to bridge this gap by developing computational tools fed
with features derived from psychological theories. That is,
ﬁrst, we use psychological theories to identify potentially
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

656

