Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bounding the Probability of Resource
Constraint Violations in Multi-Agent MDPs
Frits de Nijs, Erwin Walraven, Mathijs M. de Weerdt, Matthijs T. J. Spaan
Delft University of Technology
Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD
Delft, The Netherlands

an uncertain environment, such an allocation may leave a
signiﬁcant portion of the available resources unused.
When policies of agents are allowed to satisfy resource
constraints in expectation (such as with accidental overruns
of budget, or infrastructural constraints), this weakness of
deterministic resource allocations can be overcome, resulting in signiﬁcantly higher expected value. Column Generation for linear programs (LPs) and Constrained Markov
Decision Processes (CMDPs) can be used to compute such
conditional resource allocations by demanding that the total
expected resource consumption of the agents is not more
than the resource availability (Yost and Washburn 2000;
Altman 1999). However, the resulting policies satisfy the
constraints only in expectation, and constraint violations may
occur at execution time. There is no guarantee on the probability of violations occurring, which makes it unattractive
when only a limited amount of violations can be tolerated.
In this paper we demonstrate that the probability of constraint violation can be bounded by using Hoeffding’s inequality (1963) to derive a reduced constraint. By planning
using this reduced constraint, we obtain safe conditional policies for the real constraint. Because this bound turns out to
be quite conservative, we also propose to iteratively relax
it, resulting in conditional resource allocations with higher
expected value that still respect the constraint violation tolerance. We show that Column Generation for LPs has several
attractive properties compared to CMDPs when using the
constraint relaxation. We further improve the scalability of
this method by introducing a column pruning technique that
signiﬁcantly reduces the number of columns considered per
iteration, while preserving convergence characteristics.
When communication between agents is available, resource conﬂicts can be arbitrated at policy execution time
(Meuleau et al. 1998; De Nijs, Spaan, and De Weerdt
2015). Existing deterministic preallocation methods that
work when communication is not available only support binary resource consumption functions (Wu and Durfee 2010;
Agrawal, Varakantham, and Yeoh 2016). Our method naturally supports multi-unit resource consumption, and requires
no communication between agents during execution. It can
be seen as an anytime algorithm for computing policies satisfying a given violation tolerance.
We evaluate our algorithm against two state-of-the-art
deterministic resource allocation methods (Wu and Durfee

Abstract
Multi-agent planning problems with constraints on global
resource consumption occur in several domains. Existing algorithms for solving Multi-agent Markov Decision Processes can
compute policies that meet a resource constraint in expectation,
but these policies provide no guarantees on the probability that
a resource constraint violation will occur. We derive a method
to bound constraint violation probabilities using Hoeffding’s
inequality. This method is applied to two existing approaches
for computing policies satisfying constraints: the Constrained
MDP framework and a Column Generation approach. We also
introduce an algorithm to adaptively relax the bound up to a
given maximum violation tolerance. Experiments on a hard
toy problem show that the resulting policies outperform static
optimal resource allocations to an arbitrary level. By testing
the algorithms on more realistic planning domains from the
literature, we demonstrate that the adaptive bound is able to
efﬁciently trade off violation probability with expected value,
outperforming state-of-the-art planners.

Introduction
When decision-making agents share collectively owned resources, their actions need to be coordinated subject to the
availability of these resources. In many problem domains it is
impractical, inefﬁcient or costly to coordinate resource consumption during execution. For example, load balancing of
energy consumption in smart energy grids has instantaneous
effects on the stability of the grid, which requires real-time
decisions. Other examples are rescue operations or military
campaigns, during which communication options may be
limited by the hostile environment.
Before execution, it is possible to merge the decisionmaking problems of individual agents into a joint resourceconstrained optimization problem. However, solving this
problem quickly becomes intractable because the size of the
joint problem grows exponentially in the number of agents.
Wu and Durfee (2010) show that it is more efﬁcient to optimize an off-line deterministic allocation of resources to
agents. A scalable Lagrangian relaxation of this optimization problem is presented by Agrawal, Varakantham, and
Yeoh (2016). Unfortunately, when agents are operating in
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3562

