Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Riemannian Submanifold Tracking
on Low-Rank Algebraic Variety
Qian Li

Zhichao Wang∗

Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
qianli.charlene@gmail.com

Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
wzchary@gmail.com

by the cost of iterative calling of singular value decomposition (SVD) or truncated SVD (Bouwmans and Zahzah 2014). To reduce this cost, many algorithms transform the problem into a convex programming on the positive semi-deﬁnite matrices and use the approximate SDP
solver (Hazan 2008; Jaggi, Sulovsk, and others 2010). However, these algorithms either converge slowly (Wang et al.
2014; Jaggi 2013) or are memory inefﬁcient on large-scale
problems (Laue 2012; Tan et al. 2014). More signiﬁcantly,
these algorithms resolve the convex-relaxed problem of lowrank matrix recovery instead of the original non-convex
one, which may produce the solutions that seriously deviate
from the true ones (Papamakarios, Panagakis, and Zafeiriou
2011).
An alternative heuristic resorts to Riemannian optimization by exploiting the smooth geometry for optimum searching, which has shown superior scalability than the convex relaxation methods (Vandereycken 2013; Candès et al.
2011). Most existing Riemannian optimization based algorithms differ in their speciﬁc choice of Riemannian manifold. For instance, RTRMC (Boumal and Absil 2011) and
Lingo (Li et al. 2015) constrain the searching space over
Grassmannian manifolds after adopting matrix factorization.
RP (Tan et al. 2014), LRGeomCG (Vandereycken 2013) and
ScGrassMC (Candès et al. 2011)) exploit the rank constraint
as the ﬁxed-rank matrix manifold and directly optimize the
matrix recovery problem via Riemannian theory. Though
most Riemannian optimization based algorithms show superior performance than classical heuristics on numerical
experiments, two main limitations still exist. First, the rank
of the matrix to be recovered determines the geometry of
Riemannian manifold, which is usually unknown and nontrivial to specify. Moreover, most Riemannian optimization
approaches establish the linear convergence rate at best. In
addition, as Riemannian manifold is open without boundary when the rank is ﬁxed, this convergence analysis may be
limited due to the neglect of manifold boundary (Schneider
and Uschmajew 2015; Agarwal, Negahban, and Wainwright
2010; Yan et al. 2015).
To address above issues, this paper proposes an effective matrix recovery solver named Riemannian Submanifold
Tracking (RIST), which optimizes on the closure of ﬁxedrank matrix manifolds and searches for the optimal solution
with the second-order information of Riemannian geometry.

Abstract
Matrix recovery aims to learn a low-rank structure from high
dimensional data, which arises in numerous learning applications. As a popular heuristic to matrix recovery, convex relaxation involves iterative calling of singular value decomposition (SVD). Riemannian optimization based method can
alleviate such expensive cost in SVD for improved scalability, which however is usually degraded by the unknown rank.
This paper proposes a novel algorithm RIST that exploits the
algebraic variety of low-rank manifold for matrix recovery.
Particularly, RIST utilizes an efﬁcient scheme that automatically estimate the potential rank on the real algebraic variety and tracks the favorable Riemannian submanifold. Moreover, RIST utilizes the second-order geometric characterization and achieves provable superlinear convergence, which is
superior to the linear convergence of most existing methods.
Extensive comparison experiments demonstrate the accuracy
and efﬁciency of RIST algorithm.

Introduction
Matrix recovery is becoming a fundamental problem arising
in many applications ranging from machine learning, data
mining to computer vision (Vandereycken 2013; Liu et al.
2011; Candès et al. 2011). In particularly, low-rank matrix
recovery decomposes a possibly noisy data Z into a lowrank component X and a sparse component E, and this can
be formalized as an optimization problem:
min : rank(X) + λΥ(E)

X, E

s.t. Z = A(X) + B(E)

(1)

where rank(·) encourages variable X to be low-rank, Υ(·)
refers to a non-smooth regularizer and λ is the regularization parameter. Both A(·) and B(·) are linear operators determined by applications (Candès et al. 2011; Candès and
Recht 2009; Recht 2011).
Early attempts adopt the convex relaxation to make the
non-convex low-rank matrix recovery tractable (e.g., the
trace norm as the convex surrogates for the rank function),
such as EALM (Lin, Chen, and Ma 2010), IALM (Lin,
Chen, and Ma 2010) and LSADM (Goldfarb, Ma, and
Scheinberg 2013). Above algorithms are greatly inﬂuenced
∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2196

