Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Study of Compact Reserve Pricing Languages
MohammadHossein Bateni,† Hossein Esfandiari,‡ Vahab Mirrokni,† Saeed Seddighin‡ ∗
†Google, ‡University of Maryland
{bateni,mirrokni}@google.com, {esfandiari, seddighin}@cs.umd.edu

1

Abstract

Introduction

As a main advantage over traditional advertising, online
advertising allows advertisers to target speciﬁc subsets of
users via a very ﬁne-tuned and descriptive targeting criteria. In these settings, both publishers and advertisers face
challenging pricing and bid optimization problems in multidimensional settings. As a result, the space of possibilities for setting the price or declaring the bids are exponential, even when restricted to the few most important features.
This leads to interesting problems of designing efﬁcient and
compact multidimensional bidding and pricing systems and
algorithms, which are practically important for online advertisement. While compact bidding languages have already
been studied, our goal in this work is to study the compact
pricing problem.
More speciﬁcally, in the context of online advertising for
sponsored search or display ads, the space of impression
types of interest to the advertiser is usually very big, specially because it is the Cartesian product of several features (such as geographic location, time of day/week), domains of which have sizes typically ranging from thousands
to millions. These features have a big impact on the quality and desirability of the impression, hence their importance in determining the bid. Compact bidding languages
(and, in particular, multiplicative bidding) were proposed
and are now widely used as a solution to the challenge of
maneuvering in this large exponential space. Not only do
these make campaign management easier and more focused,
but they also mitigate the issue of over-reliance on sparse
data. Such bidding languages provide a middle ground between a uniform bidding strategy ((Feldman et al. 2007b;
Muthukrishnan, Pál, and Svitkina 2007a)) over all interesting impressions and the unmanageable strategy of setting up
a customized campaign for each type of impression. More
speciﬁcally, the advertiser speciﬁes, in addition to targeting
criteria for interesting impressions and a base bid, certain
multiplicative adjustments for each feature associated with
the impression. In the wake of adoption of multiplicative
bidding languages by several major search engine-based advertising platforms ((Bing Ads 2014; Google Support 2014;
HubSpot 2013)), (Bateni et al. 2014) studied the impact of
employing such a bidding language on advertisers’ welfare.
They focus on two questions: (1) how expressive is this language? (2) how difﬁcult is it to optimize over?

Online advertising allows advertisers to implement ﬁne-tuned
targeting of users. While such precise targeting leads to more
effective advertising, it introduces challenging multidimensional pricing and bidding problems for publishers and advertisers. In this context, advertisers and publishers need to deal
with an exponential number of possibilities. As a result, designing efﬁcient and compact multidimensional bidding and
pricing systems and algorithms are practically important for
online advertisement. Compact bidding languages have already been studied in the context of multiplicative bidding.
In this paper, we study the compact pricing problem.
More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst deﬁne the multiplicative reserve
price optimization problem (MRPOP) and show that unlike
the unrestricted reserve price system, it is NP-hard to ﬁnd the
best reserve price solution in this setting. Next, we present
an efﬁcient algorithm to compute a solution for MRPOP that
achieves a logarithmic approximation of the optimum solution of the unrestricted setting, where we can set a reserve
price for each individual impression type (i.e., one element
in the Cartesian product of all features). We do so by characterizing the properties of an optimum solution. Furthermore,
our empirical study conﬁrms the effectiveness of multiplicative pricing in practice. In fact, the simulations show that our
algorithm obtains 90–98% of the value of the best solution
that sets the reserve prices for each auction individually (i.e.,
the optimum set of reserve prices).
Finally, in order to establish the tightness of our results in the
adversarial setting, we demonstrate that there is no compact
pricing system (i.e., a pricing system using O(n1− ) bits to
set n reserve prices) that loses, in the worst case, less than
a logarithmic factor compared to the optimum set of reserve
prices. Notice that this hardness result is not restricted to the
multiplicative setting and holds for any compact pricing system. In summary, not only does the multiplicative reserve
price system show great promise in our empirical study, but
it is also theoretically optimal up to a constant factor in the
adversarial setting.

∗
Supported in part by NSF CAREER award CCF-1053605,
NSF BIGDATA grant IIS-1546108, NSF AF:Medium grant CCF1161365, DARPA GRAPHS/AFOSR grant FA9550-12-1-0423,
and another DARPA SIMPLEX grant.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

363

