Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Social Choice Under Metric Preferences: Scoring Rules and STV
Piotr Skowron

Edith Elkind

University of Oxford
United Kingdom
p.k.skowron@gmail.com

University of Oxford
United Kingdom
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

considerable amount of attention in the social choice literature due to its intuitive appeal (Davis and Hinich 1966;
Plott 1967; Enelow and Hinich 1984; 1990; McKelvey,
Ordeshook, and others 1990; Merrill and Grofman 1999;
Schoﬁeld 2007). Recently Elkind et al. (2017) used the spacial model to illustrate principles governing different multiwinner election rules.
Now, when preferences are driven by distances, it is natural to measure the quality of a candidate c by computing
the sum of distances or the maximum distance from c to
the voters; these two approaches correspond to, respectively,
the utilitarian and the egalitarian social welfare associated
with c. We may then want to select a candidate that optimizes the relevant notion of welfare. Of course, this task is
not difﬁcult if we are given access to voters’ and candidates’
locations. However, typically voters are unable to precisely
pinpoint their position with respect to each issue, and even
the issue space itself may not be known to the designer of the
aggregation function. Thus, it is more realistic to expect the
voters to simply provide their rankings of candidates, which
are determined by the underlying metric space: each voter
ranks the candidates by the distance from her. We can then
apply one of the many commonly used voting rules (Zwicker
2015) to select an election winner.
Of course, we cannot expect a voting rule that operates
on ranked ballots to always identify an alternative that maximizes the social welfare. Consider for instance, the following example, which can be found in the work of Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl (2015): voters and candidates are
positioned on the real line, with candidate a at −1, candidate
b at 1, n+1 voters at −.0001, and n voters at 1. Then the utilitarian social cost associated with a and b is approximately
3n and n, respectively. However, any rule that operates on
ranked ballots would see that the majority of voters prefer a
to b, so any sensible deterministic rule should favor a. Thus,
some amount of distortion is unavoidable. Nevertheless, we
may want to identify a voting rule with the best possible distortion, measured as the ratio of the social cost provided by
the optimal candidate and the social cost provided by a candidate selected by the rule, or to bound the distortion of a
given voting rule.
Anshelevich, Bhardwaj, and Postl (2015) investigate the
latter question for a number of well-known voting rules.
Their ﬁrst result is disappointing: Plurality and the Borda

Abstract
We consider voting under metric preferences: both voters and
candidates are associated with points in a metric space, and
each voter prefers candidates that are closer to her to ones that
are further away. In this setting, it is often desirable to select
a candidate that minimizes the sum of distances to the voters.
However, common voting rules operate on voters’ preference
rankings and therefore may be unable to identify the best candidate. A relevant measure of the quality of a voting rule is
then its distortion, deﬁned as the worst-case ratio between the
performance of a candidate selected by the rule and that of an
optimal candidate. Anshelevich, Bhardwaj and Postl (2015)
show that some popular rules such as Borda and Plurality do
badly in this regard: their distortion scales linearly with the
number of candidates. On the positive side, Anshelevich et
al. identify a few voting rules whose distortion is bounded
by a constant; however, these rules are rarely used in practice. In this paper, we analyze the distortion of two widely
used (classes of) voting rules, namely, scoring rules and Single Transferable Vote (STV). We show that all scoring rules
have super-constant distortion, answering a question that was
left open by Anshelevich et al.; however, we identify a scoring rule whose distortion is asymptotically better than that
of Plurality and Borda. For STV, we obtain an upper bound
of O(ln m), where m is the number of candidates, as well
as a super-constant lower bound; thus, STV is a reasonable,
though not a perfect rule from this perspective.

1

Introduction

Voting rules aggregate preferences of multiple agents over
a set of available candidates, enabling the agents to choose
an option that reﬂects their collective opinion. Often, voters’ preferences are determined by the candidate’s positions
on several issues, such as the levels of taxation or military
spending. In this case, each voter and each candidate can
be identiﬁed with a point in the issue space, and voters tend
to prefer candidates who are close to them to the ones that
are further away. This setting can be formally modeled by
embedding the input election into a metric space, i.e., a
set of points S endowed with a distance measure d: voters’ preferences are consistent with this embedding if voter
v prefers candidate a to candidate b whenever d(v, a) <
d(v, b). The spatial model of preferences has received a
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

706

