Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

General Bounds on Satisﬁability Thresholds
for Random CSPs via Fourier Analysis
Colin Wei and Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
{colinwei,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

For m/n larger than a threshold, the probability of satisﬁability is close to 0. The statistical physics, computer science,
and mathematics communities have focused much attention
on identifying these threshold locations (Achlioptas, Naor,
and Peres 2005; Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2009).
Phase transitions for common classes of CSPs such as kSAT and k-XORSAT are very well-studied. For k-SAT, researchers struggled to ﬁnd tight lower bounds on the satisﬁability threshold until the breakthrough work of Achlioptas
and Moore, which provided lower bounds a constant factor
away from the upper bounds. Later works closed this gap
for k-SAT (Coja-Oghlan and Panagiotou 2013; 2016). More
recently, Dudek, Meel, and Vardi (2016) also studied the satisﬁability threshold for a more general CSP class, namely kCNF-XOR, where both k-SAT and k-XORSAT constraints
can be used. The results and analyses from these works,
however, are all speciﬁc to the constraint classes studied.
In this paper, we provide new lower bounds on the location of the satisﬁability threshold that hold for general
boolean CSP classes. We focus on the setting where CSPs
are generated by a single constraint type, though our analysis
can extend to the setting with uniform mixtures of different
constraint functions. We extend techniques from (Achlioptas
and Peres 2004) and build on (Creignou and Daudé 2003),
which proposes a distributional model for generating CSPs
and provides lower bounds on the satisﬁability threshold
for these models. The signiﬁcance of our work is that our
bounds hold for all functions that could be used to generate
random CSP instances. The lower bounds from (Creignou
and Daudé 2003) are also broadly applicable, but they are
looser than ours because they do not depend on constraintspeciﬁc properties. Our lower bounds are often tight (within
a constant factor of upper bounds for many CSP classes)
because they depend on speciﬁc properties of the Fourier
spectrum of the function used to generate the random CSPs.
Since these properties are simple to compute for any constraint function, our lower bounds are broadly applicable
too.
The Fourier analysis of boolean functions (O’Donnell
2014) will be vital for obtaining our main results. Expressing functions in the Fourier basis allows for clean analyses of random constraints (Friedgut and Bourgain 1999;
Barak et al. 2015; Achim, Sabharwal, and Ermon 2016). Our
use of Fourier analysis is inspired by the work of Achim,

Abstract
Random constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) have been
widely studied both in AI and complexity theory. Empirically
and theoretically, many random CSPs have been shown to exhibit a phase transition. As the ratio of constraints to variables
passes certain thresholds, they transition from being almost
certainly satisﬁable to unsatisﬁable. The exact location of this
threshold has been thoroughly investigated, but only for certain common classes of constraints.
In this paper, we present new bounds for the location of these
thresholds in boolean CSPs. Our main contribution is that our
bounds are fully general, and apply to any ﬁxed constraint
function that could be used to generate an ensemble of random CSPs. These bounds rely on a novel Fourier analysis and
can be easily computed from the Fourier spectrum of a constraint function. Our bounds are within a constant factor of the
exact threshold location for many well-studied random CSPs.
We demonstrate that our bounds can be easily instantiated to
obtain thresholds for many constraint functions that had not
been previously studied, and evaluate them experimentally.

1

Introduction

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) are widely used in
AI, with applications in optimization, control, and planning
(Russell et al. 2003). While many classes of CSPs are intractable in the worst case (Cook 1971), many real-world
CSP instances are easy to solve in practice (Vardi 2014). As
a result, there has been signiﬁcant interest in understanding
the average-case complexity of CSPs from multiple communities, such as AI, theoretical computer science, physics, and
combinatorics (Biere, Heule, and van Maaren 2009).
Random CSPs are an important model for studying the
average-case complexity of CSPs. Past works have proposed several distributional models for random CSPs (Molloy 2003; Creignou and Daudé 2003). An interesting feature
arising from many models is a phase transition phenomenon
that occurs as one changes the ratio of number of constraints,
m, to the number of variables, n. Empirical results (Mitchell,
Selman, and Levesque 1992) show that for many classes
of CSPs, randomly generated instances are satisﬁable with
probability near 1 when m/n is below a certain threshold.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3958

