Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Community Preserving Network Embedding
Xiao Wang,1 Peng Cui,1 Jing Wang,2 Jian Pei,3 Wenwu Zhu,1 Shiqiang Yang1
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
2
Faculty of Science and Technology, Bournemouth University, UK
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
wangxiao007@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, jwang@bournemouth.ac.uk,
jpei@cs.sfu.ca, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn, yangshq@tsinghua.edu.cn

One basic requirement of network embedding is that the
learned representations of nodes should preserve the network structure and its inherent properties (Ou et al. 2016).
Along with this direction, some network embedding methods, e.g., IsoMap (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford
2000), are proposed to preserve the ﬁrst-order proximity between nodes; the second-order proximity between nodes are
then considered in (Tang et al. 2015; Wang, Cui, and Zhu
2016), and (Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015) further extends to capture higher-order proximity.
Essentially, these methods mainly focus on the microscopic structure of network, i.e., the pairwise relationship
or similarity between nodes. Nevertheless, the community
structure, one important mesoscopic description of network
structure, is largely ignored. Many networks consists of different communities with dense connections within communities but sparser connections between them (Girvan and
Newman 2002). It is well recognized that community structure is one of the most prominent features of networks,
which reveals the organizational structures and functional
components of networks (Wang et al. 2016). Therefore,
whether the learned embedding space can well reﬂect the
community structures in the original network is a critical requirement for network embedding methods.
Moreover, different from the microscopic structure, the
mesoscopic community structure imposes constraints in a
higher structural level on the node representations. The representations of nodes within a community should be more
similar than those belonging to different communities. Also,
for two nodes within a community, even if they only have
weak relationship in microscopic structure due to the data
sparsity issue, their similarities will also be strengthened by
the community structure constraint. Thus, the incorporation
of community structure in network embedding can provide
effective and rich information to solve data sparsity issues
in microscopic structures and also make the learned node
representations more discriminative.
In this paper, we propose a novel Modularized Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (M-NMF) model which preserves
both the microscopic structure (pairwise node similarity)
and mesoscopic structure (community) for network embedding. In particular, for microscopic structure, we incorporate ﬁrst- and second-order proximities of nodes to learn the
representations using matrix factorization; for mesoscopic

Abstract
Network embedding, aiming to learn the low-dimensional
representations of nodes in networks, is of paramount importance in many real applications. One basic requirement of
network embedding is to preserve the structure and inherent
properties of the networks. While previous network embedding methods primarily preserve the microscopic structure,
such as the ﬁrst- and second-order proximities of nodes, the
mesoscopic community structure, which is one of the most
prominent feature of networks, is largely ignored. In this paper, we propose a novel Modularized Nonnegative Matrix
Factorization (M-NMF) model to incorporate the community structure into network embedding. We exploit the consensus relationship between the representations of nodes and
community structure, and then jointly optimize NMF based
representation learning model and modularity based community detection model in a uniﬁed framework, which enables
the learned representations of nodes to preserve both of the
microscopic and community structures. We also provide efﬁcient updating rules to infer the parameters of our model, together with the correctness and convergence guarantees. Extensive experimental results on a variety of real-world networks show the superior performance of the proposed method
over the state-of-the-arts.

Introduction
Network analysis has attracted considerable attention as networks exist in various complex systems, such as biological
and social systems. Network analysis heavily relies on the
network representation, which is traditionally represented
as discrete adjacency matrix. However, this straightforward
representation usually cannot well reﬂect the underlying distinct structural characteristics of networks and suffers from
the data sparsity issue (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014).
In recent years, network embedding, i.e., learning an effective low-dimensional vector representations of nodes while
preserving the network structure, has aroused considerable
research interest in network analysis (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and
Skiena 2014). Beneﬁted from this, a variety of applications on networks, such as node classiﬁcation (Bhagat, Cormode, and Muthukrishnan 2011), can be directly conducted
by the off-the-shelf machine learning methods in the lowdimensional vector space.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

203

