Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Contextual RNN-GANs for
Abstract Reasoning Diagram Generation
Viveka Kulharia,∗1 Arnab Ghosh,∗1 Amitabha Mukerjee,1
Vinay Namboodiri,1 Mohit Bansal2
1

IIT Kanpur 2 UNC Chapel Hill
{vivekakulharia,arnabghosh93}@gmail.com,{amit,vinaypn}@iitk.ac.in,
mbansal@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Understanding, predicting, and generating object motions
and transformations is a core problem in artiﬁcial intelligence. Modeling sequences of evolving images may provide better representations and models of motion and may
ultimately be used for forecasting, simulation, or video generation. Diagrammatic Abstract Reasoning is an avenue in
which diagrams evolve in complex patterns and one needs to
infer the underlying pattern sequence and generate the next
image in the sequence. For this, we develop a novel Contextual Generative Adversarial Network based on Recurrent
Neural Networks (Context-RNN-GANs), where both the generator and the discriminator modules are based on contextual history (modeled as RNNs) and the adversarial discriminator guides the generator to produce realistic images for
the particular time step in the image sequence. We evaluate
the Context-RNN-GAN model (and its variants) on a novel
dataset of Diagrammatic Abstract Reasoning, where it performs competitively with 10th-grade human performance but
there is still scope for interesting improvements as compared
to college-grade human performance. We also evaluate our
model on a standard video next-frame prediction task, achieving improved performance over comparable state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: Example abstract reasoning problem, where our
model was able to generate an image very close to the correct answer.
tion of a future diagram based on the sequential evolution of
component patterns in the given problem sequence.
Fig. 1 shows an example problem from our DAT-DAR
dataset and highlights the intricacies of the reasoning involved in inferring the correct answer (i.e., the next image
in the sequence). Different pattern components on both the
sides and both the corners are changing in different and multiple ways, making it an interesting challenge to correctly
generate the next image in the sequence.1 Accurate generation models developed for such a reasoning task can be used
for general AI applications such as forecasting and simulation generation. These models will also be useful for generation of real-world images and videos, a recent research
direction in computer vision and deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al., 2015; Denton et al., 2015;
Im et al., 2016; Mathieu et al., 2015). In this direction, we
present an application of our best models to the task of next
frame generation in Moving MNIST videos.
Our sequential generation model is a temporally recurrent
version of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), which we name Context-RNN-GANs2 ,
where context refers to the sequential history (modeled as
RNNs). This is especially well-suited to our sequential
image-based reasoning tasks. In this model, the generator

Introduction
The recent success of machine learning and neural networks
in Atari and Go (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016) has
sparked a renewed interest in artiﬁcial intelligence models
that can perform well at tasks which even humans ﬁnd challenging. An important task in this category is abstract reasoning, which measures one’s lateral thinking skills or ﬂuid
intelligence, i.e., the ability to quickly identify patterns, logical rules and trends in data, integrate this information, and
apply it to solve new problems. Speciﬁcally, we address
the problem of diagrammatic abstract reasoning (DAR), a
subset of Differential Aptitude Tests (DATs), which were
introduced by (Bennett et al., 1947) to judge psychometric
proﬁciency. It has featured in Intelligence Assessment Systems since 1950s and has been validated by (Berdie, 1951),
who showed that proﬁciency in DAT-DARs were predictors
in engineering training. A DAR task involves the genera-

1
An explanation of the ground truth is that the dashed line ﬁrst
goes to the left, then to the right, and then on both sides, and also
changes from single to double, hence the ground truth should have
double dashed lines on both the sides. On the corners, the number
of slanted lines increase by one after every two images, hence the
ground truth should have four slant lines on both the corners.
2
In Context-RNN-GAN, ‘context’ refers to the adversary receiving previous images (modeled as an RNN) and the generator
is also an RNN. The name distinguishes it from our simpler RNNGAN model where the adversary is not contextual (as it only uses
a single image) and only the generator is an RNN.

∗

Equal Contribution
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1382

