Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Predicting Mortality of Intensive Care Patients via Learning about Hazard
Dae Hyun Lee1 and Eric Horvitz2
Biomedical and Health Informatics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA1; Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA USA2
dhlee4@uw.edu1; horvitz@microsoft.com2

4,000 patients, including clinical measurements, demographic information, and outcome-related information (i.e.,
in-hospital death, SAPS, length of stay). 13.85% of the
patients died in hospital. For the study, we merged the noninvasive and invasive measurements for each blood pressure measurement (mean arterial pressure, systolic arterial
blood pressure, diastolic arterial blood pressure) into single
features. Fraction of inspired oxygen, FiO2, and partial
pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, PaO2, were merged to
constitute the PaO2/FiO2 ratio (PFR), a widely used clinical variable to estimate pulmonary function. Since a clear
indication of when patients are weaned from a ventilator
machine could not be obtained from the data, mechanical
ventilation, MechVent, was used as a demographic feature
to present whether or not the patient had been mechanically ventilated within the first 48 hours following admission.

Introduction
We explore the promise of employing machine learning
and inference to assist with the care of patients in intensive
care units (ICU). Such patients are acutely ill and have the
highest mortality rates of hospitalized patients. Predictive
models and planning systems could forecast and guide
interventions to prevent the hazardous deterioration of patients’ physiologies. Such analyses are supported by the
relatively large amounts of data available about ICU patients, stemming from the use of specialized monitoring
equipment and the intensive clinical workflow.
Identifying patients who are at high risk of death may be
useful for guiding focus of attention on patients, including
proactive monitoring and interventions. As the cost per day
is typically higher in the ICU than for the general wards
(Barrett et al. 2014), caregivers seek to move patients out
of the ICU as soon as they believe that they are stable.
Inferences about risk of death can guide decisions about
retaining patients in the ICU or moving patients from general wards to the ICU.
Prior work on data-centric approaches has demonstrated
boosts in performance for predicting the risk of death for
ICU patients (Johnson et al. 2012) over the use of more
widely used heuristic scores (Zimmerman et al. 2006). We
report on the construction of a prediction pipeline that estimates the probability of death by inferring rates of hazard
over time, based on patients’ physiological measurements.
The inferred models can provide insights to physicians
about the contribution of each variable and information
about the influence of sets of observations on the overall
risks and expected trajectories of patients.

Method
With an eye to parsimony and associated interpretability of
the model, we explore the power of employing a cumulative hazard function with a single governing parameter. We
learn the parameter from data and then perform inference
with the parametric function. A higher lambda drives the
function to reach a higher probability of death earlier, so a
learned lambda can be regarded as a quantitative summary
of a patient’s physiological stability.
We determine the probability of a patient death 48 hours
after admission to the ICU. For each patient, time series
data for each 48-hour period were divided into multiple
, and
time intervals
was predicted using the
the lambda for each interval
trained model. Thereafter, the probability of death for each
was calculated using the cumulative hazard function of
. The probability of death at the 48th hour of ICU admission was then
calculated with an absorbing Markov chain (Figure 1).

Data Description
We base our predictions on the PhysioNet ICU challenge
dataset (Silva et al. 2012). This data was collected during
the first 48 hours of observation after ICU admission for
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1. Absorbing Markov chain

4953

