Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bilingual Lexicon Induction from Non-Parallel Data with Minimal Supervision
Meng Zhang,1,2 Haoruo Peng,3 Yang Liu,1,2∗ Huanbo Luan,1 Maosong Sun1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Competence, Jiangsu, China
3
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
zmlarry@foxmail.com, hpeng7@illinois.edu, liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn
luanhuanbo@gmail.com, sms@tsinghua.edu.cn

model (Rapp 1999; Gaussier et al. 2004; Vulić, Smet, and
Moens 2011; Vulić and Moens 2013a).
Recently, with the surge of continuous vector representation of words, commonly known as word embeddings, an
interesting approach to bilingual lexicon induction is to replace the conventional statistics-based monolingual vector
space with the new neural-network-inspired vector representation of words, which is supposed to carry semantic clues.
This uncovers interesting ﬁndings. For example, an accurate
linear transformation can be established between two monolingual embedding spaces by using a seed lexicon (Mikolov,
Le, and Sutskever 2013).
However, this approach is limited by the number of seeds.
As it relies on seed word pairs to provide supervision, large
areas of the vector space may receive little guidance from
seeds, especially when the seed lexicon is small in realistic
settings. Attempts to translate words whose vectors reside
in those areas are bound to fail miserably. Therefore, previous efforts typically require a rather large seed lexicon,
with e.g. 5,000 entries (Mikolov, Le, and Sutskever 2013).
Recent results indicate that at least a few hundred seeds are
needed to achieve noticeable generalization (Vulić and Korhonen 2016).
Fortunately, as connection through seeds can reveal a few
new translation pairs, we attempt to utilize them to provide
further information about how the two monolingual vector
spaces should be aligned, which should in turn expose more
translation pairs. We can incrementally reﬁne the quality of
our bilingual word embeddings through this process, as it
infuses information about proper alignment into extended
areas of the vector space.
We encode our intuition into a novel matching term in
the learning objective of bilingual word embeddings. Our
matching term introduces latent variables that represent appropriate matching between words across languages. As every word in the vocabulary is considered for matching, the
seed lexicon reaches its full potential because any newly
discovered translation gets involved in reﬁning the bilingual vector space. During training, our approach alternates
between matching reliable translation pairs and adjusting
the word vectors accordingly, which naturally reﬂects the
intuition. In our experiments, we show that the matching
mechanism substantially improves our system, compared to
systems that only exploit seeds in superﬁcial ways. This

Abstract
Building bilingual lexica from non-parallel data is a longstanding natural language processing research problem that
could beneﬁt thousands of resource-scarce languages which
lack parallel data. Recent advances of continuous word representations have opened up new possibilities for this task, e.g.
by establishing cross-lingual mapping between word embeddings via a seed lexicon. The method is however unreliable
when there are only a limited number of seeds, which is a reasonable setting for resource-scarce languages. We tackle the
limitation by introducing a novel matching mechanism into
bilingual word representation learning. It captures extra translation pairs exposed by the seeds to incrementally improve
the bilingual word embeddings. In our experiments, we ﬁnd
the matching mechanism to substantially improve the quality of the bilingual vector space, which in turn allows us to
induce better bilingual lexica with seeds as few as 10.

Introduction
Bilingual lexica provide valuable information for semantic
equivalence of words across languages, and prove to be helpful for various cross-lingual tasks, including cross-lingual
information retrieval (Levow, Oard, and Resnik 2005), statistical machine translation (Och and Ney 2003), and annotation projection for a variety of natural language processing
tasks (Täckström et al. 2013, inter alia). Naturally, the size
and quality of the bilingual lexica have a pivotal impact on
these tasks (Levow, Oard, and Resnik 2005).
Although word alignment has proven effective for building bilingual lexica (Och and Ney 2003), it crucially relies
on parallel data, and thus only applies to a limited number
of domains between resource-rich languages. Therefore, researchers have focused their efforts on ﬁnding word translation pairs from non-parallel data, which is both more signiﬁcant and more challenging (Koehn and Knight 2002;
Fung and Cheung 2004; Haghighi et al. 2008). Most traditional approaches hinge on cross-lingual signals to link independent monolingual spaces: each word is associated with
a vector that comprises monolingual statistics like PMI, and
then the monolingual vector spaces are connected through
bilingual signals, such as a seed lexicon or a bilingual topic
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3379

