Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Uniﬁed Algorithm for One-Cass Structured
Matrix Factorization with Side Information
Hsiang-Fu Yu

Hsin-Yuan Huang

Inderjit S. Dihillon

Chih-Jen Lin

University of Texas at Austin
rofuyu@cs.utexas.edu

National Taiwan University
momohuang@gmail.com

University of Texas at Austin
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

National Taiwan University
cjlin@csie.ntu.edu.tw

that instance i is associated with label j. In practice, only
part of instance i’s labels have been observed.
PU learning is essentially a matrix completion problem.
Given Yij = 1, ∀(i, j) ∈ Ω+ , we would like to predict
if other entries are zero or one. One common approach for
matrix completion is through matrix factorization (MF) by
ﬁnding two low-rank latent matrices

Abstract
In many applications such as recommender systems and
multi-label learning the task is to complete a partially observed binary matrix. Such PU learning (positive-unlabeled)
problems can be solved by one-class matrix factorization
(MF). In practice side information such as user or item features in recommender systems are often available besides the
observed positive user-item connections. In this work we consider a generalization of one-class MF so that two types of
side information are incorporated and a general convex loss
function can be used. The resulting optimization problem
is very challenging, but we derive an efﬁcient and effective
alternating minimization procedure. Experiments on largescale multi-label learning and one-class recommender systems demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1

W = [. . . , wi , . . .] ∈ Rm×k and H = [. . . , hj , . . .] ∈ Rn×k
such that Yij = 1 ≈ wi hj , ∀(i, j) ∈ Ω+ . Note that k is a
pre-speciﬁed number satisfying k  m and k  n. Unlike
traditional matrix completion problems where Yij , ∀(i, j) ∈
Ω+ have different values, here approximating all the observed positive entries will result in the all-one prediction
for all (i, j) ∈
/ Ω+ . For such a one-class scenario, in the
approximation process one must treat some (i, j) ∈
/ Ω+ as

negative entries so that Yij = 0 ≈ wi hj . Therefore, existing one-class MF works solve the following optimization
problem.

Introduction

Many practical applications can be modeled in a positive
and unlabeled data learning (PU learning) framework. Between two types of objects, some connections between object i of the ﬁrst type and j of the second type are observed, but for most remaining situations, either i and j are
not connected or the connection is not observed. A typical
example is the collaborative ﬁltering with one-class information (Pan et al. 2008; Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008;
Pan and Scholz 2009; Li et al. 2010; Paquet and Koenigstein 2013). Given m users and n items, we observe part of
a 0/1 matrix Y ∈ Rm×n with Yij = 1, where (i, j) ∈ Ω+ .
An observed entry indicates that user i likes item j. The goal
is to know for any unobserved pair (i, j) ∈
/ Ω+ , whether i
likes j or not. Thus, only part of positive-labeled entries are
observed, while there are many unknown negative entries.
This setting is very different from traditional collaborative
ﬁltering, where a real-valued rating (observed or not) is associated with any Yij . Note that this may be a more common
scenario; for example, most people watch the video that interest them, without leaving any rating information.
Another important application that falls into the PU leaning framework is multi-label classiﬁcation (Kong et al. 2014;
Hsieh, Natarajan, and Dhillon 2015). The two types of objects are instances and labels. An entry Yij = 1 indicates

min

W,H



i,j∈Ω

Cij (Yij − wiT hj )2 +


i

λi wi 2 +



λ̄j hj 2 , (1)

j

where Cij is a cost associated with the loss, and λi , λ̄j are
regularization parameters. The set Ω = Ω+ ∪ Ω− includes
both observed positive and selected negative entries. The
rationale of selecting some (i, j) ∈
/ Ω+ and treating their
Yij = 0 is because in general each user likes only a small
set of items (or each instance is associated with a small set
of labels).
The selection of negative entries in Ω− is an important
issue. Roughly there are two approaches:
• Subsampled: we subsample some unobserved entries to
have Ω− with |Ω− | = O(|Ω+ |).
• Full: Ω− = [m]×[n]\Ω+ . That is, every unobserved entry
is considered as negative. Unfortunately, the huge size of
Ω− makes this approach computationally expensive.
Recently, Yu, Bilenko, and Lin (2016) successfully developed efﬁcient optimization methods to solve (1) for the
Full approach. They show that the Full approach gives signiﬁcantly better results than the Subsampled approach.
A shortcoming is that their methods work only with the
squared loss (Yij − wi hj )2 , which is a real-value regression loss. However Y is a 0/1 matrix in the one-class setting, so a 0/1 classiﬁcation loss might be more suitable. Yet,

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2845

