Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Visual Sentiment Analysis by Attending on Local Image Regions
Quanzeng You

Hailin Jin

Jiebo Luo

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
qyou@cs.rochester.edu

Adobe Research
345 Park Avenue
San Jose, CA 95110
hljin@adobe.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
jluo@cs.rochester.edu

trying to reveal the high-level sentiment from the global
perspective of the whole images. Little attention has been
paid to research from which local regions have we obtain
the sentimental response and how is the local regions towards the task of visual sentiment analysis. In this work, we
are trying to solve these two challenging problems. We employ the recent proposed attention model (Mnih et al. 2014;
Xu et al. 2015) to learn the correspondence between local
image regions and the sentimental visual attributes. In such
a way, we are able to identify the local image regions, which
is relevant to sentiment analysis. Subsequently, a sentiment
classiﬁer is built on top of the visual features extracted from
these local regions.
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to automatically discover the relevant local images and build a sentiment classiﬁer on top of the features from these local image regions. Indeed, Chen et al. (Chen et al. 2014) has been
trying to identify the local regions corresponding sentiment
related adjective noun pairs. However, their approach is limited to hand-tuned small number of adjectives and nouns.
The work in (Campos, Jou, and Giro-i Nieto 2016) tries to
visualize the sentiment distribution over a given image using
a ﬁne-tuned fully convolutional neural network on the given
images. Their results are obtained by using the global images and the localization is only used for visualization purpose.
We evaluate the proposed model on the publicly available
Visual Sentiment Ontology dataset1 , which is the largest
available dataset for visual sentiment analysis. We will learn
both the attention model and the sentiment classiﬁer simultaneously. The performance on sentiment analysis using local visual features will be reported. Meanwhile, we will also
quantitatively validate the attention model on discovering
sentiment relevant local image regions.

Abstract
Visual sentiment analysis, which studies the emotional response of humans on visual stimuli such as images and
videos, has been an interesting and challenging problem. It
tries to understand the high-level content of visual data. The
success of current models can be attributed to the development of robust algorithms from computer vision. Most of the
existing models try to solve the problem by proposing either robust features or more complex models. In particular,
visual features from the whole image or video are the main
proposed inputs. Little attention has been paid to local areas,
which we believe is pretty relevant to human’s emotional response to the whole image. In this work, we study the impact
of local image regions on visual sentiment analysis. Our proposed model utilizes the recent studied attention mechanism
to jointly discover the relevant local regions and build a sentiment classiﬁer on top of these local regions. The experimental
results suggest that 1) our model is capable of automatically
discovering sentimental local regions of given images and 2)
it outperforms existing state-of-the-art algorithms to visual
sentiment analysis.

Introduction
Visual sentiment analysis studies the emotional response
of humans on visual stimuli such as images and videos.
It is different from textual sentiment analysis (Pang and
Lee 2008), which focus on human’s emotional response
on textual semantics. Recently, visual sentiment analysis
has achieved comparable performance with textual sentiment analysis (Borth et al. 2013; Jou et al. ; You et al.
2015). This can be attributed to the success of deep learning
on vision tasks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
which makes the understanding of high-level visual semantics, such as image aesthetic analysis (Lu et al. 2014), and
visual sentiment analysis (Borth et al. 2013), tractable.
The studies on visual sentiment analysis have been focused on designing visual features, from pixel-level (Siersdorfer et al. 2010a), to middle attribute level (Borth et al.
2013) and to recent deep visual features (You et al. 2015;
Campos, Jou, and Giro-i Nieto 2016). Thus, the performance of visual sentiment analysis systems has been gradually improved due to more and more robust visual features. However, almost all of these approaches have been

Related work
Computer vision and natural language processing are important application domains of machine learning. Recently,
deep learning has made signiﬁcant advances in tasks related to both vision and language (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012). Consequently, the task of higher-level

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
http://www.ee.columbia.edu/ln/dvmm/vso/download/
sentibank.html

231

