Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Visual Memory QA: Your Personal Photo and Video Search Agent
Lu Jiang,1 LiangLiang Cao,2 Yannis Kalantidis,2 Sachin Farfade,2 Alexander G. Hauptmann,1
1

Carnegie Mellon University, United States
2
Yahoo Research, United States
{lujiang, alex}@cs.cmu.edu, liangliang.cao@gmail.com,
ykalant@image.ntua.gr, fsachin@yahoo-inc.com

Abstract
The boom of mobile devices and cloud services has led
to an explosion of personal photo and video data. However, due to the missing user-generated metadata such
as titles or descriptions, it usually takes a user a lot of
swipes to ﬁnd some video on the cell phone. To solve
the problem, we present an innovative idea called Visual Memory QA which allow a user not only to search
but also to ask questions about her daily life captured in
the personal videos. The proposed system automatically
analyzes the content of personal videos without usergenerated metadata, and offers a conversational interface to accept and answer questions. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the ﬁrst to answer personal questions
discovered in personal photos or videos. The example
questions are “what was the lat time we went hiking in
the forest near San Francisco?”; “did we have pizza last
week?”; “with whom did I have dinner in AAAI 2015?”.

Figure 1: Comparison of Visual QA & Visual Memory QA.
a question in VQA. However, it is considerably more difﬁcult for the same adult to answer questions in VMQA. This
is particularly difﬁcult to answer questions over a collection
videos. Second, the question space in VMQA is a subset of
that in VQA, which only includes the questions a user might
ask later to recall his or her memories. Because of the two
differences, Visual Memory QA is expected to be more useful in practice.
To address this novel problem, this paper introduces a prototype system that can automatically analyzes the content
of personal videos/photos without user-generated metadata,
and offers a conversational interface to answer questions discovered from the user’s personal videos/photos. Technically,
it can be regarded as an end-to-end neural network, consisting of three major components: a recurrent neural network to
understand the user question, a content-based video engine
to analyze and ﬁnd relevant videos, and a multi-channel attention neural network to extract the answer. To the best of
our knowledge, the proposed system is the ﬁrst to answer
personal questions discovered in personal photos or videos.

Introduction
The prevailing of mobile devices and cloud services has led
to an unprecedented growth of personal photo and video
data. A recent study shows that the queries over personal
photos or videos are usually task- or question-driven (Jiang
et al. 2017). For question-driven queries, users seem to be
using photos or videos as a mean to recover pieces from
their own memories, i.e. looking for a speciﬁc name, place
or date. For example, a user might ask “what was the last
time we went hiking?”; “did we have pizza last week?” or
“with whom did I have dinner in AAAI 2015?”.
We deﬁne the problem of seeking answers about the user’s
daily life discovered in his or her personal photo and video
collection as VMQA (Visual Memory Question Answering).
As about 80% of personal photos and videos do not have
metadata such as tags or titles (Jiang et al. 2017), this functionality can be very useful in helping users ﬁnd information
in their personal photos and videos. Visual Memory QA is a
novel problem and has two key differences from VQA (Visual QA) (Antol et al. 2015): ﬁrst the user is able to ask questions over a collection of photos or videos in Visual Memory QA as opposed to a single image in VQA. As shown
in Fig. 1, given an image it is trivial for an adult to answer

Visual Memory Question Answering
As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed model is inspired by the
classical text QA model (Ferrucci et al. 2010), consisting of
three major components: a recurrent neural network to understand the user question, a content-based video engine to
ﬁnd the relevant videos, and a multi-channel attention feedforward neural network to extract the answer. Each component is pre-trained on its own task, and then the ﬁrst and

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5093

