Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Informative Subspace Learning
for Counterfactual Inference
Yale Chang, Jennifer G. Dy
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Northeastern University, Boston, MA

treatment effect is evaluated by comparing the outcomes of
treatment samples and control samples. However, RCTs are
in many situations expensive or unethical. Therefore, we often need to discover causal relations from observational data.
The major challenge in causal inference from observational data is how to adjust for confounding factors. For
example, if the ages of treatment samples are much higher
than those of control samples, then the difference between
outcomes of treatment and control group cannot be solely
explained by the treatment. In this case, age is a potential
confounding factor. The potential outcome framework, also
called Rubin-Neyman causal model (Rubin 1974), addresses
this challenge by estimating the counterfactual outcome of
each sample. For a sample in the treatment (control) group,
the counterfactual outcome is deﬁned as the outcome when
the sample is assigned to the control (treatment) group. The
treatment effect can be computed given the factual outcome
and estimated counterfactual outcome for each sample.
The fundamental problem in the potential outcome framework is that only the factual outcome is observed for each
sample. Nearest neighbor matching (NNM) sets the counterfactual outcome of treatment (control) samples to be equal to
its nearest neighbor’s factual outcome in the control (treatment) group. Matching has the advantage of being simple,
ﬂexible and interpretable. However, matching heavily depends on the metric used to measure the distance between
samples. Commonly used distance measures include Mahalanobis distance (Rosenbaum 2002), and propensity score
(Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983; Austin 2011). It has been
proved that the bias of NNM estimator increases as the dimensionality of data grows, which explains the poor performance of those matching approaches in high-dimensional
data (Abadie and Imbens 2006). Li et al. proposed to reduce
the bias of matching for high-dimensional data using random linear projection. However, all the existing matching
approaches do not take the outcome variable into consideration, therefore could be easily misled by variables that do
not affect the outcome.
To tackle the above drawback of existing NNM approaches, we propose to ﬁrst learn informative subspaces
that are predictive of the outcome and then apply matching
in the learned subspaces. In particular, to estimate the counterfactual outcomes of treatment samples, we ﬁrst learn a
projection matrix by maximizing the nonlinear dependence

Abstract
Inferring causal relations from observational data is widely
used for knowledge discovery in healthcare and economics.
To investigate whether a treatment can affect an outcome of
interest, we focus on answering counterfactual questions of
this type: what would a patient’s blood pressure be had he/she
recieved a different treatment? Nearest neighbor matching
(NNM) sets the counterfactual outcome of any treatment
(control) sample to be equal to the factual outcome of its nearest neighbor in the control (treatment) group. Although being simple, ﬂexible and interpretable, most NNM approaches
could be easily misled by variables that do not affect the
outcome. In this paper, we address this challenge by learning subspaces that are predictive of the outcome variable for
both the treatment group and control group. Applying NNM
in the learned subspaces leads to more accurate estimation
of the counterfactual outcomes and therefore treatment effects. We introduce an informative subspace learning algorithm by maximizing the nonlinear dependence between the
candidate subspace and the outcome variable measured by the
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC). We propose
a scalable estimator of HSIC, called HSIC-RFF that reduces
the quadratic computational and storage complexities (with
respect to the sample size) of the naive HSIC implementation to linear through constructing random Fourier features.
We also prove an upper bound on the approximation error
of the HSIC-RFF estimator. Experimental results on simulated datasets and real-world datasets demonstrate our proposed approach outperforms existing NNM approaches and
other commonly used regression-based methods for counterfactual inference.

Introduction
Many challenging problems arising from healthcare, economics, and public policy depend on the discovery of reliable causal relations. For example, clinical studies aim to
determine whether a new medical treatment is effective in
changing clinical outcome related to a disease. Traditionally,
the gold standard is to conduct randomized controlled trials
(RCT) (Fisher 1960), where a set of samples are randomly
assigned to the treatment group and control group. We deﬁne treatment samples as the set of samples in the treatment
group and control samples as those in the control group. The
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1770

