Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Schematic Invariants by
Reduction to Ground Invariants
Jussi Rintanen∗
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland

In this work we devise algorithms that share the beneﬁts of both approaches: the algorithms are simple and efﬁcient to implement (similar to invariant algorithms based on
grounding), and scale well even when the number of ground
instances is high (similarly to schematic algorithms.) Careful implementation can ensure that runtimes are never (substantially) higher than corresponding ground algorithms.
Our novel idea is to devise hybrid algorithms, which perform the basic invariance tests with a ground method, but
ground the actions and formulas only with respect to a small
number of objects, roughly matching what takes place in
schematic algorithms which partially instantiate schematic
actions and formulas through uniﬁcation and substitution
operations. The challenge here is to keep the number of
objects as small as possible – to guarantee efﬁciency and
scalability – but not too small, to guarantee correctness and
to identify as many and as strong invariants as possible.
This idea is, in effect, exploiting the structural symmetry
of the state space generated by schematic actions. The set
of schematic candidate invariants obtained from the initial
state (as opposed to the (ground) facts holding in the initial
state), is symmetric, and the schematic formulas (approximately) representing the sets of states reachable by a given
number of steps are similarly symmetric in the sense that
if φ is a ground instance of a schematic formula, then any
permutation of its objects that respects typing also is.
The main outcome from the work is a substantial improvement in the scalability of the invariant algorithm for
temporal planning by Rintanen (2014). That algorithm ﬁnds
broad classes of invariants and can be easily adapted to a
wide range of temporal modeling languages, but its scalability needs to be improved because of the time complexity of
its satisﬁability tests. In earlier work, Smith & Weld (1999)
extended Blum & Furst’s (1997) planning graph method to
temporal planning, but – similarly to Rintanen (2014) – the
method works with ground actions and has reduced scalability, and additionally, it is deﬁned for a limited temporal language only. Bernardini & Smith (2011) proposed a
schematic algorithm with a very good scalability, but, it ﬁnds
at-most-one invariants only, and is deﬁned for a syntactically
limited modeling language with no easy avenues to generalization. At-most-one invariants have limited utility with expressive modeling languages that support multi-valued (not
only Boolean) discrete state variables.

Abstract
Computation of invariants, which are approximate reachability information for state-space search problems such as AI
planning, has been considered to be more scalable when using a schematic representation of actions/events rather than
an instantiated/ground representation. A disadvantage of
schematic algorithms, however, is their complexity, which
also leads to high runtimes when the number of schematic
events/actions is high. We propose algorithms that reduce the
problem of ﬁnding schematic invariants to solving a smaller
ground problem.

Introduction
Invariants are a form of approximate reachability information for state-space search problems (Blum and Furst 1997;
Gerevini and Schubert 1998), which can be used as a
pruning method for search algorithms for planning (Rintanen 2012), and also have a close connection to admissible heuristics used with informed search (Rintanen 2006;
2008). Many of the early algorithms used a ground representation of actions (Blum and Furst 1997; Rintanen 1998).
The number of ground instances of schematic actions can
be impractically high. Also, invariants for action sets induced by a small set of schematic actions can often be compactly represented as a small number of schematic invariants. This motivates the introduction of invariant algorithms
that directly work with the schematic action/event representation and produce invariants in a schematic form (Gerevini
and Schubert 1998; Rintanen 2000). In their most general
forms, however, such algorithms are quite complex to implement and to prove correct, and there is also a signiﬁcant
performance penalty for handling a schematic representation. This performance penalty makes schematic algorithms
uncompetitive when the number of schematic actions is high
but the number of ground instances is low. In such cases algorithms working with the grounded representation can dramatically outperform schematic algorithms.
∗

Also afﬁliated with Grifﬁth University, Brisbane, Australia,
and the Helsinki Institute for Information Technology, Finland.
This work was funded by the Academy of Finland (Finnish Centre of Excellence in Computational Inference Research COIN,
251170).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3644

