Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Spatio-Temporal Residual Networks
for Citywide Crowd Flows Prediction∗
Junbo Zhang,1 Yu Zheng,1,2,3,4† Dekang Qi2,1

2

1
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
School of Information Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, China
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{junbo.zhang, yuzheng}@microsoft.com, dekangqi@outlook.com

other places during a given time interval. Outﬂow denotes
the total trafﬁc of crowds leaving a region for other places
during a given time interval. Both ﬂows track the transition
of crowds between regions. Knowing them is very beneﬁcial
for risk assessment and trafﬁc management. Inﬂow/outﬂow
can be measured by the number of pedestrians, the number
of cars driven nearby roads, the number of people traveling
on public transportation systems (e.g., metro, bus), or all of
them together if data is available. Figure 1(b) presents an
example. We can use mobile phone signals to measure the
number of pedestrians, showing that the inﬂow and outﬂow
of r2 are (3, 1) respectively. Similarly, using the GPS trajectories of vehicles, two types of ﬂows are (0, 3) respectively.

Abstract
Forecasting the ﬂow of crowds is of great importance to trafﬁc
management and public safety, and very challenging as it is
affected by many complex factors, such as inter-region trafﬁc, events, and weather. We propose a deep-learning-based
approach, called ST-ResNet, to collectively forecast the inﬂow and outﬂow of crowds in each and every region of a
city. We design an end-to-end structure of ST-ResNet based
on unique properties of spatio-temporal data. More speciﬁcally, we employ the residual neural network framework to
model the temporal closeness, period, and trend properties
of crowd trafﬁc. For each property, we design a branch of
residual convolutional units, each of which models the spatial properties of crowd trafﬁc. ST-ResNet learns to dynamically aggregate the output of the three residual neural networks based on data, assigning different weights to different
branches and regions. The aggregation is further combined
with external factors, such as weather and day of the week,
to predict the ﬁnal trafﬁc of crowds in each and every region.
Experiments on two types of crowd ﬂows in Beijing and New
York City (NYC) demonstrate that the proposed ST-ResNet
outperforms six well-known methods.

(a) Inﬂow and outﬂow

(b) Measurement of ﬂows

Introduction

Figure 1: Crowd ﬂows in a region

Predicting crowd ﬂows in a city is of great importance to
trafﬁc management and public safety (Zheng et al. 2014).
For instance, massive crowds of people streamed into a strip
region at the 2015 New Year’s Eve celebrations in Shanghai,
resulting in a catastrophic stampede that killed 36 people. In
mid-July of 2016, hundreds of “Pokemon Go” players ran
through New York City’s Central Park in hopes of catching
a particularly rare digital monster, leading to a dangerous
stampede there. If one can predict the crowd ﬂow in a region, such tragedies can be mitigated or prevented by utilizing emergency mechanisms, such as conducting trafﬁc control, sending out warnings, or evacuating people, in advance.
In this paper, we predict two types of crowd ﬂows (Zhang
et al. 2016): inﬂow and outﬂow, as shown in Figure 1(a).
Inﬂow is the total trafﬁc of crowds entering a region from

Simultaneously forecasting the inﬂow and outﬂow of
crowds in each region of a city, however, is very challenging,
affected by the following three complex factors:
1. Spatial dependencies. The inﬂow of Region r2 (shown in
Figure 1(a)) is affected by outﬂows of nearby regions (like
r1 ) as well as distant regions. Likewise, the outﬂow of r2
would affect inﬂows of other regions (e.g., r3 ). The inﬂow
of region r2 would affect its own outﬂow as well.
2. Temporal dependencies. The ﬂow of crowds in a region
is affected by recent time intervals, both near and far. For
instance, a trafﬁc congestion occurring at 8am will affect
that of 9am. In addition, trafﬁc conditions during morning
rush hours may be similar on consecutive workdays, repeating every 24 hours. Furthermore, morning rush hours
may gradually happen later as winter comes. When the
temperature gradually drops and the sun rises later in the
day, people get up later and later.
3. External inﬂuence. Some external factors, such as weather
conditions and events may change the ﬂow of crowds
tremendously in different regions of a city.

∗
This research was supported by NSFC (Nos. 61672399,
U1401258), and the 973 Program (No. 2015CB352400).
†
Correspondence author. This work was done when the third
author was an intern at Microsoft Research.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1655

