Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Parsing with Neural Hybrid Trees
Raymond Hendy Susanto, Wei Lu
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372
{raymond susanto, luwei}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract

Q UERY : answer(S TATE)

We propose a neural graphical model for parsing natural language sentences into their logical representations. The graphical model is based on hybrid tree structures that jointly represent both sentences and semantics. Learning and decoding
are done using efﬁcient dynamic programming algorithms.
The model is trained under a discriminative setting, which
allows us to incorporate a rich set of features. Hybrid tree
structures have shown to achieve state-of-the-art results on
standard semantic parsing datasets. In this work, we propose
a novel model that incorporates a rich, nonlinear featurization
by a feedforward neural network. The error signals are computed with respect to the conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs)
objective using an inside-outside algorithm, which are then
backpropagated to the neural network. We demonstrate that
by combining the strengths of the exact global inference in
the hybrid tree models and the power of neural networks to
extract high level features, our model is able to achieve new
state-of-the-art results on standard benchmark datasets across
different languages.

S TATE : exclude(S TATE, S TATE)
S TATE : state(all)

S TATE : next to(S TATE)
S TATE : stateid(S TATE NAME)
S TATE NAME : ( tx )

Which states do not border Texas ?

Figure 1: An example tree-structured semantic representation and its corresponding natural language sentence.
explicit labelings between words and meaning representation tokens are not available in the training data. This creates a latent variable learning problem that can be solved efﬁciently using an inside-outside algorithm (Lu et al. 2008).
A relaxed hybrid tree (Lu 2014) is a discriminative version
of the original hybrid tree model that is able to incorporate
a wide range of features, some of which are able to capture
long distance dependency. The constrained semantic forest
addresses the under-speciﬁcity in the relaxed hybrid tree by
limiting the height of the tree that should be considered (Lu
2015). Both extensions of the hybrid tree achieved state-ofthe-art performance in semantic parsing.
Recently, neural networks have received a signiﬁcant
amount of interests from the NLP community. Neural approaches have shown its success in a variety of NLP tasks,
ranging from parsing (Vinyals et al. 2015) to machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015). One of the main
advantages of using such neural approaches is its ability
to learn a compact representation of its inputs, which often involves nonlinear interactions. It is common to treat an
NLP task as a sequence-to-sequence problem where predictions are made sequentially using inexact inference, such as
greedy or beam search. For example, the recent semantic
parsing work in (Dong and Lapata 2016; Jia and Liang 2016)
are based on sequential recurrent neural network models.
The idea of combining graphical models and neural networks has been explored in the past and started to see
more interest in the recent years. For example, LeCun et al.

Introduction
Semantic parsing refers to the task of parsing natural language sentences into their corresponding semantic representations, such as the ﬁrst-order logic or lambda calculus. It is
one of the classical problems in natural language processing (NLP) and artiﬁcial intelligence. For example, consider
the following natural language sentence paired with its corresponding semantic representation:
Which states do not border Texas ?
answer(exclude(state(all), next to(stateid( tx ))))

It is also possible to represent the above semantics as recursive structures such as trees, which consist of atomic semantic units as its nodes. For example, we can convert the above
semantics into an equivalent tree structure as shown in Figure 1. Following previous works (Kate and Mooney 2006;
Wong and Mooney 2006), we speciﬁcally focus on such
tree-structured semantic representations.
A hybrid tree structure can represent a sentence-semantics
pair as a tree where each node includes both natural language words and meaning representation tokens. However,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3309

