Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semi-Supervised Adaptive Label Distribution
Learning for Facial Age Estimation
Peng Hou, Xin Geng,∗ Zeng-Wei Huo, Jia-Qi Lv
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration,
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{hpeng, xgeng, huozw, lvjiaqi}@seu.edu.cn
from FG-NET (Cootes and Lanitis 2008). The other possible solution is to design a robust age estimator to tolerate
the ill-labeled images. However, it has been also proved to
be impractical. In detail, applying the age estimator learned
from the collected face aging data from the Internet to some
standard datasets, the MAE could be 8.60 years on MORPH
(Ricanek Jr and Tesafaye 2006) and 9.49 years on FG-NET
(Cootes and Lanitis 2008), respectively.
To estimate ages as precisely as possible, it is more feasible to make the most of existing slight well-labeled aging data. Motivated by this, one novel method was proposed
to use the neighboring ages while learning a particular age
based on the fact that aging is a slow and gradual process
(Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013). This is achieved by assigning
a label distribution instead of a single label of the chronological age to each face image. The label distribution covers a
certain number of neighboring ages, representing the degree
that each age describes the corresponding face image. The
shape of label distributions is same at all ages. Later, they
found that the aging process could be signiﬁcantly different
at different aging stages (Geng, Wang, and Xia 2014). Generally speaking, the change of facial appearance during the
childhood and senior ages is more apparent than that during
the middle age. To accord with the tendency of aging variation, an adaptive method called Adaptive Label Distribution
Learning (ALDL), was proposed to generate the proper label
distribution for each age. But the adaptation process itself
requires more labeled training data. Specially, if the training
data are extremely limited, the performance of ALDL will
get worse with the increase of the number of the adaptation
iterations. An example is shown in Fig. 2. The horizontal ordinate represents the label distribution adaptation step. The
vertical ordinate represents the MAE on 5,000 test images.
The number of the training images for ALDL is 500. As
can be seen that the MAE increases with the increase of the
adaptation step. This demonstrates the poor performance of
ALDL with limited training images.
Semi-supervised learning is an efﬁcient technique to
make use of unlabeled data to improve performance (Zhu
2005). As discussed above, the images with faces are extremely easy to obtain today. Tens of millions of face
images are produced by people all over the world every day. If the images are treated as unlabeled, semisupervised learning can be used. Correspondingly, there was

Abstract
Lack of sufﬁcient training data with exact ages is still a challenge for facial age estimation. To deal with such problem,
a method called Label Distribution Learning (LDL) was proposed to utilize the neighboring ages while learning a particular age. Later, an adaptive version of LDL called ALDL was
proposed to generate a proper label distribution for each age.
However, the adaptation process requires more training data,
which creates a dilemma between the performance of ALDL
and the training data. In this paper, we propose an algorithm
called Semi-supervised Adaptive Label Distribution Learning
(SALDL) to solve the dilemma and improve the performance
using unlabeled data for facial age estimation. On the one
hand, the utilization of unlabeled data helps to improve the
adaptation process. On the other hand, the adapted label distributions conversely reinforce the semi-supervised process.
As a result, they can promote each other to get better performance. Experimental results show that SALDL performs
remarkably better than state-of-the-art algorithms when there
are only limited accurately labeled data available.

Introduction
Age estimation has attracted more attention in recent years
because of its potential applications in business intelligence,
human-computer interaction and so on. However, obtaining
enough data with exact ages is still difﬁcult. Although with
the rise of big data, it is easier to collect a large scale of images for age estimation task, for example, from the Internet,
unfortunately, these images are mostly labeled very roughly
and contain large outliers of ages. They are harmful to learn
a good age estimator (Ni, Song, and Yan 2009). One solution
to utilize these images is to re-annotate them by humans. Obviously, it is not only time-consuming and cost-consuming
but unreliable. The reason is that different people may age
quite differently, because of the gene differences as well as
life style and living condition differences. Correspondingly,
there was one research reported that annotating the face images with perceiving ages by humans is a challenging task
(Zeng et al. 2011). The mean absolute error (MAE) is 8.58
years for human age perception on images from MORPH
(Ricanek Jr and Tesafaye 2006), and is 8.13 years on images
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2015

