Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Visual Sentiment Distributions
via Augmented Conditional Probability Neural Network
Jufeng Yang, Ming Sun, Xiaoxiao Sun
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Nankai University
Tianjin, China

Abstract
Visual sentiment analysis is raising more and more attention
with the increasing tendency to express emotions through images. While most existing works assign a single dominant
emotion to each image, we address the sentiment ambiguity by label distribution learning (LDL), which is motivated
by the fact that image usually evokes multiple emotions. Two
new algorithms are developed based on conditional probability neural network (CPNN). First, we propose BCPNN which
encodes image label into a binary representation to replace
the signless integers used in CPNN, and employ it as a part
of input for the neural network. Then, we train our ACPNN
model by adding noises to ground truth label and augmenting
affective distributions. Since current datasets are mostly annotated for single-label learning, we build two new datasets,
one of which is relabeled on the popular Flickr dataset and
the other is collected from Twitter. These datasets contain
20,745 images with multiple affective labels, which are over
ten times larger than the existing ones. Experimental results
show that the proposed methods outperform the state-of-theart works on our large-scale datasets and other publicly available benchmarks.

Amusement

Awe

Contentment

Excitement

Anger

Disgust

Fear

Sadness

40%

40%

20%

20%
0%

0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Figure 1: For each image, its sentiment label distribution is
shown at the bottom. Both images are selected from the Abstract Paintings, and annotated by 14 users. Different colors
indicate different sentiments, e.g. red is for amusement, and
yellow is for contentment.

Introduction

(Machajdik and Hanbury 2010), which provides detailed annotations by 14 users. Existing works use this dataset for
SLL task, that is, for each image the category with the most
votes is selected as the ground truth. Surprisingly, the 14
users can not reach an agreement on any of the total 228
samples, which indicates using the dominant votes as sentiment label misses the diversity of viewer emotions. This fact
encourages us to explore multiple affective labels in images.
Multi-label learning (MLL) studies the problem where
one instance is associated with a number of class labels
(Zhou and Zhang 2006). Since MLL does not ﬁt some real
applications well where the overall distribution of the importance of the labels matters, label distribution learning (LDL)
is proposed to cover a certain number of labels, representing
the degree to which each label describes the instance (Geng
2016). A state-of-the-art algorithm is conditional probability neural network (CPNN) (Geng, Yin, and Zhou 2013).
However, CPNN uses signless integers as label representation and inputs them into the network for computation. It’s
unreasonable doing this in sentiment prediction systems, because it is meaningless to add two sentiment labels or sub-

In recent years, lots of attention has been paid to affective image classiﬁcation (Jou et al. 2015; Joshi et al. 2011;
Chen et al. 2015). Most of these works are conducted
by psychological studies (Lang 1979; Lang, Bradley, and
Cuthbert 1998), and focus on manual design of features
and classiﬁers (You et al. 2015a). As deﬁned as a singlelabel learning (SLL) problem which assigns a single emotional label to each image, previous works (You et al. 2016;
Sun et al. 2016) have performed promising results.
However, image sentiment may be the mixture of all components from different regions rather than a single representative emotion. Meanwhile, different people may have
different emotional reactions to the same image, which is
caused by a variety of elements like the different culture
background and various recognitions from unique experiences (Peng et al. 2015). Furthermore, even a single viewer
may have multiple reactions to one image. Figure 1 shows
examples from a widely used dataset, i.e. Abstract Paintings
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

224

