Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Connection Based Topic Evolution
(∼)

Jiamiao Wang,(∼) Xindong Wu,(+) Lei Li(∼)
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, 230009, Anhui, China
(+)
School of Computing and Informatics, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, 70503, Louisiana, USA
wjmzjx@163.com, xwu@louisiana.edu, lilei@hfut.edu.cn

Directly linking topics which are similar is not convincing
when topic-word distributions are different. The latter maintains consistent topic-word distributions when adding data
of the next time slice, but it is insensitive to changes. Given
these observations, we choose the LDA model to obtain topics instead of an incremental model in order to guarantee
the rapid response capability of both the vanishment of old
topics and occurrences of new topics. As for the problem of
independence between topics of different time slices, we use
the sliding window technique and model LDA for every time
window for consistent topic-word distributions.

Abstract
Contrary to previous studies on topic evolution that directly
extract topics by topic modeling and preset the number of
topics, we propose a method of topic evolution based on semantic connection for an adaptive number of topics and rapid
responses to the changes of contents. Semantic connection
not only indicates the content similarity between documents
but also shows the time decay, so semantic connection features can be used to visualize topic evolution, which makes
the analyses of changes much easier. Preliminary experimental results demonstrate that our method performs well compared to a state-of-the-art baseline on both qualities of topics
and the sensitivity of changes.

Semantic Connection
The semantic connection (SC) of documents indicates both
content similarity and time decay. More speciﬁcally, semantics here represent what topics the documents involve and
what proportions of those topics, and the connection not
only shows whether there are links between documents but
can also spread semantic similarity across successive time
slices. The main idea of SC is extracting topics as semantics
by LDA and linking the documents that are similar enough
by a sliding window to express time decay.

Introduction
Using topic evolution technology to handle the vast amounts
of data can obtain useful information quickly and avoid
the disadvantage of manual processing. However, there are
some defects in existing methods and we contribute the following as potential reasons.
First, conventional methods have a characteristic that the
number of topics is ﬁxed, which carries two problems: too
many redundant topics or a situation that useful topics are
not visible. To solve these problems, we introduce semantic connection and use a density-based clustering algorithm
(Rodriguez and Laio 2014) to acquire topics according to semantic connection features (SCF). Such selection can bring
two beneﬁts: an adaptive number of topics and automatic
removals of outliers. Moreover, as the clustering is based
on SCF, the scale of a cluster indicates the topic strength.
This means that the number of topics is determined by topic
strength. Furthermore, semantic connection features make
visualization possible, because topic evolution can be depicted in a two-dimensional ﬁgure when setting the number
of features as 2.
Second, there are two strategies of extracting topics: a
simple topic model like LDA (Hindle, Godfrey, and Holt
2009) and an incremental model (Hu, Sun, and Li 2015).
However, the former results in independence between topics
of different time slices because topic-word distributions are
different in different time slices, which raises an open problem on how to connect topics across successive time slices.

Algorithm 1 Semantic Connection
Require:
data set D, window size wz, threshold T .
Output:
semantic connection graph (SCG) and semantic connection features (SCF ).
1: Divide D into D={D1 , D2 , · · ·, Dn } according to the
granularity of time slice.
2: for w=1 to n − wz do
3:
W = {Dw , Dw+1 , · · · Dw+wz−1 };
4:
θW = LDA(W );
5:
for all di ∈ W do
6:
kl = KLavg (θwdi , θwdi+1 );
7:
if kl < T then
8:
Add an edge between di and di+1 into SCG.
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
SCF = DeepW alk(SCG)
12: end for
13: return SCG, SCF

Steps of the semantic connection algorithm are represented
in Algorithm 1. This algorithm consists of three main
components: ﬁrstly, acquire semantics via LDA (Lines 3-4),

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5001

