Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Non-Monotone DR-Submodular Function Maximization
Tasuku Soma

Yuichi Yoshida

The University of Tokyo
tasuku soma@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics, and
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

achieving 12 -approximation, and this approximation ratio is
tight (Feige, Mirrokni, and Vondrak 2011). Applications of
non-monotone submodular function maximization include
efﬁcient sensor placement (Krause, Singh, and Guestrin
2008), privacy in online services (Krause and Horvitz 2008),
and maximum entropy sampling (Ko, Lee, and Queyranne
1995).
The models and applications mentioned so far are built
upon submodular set functions. Although set functions are
fairly powerful for describing problems such as variable selection, we sometimes face difﬁcult situations that cannot be
cast with set functions. For example, in the budget allocation
problem (Alon, Gamzu, and Tennenholtz 2012), we would
like to decide how much budget should be set aside for each
ad source, rather than whether we use the ad source or not.
A similar issue arises when we consider models allowing
multiple choices of an element in the ground set.
To deal with such situations, several generalizations of
submodularity have been proposed. (Soma et al. 2014) devised a general framework for maximizing monotone submodular functions on the integer lattice, and showed that
the budget allocation problem and its variant fall into this
framework. In their framework, functions are deﬁned over
the integer lattice ZE
+ and therefore effectively represent discrete allocations of budget. Regarding the original motivation for the diminishing return property, one can naturally
consider its generalization to the integer lattice: a function
f : ZE
+ → R satisfying

Abstract
We consider non-monotone DR-submodular function maximization, where DR-submodularity (diminishing return submodularity) is an extension of submodularity for functions
over the integer lattice based on the concept of the diminishing return property. Maximizing non-monotone DRsubmodular functions has many applications in machine
learning that cannot be captured by submodular set functions.
1
In this paper, we present a 2+
-approximation algorithm with
a running time of roughly O( n log2 B), where n is the size
of the ground set, B is the maximum value of a coordinate,
and  > 0 is a parameter. The approximation ratio is almost
tight and the dependency of running time on B is exponentially smaller than the naive greedy algorithm. Experiments
on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our algorithm outputs almost the best solution compared to other
baseline algorithms, whereas its running time is several orders of magnitude faster.

Introduction
Submodular functions have played a key role in various
tasks in machine learning, statistics, social science, and economics. A set function f : 2E → R with a ground set E is
submodular if
f (X ∪ {e}) − f (X) ≥ f (Y ∪ {e}) − f (Y )
for arbitrary sets X, Y ⊆ E with X ⊆ Y , and an element e ∈ E \ Y . The importance and usefulness of submodularity in these areas are due to the fact that submodular functions naturally capture the diminishing return property. Various important functions in these areas such as the
entropy function, coverage function, and utility functions
satisfy this property. See, e.g., (Krause and Golovin 2014;
Fujishige 2005).
Recently, maximizing (non-monotone) submodular functions has attracted particular interest in the machine learning community. In contrast to minimizing submodular functions, which can be done in polynomial time, maximizing
submodular functions is NP-hard in general. However, we
can achieve a constant factor approximation for various settings. Notably, (Buchbinder et al. 2012) presented a very elegant double greedy algorithm for (unconstrained) submodular function maximization, which was the ﬁrst algorithm

f (x + χe ) − f (x) ≥ f (y + χe ) − f (y)
for x ≤ y and e ∈ E, where χe ∈ RE is the vector with
χe (e) = 1 and χe (a) = 0 for every a = e. Such functions
are called diminishing return submodular (DR-submodular)
functions (Soma and Yoshida 2015) or coordinate-wise concave submodular functions (Milgrom and Strulovici 2009).
DR-submodular functions have found various applications
in generalized sensor placement (Soma and Yoshida 2015)
and (a natural special case of) the budget allocation problem (Soma et al. 2014).
As a related notion, a function is said to be lattice submodular if
f (x) + f (y) ≥ f (x ∨ y) + f (x ∧ y)
for arbitrary x and y, where ∨ and ∧ are coordinate-wise
max and min, respectively. Note that DR-submodularity is

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

898

