Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Mechanism Design in Social Networks
Bin Li,a Dong Hao,a Dengji Zhao,b Tao Zhoua
a

Big Data Research Center, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{libin@std.uestc., haodong@uestc., zhutou@ustc.}edu.cn
b
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
zhaodj@shanghaitech.edu.cn

order to simultaneously improve the seller’s revenue and the
social welfare, which are two primary and generally conﬂicting objectives in any auction design (Myerson 1981;
Krishna and Perry 1998), it is of great importance to design auction mechanisms in social networks, which not only
satisfy the classical criteria such as incentive compatibility
and individual rationality, but also incentivize individuals to
spread the auction information in the social network.
The main difﬁculty for incentivizing the individuals to
spread the auction information lies in the general conﬂict
that the seller wishes to attract more people to participate in
the auction in order to increase her revenue, but participants
have no incentive to bring more competitors into the auction. This essentially reﬂects the conﬂict between the system’s optimality and the individuals’ self-interests. Under
all classic auction protocols including the Vickrey-ClarkeGroves (VCG) mechanism (Vickrey 1961; Clarke 1971;
Groves 1973), the seller can only convene a small amount
of people into the auction while the other potential buyers in
the social network are all excluded from the auction, even
though they may have higher valuations. As a result, the
seller’s revenue can only be locally optimized, or, the efﬁciency (social welfare) can only be locally maximized.
The goal of this paper is to design mechanisms that can
improve both the efﬁciency and the seller’s revenue, which
is not achievable with existing mechanisms. To this end, we
propose a novel mechanism that incentivizes all participants
to further propagate the auction information, which will lead
to a more efﬁcient allocation and more revenue to the seller.
The intuition behind this mechanism is that information diffusion is rewarded if it leads to a more efﬁcient allocation.
Our contributions advance the state of the art in the following ways:

Abstract
This paper studies an auction design problem for a seller to
sell a commodity in a social network, where each individual
(the seller or a buyer) can only communicate with her neighbors. The challenge to the seller is to design a mechanism to
incentivize the buyers, who are aware of the auction, to further propagate the information to their neighbors so that more
buyers will participate in the auction and hence, the seller
will be able to make a higher revenue. We propose a novel
auction mechanism, called information diffusion mechanism
(IDM), which incentivizes the buyers to not only truthfully report their valuations on the commodity to the seller, but also
further propagate the auction information to all their neighbors. In comparison, the direct extension of the well-known
Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanism in social networks
can also incentivize the information diffusion, but it will decrease the seller’s revenue or even lead to a deﬁcit sometimes.
The formalization of the problem has not yet been addressed
in the literature of mechanism design and our solution is very
signiﬁcant in the presence of large-scale online social networks.

Introduction
Mechanism design is a representative interface integrating
economics and artiﬁcial intelligence (Nisan et al. 2007). It
utilizes game theoretic tools to model interactions between
agents, and takes a systematic investigation of the design of
institutions and how these institutions affect the outcomes of
agents’ interactions. Auction has been a common paradigm
(Krishna 2009) and a successful application (Edelman and
Schwarz 2007; Bajari and Hortacsu 2003) in mechanism design. Although in almost every human-activated system, the
social network matters (Jackson 2008; Borgatti et al. 2009),
the standard auction theory only considers buyers who are
called together by the seller, while the effects of social links
connecting these buyers to other potential buyers who are
not known by the seller have not yet been explored. Without
an effective auction mechanism that facilitates information
propagation in the social network, a potential buyer with a
high valuation may not be aware of the auction since she
is not directly connected to the seller and her neighbors do
not wish to tell her the auction information. Therefore, in

• We propose the very ﬁrst model for selling one item in a
social network, where each participant in the network can
only communicate with her neighbors.
• In the network setting, we ﬁrst show that the well-known
VCG mechanism can be extended to incentivize information diffusion and therefore all potential buyers in the network will join the auction to achieve the optimal social
welfare. However, it does not increase the revenue of the
seller and even leads to a deﬁcit sometimes, which will
disincentivize the seller to apply such a mechanism.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

586

