Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Long-Term Trends in the
Public Perception of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Ethan Fast, Eric Horvitz
ethaen@stanford.edu, horvitz@microsoft.com

Understanding public concerns about AI is important, as
these concerns can translate into regulatory activity with potentially serious repercussions (Stone, P. et al. 2016). For
example, some have recently suggested that the government
should regulate AI development to prevent existential threats
to humanity (Guardian 2014). Others have argued that racial
proﬁling is implicit in some machine learning algorithms, in
violation of current law (ProPublica 2016). More broadly, if
public expectations diverge too far from what is possible, we
may court the smashed hopes that often follow from intense
enthusiasm and high expectations.
AI presents a difﬁcult case for studies of topic sentiment
over time because the term is not precisely deﬁned. Lay people and experts alike have varied understandings of what “artiﬁcial intelligence” means (Stone, P. et al. 2016). Even in
the narrowest, engineering-centric deﬁnitions, AI refers to a
broad constellation of computing technologies.
We present a characterization of impressions expressed
about AI in the news over 30 years. First, we deﬁne a set of
indicators that capture levels of engagement, general sentiment, and hopes and concerns about AI. We then apply and
study these indicators across 30 years of articles from the
New York Times. As a proxy for public opinion and engagement, no other corpus extends so far into the past to capture
how a general audience thinks about AI. Moving forward,
we can apply these indicators to present day articles in an
ongoing effort to track public perception.
Our study relies on a combination of crowdsourcing and
natural language processing. For each article under analysis,
we extract all mentions of artiﬁcial intelligence and use paid
crowdsourcing to annotate these mentions with measures
of relevance, their levels of pessimism or optimism about
AI, and the presence of speciﬁc hopes and concerns, such
as “losing control of AI” or “AI will improve healthcare.”
These annotations form the basis of the indicators and allow
us to bootstrap a classiﬁer that can automatically extract impressions about AI, with applications to tracking trends in
new articles as they are generated.
To study how public perception of AI has changed over
time, we analyze the set of indicators for articles published
in the New York Times between January 1986 and June
2016. We address four research questions:
R1: How prominent is AI in the public discussion today,
as compared to the past?

Abstract
Analyses of text corpora over time can reveal trends in beliefs, interest, and sentiment about a topic. We focus on views
expressed about artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in the New York
Times over a 30-year period. General interest, awareness, and
discussion about AI has waxed and waned since the ﬁeld was
founded in 1956. We present a set of measures that captures
levels of engagement, measures of pessimism and optimism,
the prevalence of speciﬁc hopes and concerns, and topics that
are linked to discussions about AI over decades. We ﬁnd that
discussion of AI has increased sharply since 2009, and that
these discussions have been consistently more optimistic than
pessimistic. However, when we examine speciﬁc concerns,
we ﬁnd that worries of loss of control of AI, ethical concerns
for AI, and the negative impact of AI on work have grown in
recent years. We also ﬁnd that hopes for AI in healthcare and
education have increased over time.

Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence will spur innovation and create opportunities, both for individuals and entrepreneurial companies,
just as the Internet has led to new businesses like Google and
new forms of communication like blogs and social networking. Smart machines, experts predict, will someday tutor students, assist surgeons and safely drive cars.
Computers Learn to Listen, and Some Talk Back. NYT, 2010
In the wake of recent technological advances in computer vision, speech recognition and robotics, scientists say they are
increasingly concerned that artiﬁcial intelligence technologies may permanently displace human workers, roboticize
warfare and make Orwellian surveillance techniques easier
to develop, among other disastrous effects.
Study to Examine Effects of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. NYT, 2014

These two excerpts from articles in the New York Times
lay out competing visions for the future of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in our society. The ﬁrst excerpt is optimistic
about the future of AI—the ﬁeld will “spur innovation,” creating machines that tutor students or assist surgeons—while
the second is pessimistic, raising concerns about displaced
workers and dystopian surveillance technologies. But which
vision is more common in the public imagination, and how
have these visions evolved over time?
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

963

