Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Expectile Matrix Factorization for Skewed Data Analysis
1

Rui Zhu,1 Di Niu,1 Linglong Kong,2 Zongpeng Li3

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, {rzhu3, dniu}@ualberta.ca
2
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, lkong@ualberta.ca
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, zongpeng@ucalgary.ca

by noise, the goal is to recover the underlying low-rank latency matrix, which is present due to network path and function correlations.
Matrix factorization is a popular approach for low-rank
matrix estimation, in which the underlying matrix M ∗ ∈
Rm×n is assumed to be M ∗ = XY T , with X ∈ Rm×k
and Y ∈ Rn×k , such that the rank of M ∗ is enforced
to k. The goal is to ﬁnd M̂ that minimizes the aggregate
loss of the estimation A(M̂ ) on all observed samples bi ,
i = 1, . . . , p. Matrix factorization problems, although being nonconvex, can be solved efﬁciently at a large scale
by several standard optimization methods such as alternating minimization and stochastic gradient descent. As a result, matrix factorization has gained enormous success in
real-world recommender systems, e.g., Netﬂix Prize competition (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), and large-scale
network latency estimation, e.g., DMFSGD (Liao et al.
2013), due to its scalability, low computation cost per iteration, and the ease of distributed implementation. In contrast, another approach to matrix estimation and completion,
namely nuclear-norm minimization (Candès and Tao 2010;
Candes and Plan 2010) based on SVT (Cai, Candès, and
Shen 2010) or proximal gradient methods (Ma, Goldfarb,
and Chen 2011), is relatively less scalable to problems of
huge sizes due to high computational cost per iteration (Sun
and Luo 2015). Recently, a few studies (Sun and Luo 2015;
Jain, Netrapalli, and Sanghavi 2013; Zhao, Wang, and Liu
2015) have also theoretically shown that many optimization
algorithms converge to the global optimality of the matrix
factorization formulation, and can recover the underlying
true low-rank matrix under certain conditions.
Nevertheless, a common limitation of almost all existing
studies on matrix estimation is that they have ignored the
fact that observations in practice could be highly skewed
and do not follow symmetric normal distributions in many
applications. For example, latencies to web services over
the Internet are highly skewed, in that most measurements
are within hundreds of milliseconds while a small portion of
outliers could be over several seconds due to network congestion or temporary service unavailability (Zheng, Zhang,
and Lyu 2014; Liu et al. 2015). In a video recommender system based on implicit feedback (e.g., user viewing history),
the watching time is also highly skewed, in the sense that a
user may watch most videos for a short period of time and

Abstract
Matrix factorization is a popular approach to solving matrix
estimation problems based on partial observations. Existing
matrix factorization is based on least squares and aims to
yield a low-rank matrix to interpret the conditional sample
means given the observations. However, in many real applications with skewed and extreme data, least squares cannot
explain their central tendency or tail distributions, yielding
undesired estimates. In this paper, we propose expectile matrix factorization by introducing asymmetric least squares, a
key concept in expectile regression analysis, into the matrix
factorization framework. We propose an efﬁcient algorithm to
solve the new problem based on alternating minimization and
quadratic programming. We prove that our algorithm converges to a global optimum and exactly recovers the true underlying low-rank matrices when noise is zero. For synthetic
data with skewed noise and a real-world dataset containing
web service response times, the proposed scheme achieves
lower recovery errors than the existing matrix factorization
method based on least squares in a wide range of settings.

Introduction
Matrix estimation has wide applications in many ﬁelds
such as recommendation systems (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), network latency estimation (Liao et al. 2013),
computer vision (Chen and Suter 2004), system identiﬁcation (Liu and Vandenberghe 2009), etc. In these problems, a
low-rank matrix M ∗ ∈ Rm×n or a linear mapping A(M ∗ )
from the low-rank matrix M ∗ is assumed to underlie some
possibly noisy observations, where A : Rm×n → Rp .
The objective is to recover the underlying low-rank matrix based on partial observations bi , i = 1, . . . , p. For example, a movie recommendation system aims to recover
all user-movie preferences based on the ratings between
some user-movie pairs (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009;
Su and Khoshgoftaar 2009), or based on implicit feedback, e.g., watching times/frequencies, that are logged for
some users on some movies (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008;
Rendle et al. 2009). In network or web service latency estimation (Liao et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2015; Zheng, Zhang,
and Lyu 2014), given partially collected latency measurements between some nodes that are possibly contaminated
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

259

