Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Explaining Ourselves: Human-Aware Constraint Reasoning
Eugene C. Freuder
Insight Centre for Data Analytics, School of Computer Science and IT, University College Cork, Ireland
eugene.freuder@insight-centre.org

Abstract

by checking boxes for which airlines to use or moving
sliders to constrain arrival times.
On the one hand, we are increasingly being led to expect
that we can simply explain to “intelligent assistants”, like
Siri or Alexa, what our needs or preferences are, and these
programs can then decide how best to satisfy them. On the
other hand, by 2018 the European Union General Data
Protection Regulation may give citizens the right to demand explanations of decisions that computer algorithms
make about them (Goodman and Flaxmanar 2016).
Of course, the constraint programming community has
been addressing related issues for some time, but it has not
been a primary focus, and now is a good time for a renewed emphasis on “user-friendly I/O”.
Twenty years ago, in a paper entitled “In Pursuit of the
Holy Grail” (Freuder 1997), I laid out a strategic goal for
constraint programming where the user simply states the
problem and the computer solves it. Fifteen years ago, in
an invited talk for the International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP), I borrowed James Carville’s famous line about a U.S. presidential election “It’s the economy stupid” to claim “It’s usability stupid”, and Barry O’Sullivan and I organized the First
International Workshop on User-Interaction in Constraint
Satisfaction. Ten years ago, in a paper entitled “Holy Grail
Redux” (Freuder 2007), I spoke of the exciting opportunity
for members of the constraint programming community to
be pioneers of a new “usability science” and to go on to
“engineer usability”. Of course, I am hardly the only one to
have recognized this challenge. For example, JeanFrancois Puget, now an IBM Distinguished Engineer, gave
an invited talk at CP 2004 entitled “The next challenge for
CP: Ease of use” (Puget 2004).
However, as one crude example of the relative attention
to these issues, a search of over two decades of papers in
the CP conferences reveals an approximate average of only
one paper every two years with “explanation(s)” in the
title. So I expect there even remains some “low hanging
fruit” to be picked. In the following I lay out some “dimensions of the orchard”. I also cite a few examples of “al-

Human-aware AI is increasingly important as AI becomes
more powerful and ubiquitous. A good foundation for human-awareness should enable ourselves and our “AIs” to
“explain ourselves” naturally to each other. Constraint reasoning offers particular opportunities and challenges in this
regard. This paper takes note of the history of work in this
area and encourages increased attention, laying out a rough
research agenda.

Explaining Ourselves: Me and My AI
Human-aware AI (the IJCAI-16 Special Theme) is increasingly important as AI becomes more powerful and ubiquitous. A good foundation for human-awareness should enable ourselves and our “AIs” to “explain ourselves” naturally to each other. Constraint reasoning offers particular opportunities and challenges in this regard. This paper takes
note of the history of work in this area and encourages increased attention, outlining a rough research agenda.
Constraint reasoning (or “constraint programming”)
involves finding values for problem variables that satisfy
constraints on which combinations of values are allowed.
The constraints may be “soft”, representing preferences or
probabilities or costs, introducing an element of optimization. Constraint reasoning has been widely used in AI,
from vision to planning, and a great many practical problems, from factory scheduling to molecular biology, can be
modeled and solved as constraint satisfaction problems
(CSPs) (Freuder 2006).
Constraints are a natural, and as opposed to rules, a declarative way of expressing our needs. We encounter constraints in everyday interactions with computers, whether
or not there is specifically constraint programming technology operating behind the scenes. We are able to convey
simple constraints to our phones in plain English: “I want a
restaurant that has vegetarian options.” We express constraints that “filter” our purchasing options, e.g. for flights
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4858

