Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sequential Classiﬁcation-Based
Optimization for Direct Policy Search∗
Yi-Qi Hu, Hong Qian, Yang Yu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
yuy@nju.edu.cn

they are expected to iteratively ﬁnd better solutions. Typical
derivative-free optimization algorithms include evolutionary algorithms (Hansen, Müller, and Koumoutsakos 2003;
Golberg 1989; Larranaga and Lozano 2002; Neumann and
Wegener 2007) and similar methods such as cross-entropy
methods (de Boer et al. 2005), however, these methods have
little theoretical support, except very few of them (Qian,
Yu, and Zhou 2015a; 2015b; Yu, Yao, and Zhou 2012).
Recently emerged optimistic optimization methods (Munos
2011; 2014) and Bayesian optimization methods (Bull 2011;
de Freitas et al. 2012) are better theoretically supported, but
often suffer from poor scalability.
Classiﬁcation-based optimization is a recently developed
theoretical framework of model-based derivative-free optimization method. Its implementation, the R ACOS algorithm (Yu, Qian, and Hu 2016) has shown outstanding performance in various applications (Yu, Qian, and Hu 2016;
Qian, Hu, and Yu 2016; Qian and Yu 2016), and may provide
a powerful optimization tool for direct policy search. However, we have noticed an inefﬁcient component of R ACOS:
like other batch-mode algorithms, it updates its model only
after sampling and evaluating a batch of solutions, even if
the model samples out unnecessary bad solutions. Meanwhile, in direct policy search, policies often have to be evaluated sequentially but not in parallel, such as evaluating policise on a single physical robot. Therefore, the original batchmode R ACOS may not efﬁcient for direct policy search.
In this paper, we propose the sequential classiﬁcationbased optimization, which updates the model after sampling
every solution by reusing historical samples. We ﬁrst analyze when the sequential-mode need fewer samples than
the batch-mode. Then we design a new algorithm named
Sequential R ACOS (SR ACOS), with which three replacing
strategies for maintaining the historical samples are proposed. We empirically compare SR ACOS with R ACOS and
several other model-based optimization algorithms on two
synthetic testing functions, and apply them to direct policy search for 9 controlling tasks, where an artiﬁcial neural network is used as the policy and optimized. Experiment results show that SR ACOS can signiﬁcantly improve
the performance of R ACOS as well as the other state-of-theart derivative-free optimization methods.
The rest four sections presents the background, new algorithm, experiments, and conclusion, respectively.

Abstract
Direct policy search often results in high-quality policies in
complex reinforcement learning problems, which employs
some optimization algorithms to search the parameters of
the policy for maximizing the its total reward. Classiﬁcationbased optimization is a recently developed framework for
derivative-free optimization, which has shown to be effective and efﬁcient for non-convex optimization problems with
many local optima, and may provide a power optimization
tool for direct policy search. However, this framework requires to sample a batch of solutions for every update of
the search model, while in reinforcement learning, the environment often offers only sequential policy evaluation. Thus
the classiﬁcation-based optimization may not efﬁcient for direct policy search, where solutions have to be sampled sequentially. In this paper, we adapt the classiﬁcation-based optimization for sequential sampled solutions by forming the
sample batch via reusing historical solutions. Experiments on
a helicopter hovering task and controlling tasks in OpenAI
Gym show that the new algorithm signiﬁcantly improve the
performance from several state-of-the-art derivative-free optimization approaches.

Introduction
With the goal of learning an optimal policy from autonomous interactions with the environment, reinforcement
learning is in the core of artiﬁcial intelligence. Previous
studies (Wang et al. 2007; El-Fakdi, Carreras, and Palomeras 2005) show that direct policy search, which employs
some optimization algorithms to ﬁnd parameters of the policy to maximize the received total reward, can have better performance than traditional reinforcement learning approaches. The policy optimization task is usually quite complex, involving many local optima, for which derivativefree optimization can be useful. Many derivative-free optimization methods are model-based, and mainly consist
of a cycle of two steps: sampling solutions from the current model, and updating the model from the sampled solutions along with their evaluation values. Through the cycle,
∗
This research was supported by the NSFC (61375061,
61333014), JiangsuSF (BK20160066), Foundation for the Author
of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (201451), and
2015 Microsoft Research Asia Collaborative Research Program.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2029

