Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Optimizing Quantiles in
Preference-Based Markov Decision Processes
Hugo Gilbert

Paul Weng, Yan Xu

Sorbonne Universités,
UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS,
LIP6 UMR 7606, Paris, France
hugo.gilbert@lip6.fr

SYSU-CMU Joint Institute of Engineering, Guangzhou, China
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Guangzhou, China
SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute, Shunde, China
{paweng,xuyan}@cmu.edu
Of-Service are often made based on quantiles. For instance,
Amazon reports (DeCandia et al. 2007) that they optimize
the 99.9% quantile for their cloud services. More generally, in the service industry, because of skewed distributions
(Benoit and Van den Poel 2009), one generally does not want
that customers are satisﬁed on average, but rather that most
customers (e.g., 99% of them) to be as satisﬁed as possible.
Our contribution: We show that optimizing the quantile
criterion amounts to solving a sequence of MDP problems
using an Expected Utility criterion with a target utility function. We provide a binary search algorithm using functional
backward induction (Liu and Koenig 2006) as a subroutine
for computing an optimal policy. Moreover, we investigate
some properties of the optimal policies in the ﬁnite and inﬁnite cases. Finally, we provide the results of experiments
testing our algorithm in a variety of settings.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
the necessary background to present our approach and state
formally our problem. Section 3 presents the details of our
solving algorithm for the ﬁnite horizon case. Section 4 provides some theoretical results in the inﬁnite horizon case. In
Section 5, we experimentally evaluate our proposition. Section 6 discusses the related work and Section 7 concludes.

Abstract
In the Markov decision process model, policies are usually
evaluated by expected cumulative rewards. As this decision
criterion is not always suitable, we propose in this paper an algorithm for computing a policy optimal for the quantile criterion. Both ﬁnite and inﬁnite horizons are considered. Finally
we experimentally evaluate our approach on random MDPs
and on a data center control problem.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making in uncertain environments is an
important task in artiﬁcial intelligence. Such problems can
be modeled as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). In an
MDP, an agent chooses at every time step actions to perform according to the current state of the world in order
to optimize a criterion in the long run. In standard MDPs,
uncertainty is described by probabilities over the possible
action outcomes, preferences are represented by numeric rewards and the expectation of future cumulated rewards is
used as the decision criterion. And yet, for numerous applications, the expectation of cumulated rewards may not
be the most appropriate criterion. For instance, in one-shot
decision-making problems an alternative and well motivated
objective for the agent is to insure a certain level of satisfaction with high probability.
In this paper we focus on the decision criterion that consists in maximizing a quantile. Intuitively, the τ th quantile
of a population is the value x such that 100 · τ percent of the
population is equal or lower than x and 100 · (1 − τ ) percent
of the population is equal or greater than x. Optimizing a
quantile criterion offers nice properties: i) no assumption is
made about the commensurability between preferences and
uncertainty, ii) preferences over actions or trajectories can be
expressed on a purely ordinal scale, iii) preferences induced
over policies are more robust than with the standard criterion
of maximizing the expectation of cumulated rewards.
As a result, maximizing a quantile is used in many applications. For instance, the Value-at-Risk criterion (Jorion
2006) widely used in ﬁnance is in fact a quantile. Moreover, in the Web industry (Wolski and Brevik 2014; DeCandia et al. 2007), decisions about performance or Quality-

2

Background

In this section, we provide the background information necessary for the sequel.

2.1

Markov Decision Process

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) offer a general and
powerful formalism to model and solve sequential decisionmaking problems (Puterman 1994). An MDP is formally deﬁned as a tuple MT = (S, A, P, r, s0 ) where T is a time
horizon, S is a ﬁnite set of states, A is a ﬁnite set of actions,
P : S × A × S → R is a transition function with P(s, a, s )
being the probability of reaching state s when action a is
performed in state s, r : S × A → R is a bounded reward
function and s0 ∈ S is a particular state called initial state.
In a nutshell, at each time step t, the agent knows her
current state st . According to this state, she decides to
perform an action at . This action results in a new state
st+1 ∈ S according to probability distribution P(st , at , .),
and a reward signal r(st , at ) which penalizes or reinforces
the choice of this action. At time step t = 0, the agent

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3569

