Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Unsupervised Feature Learning for
3D Scene Reconstruction with Occupancy Maps
Vitor Guizilini, Fabio Ramos
School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney
{vitor.guizilini,fabio.ramos}@sydney.edu.au

from repetitive environments that share similar structures.
Sparse coding is employed in (Ruhnke et al. 2013) to achieve
massive decreases in memory storage requirements, while
producing 3D surface models that outperform the widely
used Octomap (Hornung et al. 2013). Alternatively, the work
in (Deuge et al. 2013) focuses on outdoor datasets, developing a novel technique for the regular sampling of densely irregular Velodyne scans that allows unsupervised learning of
relevant features, as opposed to standard hand-crafted features (Johnson 1997). Recently, much work has been done
on using clustering for unsupervised deep learning (Dosovitskiy et al. 2014), such as convolutional clustering in (Dundar, Jin, and Culurciello 2016) to minimize redundancy in
learned features and spherical K-means in (Coates and Ng
2012) to learn a dictionary of features to represent the original structures.
Inspired by the above works, in this paper we propose a
novel clustering technique that takes into account the orientation of each cluster, in addition to its spatial coordinates1 , and apply this methodology to 3D scene reconstruction problems. We use as input an unorganized point cloud
composed of occupied points (i.e. obtained by laser scans),
indicating structures captured by the sensor. Unoccupied
points are generated by randomly sampling the beams that
produced occupied points (a ratio of 1 point / 2 meters
was used throughout the paper). Cluster orientation is calculated based on statistical information obtained from this
point cloud, and used to produce planar surface features,
composed of clusters that share a similar normal vector.
These planar surface features are capable of describing
the environment in a much more compact way without sacriﬁcing accuracy. In particular, we show how this compact representation can be used by the Hilbert Maps framework to greatly decrease the dimensionality of the feature
vector used to project observations into the reproducing
kernel Hilbert space. The original paper (Ramos and Ott
2015) discussed 2D applications of this framework, while
(Guizilini and Ramos 2016) introduced the concept of localized length-scales, in which the position of each feature is
learned based on available data. Here, we propose learning
the shape of each feature alongside its position. The contri-

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of unsupervised feature learning for three-dimensional occupancy mapping, as a way to
segment higher-level structures based on raw unorganized
point cloud data. In particular, we focus on detecting planar surfaces, which are common in most structured or semistructured environments. This segmentation is then used to
minimize the amount of parameters necessary to properly
create a 3D occupancy model of the surveyed space, thus
increasing computational speed and decreasing memory requirements. As the 3D modeling tool, an extension to Hilbert
Maps (Ramos and Ott 2015) recently proposed in (Guizilini
and Ramos 2016) was selected, since it naturally uses a
feature-based representation of the environment to achieve
real-time performance. Experiments conducted in simulated
and real large-scale datasets show a substantial gain in performance, while decreasing the amount of stored information
by orders of magnitude without sacriﬁcing accuracy.

Introduction
Nowadays, the task of obtaining information from the surrounding environment is no longer an issue in mobile
robotics. Stereo and RGBD cameras are able to provide
scale-aware per-pixel dense point clouds that include color
information, while 3D laser range sensors produce snapshots
of surrounding structures at sub-degree resolution and subcentimeter accuracy. Millions of points can be obtained in
a fraction of a second creating challenges to store and process this vast amount of data in an efﬁcient and useful manner. Furthermore, points-clouds are what is called ”low-level
information”, meaning that they encode patterns that could
be used to describe the same environment in a much more
compact way. This is how the human brain works, by introducing high-level patterns that cluster large segments of the
input data into semantically meaningful classes or features.
In (Lai, Bo, and Fox 2014) the authors explore unsupervised learning of features based on a virtual training dataset,
extending to three-dimensional space the state-of-the-art 2D
classiﬁer Hierarchical Matching Pursuit, or HMP (Bo, Ren,
and Fox 2011; Ren and Ramanan 2013). An alphabet of local scans is constructed in (Ruhnke et al. 2010) to describe
the point cloud based on recurrent surfaces, thus beneﬁting
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A C++ demo of the proposed algorithm is available in https:
//bitbucket.org/vguizilini/cvpp

3827

