Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Tsallis Regularized Optimal Transport and Ecological Inference
†

Boris Muzellec,† Richard Nock,‡,¶,§ Giorgio Patrini,¶,‡ Frank Nielsen†,

Ecole Polytechnique, France; ‡ Data61, Australia; ¶ The Australian National University, Australia
§
The University of Sydney, Australia;  Sony CS Labs, Inc., Japan
boris.muzellec@polytechnique.edu; richard.nock@data61.csiro.au; giorgio.patrini@anu.edu.au; Frank.Nielsen@acm.org

convergence rates (Cuturi 2013; Franklin and Lorenz 1989).
As a result, we can picture two separate approches to OT:
one essentially relies on the initial Monge-Kantorovitch formulation optimizing the transportation cost itself (Villani
2009), but is computationally expensive; the other is based
on tweaking the transportation cost by Shannon regularizer
(Cuturi 2013). The corresponding optimization algorithm,
grounded in a variety of different works (Csiszár 1989;
Sinkhorn 1967; Soules 1991), is fast and can be very efﬁciently parallelized (Cuturi 2013).
Our paper brings three contributions. (i) We interpolate
these two worlds using a family of entropies celebrated in
nonextensive statistical mechanics, Tsallis entropies (Tsallis 1988), and hence we deﬁne the Tsallis regularized optimal transport (TROT). We show that the metric properties
for Shannon entropy still hold in this more general case,
and prove new properties that are key to our application.
(ii) We provide efﬁcient optimization algorithms to compute
TROT and the optimal transportation plan. (iii) Last but not
least, we provide a new application of TROT to a ﬁeld in
which this optimal transportation plan is the key unknown:
the problem of ecological inference.
Ecological inference deals with recovering information
from aggregate data. It arises in a diversity of applied ﬁelds
such as econometrics (Cross and Manski 2002; Cho and
Manski 2008), sociology and political science (King 1997;
King, Tanner, and Rosen 2004) and epidemiology (Wakeﬁeld and Shaddick 2006), with a long history (Robinson 1950); interestingly, the empirical software engineering
community has also explored the idea (Posnett, Filkov, and
Devanbu 2011). Its iconic application is inferring electorate
behaviour: given turnout results for several parties and proportions of some population strata, e.g. percentages of ethnic
groups, for many geographical regions such as counties, the
aim is to recover contingency tables for parties × groups for
all those counties. In the language of probability the problem is isomorphic to the following: given two random variables and their respective marginal distributions — conditioned to another variable, the geography —, compute their
conditional joint distribution (See Figure 1).
The problem is fundamentally under-determined and any
solution can only either provide loose deterministic bounds
(Duncan and Davis 1953; Cross and Manski 2002; Cho and
Manski 2008) or needs to enforce additional assumptions

Abstract
Optimal transport is a powerful framework for computing
distances between probability distributions. We unify the
two main approaches to optimal transport, namely MongeKantorovitch and Sinkhorn-Cuturi, into what we deﬁne as
Tsallis regularized optimal transport (TROT). TROT interpolates a rich family of distortions from Wasserstein to
Kullback-Leibler, encompassing as well Pearson, Neyman
and Hellinger divergences, to name a few. We show that
metric properties known for Sinkhorn-Cuturi generalize to
TROT , and provide efﬁcient algorithms for ﬁnding the optimal
transportation plan with formal convergence proofs. We also
present the ﬁrst application of optimal transport to the problem of ecological inference, that is, the reconstruction of joint
distributions from their marginals, a problem of large interest
in the social sciences. TROT provides a convenient framework
for ecological inference by allowing to compute the joint distribution — that is, the optimal transportation plan itself —
when side information is available, which is e.g. typically
what census represents in political science. Experiments on
data from the 2012 US presidential elections display the potential of TROT in delivering a faithful reconstruction of the
joint distribution of ethnic groups and voter preferences.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) allows to compare probability distributions by exploiting the underlying metric space on their
supports (Kantorovitch 1958; Monge 1781). A number of
prominent applications allow for a natural deﬁnition of this
underlying metric space, from image processing (Rubner,
Tomasi, and Guibas 2000) to natural language processing
(Kusner et al. 2015) and computer graphics (Solomon et al.
2015).
One key problem of OT is its processing complexity —
cubic in the support size, ignoring low order terms (on state
of the art LP solvers (Cuturi 2013)). Moreover, the optimal
transportation plan has often many zeroes, which is not desirable in some applications. An important workaround was
found and consists in penalizing the transport cost with a
Shannon entropic regularizer (Cuturi 2013). At the price of
changing the transport distance, for a distortion with metric related properties, comes an algorithm with geometric
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2387

