Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Correlated Cascades: Compete or Cooperate
Ali Zarezade,∗ Ali Khodadadi,∗ Mehrdad Farajtabar,† Hamid R. Rabiee,∗ Hongyuan Zha†
∗

Sharif University of Technology, Azadi Ave, Tehran, Iran
Georgia Institute of Tech., North Ave NW, Atlanta, GA 30332, United States
{zarezade,khodadadi}@ce.sharif.edu, mehrdad@gatech.edu, rabiee@sharif.edu, zha@cc.gatech.edu

 

In real world social networks, there are multiple cascades
which are rarely independent. They usually compete or cooperate with each other. Motivated by the reinforcement theory in sociology we leverage the fact that adoption of a user
to any behavior is modeled by the aggregation of behaviors
of its neighbors. We use a multidimensional marked Hawkes
process to model users product adoption and consequently
spread of cascades in social networks. The resulting inference
problem is proved to be convex and is solved in parallel by using the barrier method. The advantage of the proposed model
is twofold; it models correlated cascades and also learns the
latent diffusion network. Experimental results on synthetic
and two real datasets gathered from Twitter, URL shortening
and music streaming services, illustrate the superior performance of the proposed model over the alternatives.

       



1000
500
0

0

200

400

 

      
 

1000

 

 

Abstract

 

†

600




500

 
0

0

50

100

150

200

250

 

Figure 1: Visualization of correlated cascading behavior in
real data. (left) Tweets with terms google and youtube
are synchronized most of the time. (right) different URL
shortening services; tiny.ly and tinyurl are cooperating while migre.me andj.mp are competing.

done to extend basic diffusion models to competitive case
(He et al. 2012; Pathak, Banerjee, and Srivastava 2010;
Lu, Chen, and Lakshmanan 2015). Meyer et al. proposed
a probabilistic model for diffusion of competitive or cooperative contagions (Myers and Leskovec 2012). They estimate
the probability of a user being infected given a sequence
of previously observed contagions. But the main drawback
of these models is that they are all discrete time, which
limits the ﬂexibility of model. Valera in (Valera and Rodriguez 2015) proposed a continuous time method for modeling competing products but incapable of learning the latent
diffusion network and prone to overﬁtting.
Inspired by the sociological evidence in social science
about users’ behavior, and the success of the recurrent point
processes in modeling temporal event histories, we propose
a data-driven continuous time method, which can jointly
model the spread of multiple correlated behaviors (information, ideas, memes), and learn the latent diffusion network.
Intuitively, the rate (or intensity) that a user adopts a behavior is considered as the weighted sum of those of her
neighbors. The more your friends adopt a behavior the more
you are excited to adopt it. This users’ behavior adoption
intensity is modeled by a special stochastic point process,
called Hawkes process (Hawkes 1971). It is well suited for
modeling temporal events with self-exciting property (Zhou,
Zha, and Song 2013; Blundell, Beck, and Heller 2012;
Farajtabar et al. 2014; Xu, Farajtabar, and Zha 2016).
Finally, we validate the proposed method on synthetic and
two real datasets. First, using synthetic data generated randomly we’ve studied how effectively we can recover the la-

Introduction
Social networks and virtual communities play a key role in
today’s life. People share their thoughts, beliefs, opinions,
news, and even their locations in social networks and engage
in social interactions by commenting, liking, mentioning
and following each other. This virtual world is an ideal place
for studying social behaviors and spread of cultural norms
(Vespignani 2012), contagion of diseases (Barabasi 2015),
advertising and marketing (Valera and Rodriguez 2015) and
estimating the culprit in malicious diffusions (Farajtabar et
al. 2015a). Among them, the study of information diffusion
or more generally dynamics on the network is of crucial importance and can be used in many applications. The trace of
information diffusion, virus or infection spread, rumor propagation, and product adoption is usually called cascades.
In conventional studies of diffusion networks, individual
cascades are mostly considered in isolation, i.e., independent
of each other (Rodriguez et al. 2015). However in realistic
situations, they are rarely independent and can be competitive, when a URL shortening service become popular the
others receive less attention; or cooperative, when usage of
Google Play Music correlates with that of Youtube due to,
for example, simultaneous arrival of new albums (Fig. 1).
Modeling multiple cascades which are correlated to each
other is a challenging problem. Considerable work have
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

238

