Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Random-Radius Ball Method for Estimating Closeness Centrality
Wataru Inariba

Takuya Akiba

Yuichi Yoshida

The University of Tokyo
and JST, ERATO,
Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
oinari17@gmail.com

Preferred Networks, Inc.
akiba@preferred.jp

National Institute of Informatics
and Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

possible solution to these problems. The harmonic centrality has a similar deﬁnition, speciﬁcally,

1
.
CH (v) =
d(u, v)

Abstract
In the analysis of real-world complex networks, identifying
important vertices is one of the most fundamental operations.
A variety of centrality measures have been proposed and extensively studied in various research areas. Many of distancebased centrality measures embrace some issues in treating
disconnected networks, which are resolved by the recently
emerged harmonic centrality. This paper focuses on a family of centrality measures including the harmonic centrality
and its variants, and addresses their computational difﬁculty
on very large graphs by presenting a new estimation algorithm named the random-radius ball (RRB) method. The
RRB method is easy to implement, and a theoretical analysis, which includes the time complexity and error bounds,
is also provided. The effectiveness of the RRB method over
existing algorithms is demonstrated through experiments on
real-world networks.

u∈V \{v}

This slight modiﬁcation produces meaningful values even
on disconnected graphs. Moreover, a recent survey on centralities (Boldi and Vigna 2014) concluded that, although
the appropriate centrality may differ by application, the harmonic centrality has the most desirable features among popular centrality notions. In this paper, we focus on a generalized notion of the harmonic centrality that we call the (generalized) closeness centrality. The closeness centrality with
respect to a distance-decay (monotone decreasing) function
α : N → R+ is deﬁned by

α(d(u, v)).
Cα (v) =
u∈V \{v}

Introduction

For example, Cα (v) with α(x) = 1/x and α(x) = 2−x
coincides with the harmonic centrality and exponentially attenuated centrality (Dangalchev 2006), respectively.
However, the exact computation of the closeness centrality is impractical on today’s massive graphs. Computing the
closeness centralities of all the vertices requires the all-pairs
shortest paths (APSP) computation, which costs O(nm)
time on unweighted graphs, where n and m are the number
of vertices and edges, respectively. Moreover, computing
the closeness centrality of a single vertex takes O(m) time,
which is not acceptable on large graphs.
Therefore, faster approximation algorithms are needed.
Regarding the closeness centrality, two ingenious algorithms
have been proposed independently: HyperBall (Boldi, Rosa,
and Vigna 2011; Boldi and Vigna 2013) and All-Distances
Sketches (ADS) (Cohen 1997; 2015).
HyperBall is practically the fastest method for approximating the closeness centrality. However, this method has
two drawbacks. First, HyperBall relies heavily on a complicated data structure called a HyperLogLog counter (Flajolet
et al. 2007; Heule, Nunkesser, and Hall 2013) and is hard
to implement. Second, although the experimental results on
real-world networks in (Boldi and Vigna 2013) are promising, no theoretical error bounds are available.
ADS is a framework that can be used to estimate various statistics of graphs, including the closeness centrality.

A measure that indicates the relative importance of a vertex
is called the centrality. Centrality has found many applications in broad research areas such as sociology, psychology,
biology, and computer science (Borgatti and Everett 2006;
Boldi and Vigna 2014).
Bavelas’ closeness centrality (Bavelas 1950) is one
the most classic centralities and is still actively studied (Chechik, Cohen, and Kaplan 2015; Bergamini et al.
2016). It formulates the centrality of a vertex as the inverse
of the sum of the distances to the other vertices. More specifically, Bavelas’ closeness centrality of a vertex v ∈ V in a
graph G = (V, E) is deﬁned by
C(v) = 

1
,
u∈V d(u, v)

where d(u, v) denotes the distance from u to v. However,
Bavelas’ closeness centrality has several drawbacks. First,
it makes sense only on strongly connected graphs; any vertex that is not reachable from some other vertex has the null
centrality value. Second, even if the graph is strongly connected, it can easily be affected by distant vertices.
The recently emerged harmonic centrality (Opsahl, Agneessens, and Skvoretz 2010; Boldi and Vigna 2014) is a
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

125

