Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Correlated Metric Learning for
Sketch-Based 3D Shape Retrieval
Guoxian Dai, Jin Xie, Fan Zhu, Yi Fang∗
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Abu Dhabi, UAE
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, USA
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, USA
categories, example-based 3D shape retrieval and sketchbased 3D shape retrieval. Most of the existing works fall into
the ﬁrst group, which is provided with a query 3D model and
returns similar models. Example-based 3D shape retrieval is
quite straightforward, however, not convenient, since people
usually don’t always have the desired 3D model example
available at hand. Recently, the sketch-based 3D shape retrieval has received more and more attention from computer
vision and computer graphics communities. Compared to
the example-based framework, the sketches are much more
convenient and easier to get, even a young kid could draw
simple and comprehensive sketches. Apart from simpleness,
sketch is also informative since it is very easy for people to
understand the class labels for simple query sketches.
Despite of all the advantages of sketch-based 3D shape
retrieval, actually, it is a quite challenging problem. First,
sketch and 3D shape come from two different modalities
with huge gap. And features extracted from both modalities follow quite different distributions, which makes it very
difﬁcult to directly retrieve 3D shapes from query sketches.
Secondly, sketches are usually very simple with only several lines. The simpleness, on the contrary, also makes the
sketch contain very limited information. The 3D shapes look
visually similar as the query sketches only from some certain view angles. Generally, it is very hard to ﬁnd the “best
views” to project 3D shapes, which makes both sketches and
3D shapes visually similar.
The main challenge for sketch-based 3D shape retrieval is
the domain discrepancies between these two modalities. In
this work, we propose a novel deep correlated metric learning (DCML) method to mitigate the discrepancies between
sketch and 3D shape domains. We ﬁrst extract low-level
features for both sketches and 3D shapes. For sketch, we
use pre-trained AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) to extract features. For 3D shape, we extract 3DSIFT feature (Darom and Keller 2012), which is further encoded by locality-constrained linear coding (LLC) (Wang et
al. 2010) to get a global shape descriptor. Then we learn two
deep neural networks to transform the raw features of both
domains into a nonlinear feature space, mitigating the domain discrepancy as well as maintaining the discriminations.
The loss of the proposed network includes two terms, discriminative term which is constructed with the pairwise distance within each domain and correlation term which is con-

Abstract
The explosive growth of 3D models has led to the pressing
demand for an efﬁcient searching system. Traditional modelbased search is usually not convenient, since people don’t
always have 3D model available by side. The sketch-based
3D shape retrieval is a promising candidate due to its simpleness and efﬁciency. The main challenge for sketch-based 3D
shape retrieval is the discrepancy across different domains. In
the paper, we propose a novel deep correlated metric learning
(DCML) method to mitigate the discrepancy between sketch
and 3D shape domains. The proposed DCML trains two distinct deep neural networks (one for each domain) jointly with
one loss, which learns two deep nonlinear transformations
to map features from both domains into a nonlinear feature
space. The proposed loss, including discriminative loss and
correlation loss, aims to increase the discrimination of features within each domain as well as the correlation between
different domains. In the transfered space, the discriminative loss minimizes the intra-class distance of the deep transformed features and maximizes the inter-class distance of the
deep transformed features at least a predeﬁned margin within
each domain, while the correlation loss focuses on minimizing the distribution discrepancy across different domains. Our
proposed method is evaluated on SHREC 2013 and 2014
benchmarks, and the experimental results demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed method over the state-of-the-art
methods.

Introduction
With the advanced development of digitalization techniques,
3D models are widely available in our daily lives across
many areas, such as 3D printing, medical imaging and entertainment. The vast amounts of 3D model lead to the pressing demand for effectively searching the desired 3D models. Traditional text-based search could not work well for
two main reasons, 1) Only a small number of 3D models are
available with text descriptions, which is too limited to retrieve desired 3D models. 2) It is often very hard to describe
the very detailed information of complex 3D models simply
with texts. Therefore, researchers proposed content-based
3D model retrieval framework, which mainly includes two
∗

: Corresponding Author (Email: yfang@nyu.edu)
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4002

