Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Value Compression of Pattern Databases
Nathan R. Sturtevant

Ariel Felner

Malte Helmert

Computer Science Department
University of Denver
sturtevant@cs.du.edu

ISE Department
Ben-Gurion University
Be’er-Sheva, Israel
felner@bgu.ac.il

Dept. of Math. and Computer Science
University of Basel
Switzerland
malte.helmert@unibas.ch

This paper makes the following contributions. First, we
introduce and describe the idea of VC. Second, we present
an efﬁcient algorithm that, given a distribution of heuristic
values, partitions the VC ranges in a way that maximizes the
average heuristic value. Third, we present extensive experimental results that illustrate the strengths and weaknesses
of VC. We show that the static and dynamic distribution of
heuristic values of the PDB are key for predicting the usefulness of VC. When they correlate VC is more effective. VC
is particularly effective when the majority of values in the
PDB fall in a small range, as it can eliminate many of the
other values and still perform well. When heuristics do not
fall in a small range, we show that the distribution of values
in a heuristic can be shifted with delta heuristics. Finally,
we show that VC is particularly effective in the new meetin-the-middle (MM) family of bidirectional search algorithms
(Holte et al. 2016) where only high values matter. We provide experimental results that support these trends.

Abstract
One common pattern database compression technique is to
merge adjacent database entries and store the minimum of
merged entries to maintain heuristic admissibility. In this paper we propose a compression technique that preserves every
entry, but reduces the number of bits used to store each entry,
therefore limiting the values that can be represented. Even
when this technique throws away low values in the heuristic, it can still have better performance than the traditional
approach. We develop a theoretical basis for selecting which
values to keep and show improved performance in both unidirectional and bidirectional search.

1

Introduction

On approach to improving heuristic search algorithms, used
to ﬁnd a paths between states in a state space, is to improve
the heuristic used to guide the search. Algorithms in the A*
family use a cost function of f (n) = g(n) + h(n), where
g(n) is the cost of the least-cost known path to n and h(n)
is an admissible (lower bound) estimation on the remaining
cost to the goal.
Pattern Databases (PDBs) (Culberson and Schaeffer
1996) are memory-based heuristics which store lookup tables in memory containing the distance to the goal in an
abstracted state space. If the size of the lookup table exceeds the size of main memory, it is usually compressed to
ﬁt in memory. The most common class of lossy compression techniques for memory-based heuristics (Felner et al.
2007), denoted here as entry compression (EC), compresses
a group of entries into a single entry by storing the minimum
of the group, guaranteeing admissibility. Entry compression
is very effective in many domains, but it is also very sensitive to how entries are grouped together, which controls the
loss of information from compression.
In this paper we introduce an orthogonal compression
technique called Value Compression (VC). PDB entries are
traditionally stored using sufﬁcient bits to represent every
possible value in the PDB. Unlike EC, VC retains all entries
in the PDB but reduces the number of bits used to store each
entry. VC partitions the range of values into subranges and
stores one value (the minimum) for each subrange. VC can
be used alone or together with EC.

2

Background

A heuristic h is consistent if, for all states a and b, h(a) ≤
c(a, b)+h(b), where c(a, b) is the cost of a shortest path from
a to b (Felner et al. 2011). Inconsistent heuristics can cause
complications during search, but these can be remedied by
using pathmax or bidirectional pathmax (BPMX) (Felner et
al. 2005) which propagate heuristic values along edges to
smooth local inconsistencies.
A pattern database (PDB) (Culberson and Schaeffer 1996)
is an admissible heuristic built by abstracting the underlying
state space S into an abstract state space S  , usually by ignoring some of the details of states in S. The abstract statespace is usually exponentially smaller than the underlying
search space. The shortest (abstract) distance from any abstract state s ∈ S  to the abstract goal is computed and then
stored in a lookup table – the pattern database. When the
search algorithm arrives at a state s, s is then abstracted into
s , and s is used as an index into the PDB. The value stored
in PDB(s ) is used as an admissible heuristic for s.
PDBs are usually generated in a preprocessing phase and
stored in a lookup table of h-values, with one entry per
abstract state, using a ranking function (e.g., Myrvold and
Ruskey 2001) which maps abstract states to consecutive integers. Once the PDB is created, it can be used to provide
heuristics for an inﬁnite number of problems, either to the

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

912

