Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Thompson Sampling for Stochastic Bandits with Graph Feedback
Aristide C. Y. Tossou

Christos Dimitrakakis

Devdatt Dubhashi

Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
aristide@chalmers.se

University of Lille, France
Chalmers University of Technology
Harvard University, USA
christos.dimitrakakis@gmail.com

Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
dubhashi@chalmers.se

(Scott 2010; Chapelle and Li 2011) demonstrated performance exceeding state of the art. This has prompted a surge
of interest in Thompson sampling, with the ﬁrst theoretical results (Agrawal and Goyal 2012) and industrial adoption (Scott 2015) appearing only recently. However, there are
still only a few theoretical results and many of these are in
the simplest settings. However, it is easy to implement and
effective under very many different settings with complex
feedback structures, and there is thus great need to extend the
theoretical results to these wider settings.
Russo and Roy argue that Thompson sampling is a very
effective and versatile strategy for different information structures. Their paper focuses on speciﬁc examples: the two extreme cases of no and full information mentioned above and
the case of linear bandits and combinatorial feedback.
Here we consider the case where the feedback is deﬁned
through a graph (Caron et al. 2012; Alon et al. 2015). More
speciﬁcally, the arms (choices) are vertices of a (potentially
changing) graph and when an arm is chosen, we see the
reward of that arm as well as its neighbours. On one hand,
it is a clean model for theoretical and experimental analysis
and on the other hand, it also corresponds to realistic settings
in social networks, for example in advertisement settings (c.f.
(Caron et al. 2012)).
We provide a problem-independent1 regret bound that is
parametrized by the clique cover number of the graph and
naturally generalizes the two extreme cases of zero and full
information. We present two variants of Thompson sampling,
that are both very easy to implement and computationally
efﬁcient. The ﬁrst is straightforward Thompson sampling,
and so draws an arm according to its probability of being the
best, but also uses the graph feedback to update the posterior
distribution. The second one can be seen as sampling cliques
in the graph according to their probability of containing the
best arm, and then choosing the empirically best arm in that
clique. Neither algorithm requires knowledge of the complete
graph.
Almost all previous algorithms require the full structure
of the feedback graph in order to operate. Some require the
entire graph for performing their updates only at the end of
round (e.g. (Alon et al. 2015)) Others actually need the description of the graph at the beginning of the round to make

Abstract
We present a novel extension of Thompson Sampling for
stochastic sequential decision problems with graph feedback,
even when the graph structure itself is unknown and/or changing. We provide theoretical guarantees on the Bayesian regret
of the algorithm, linking its performance to the underlying
properties of the graph. Thompson Sampling has the advantage
of being applicable without the need to construct complicated
upper conﬁdence bounds for different problems. We illustrate
its performance through extensive experimental results on real
and simulated networks with graph feedback. More speciﬁcally, we tested our algorithms on power law, planted partitions
and Erdős–Rényi graphs, as well as on graphs derived from
Facebook and Flixster data. These all show that our algorithms
clearly outperform related methods that employ upper conﬁdence bounds, even if the latter use more information about
the graph.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision making problems under uncertainty appear in most modern applications, such as automated experimental design, recommendation systems and optimisation.
The common structure of these applications that, at each
time step t, the decision-making agent is faced with a choice.
After each decision, it obtains some problem-dependent feedback (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006). For the so-called bandit problem, the choices are between different arms, and
the feedback consists of a single scalar reward obtained by
the arm at time t. For the prediction (or full-information)
problem, it obtains the reward of the chosen arm, but also
observes the rewards of all other choices at time t. In both
cases, the problem is to maximise the total reward obtained
over time. However, dealing with speciﬁc types of feedback
may require specialised algorithms. In this paper, we show
that the Thompson sampling algorithm can be applied successfully to a range of sequential decision problems, whose
feedback structure is characterised by a graph.
Our algorithm is an extension of Thompson sampling,
introduced in (Thompson 1933). Although easy to implement and effective in practice, it remained unpopular until relatively recently. Interest grew after empirical studies
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2660

In the sense that it does not depend on the reward structure.

