Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Practical TBox Abduction Based on Justiﬁcation Patterns
Jianfeng Du,1,2 Hai Wan,3,4∗ Huaguan Ma3

1

Collaborative Innovation Center for 21st-century Maritime Silk Road Studies,
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou 510420, P.R.China
2
Cisco School of Informatics, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn
3
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn
TBox abduction is particularly useful in handling missing is-a relations (Lambrix, Dragisic, and Ivanova 2012;
Lambrix and Liu 2013). An is-a relation is a concept inclusion between two concept names, called an atomic concept
inclusion (ACI) in this paper. Simply adding the missing is-a
relations to the TBox may not be a proper way to revise the
TBox since some crucial axioms are still missing. A better
way is to ﬁnd essential causes of the missing is-a relations
and add axioms in these causes to the TBox. Take a TBox T1
consisting of the following axioms α1 , . . . , α6 for example.
α1 : GrandFather  Man
α2 : GrandFather  ∃hasChild.∃hasChild.Human
α3 : GrandMother  Woman
α4 : GrandMother  ∃hasChild.∃hasChild.Human
α5 : Man  ∃hasChild.Human  Father
α6 : Woman  ∃hasChild.Human  Mother
Suppose there is a missing is-a relation GrandFather 
Father and we want to make it entailed by T1 . Although simply adding this relation to T1 will work, this addition cannot
make another missing is-a relation GrandMother  Mother
entailed by T1 . This means that such an addition does not
sufﬁciently improve the quality of T1 . In contrast, adding a
crucial axiom ∃hasChild.Human  Human to T1 will make
the above two missing is-a relations entailed by T1 . TBox
abduction is required to ﬁnd such crucial axioms.
Most existing approaches to TBox abduction adopt simple representation languages for explanations, such as ACI
(Lambrix, Dragisic, and Ivanova 2012; Lambrix and Liu
2013; Wei-Kleiner, Dragisic, and Lambrix 2014) or slightly
extended ACI that allows atomic negation and unqualiﬁed
existential or universal restriction (Halland, Britz, and Klarman 2014). These representation languages may discard essential causes of non-entailments. For the previous example,
if we disallow qualiﬁed existential restrictions, we cannot
discover the explanation {∃hasChild.Human  Human} for
the missing is-a relation GrandFather  Father in T1 .
A more practical way is to allow more DL constructors including qualiﬁed existential restriction to appear in explanations. However, a representation language supporting qualiﬁed existential restriction will yield inﬁnitely many explanations since it allows inﬁnitely many nested role names to
appear in a concept. To guarantee a ﬁnite space for explanations without losing DL expressivity, we consider patterns.

Abstract
TBox abduction explains why an observation is not entailed
by a TBox, by computing multiple sets of axioms, called explanations, such that each explanation does not entail the observation alone while appending an explanation to the TBox
renders the observation entailed but does not introduce incoherence. Considering that practical explanations in TBox
abduction are likely to mimic minimal explanations for TBox
entailments, we introduce admissible explanations which are
subsets of those justiﬁcations for the observation that are instantiated from a ﬁnite set of justiﬁcation patterns. A justiﬁcation pattern is obtained from a minimal set of axioms responsible for a certain atomic concept inclusion by replacing all
concept (resp. role) names with concept (resp. role) variables.
The number of admissible explanations is ﬁnite but can still
be so large that computing all admissible explanations is impractical. Thus, we introduce a variant of subset-minimality,
written ⊆ds -minimality, which prefers fresh (concept or role)
names than existing names. We propose efﬁcient methods for
computing all admissible ⊆ds -minimal explanations and for
computing all justiﬁcation patterns, respectively. Experimental results demonstrate that combining the proposed methods
is able to achieve a practical approach to TBox abduction.

Introduction
Ontologies have been used in many real-life applications, including e-Commerce, medical informatics, bio-informatics,
and the Semantic Web. As a popular formalism for expressing ontologies, description logics (DLs) (Baader et al. 2003)
underpin the standard Web Ontology Language (OWL)
(Horrocks, Patel-Schneider, and van Harmelen 2003). A DL
ontology is often expressed as a knowledge base consisting of both schema information in the TBox and data information in the ABox. TBox abduction, advocated in (Elsenbroich, Kutz, and Sattler 2006), is a pragmatic formalism
for abductive reasoning in DLs. Given a coherent TBox and
an observation which is a concept inclusion not entailed by
the TBox, TBox abduction often explains the observation by
computing multiple sets of axioms called explanations such
that each explanation does not entail the observation alone
while appending an explanation to the TBox renders the observation entailed but does not introduce incoherence.
∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1100

