Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Text-Guided Attention Model for Image Captioning
Jonghwan Mun, Minsu Cho, Bohyung Han
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{choco1916, mscho, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Visual attention plays an important role to understand images
and demonstrates its effectiveness in generating natural language descriptions of images. On the other hand, recent studies show that language associated with an image can steer
visual attention in the scene during our cognitive process. Inspired by this, we introduce a text-guided attention model for
image captioning, which learns to drive visual attention using
associated captions. For this model, we propose an exemplarbased learning approach that retrieves from training data associated captions with each image, and use them to learn attention on visual features. Our attention model enables to describe a detailed state of scenes by distinguishing small or
confusable objects effectively. We validate our model on MSCOCO Captioning benchmark and achieve the state-of-theart performance in standard metrics.

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed framework. In our
approach, the caption associated with an image guides visual
attention to better focus on relevant regions in the scene, resulting in proper and ﬁne-grained image captions even from
cluttered scenes.

Introduction
Image captioning, which aims at automatically generating
descriptions of an image in natural language, is one of the
major problems in scene understanding. This problem has
long been viewed as an extremely challenging task because
it requires to capture and express low- to high-level aspects
of local and global areas in an image containing a variety of
scene elements as well as their relationships.
Despite such challenges, the problem has drawn wide attention and signiﬁcant improvement has been achieved over
the past few years through advance of deep neural networks
together with construction of large-scale datasets. For example, the encoder-decoder framework (Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2015; Mao et al. 2015b; Vinyals et al. 2015;
Wu et al. 2016) formulates the image captioning problem
using a deep neural network trained end-to-end rather than
a pipeline of separate subtasks such as detection of objects
and activities, ordering words, etc.
Recently, one of major advances in image captioning has
been made by incorporating a form of visual attention into
the image encoder (Xu et al. 2015; You et al. 2016). Instead
of compressing an entire image into a ﬂat representation, attention models allow encoder to focus only on relevant features for image captioning. This helps to describe ﬁne details
in regions of interest even from a cluttered image.

On the other hand, recent studies in psychology reveal close relationships between language and visual attention (Mishra 2015). Spoken or text language that expresses
objects and events leads a person to construct a mental representation about them. This representation contributes to
anticipatory eye movements of the person, thus resulting
in successful detection of objects and actions (Lupyan and
Spivey 2010). This suggests that spoken or text language
associated with a scene can provide useful information for
visual attention in the scene.
In this paper, we introduce a text-guided attention model
for image captioning, which learns visual attention from associated exemplar captions for a given image, referred to as
guidance captions, and enables to generate proper and ﬁnegrained captions for the image. In our approach, we extract
the guidance captions by retrieving visually similar images
in training dataset, which would share regions of interest
with the given image. The guidance captions steer our attention model to focus only on relevant regions for image
captioning. Figure 1 illustrates the process with an example
result. The associated caption successfully guides the model
to attend to important regions, and helps it generate detailed

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4233

