Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Portfolio Selection via Subset Resampling
†

Weiwei Shen,†, ‡ Jun Wang†
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
‡
GE Global Research Center, Niskayuna, NY, USA,
realsww@gmail.com, wongjun@gmail.com

worsens when historical return data are limited. In particular,
realized loss could be unbounded when the number of assets
is larger than the sample size of data (Tu and Zhou 2011).
On the other hand, stationarity of the model parameters is
another main concern (Broadie 1993). Return data from thirty
years ago might have little bearing on returns this year, so
parameters are unlikely to be stationary over a long period of
time. While the estimation errors decrease when more data
are used, more data generally require a longer time horizon.
The dilemma between stationarity of parameters and estimation errors exaggerates the challenges in dealing with large
portfolios.
One well-known attempt to overcome the estimation problem without demanding more data is the resampled efﬁcient
portfolio proposed in (Michaud 1989). Speciﬁcally, the basic
concept of Michaud’s resampled efﬁcient portfolio comprises
of generating resamples of asset returns by a parametric bootstrap procedure, computing the mean-variance portfolio for
each resample, and ﬁnally averaging over the obtained portfolios to account for the parameter uncertainty. It aims to
lessen the impact of estimation risk on portfolio weights
and to obtain a more balanced asset allocation, thereby improving the portfolio performance (Michaud and Michaud
2008). However, due to its mixed and ambiguous testing
results, its effectiveness has been continually called into
question (Markowitz and Usmen 2003; Harvey et al. 2010;
Wolf 2013). Mostly, its generalization performance shows
limited or no improvement over Markowitz’s mean-variance
portfolio (Scherer 2002).
While the development of new resampling based portfolio strategies has relatively stagnated since Michaud’s work
(Becker, Gürtler, and Hibbeln 2015), ensemble methods have
achieved remarkable success in advancing performance of
existing algorithms and meanwhile enriching the methodology on its own (Dietterich 2000; Zhou 2012). As the resampled efﬁcient portfolio could be viewed as an application
of the bootstrap aggregating algorithm (Bagging) in order
to enhance stability and mitigate variance (Breiman 1996),
exploring new ensemble methods and leveraging them into
portfolio selection problems deserves a fresh attempt.
The illuminating papers by (Ho 1998) and (Kleiner et al.
2014) have provided a pathway to applying new ensemble
methods into portfolio problems. The former presents the
random subspace method (RSM) in a classiﬁcation context.

Abstract
As the cornerstone of the modern portfolio theory,
Markowitz’s mean-variance optimization is a major model
adopted in portfolio management. However, the estimation
errors in its input parameters substantially deteriorate its performance in practice. Speciﬁcally, loss could be huge when
the number of assets for investment is not much smaller than
the sample size of historical data. To hasten the applicability of Markowitz’s portfolio optimization to large portfolios,
in this paper, we propose a new portfolio strategy via subset resampling. Through resampling subsets of the original
large universe of assets, we construct the associated subset
portfolios with more accurately estimated parameters without
requiring additional data. By aggregating a number of constructed subset portfolios, we attain a well-diversiﬁed portfolio
of all assets. To investigate its performance, we ﬁrst analyze
its corresponding efﬁcient frontiers by simulation, provide
analysis on the hyperparameter selection, and then empirically
compare its out-of-sample performance with those of various competing strategies on diversiﬁed datasets. Experimental
results corroborate that the proposed portfolio strategy has
marked superiority in extensive evaluation criteria.

1

Introduction

Portfolio selection has taken on increasing signiﬁcance in
ﬁnance for managing a wide range of assets, such as mutual funds, pension funds and university endowments (Brandt
2010). After more than half a century since the seminal work
by (Markowitz 1952), the mean-variance framework remains
prevalent and represents the most broadly chosen approach
in both industry and academia for portfolio selection (Kolm,
Tütüncü, and Fabozzi 2014). Its popularity has called for
research on complete comprehension and practical implementation. Brieﬂy, the mean-variance framework formulates
the risk-return tradeoff of assets via the means and the covariance matrix of asset returns. It intuitively implies that
among available portfolios of assets that can achieve a return
target, investors should choose the portfolio with the lowest
volatility. However, the classical mean-variance portfolio often performs poorly out of sample, as its input parameters, the
ﬁrst two moments of asset returns, are difﬁcult to estimate accurately (Best and Grauer 1991). Moreover, such a situation
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1517

