Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Grounded Action Transformation
for Robot Learning in Simulation
Josiah P. Hanna, Peter Stone
Dept. of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA
{jphanna,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
Grounded Simulation Learning (GSL) is a framework for
learning with a simulator in which the simulator is modiﬁed
with data from the physical robot, learning takes place in
simulation, the new policy is evaluated on the robot, and data
from the new policy is used to further modify the simulator
(Farchy et al. 2013). The paper introducing GSL demonstrates
the effectiveness of the method in a single, limited experiment, by increasing the forward walking velocity of a slow,
stable bipedal walk by 26.7%.
This paper introduces a new algorithm – Grounded Action
Transformation (GAT) – for simulator grounding within the
GSL framework. The algorithm is fully implemented and
evaluated using a high-ﬁdelity simulator as a surrogate for
the real world. The results of this study contribute to a deeper
understanding of transfer from simulation methods and the
effectiveness of GAT. In contrast to prior work, our real-world
evaluation of GAT starts from a state-of-the-art walk engine as
the base policy, and nonetheless is able to improve the walk
velocity by over 43%, leading to what may be the fastest
known walk on the SoftBank NAO robot.

Abstract
Robot learning in simulation is a promising alternative to
the prohibitive sample cost of learning in the physical world.
Unfortunately, policies learned in simulation often perform
worse than hand-coded policies when applied on the physical robot. Grounded simulation learning (GSL) promises to
address this issue by altering the simulator to better match
the real world. This paper proposes a new algorithm for GSL
– Grounded Action Transformation – and applies it to learning of humanoid bipedal locomotion. Our approach results in
a 43.27% improvement in forward walk velocity compared
to a state-of-the art hand-coded walk. We further evaluate
our methodology in controlled experiments using a second,
higher-ﬁdelity simulator in place of the real world. Our results
contribute to a deeper understanding of grounded simulation
learning and demonstrate its effectiveness for learning robot
control policies.

Introduction
Manually designing control policies for every possible situation a robot could encounter is impractical. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a promising alternative to handcoding skills. Recent applications of RL to high dimensional
control tasks have seen impressive successes within simulation (Schulman et al. 2015; Lillicrap et al. 2015). Unfortunately, a large gap exists between what is possible in simulation and the reality of robot learning. State-of-the-art learning
methods require thousands of episodes of experience which
is impractical for a physical robot. Aside from the time it
would take, collecting the required training data may lead to
substantial wear on the robot. Furthermore, as the robot explores different policies it may execute unsafe actions which
could damage the robot.
An alternative to learning directly on the robot is learning in simulation (Cutler and How 2015; Koos, Mouret, and
Doncieux 2010). Simulation is a valuable tool for robotics
research as execution of a robotic skill in simulation is comparatively easier than real world execution. However, the
value of simulation learning is limited by the inherent inaccuracy of simulators in modeling the dynamics of the physical
world (Kober, Bagnell, and Peters 2013). As a result, learning that takes place in a simulator is unlikely to improve real
world performance.

Background
Preliminaries
We formalize robot skill learning as a reinforcement learning
(RL) problem (Sutton and Barto 1998). At discrete time-step
t the robot takes action At ∼ π(·|St ) according to a policy,
π, which is a distribution over actions, At ∈ A, conditioned
on the current state, St ∈ S. The environment, E, responds
with St+1 ∼ P (·|St , At ) according to the dynamics, P :
S × A × S → R≥0 which is a probability density function
over next states conditioned on the current state and action.
A trajectory of length L is a sequence of states and actions,
τ := S0 , A0 , ..., SL , AL . We also deﬁne a cost function, c,
which assigns a scalar cost to each (s, a) pair.
 We denote the
L
value of policy, π, as J(π) := Eτ ∼P r(·|π)
t=0 c(St , At )
where P r(τ |π) is the probability of τ when selecting actions
according to π.
We assume π is parameterized by a vector θ and denote the
parameterized policy as πθ . Since θ determines the policy
distribution we overload notation by referring to πθ as θ.
Given initial parameters θ 0 , the goal of policy improvement
is to ﬁnd θ  such that J(θ  ) < J(θ 0 ). In this work, θ is a
deterministic policy that maps state observations to an action

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3834

