Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Structured Prediction in Time Series Data
Jia Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60607

Introduction

(Tsochantaridis et al. 2004) is a maximum margin approach
for structured prediction.
These approaches are all based on the idea of empirical
risk minimization (ERM). However, optimizing many loss
measures such as hamming loss under ERM is NP-hard.
Thus, most existing approaches use approximate convex loss
function to replace the original one. For example, CRF uses
log-loss and Structured SVM (SSVM) uses hinge loss. Unfortunately, such replacements lead to mismatch between the
predictions with the applications. Recent adversarial methods (Asif et al. 2015) reverse the thinking of empirical risk
minimization by instead optimizing exact performance measures on approximate training data.

Time series data is common in a wide range of disciplines including ﬁnance, biology, sociology, and computer science.
Analyzing and modeling time series data is fundamental
for studying various problems in those ﬁelds. For instance,
studying time series physiological data can be used to discriminate patients’ abnormal recovery trajectories and normal ones (Hripcsak, Albers, and Perotte 2015). GPS data
are useful for studying collective decision making of groupliving animals (Strandburg-Peshkin et al. 2015).
There are different methods for studying time series data
such as clustering, regression, and anomaly detection. In this
proposal, we are interested in structured prediction problems in time series data. Structured prediction focuses on
prediction task where the outputs are structured and interdependent, contrary to the non-structured prediction which
assumes that the outputs are independent of other predicted
outputs. Structured prediction is an important problem as
there are structures inherently existing in time series data.
One difﬁculty for structured prediction is that the number of
possible outputs can be exponential which makes modeling
all the potential outputs intractable.

Problem Deﬁnition
In this paper, we focus on the following problem:
Given: training data instances with input X1:t which is a
time series data from timestep 1 to timestep t, and corresponding structured outputs y.
Learn: a model θ which provides a prediction ŷ on unseen
data that minimizes some desired loss function loss(ŷ, y),
where y are the correct outputs.

Related Work

Current Progress

For classiﬁcation and prediction task, one common approach
is to treat each data point in a time series independently. This
is typically known as non-structured prediction. Some classic approaches include support vector machines (SVM), logistic regression, and decision tree. These approaches do not
consider the structure in the data. Hidden Markov Model
(HMM) is a generative model proposed to solve the structured predictions tasks. It takes the transition probability between different timesteps into account. Maximum Entropy
Markov Model (MEMM) is a discriminative model combining HMM and maximum entropy model. In MEMM, it
predicts the most likely label at the current timestep only
considers the history which leads to a problem known as label bias. Conditional Random Fields (Sutton and McCallum
2010), as a discriminative model, is proposed to solve the label bias problem. This model uses a global normalizer which
provides the best possible sequence label. Structured SVM

We studied two problems in time series data: sequence tagging and dynamic network prediction.
Sequence tagging is the problem of assigning a class label
to each timestep in a time series. Activity recognition, which
is one example of sequence tagging, translates raw sensor
data (GPS, accelerometer data) into higher level activity labels such as walking and running. In sequence tagging, one
loss measure that people care about is hamming loss which
has very direct interpretation as the number of timesteps that
the predictor is mismatched with the correct labels. In (Li et
al. 2016), we proposed an adversarial sequence tagging approach. Instead of choosing a predictor’s parametric form
and using ERM on training data to select its parameters, we
obtain the predictor that performs the best for the worst-case
choice of conditional label distributions that match statistics measured from available training data. Under such formulation, the original non-convex and NP hard optimization problem can be solved efﬁciently. For a sequence with
length L and |Y | possible labels for each position, the number of possible labels for the sequence is |Y |L . As a result,

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5042

