Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Soft and Cost MDD Propagators
Guillaume Perez and Jean-Charles Régin
Université Nice Sophia Antipolis, CNRS, I3S, France
guillaume.perez06@gmail.com, jcregin@gmail.com

propose an adaptation of the propagator MDD4R to process
cost-MDDs and we will show that such speed up are also
observed for cost-MDD4R compared to existing methods.
We also consider propagators of soft constraints, which
will allow the violation of some arcs, with respect to a certain amount of violation. We give three original propagators,
one dedicated, one based on the cost-MDD propagator and
one obtained by intersecting the initial MDD with an MDD
expressing a sum constraint.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section
presents the motivation for this work. Then, we recall some
basics about MDDs, cost-MDDs, and propagators for both
of them. Next, we present cost-MDD4R, our cost-MDD
propagator which is an adaptation of the MDD4R propagator. The section about soft constraints presents three propagators. In the experimental section, we give some results
for the complex text generation problem that motivated our
work. We also show by using several random instances that
our methods improve the previous results. Finally, we conclude.

Abstract
Recent developments of efﬁcient propagators, operations and
creation methods for MDDs allow us to directly build efﬁcient MDD-based models, without the need for intermediate
data structures. In this paper, we take another step in this
direction by improving the propagators of cost MDDs. In addition, we introduce a soft MDD propagator in order to deal
with unsatisﬁable problems. This directly offers cost and soft
versions for table constraints and any constraints which can
be represented by an MDD (regular, slide, knapsack...).

Introduction
Multi-valued decision diagrams (MDDs) are efﬁcient data
structures for representing discrete functions. They are
implemented in almost all constraint programming solvers
and are more and more used to build models (Perez and
Régin 2015a; Andersen et al. 2007; Hadzic et al. 2008;
Hoda, van Hoeve, and Hooker 2010; Bergman, van Hoeve,
and Hooker 2011; Gange, Stuckey, and Szymanek 2011).
They can be constructed in several ways, from tables, automata, dynamic programming, etc...; or deﬁned by combining two or more MDDs thanks to operators like intersection,
union, or difference.
The MDD associated with a constraint C is an MDD
which models the set of tuples satisfying C. An MDD propagator of C is an algorithm which removes some inconsistent values of X(C), the variables on which C is deﬁned. In
this paper, we consider soft and cost MDD propagators, that
are propagators for soft constraints represented by MDDs
and cost MDDs.
The cost version of an MDD is an MDD whose arcs have
an additional information: the cost of the arc. In a costMDD, each path from the top layer to the bottom layer has
a cost, and a cost-MDD propagator aims at bounding this
cost. Cost-MDDs are useful to model optimization problems (Bergman and Cire 2016; Bergman, van Hoeve, and
Hooker 2011). Several cost-MDD propagators already exist (Demassey, Pesant, and Rousseau 2006; Gange, Stuckey,
and Van Hentenryck 2013). Recently, MDD4R (Perez and
Régin 2014) a new propagator for MDDs has been proposed.
For some industrial instances, MDD4R improves on previous propagators by a speed factor of up to 100. Hence, we

Motivation
The main motivation of this work is the generation of text
and music from a corpus while avoiding plagiarism (Papadopoulos, Roy, and Pachet 2014; Perez and Régin 2015a).
The goal of this problem, named maxOrder, is to generate sequences of words, where for example, each subsequence of size two belongs to the corpus (Markovian transition) and no subsequence of size 4 belongs to the corpus.
Here 4 denotes the maximum plagiarism size.
To handle this problem, we deﬁne two types of MDDs
(Figure 1). First, we extract the Markov transition matrix
from the corpus, then we build the MDD representing the
Markov transition constraint named M DDM .
Second we build M DDN P , the MDD representing all the
sequences of size 4 not belonging to the corpus. To do so, we
build the MDD of all the sequences of size 4 which belong
to the corpus, then we apply the negation operator (Perez
and Régin 2015b). An important remark is that the negation
of an MDD is linear in its size.
Then, for each sequence of 2 variables we deﬁne an MDD
propagator on M DDM and for each sequence of 4 variables
we deﬁne one MDD propagator on M DDN P (Figure 2).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3922

