Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fast Generalized Distillation for
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Shuang Ao, Xiang Li, Charles X. Ling
Department of Computer Science, The University of Western Ontario
sao@uwo.ca, lxiang2@uwo.ca, cling@csd.uwo.ca

Recently, a framework called Generalized Distillation
(GD)(Lopez-Paz et al. 2016) was proposed, which allows
the knowledge to be transferred between different models
effectively. GD contains two different models, the teacher
model and the student model. The student model tries to
learn from the teacher model by mimicking the outputs of
the teacher model on the training data. Remarkably, in GD,
the knowledge can be directly transferred from the teacher
model to the student model without accessing the data used
to train the teacher. Moreover, GD can be used to exploit
the information of the unlabeled data in a semi-supervised
scenario(Lopez-Paz et al. 2016). Given that GD has such
ability, it is natural to ask the following two questions: (1)
Can the GD framework be applied to solve the SDA problem? (2) How can we improve its effectiveness when we
apply GD to real SDA applications?
To answer these two questions, in this paper, we ﬁrst propose a new paradigm, called Generalized Distillation Semisupervised Domain Adaptation (GDSDA), to solve the SDA
problem. To answer the ﬁrst question, we show that with
GDSDA, the knowledge of the source models can be effectively transferred to the target domain using the unlabeled
data. Speciﬁcally, the target model is trained with the help of
the soft labels, which are the predictions of the target domain
examples given by the source models. Therefore, without
accessing each of the source examples, GDSDA is more efﬁcient, especially when the source domain is relatively large
and the source model is well-trained.
For the second question, we argue that the imitation parameter of GDSDA which controls the amount of knowledge transferred from the source model can greatly affect
the performance of the target model. However, according to
the previous work(Lopez-Paz et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2015),
the imitation parameter is the hyperparameter which was determined by either a brute force search or domain knowledge
in previous work. Therefore, we propose a novel imitation
parameter estimation method for GDSDA, called GDSDASVM, which uses SVM as the base classiﬁer and determines
the imitation parameter efﬁciently. In particular, we use the
Mean Square Error loss for GDSDA-SVM and show that the
Leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) loss can be calculated in a closed form. By minimizing the LOOCV loss on
the target data, we can ﬁnd the optimal imitation parameter. In our experiments, we show that GDSDA-SVM can

Abstract
Semi-supervised domain adaptation (SDA) is a typical setting when we face the problem of domain adaptation in real applications. How to effectively utilize
the unlabeled data is an important issue in SDA. Previous work requires access to the source data to measure the data distribution mismatch, which is ineffective, when the size of the source data is relatively large.
In this paper, we propose a new paradigm, called Generalized Distillation Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation
(GDSDA). We show that without accessing the source
data, GDSDA can effectively utilize the unlabeled data
to transfer the knowledge from the source models. Then
we propose GDSDA-SVM which uses SVM as the base
classiﬁer and can efﬁciently solve the SDA problem.
Experimental results show that GDSDA-SVM can effectively utilize the unlabeled data to transfer the knowledge between different domains under the SDA setting.

Introduction
Domain adaptation can be used in many real applications,
which addresses the problem of learning a target domain
with the help of a different but related source domain. In
real applications, it can be expensive to obtain sufﬁcient labeled examples while there are abundant unlabeled ones.
Semi-supervised domain adaptation (SDA) tries to exploit
the knowledge from the source domain and use a certain
number of unlabeled examples and a few labeled ones from
the target domain to learn a target model. Typically, the
labeled examples in the target domain are too few to construct a good classiﬁer alone. Therefore, an important issue
in SDA is how to effectively utilize the unlabeled examples.
Previous work in SDA required access to the source
data to measure the data distribution mismatch between the
source and target domains (Duan et al. 2009; Donahue et al.
2013; Daumé III, Kumar, and Saha 2010; Yao et al. 2015).
However, in some situations, we may not be able to access
each of the source examples, for many reasons. When we
use a large dataset as our source domain, for example, it is
ineffective to compare each of the source examples with the
target data to estimate the data distribution mismatch.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1719

