Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Query Complexity of Tournament Solutions
Palash Dey

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

important voting rules, like Copeland for example, are deﬁned using the tournament induced by the majority relation
of the input set of votes. Other than voting, tournaments have
found many applications in multi-criteria decision analysis (AR+ 86; BMP+ 06), zero-sum games (FR95; DLB96),
coalitional games (BH10), argumentation theory (Dun95;
Dun07), biology (CH07), etc.

Abstract
A directed graph where there is exactly one edge between every pair of vertices is called a tournament. Finding the “best”
set of vertices of a tournament is a well studied problem in social choice theory. A tournament solution takes a tournament
as input and outputs a subset of vertices of the input tournament. However, in many applications, for example, choosing
the best set of drugs from a given set of drugs, the edges of
the tournament are given only implicitly and knowing the orientation of an edge is costly. In such scenarios, we would like
to know the best set of vertices (according to some tournament solution) by “querying” as few edges as possible. We,
in this paper, precisely study this problem for commonly used
tournament solutions: given an oracle access to the edges of a
tournament T , ﬁnd f(T ) by querying as few edges as possible, for a tournament solution f. We ﬁrst show that the set of
Condorcet non-losers in a tournament can be found by querying 2n−⌊log n⌋−2 edges only and this is tight in the sense that
every algorithm for ﬁnding the set of Condorcet non-losers
needs to query at least 2n−⌊log n⌋−2 edges in the worst case,
where n is the number of vertices in the input tournament.
We then move on to study other popular tournament solutions
and show that any algorithm for ﬁnding the Copeland set, the
Slater set, the Markov set, the bipartisan set, the uncovered
set, the Banks set, and the top cycle must query Ω(n2 ) edges
in the worst case. On the positive side, we are able to circumvent our strong query complexity lower bound results by
proving that, if the size of the top cycle of the input tournament is at most k, then we can ﬁnd all the tournament solutions mentioned above by querying O(nk + n log n/log(1−1/k))
edges only.

Formally, a tournament is deﬁned as a set of alternatives
along with an irreﬂexive, antisymmetric, and total relation,
called dominance relation, on the set alternatives. An equivalent and often more convenient view of a tournament is as a
directed graph on the alternatives where, between every pair
of vertices (which corresponds to the alternatives), there is
exactly one edge. A tournament solution takes a tournament
as input and outputs a subset of the vertices. Tournament
and tournament solutions are important mathematical tools
in any general situation where we have to make a choice
from a set of alternatives solely based on pairwise comparisons.
Motivation. We often have situations where the input tournament is given “implicitly” – the vertices of the tournament are given explicitly and we have to query for an edge
to know its orientation. Moreover, knowing the orientation
of an edge of the tournament can often be costly. For example, we can think of an application where we have a set
of drugs for a particular disease and we want to know the
“best” (according to some tournament solution) set of drugs.
A natural dominance relation in this context would be to deﬁne a drug x to dominate another drug y if the probability
that the drug x cures the disease is more than the corresponding probability for the drug y. Since these probabilities
are often not known a priori, estimating them often requires
extensive lab experiments as well as clinical trials. Hence,
we would like to make as few queries as possible to know
the best set of drugs. More generally, we can think of any
tournament based voting rules like Copeland in an election
scenario. A tournament based voting rule chooses winners
solely based on the tournament induced by the pairwise majority relation between the alternatives. However, in many
applications of voting in multiagent systems, recommender
systems (PHG00) for example, the number of voters is huge
and consequently, learning the majority relation is costly.
Hence, we would like to learn the set of most popular items
(according to the tournament solution under consideration)

Introduction
Many scenarios in multiagent systems can often be modeled
and analyzed using tournaments (Mou86; BBFH14). An important example of such scenarios is voting where we have
a set of alternatives and a set of votes which are linear orders over the set of alternatives. A important tournament
to consider in this context is deﬁned by the majority relation induced by the set of votes. In the majority relation, an
alternative x is preferred over another alternative y if x is
preferred over y in a majority of the votes. Indeed, many
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2992

