Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Label-Free Supervision of Neural Networks with
Physics and Domain Knowledge
Russell Stewart , Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{stewartr, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, labeled data is scarce
and obtaining more labels is expensive. We introduce a new
approach to supervising neural networks by specifying constraints that should hold over the output space, rather than direct examples of input-output pairs. These constraints are derived from prior domain knowledge, e.g., from known laws of
physics. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on
real world and simulated computer vision tasks. We are able
to train a convolutional neural network to detect and track
objects without any labeled examples. Our approach can signiﬁcantly reduce the need for labeled training data, but introduces new challenges for encoding prior knowledge into
appropriate loss functions.

f

X

Y

g

R

Figure 1: Constraint learning aims to recover the transformation f without providing labels y. Instead, we look for a
mapping f that captures the structure required by g.
and relationships that are known to hold because of prior
domain knowledge. The process of providing these necessary constraints may still require large amounts of domain
speciﬁc engineering.
Nevertheless, by training without direct examples of the
values our hidden (output) variables take, we gain several
advantages over traditional supervised learning, including
1) a reduction in the amount of work spent labeling, and 2)
an increase in generality, as a single set of constraints can
be applied to multiple data sets without relabeling. The primary contribution of this work is to demonstrate how constraint learning may be used to supervise neural networks
across three practical computer vision tasks. We explore the
challenge of simultaneously learning feature representations
over raw data and avoiding trivial, low entropy solutions in
the constraint space.

Introduction
Applications of machine learning are often encumbered by
the need for large amounts of labeled training data. Neural networks have made large amounts of labeled data even
more crucial to success (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Nonetheless, we
observe that humans are often able to learn without direct
examples, opting instead for high level instructions for how
a task should be performed, or what it will look like when
completed. In this work, we ask whether a similar principle can be applied to teaching machines; can we supervise
networks without individual examples by instead describing
only the structure of desired outputs?
Contemporary methods for learning without labels often fall under the category of unsupervised learning. Autoencoders, for example, aim to uncover hidden structure in
the data without having access to any label. Such systems
succeed in producing highly compressed, yet informative
representations of the inputs (Kingma and Welling 2013;
Le 2013). However, these representations differ from ours as
they are not explicitly constrained to have a particular meaning or semantics.
In this paper, we constrain the type-level semantics of the
hidden variables we hope to discover, but still train without labels by learning from constraints (see (Shcherbatyi and
Andres 2016) for an introduction to this idea). Intuitively, algebraic and logical constraints are used to encode structures

Problem Setup
In a traditional supervised learning setting, we are given a
training set D = {(x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xn , yn )} of n training examples. Each example is a pair (xi , yi ) formed by an instance xi ∈ X and the corresponding output (label) yi ∈ Y .
The goal is to learn a function f : X → Y mapping inputs to outputs. To quantify performance, a loss function
 : Y × Y → R is provided, and a mapping is found via
f ∗ = arg min
f ∈F

n


(f (xi ), yi )

(1)

i=1

where the optimization is over a pre-deﬁned class of functions F (hypothesis class). In our case, F will be (convolutional) neural networks parameterized by their weights.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2576

