Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

A Monte Carlo Localization Assignment
Using a Neato Vacuum with ROS
Zuozhi Yang and Todd W. Neller
Gettysburg College
Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, 17325 USA
tneller@gettsyburg.edu

Global Localization In contrast to local position tracking,
global localization assumes no knowledge of initial pose.
However, it subsumes the local problem since it uses knowledge gained during the process to keep tracking the position.
The goal of the MCL algorithm introduced in this assignment is to perform global localization.

Abstract
Monte Carlo Localization (MCL) is a sampling-based
algorithm for mobile robot localization. In this paper we
describe an MCL assignment and its required hardware
and software. The Neato vacuum robot and a Raspberry
Pi serve as the core of the robot model. The Robot Operating System (ROS) is used as the robot programming
environment. Students are expected to learn the localization problem, implement the MCL algorithm, and
better understand the kidnapped robot problem and the
limitations of MCL by observing the performance of the
algorithm in real-time application.

Kidnapped Robot Problem The kidnapped robot problem arises from the movement of a successfully localized
robot to a different unknown position in the environment
to see if it can globally localize. Thus it is more difﬁcult
than global localization problem since the robot has a strong
but wrong belief in where it is. The original MCL algorithm
does not have the ability to recover from kidnapping. Such
failure is also often referred to as catastrophic failure.

Introduction
This abstract offers a high-level description of an openaccess robotics assignment concerning Monte Carlo Localization (MCL). We begin with a description of the assignment challenges. In later sections we described the hardware
and software employed, the relevant algorithms, and the interesting design tradeoffs posed by the assignment.
One will note that this work largely derives from that of
Paul Ruvolo, who has been generous in his assistance. However, we see possibilities for open-ended design to address
differences between Ruvolo’s assignment, classic MCL, and
newer approaches that address the Kidnapped Robot Problem.

Audience
This assignment is suited for an upper-level undergraduate
or graduate student in an Artiﬁcial Intelligence or Mobile
Robotics course.

Prerequisites
• facility with programming Python 2.7
• some experience with Unix/Linux operating system
• some exposure to linear algebra and probability theory

Resources
• Textbook:
Probabilistic Robotics by Thrun et al.
• A Gentle Introduction to ROS by Jason M. O’Kane: https:
//cse.sc.edu/%7Ejokane/agitr/

The Challenges
The mobile robot localization problem is to determine the
pose (direction and position) of the robot given the map of
the environment, sensor data, a sensor error model, movement data, and a movement error model. It is a very basic
problem of robotics since most of robot tasks require knowledge of the position of the robot. There are three types of localization problems in increasing order of difﬁculty (Thrun,
Burgard, and Fox 2005).

Hardware and Software
The Hardware
The robot consist of several parts (Ruvolo 2015):
• Neato XV vacuum robot - This model has the essential parts we need: an actuator for moving and laser range
ﬁnders for sensing.
• A Raspberry Pi 2 Model B with an Adafruit B&W
16x2 LCD and keypad kit - This is for communication
between computer and the robot. More speciﬁcally, it will
host an ad-hoc wireless connection that computer can join

Local Position Tracking The initial pose of the robot is
assumed to be known in this type of problem. Since the uncertainties are conﬁned to region near the actual pose, this is
considered to be a local problem.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4803

