Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Supervised Sparse Learning Framework to Solve EEG
Inverse Problem for Discriminative Activations Pattern
Feng Liu
Department of Industrial, Manufacturing & Systems Engineering,
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA

Abstract
guishing different sources under different brain status. We
propose a new supervised formulation of the inverse problem and with efﬁcient algorithms to solve it. The new formulation is composed of two ingredients, source reconstruction
and supervised source classiﬁcation. The contributions of
this paper is threefold, including: (a) First proposed a supervised inverse model with discriminative capability by leveraging the label information; (b) First describe the EEG inverse problem as an overcomplete dictionary learning problem and show the opportunities of using algorithms from
compressive sensing and computer vision community; (c)
Propose efﬁcient algorithms to solve the optimization model
good accuracy.

Electroencephalography (EEG) is one of the most important
noninvasive neuroimaging tools that provides excellent temporal accuracy. As the EEG electrode sensors measure electrical potentials on the scalp instead of direct measuring activities of brain voxels deep inside the head, many approaches
are proposed to infer the activated brain regions due to its signiﬁcance in neuroscience research and clinical application.
However, since mostly part of the brain activity is composed
of the spontaneous neural activities or non-task related activations, task related activation patterns will be corrupted
in strong background signal/noises. In our research, we proposed a sparse learning framework for solving EEG inverse
problem which aims to explicitly extract the discriminative
sources for different cognitive tasks by fusing the label information into the inverse model. The proposed framework is
capable of estimation the discriminative brain sources under
given different brain states where traditional inverse methods
failed. We introduced two models, one is formulated as supervised sparse dictionary learning and the other one is the graph
regularized discriminative source estimation model to promote the consistency within same class. Preliminary experimental results also validated that the proposed sparse learning framework is effective to discover the discriminative taskrelated brain activation sources, which shows the potential to
advance the high resolution EEG source analysis for real-time
non-invasive brain imaging research.

Problem formulation
The electromagnetic ﬁeld measured by EEG can be described as the following optimization model:
2

arg min X − LSF + λΘ(S)

(1)

S

where X ∈ RNc ×Nt is the EEG data measured at a set of
Nc electrodes for Nt time points, L ∈ RNc ×Nd is the lead
ﬁeld matrix which maps the source signal to sensors on the
scalp, each column of L represents the activation pattern of
a particular source to the EEG electrodes, S ∈ RNd ×Nt represents the corresponding driving potential in Nd sources locations for all the Nt time points.The penalty function Θ(S)
is to discourage unnecessary complicated source conﬁgurations and enforces neurophysiologically plausible solution.
In our research, we propose a source reconstruction formulation fused with classiﬁcation information and the label information is coded in H, the goal function is given below:

Background and Motivation
To infer brain cortex activations from the scalp recorded
EEG signals belongs to the class of inverse problem. Precise
localization of neuronal activity inside the brain can offer an
insightful understanding of how brain is functioning given
certain cognitive and motion tasks. According to previous
research (Raichle 2006), more than 80% of the brain energy
is devoted to the non-task related energy. To extract discriminative sources given different brain status is extremely difﬁcult and not well explored. In this research, we aim to calculate extract discriminative sources to facilitate the understanding of brain mechanism under different cognitive tasks
or different neurological disorders by incorporating a simple
linear classiﬁer which can be interpreted as discriminative
ﬁlters for different brain patterns.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no literature addressing simultaneously estimation of brain sources and distin-

2

2

 W, S = arg min X − LSF + β H − W SF
W,S

(2)

2

+ λ W F s.t. ∀i, si 0 ⩽ T
where H ∈ Rm×Nt is the label matrix where non-zero entry
in each column denotes the corresponding class, there are
m classes corresponding m different brain status. W is the
linear classiﬁer parameter to be trained. For Eqn.2, it can be
rewritten as

 
 2


X
L

√
√
 W, S = arg min 
−
S
 (3)
βH
βW
W,S

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2
+λ W F

5044

F

s.t. ∀i, si 0 ⩽ T

