Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Rank Ordering Constraints Elimination
with Application for Kernel Learning
Ying Xie,a Chris H.Q. Ding,b,a Yihong Gong,c Zongze Wud
a

c

Anhui University, Hefei, China; b University of Texas Arlington, Texas, USA;
Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, China; d Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
yingxie@126.com, chqding@uta.edu, ygong@xjtu.edu.cn, zzwu@scut.edu.cn

based kernels so that to maximize the ﬁnal kernel’s alignment(Cristianini et al. 2001b; 2001a) with the class information in the data.
In neural network or biological systems, very often some
parts play more important role than others. For example, in
human eyes, the primary visual cortex (V1) is considered
most important part that provides spatial features for human
recognition (deep learning are motivated by simple-cell and
complex cells populated in V1). This knowledge should be
utilized in the learning system.
In many cases, these prior knowledge manifest themselves in the rank ordering constraints(Zhu et al. 2005;
Hoi, Lyu, and Chang 2006). These are inequality constraints,
and the generally very difﬁcult to deal with in optimization.
This is partly the reason that incorporating the prior knowledge in the form of rank ordering constraints are not widely
used so far. Note also that rank ordering constraints also
occur in other contexts, for example in cost-sensitive SVM
(Lee and Scott 2010).
In this paper, we provide a slack variable transformation methods, that effectively eliminates the rank ordering
inequality constraints, and simplify the learning task signiﬁcantly. We apply this transformation in kernel learning
problem, and also provide an efﬁcient algorithm to solved
the transformed system. On seven datasets, we demonstrate
the slack variable transformation approach reduces the computational time by orders of magnitudes as compared to
the current standard quadratically constrained quadratic programming(QCQP) optimization approach.

Abstract
A number of machine learning domains, such as information retrieval, recommender systems, kernel learning, neural
network-biological systems etc, deal with importance scores.
Very often, there exist some prior knowledge that could help
improve the performance. In many cases, these prior knowledge manifest themselves in the rank ordering constraints.
These inequality constraints are usually very difﬁcult to deal
with in optimization. In this paper, we provide a slack variable transformation methods, which effectively eliminates the
rank ordering inequality constraints, and thus simplify the
learning task signiﬁcantly. We apply this transformation in
kernel learning problem, and also provide an efﬁcient algorithm to solved the transformed system. On seven datasets,
our approach reduces the computational time by orders of
magnitudes as compared to the current standard quadratically
constrained quadratic programming(QCQP) optimization approach.

Introduction
A number of data mining and machine learning domains
deal with importance scores relevant to rank ordering. Very
often, there exist some prior knowledge that could help improve the performance.
In information retrieval (IR)(Manning, Schuetze, and
Raghavan 2009), the relevance scores determine the ranking
of retrieved documents. If some prior knowledge exist that
says certain documents must be more relevant than certain
other documents, than this partial rank ordering knowledge
should be incorporated in the IR system, maybe in a form of
constraints if the system uses an optimization framework to
compute the relevance scores.
In recommender systems(Jannach et al. 2010), the ﬁnal
rating scores are used to rank the recommendation list to a
user. If some prior knowledge are known that certain movies
should be ranked higher than certain other movies, this prior
knowledge should be incorporated into the system.
In kernel learning(Lanckriet et al. 2004), in the popular framework of learning the weights of a linear combination of input kernels, there are sometimes prior knowledge
that should incorporated into the system. For example, spectral kernel learning optimizes the weights of eigenvector-

Rank Ordering Constraints
Let α1 , · · · , αm be the relevance score of documents in information retrieval system, or rating score of items in recommender system, or the weights of kernels in linear combination of kernels for kernel learning, etc. Sometimes, we
have some prior knowledge and wish to impose the rank
ordering constraints(Zhu et al. 2005).
αi ≥ αi+1 , i = 1, · · · , m − 1.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

(1)

Typically, the learning system ( IR system, recommender
system, kernel learning system, etc) determines these impor-

2775

