Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Question Difﬁculty Prediction for
READING Problems in Standard Tests
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{huangzhy, zhhk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {qiliuql, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
‡
iFLYTEK Research, {mygao2, siwei, gphu}@iﬂytek.com

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, yusu@iﬂytek.com
Abstract

(TD) Larry was on another of his underwater expeditions but this
time, it was different. He decided to take his daughter along with
him. She was only ten years old.[...]Dangerous areas did not prevent
him from continuing his search. Sometimes, he was limited to a
cage underwater but that did not bother him. [...]Already, she
looked like she was much braver than had been then. This was the
key to a successful underwater expedition.

Standard tests aim to evaluate the performance of examinees using different tests with consistent difﬁculties. Thus,
a critical demand is to predict the difﬁculty of each test question before the test is conducted. Existing studies are usually
based on the judgments of education experts (e.g., teachers),
which may be subjective and labor intensive. In this paper, we
propose a novel Test-aware Attention-based Convolutional
Neural Network (TACNN) framework to automatically solve
this Question Difﬁculty Prediction (QDP) task for READING problems (a typical problem style in English tests) in
standard tests. Speciﬁcally, given the abundant historical test
logs and text materials of questions, we ﬁrst design a CNNbased architecture to extract sentence representations for the
questions. Then, we utilize an attention strategy to qualify the
difﬁculty contribution of each sentence to questions. Considering the incomparability of question difﬁculties in different
tests, we propose a test-dependent pairwise strategy for training TACNN and generating the difﬁculty prediction value.
Extensive experiments on a real-world dataset not only show
the effectiveness of TACNN, but also give interpretable insights to track the attention information for questions.

1

(TQ)
Q1:In what way was this expedition different for Larry?
A. His daughter had grown up.
B. He had become a famous diver.
(TO)
C. His father would dive with him.
D. His daughter would dive with him.
(TQ)
Q2:Why did Larry have to stay in a cage underwater sometimes?
A. To protect himself from danger.
B. To dive into the deep water.
(TO)
C. To admire the underwater view.
D. To take photo more conveniently.

(a) A READING problem

1

Q1
Q2

0.8

Difficulty (P)

†

Zhenya Huang,† Qi Liu,†∗ , Enhong Chen,† Hongke Zhao,†
Mingyong Gao,‡ Si Wei,‡ Yu Su, Guoping Hu‡

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
T1

T2

T3

T4

T5

T6

T7

T8

(b) Difﬁculties in tests

Figure 1: Two questions of READING problem in tests.

(we will illustrate this discovery experimentally). Therefore,
it is an urgent issue to automatically predict question difﬁculty without manual intervention. Fortunately, with abundant tests recorded by automatic test paper marking systems, test logs of examinees and text materials of questions,
as the auxiliary information, become more and more available, which beneﬁts a data-driven solution to this Question
Difﬁculty Prediction (QDP) task, especially for the typical
READING problems. For example, Figure 1(a) shows an example of a READING problem with 2 questions, and each
question contains the corresponding materials of document
(TD), question (TQ) and options (TO).
Actually, there are some efforts on text understanding for
READING problems, e.g., machine comprehension (Yin,
Ebert, and Schütze 2016; Sachan et al. 2015). However,
these works could not be directly applied to QDP in standard tests due to the unique challenges in this task. First,
READING problems contain multiple parts of text materials (i.e., TD, TQ and TO in Figure 1(a)), which requires an
uniﬁed way to understand and represent them from a semantic perspective. Second, it is necessary to distinguish the importance of text materials to a speciﬁc question, because different questions concern different parts of texts. For example, Q1 in Figure 1(a) concentrates more on the highlighted
“blue” sentences while Q2 focuses more on the “green”
ones. Third, as shown in Figure 1(b), question (Q1 , Q2 ) difﬁculties are obviously different in different tests (T1 to T8 ).
This evidence indicates that different questions are incomparable in different tests. E.g., we cannot conclude that Q2
with difﬁculty 0.6 in T1 is more difﬁcult than Q1 with 0.37

Introduction

In the widely used standard test, such as TOEFL or SAT, examinees are often allowed to retake tests and choose higher
scores for college admission (Zhang and Yanling 2008). This
rule brings an important requirement that we should select
test papers with consistent difﬁculties to guarantee the fairness. Therefore, measurements on tests have attracted much
attention (Boopathiraj and Chellamani 2013).
Among the measurements, one of the most crucial demands is predicting the difﬁculty of each speciﬁc test question, i.e., the percentage of examinees who answer the question wrong (Hontangas et al. 2000). Unfortunately, the question difﬁculty is not directly observable before the test is
conducted, and traditional methods often resort to expertise, such as manual labeling or artiﬁcial tests organization (Fuchs et al. 1992). Obviously, these human-based solutions are limited in that they are subjective and labor intensive, and the results could also be biased or misleading
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author.

1352

