Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Optimal Neighborhood Kernel
Clustering with Multiple Kernels
Xinwang Liu, Sihang Zhou, Yueqing Wang,
Miaomiao Li, Yong Dou, En Zhu, Jianping Yin
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China, 410073

Lu et al. 2014). This category has received intensive attention during the past few years, and progress continues being
made along this line of research (Gönen and Margolin 2014;
Du et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016). In (Gönen
and Margolin 2014), the kernel combination weights are allowed to adaptively change with respect to samples to better capture their individual characteristics. By replacing the
squared error in k-means with an 2,1 -norm based one, (Du
et al. 2015) presents a robust multiple kernel k-means algorithm that simultaneously ﬁnds the best clustering labels
and the optimal combination of multiple kernels. The work
in (Liu et al. 2016) designs a matrix-induced regularization
to reduce the redundancy and enhance the diversity of the
selected kernels. (Li et al. 2016) proposes a MKC algorithm
with a “local” kernel alignment, which only requires that the
similarity of a sample to its k-nearest neighbours be aligned
with the ideal similarity matrix. Our work in this paper focuses on the second category.
One common assumption taken by the above clustering
algorithms in the second category is that the optimal kernel
is expressed as a linear combination of base kernels. This
assumption is not only helpful to reduce the computational
load of learning algorithms but also achieves promising clustering performance in partial practical applications (Yu et al.
2012; Gönen and Margolin 2014). Nevertheless, although
this assumption bears the aforementioned good properties,
we observe that it: i) over reduces the feasible set of optimal kernels, which could result in the learned kernel with
limited representability; and ii) does not well take into account the effect of clustering on learning the optimal kernel,
and ignores the possibility that these two learning processes
may need to negotiate with each other in order to achieve the
optimality. Both factors could adversely affect the learned
kernel, resulting in unsatisfying clustering performance.
To address these issues, we propose an optimal neighborhood kernel clustering algorithm to enhance the representability of the learned optimal kernel. In speciﬁc, instead
of rigorously requiring the optimal kernel being a linear
combination of base kernels, our algorithm allows the optimal kernel to reside in the neighborhood of the latter. In
this way, our algorithm effectively enlarges the region from
which an optimal kernel can be chosen, and therefore is in
a better position than the traditional ones to identify a more
suitable kernel for clustering. Moreover, as a by-product, we

Abstract
Multiple kernel k-means (MKKM) aims to improve clustering performance by learning an optimal kernel, which is usually assumed to be a linear combination of a group of prespeciﬁed base kernels. However, we observe that this assumption could: i) cause limited kernel representation capability;
and ii) not sufﬁciently consider the negotiation between the
process of learning the optimal kernel and that of clustering,
leading to unsatisfying clustering performance. To address
these issues, we propose an optimal neighborhood kernel
clustering (ONKC) algorithm to enhance the representability
of the optimal kernel and strengthen the negotiation between
kernel learning and clustering. We theoretically justify this
ONKC by revealing its connection with existing MKKM algorithms. Furthermore, this justiﬁcation shows that existing
MKKM algorithms can be viewed as a special case of our approach and indicates the extendability of the proposed ONKC
for designing better clustering algorithms. An efﬁcient algorithm with proved convergence is designed to solve the
resultant optimization problem. Extensive experiments have
been conducted to evaluate the clustering performance of the
proposed algorithm. As demonstrated, our algorithm signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art ones in the literature,
verifying the effectiveness and advantages of ONKC.

Introduction
Multiple kernel clustering (MKC) learns an optimal kernel
from a group of pre-speciﬁed kernels to improve clustering performance (Zhao, Kwok, and Zhang 2009; Kumar and
Daumé 2011; Xia et al. 2014; Gönen and Margolin 2014;
Zhou et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016; Cao et
al. 2015a; Zhang et al. 2015; Cao et al. 2015b; Zhang et
al. 2016). These algorithms can roughly be grouped into
two categories. The ﬁrst category constructs a consensus
matrix by utilizing low-rank optimization (Xia et al. 2014;
Zhou et al. 2015; Kumar and Daumé 2011). By following
the multiple kernel learning (MKL) framework (Rakotomamonjy et al. 2008; Cortes, Mohri, and Rostamizadeh 2012;
Liu et al. 2015; Xu et al. 2016; Xu, Tsang, and Xu 2013;
2012; Liu et al. 2013a; 2014), the other category of methods
optimize the combination coefﬁcients of each base kernel
by minimizing a clustering-related criterion (Yu et al. 2012;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2266

