Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Face Hallucination with Tiny Unaligned Images by
Transformative Discriminative Neural Networks
Xin Yu, Fatih Porikli
Australian National University
{xin.yu, fatih.porikli}@anu.edu.au

der the accuracy of automatic alignment techniques, which
usually assume facial landmarks are visible and detectable.
As a result, the performance of face hallucination degrades
severely. Such a broad spectrum of pose and expression
variations also makes learning a comprehensive appearance
model even harder. For instance, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) based schemes become critically ineffective to
learn a reliable face model while aiming to capture different in- and out-plane rotations, scale changes, translational
shifts, and facial expressions. As a result, these methods lead
to unavoidable artifacts when LR faces are misaligned or
depict different poses and facial expressions from the base
appearance model.
Rather than learning holistic appearance models, many
methods upsample facial components by transferring references from an HR training dataset and then blending them
into an HR version (Tappen and Liu 2012; Yang, Liu, and
Yang 2013; Zhou and Fan 2015). These methods expect the
resolution of input faces to be sufﬁcient enough for detecting the facial landmarks and parts. When the resolution is
very low, they fail to localize the components accurately,
thus producing non-realistic faces. In other words, the facial component based methods are unsuitable to upsample
very LR faces.
In this paper, we present a new transformative discriminative neural network (TDN) to overcome the above issues
and achieve super-resolving a tiny (i.e.16×16 pixels) and
unaligned face image by a remarkable upscaling factor 8,
where we reconstruct 64 pixels for each single pixel of the
input LR image.
Our network consists of two components: an upsampling
network that comprises deconvolutional and spatial transformation network (Jaderberg et al. 2015) layers, and a discriminative network. The upsampling network is designed
to progressively improve the resolution of the latent feature maps at each deconvolutional layer. We do not assume
the LR face is aligned in advance. Instead, we compensate for any misalignment and changes through the spatial
transformation network layers that are embedded into the
upsampling network. One can use the pixel-wise intensity
similarity between the estimated and the ground-truth HR
face images as the objective function in the training stage.
However, when the upscaling factor becomes larger, employing only the pixel-wise intensity similarity causes over-

Abstract
Conventional face hallucination methods rely heavily on accurate alignment of low-resolution (LR) faces before upsampling them. Misalignment often leads to deﬁcient results and
unnatural artifacts for large upscaling factors. However, due
to the diverse range of poses and different facial expressions, aligning an LR input image, in particular when it is
tiny, is severely difﬁcult. To overcome this challenge, here
we present an end-to-end transformative discriminative neural network (TDN) devised for super-resolving unaligned and
very small face images with an extreme upscaling factor of
8. Our method employs an upsampling network where we
embed spatial transformation layers to allow local receptive
ﬁelds to line-up with similar spatial supports. Furthermore,
we incorporate a class-speciﬁc loss in our objective through a
successive discriminative network to improve the alignment
and upsampling performance with semantic information. Extensive experiments on large face datasets show that the proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Face images provide vital information for visual perception
and identity analysis. Nonetheless, when the resolution of
the face image is very small (e.g. in typical surveillance
videos), there is little information that can be inferred from
it. Very low-resolution (LR) face images not only degrade
the performance of the recognition systems but also impede
human interpretation. This challenge motivates the reconstruction of high-resolution (HR) images from given LR
counterparts, known as face hallucination, and attracts increasing interest in recent years.
Previously proposed face hallucination methods based on
holistic appearance models (Liu, Shum, and Zhang 2001;
Baker and Kanade 2002; Wang and Tang 2005; Liu, Shum,
and Freeman 2007; Hennings-Yeomans, Baker, and Kumar 2008; Ma, Zhang, and Qi 2010; Yang et al. 2010;
Li et al. 2014; Arandjelović 2014; Kolouri and Rohde 2015)
demand LR faces to be precisely aligned beforehand. However, aligning LR faces to appearance models is not a
straightforward task itself, and more often, it requires expert
feedback when the input image is small. Pose and expression variations that naturally exist in LR face images hinc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4327

