Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Structure Regularized Unsupervised Discriminant Feature Analysis
Mingyu Fan

Xiaojun Chang

Dacheng Tao

College of Maths & Info. Science,
Wenzhou University,
Wenzhou 325035, China
fanmingyu@wzu.edu.cn

Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
University of Technology Sydney,
Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
cxj273@gmail.com

Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
University of Technology Sydney,
Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au

supervised feature selection (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2006). Supervised feature selection evaluates features by computing a
feature’s correlation with the class labels. Representative supervised feature selection methods include the Fisher score
method (Duda, Hart, and Stork 2000), robust 21 regression
method (Nie et al. 2010) and the generalized Fisher score
method (Gu, Li, and Han 2011). By exploiting the information of class labels, supervised feature selection is usually
able to identify the discriminative and effective features for
recognition and classiﬁcation (Tao et al. 2016). On the other
hand, with insufﬁcient class labels, unsupervised and semisupervised methods have to consider the capability of the
features in preserving or revealing of the underlying structure of data (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2006). A frequently used
criterion is to select the features which best preserve intrinsic data structure. Recent research has witnessed several
important data structures that should be preserved by features, where these data structures include, but not limit to,
the sparse global structure (Du and Shen 2015) and the local manifold structure (Han et al. 2015). Generally speaking,
because of insufﬁcient class labels, it is more difﬁcult for unsupervised and semi-supervised feature selection to ﬁnd the
discriminative and informative features.
In practice, data structures for unsupervised feature selection are usually captured in the form of weighted graphs,
such as the sample pair-wise similarity graph and the sparse
graph (Du and Shen 2015) and the locally linear reconstruction graph (Hou et al. 2014). In graph based feature selection
methods, the constructed graph is ﬁxed in the following procedures and the performance of feature selection is largely
determined by the quality of graph. Ideally, the quality of
constructed graphs should be improved using the selected
informative features instead of all the features that contain
noisy and irrelevant ones. It is reasonable to alternatively optimize the data structure characterization using the selected
features and then identify the selected feature set using the
reﬁned graph. Each sub-task and be iteratively boosted by
using the result of the other one. Motivated by this, the main
contributions of our work are:

Abstract
Feature selection is an important technique in machine learning research. An effective and robust feature selection method
is desired to simultaneously identify the informative features
and eliminate the noisy ones of data. In this paper, we consider the unsupervised feature selection problem which is particularly difﬁcult as there is not any class labels that would
guide the search for relevant features. To solve this, we propose a novel algorithmic framework which performs unsupervised feature selection. Firstly, the proposed framework
implements structure learning, where the data structures (including intrinsic distribution structure and the data segment)
are found via a combination of the alternative optimization
and clustering. Then, both the intrinsic data structure and data
segmentation are formulated as regularization terms for discriminant feature selection. The results of the feature selection also affect the structure learning step in the following
iterations. By leveraging the interactions between structure
learning and feature selection, we are able to capture more
accurate structure of data and select more informative features. Clustering and classiﬁcation experiments on real world
image data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Introduction
Real world applications usually involve big data with high
dimensionality, such as in computer vision (Collins, Liu,
and Leordeanu 2005), bioinformatics (Saeys, Inza, and Larranaga 2007), and data mining (Liu et al. 2010). High dimensionality generally poses great challenges, including
“the curse of dimensionality”, huge computation and storage cost, to conventional machine learning algorithms. In
order to address this issue, feature selection is proposed to
select a subset of features from the feature pool of high dimensional data for a compact and informative representation
(Guyon and Elisseeff 2003). After the implementation of
feature selection, conventional machine learning algorithms
can be applied on data represented by only the selected relevant features instead of all the features.
According to the availability of class labels of data, feature selection algorithms can be roughly classiﬁed into three
groups, i.e., supervised feature selection (Song et al. 2007),
semi-supervised feature selection (Xu et al. 2010), and un-

• Data structure characterization is learned in two forms,
which are referred as the soft structure and hard structure. The soft structure is deﬁned by pair-wise similarities
between data points and the hard structure is learned by
data segmentation. Soft data structure is used to evaluate

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1870

