Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Anytime Anyspace AND/OR Search for Bounding the Partition Function
Qi Lou

Rina Dechter

Alexander Ihler

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
qlou@ics.uci.edu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
dechter@ics.uci.edu

University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
ihler@ics.uci.edu

In this work, we explore AND/OR search algorithms for
providing anytime, deterministic bounds on the partition
function. Historically, search techniques are well studied in
graphical models for optimization (e.g., MAP, or maximum
a posteriori and weighted CSP tasks), (Shimony and Charniak 1991; Santos 1991; Kask and Dechter 2001; F. Bacchus
and Piassi 2003b) and exact summation (Darwiche 2001;
Chavira and Darwiche 2008; F. Bacchus and Piassi 2003a;
Sang, Beame, and Kautz 2005; Darwiche 2009). However,
there have been relatively little recent study for approximate
summation problems such as the partition function via search.
One exception is Viricel et al. (2016), which adapts a depthﬁrst branch-and-bound search scheme to provide deterministic upper and lower bounds on the partition function.
AND/OR search spaces (Dechter and Mateescu 2007) provide an elegant framework that exploits conditional, possibly context-speciﬁc independence structure during search.
In contrast to methods such as recursive conditioning
or “clamping” (Darwiche 2001; Weller and Domke 2015;
Dechter and Mateescu 2007) and recent work on knowledge compilation (Kisa et al. 2014), that can also explore
the AND/OR search space, most explicit AND/OR search
algorithms were used for optimization, employing a ﬁxed
search order that restricts the search but enables the use of
strong, pre-compiled heuristic functions and can lead to faster
exploration and better early pruning (Marinescu and Dechter
2009a; 2009b; Otten et al. 2011; Otten and Dechter 2012;
Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2014; 2015).
Other, related approaches for summation queries include
cutset-conditioning for exact solutions (Pearl 1988; Dechter
2013) or approximation with sampling (Bidyuk and Dechter
2007). Bidyuk, Dechter, and Rollon (2010) used conditioning
to combine bound intervals on marginal probabilities.

Abstract
Bounding the partition function is a key inference task in
many graphical models. In this paper, we develop an anytime
anyspace search algorithm taking advantage of AND/OR tree
structure and optimized variational heuristics to tighten deterministic bounds on the partition function. We study how our
priority-driven best-ﬁrst search scheme can improve on stateof-the-art variational bounds in an anytime way within limited
memory resources, as well as the effect of the AND/OR framework to exploit conditional independence structure within the
search process within the context of summation. We compare
our resulting bounds to a number of existing methods, and
show that our approach offers a number of advantages on realworld problem instances taken from recent UAI competitions.

Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models, including Bayesian networks
and Markov random ﬁelds, provide a framework for representing and reasoning with probabilistic and deterministic information (Dechter, Geffner, and Halpern 2010;
Darwiche 2009; Dechter 2013). Reasoning in a probabilistic graphical model often requires computing the partition
function, i.e., the normalizing constant of the underlying
distribution. In general, exact computation of the partition
function is known to be #P-hard (Valiant 1979), leading to
the development of a broad array of approximate schemes.
Particularly useful are schemes that provide guarantees, such
as a conﬁdence interval (upper and lower bounds), that can
also improve them in an anytime and anyspace manner.
Approximate elimination methods (Dechter and Rish
2003; Liu and Ihler 2011) and closely related variational
bounds (Wainwright and Jordan 2008) provide deterministic
guarantees on the partition function. However, these bounds
are not anytime; their quality often depends on the amount
of memory available, and do not improve without additional
memory. On the other hand, Monte Carlo methods, such as
those based on importance sampling (Liu, Fisher, and Ihler 2015), or approximate hash-based counting for weighted
SAT (e.g., Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi, 2016) can smoothly
trade time for quality, but provide only probabilistic bounds
(e.g., they hold with probability 1 − δ for some conﬁdence
parameter δ), and can be slow to provide tight intervals.

Our contributions In this paper, we develop an anytime
anyspace AND/OR best-ﬁrst search algorithm to improve
deterministic bounds for the partition function. Our prioritydriven best-ﬁrst search scheme takes advantage of both
AND/OR tree search and optimized variational heuristics,
to efﬁciently reduce the bound gap on the partition function. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach with
heuristics extracted from weighted mini-bucket (Liu and Ihler
2011) is almost always superior to the baselines on various
benchmark-memory settings.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

860

