Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Twin Learning for Similarity and
Clustering: A Uniﬁed Kernel Approach
Zhao Kang, Chong Peng, Qiang Cheng
Department of Computer Science, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA
{Zhao.Kang, pchong, qcheng}@siu.edu

data space. Thus the performance of kernel-based methods
are largely affected by the choice of kernel.
Spectral clustering does a low-dimensional embedding of
the similarity matrix of the data before performing k-means
clustering (Ng et al. 2002). The similarity between every
pair of points, as an input, leverages the manifold information in this clustering model. Thus similarity-based clustering methods usually show better performance than k-means
algorithm. However, the performance of this kind of methods is largely determined by the similarity matrix (Huang,
Nie, and Huang 2015). Any variations during the similarity
measurement, such as metric, neighborhood size, and data
scale, may lead to suboptimal performance.
Recently, self-expression has been successfully utilized
in subspace recovery (Elhamifar and Vidal 2009; Luo et
al. 2011), low rank representation (Kang, Peng, and Cheng
2015b; 2015a), and recommender systems (Kang and Cheng
2016). It represents each data point in terms of the other
points. By solving an optimization problem, the similarity
information is automatically learned from the data. This approach can not only reveal low-dimensional structure, but
also be robust to noise and data scale (Huang, Nie, and
Huang 2015).

Abstract
Many similarity-based clustering methods work in two separate steps including similarity matrix computation and subsequent spectral clustering. However, similarity measurement
is challenging because it is usually impacted by many factors, e.g., the choice of similarity metric, neighborhood size,
scale of data, noise and outliers. Thus the learned similarity
matrix is often not suitable, let alone optimal, for the subsequent clustering. In addition, nonlinear similarity often exists in many real world data which, however, has not been
effectively considered by most existing methods. To tackle
these two challenges, we propose a model to simultaneously
learn cluster indicator matrix and similarity information in
kernel spaces in a principled way. We show theoretical relationships to kernel k-means, k-means, and spectral clustering
methods. Then, to address the practical issue of how to select
the most suitable kernel for a particular clustering task, we
further extend our model with a multiple kernel learning ability. With this joint model, we can automatically accomplish
three subtasks of ﬁnding the best cluster indicator matrix, the
most accurate similarity relations and the optimal combination of multiple kernels. By leveraging the interactions between these three subtasks in a joint framework, each subtask
can be iteratively boosted by using the results of the others towards an overall optimal solution. Extensive experiments are
performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Contributions
In this paper, we perform clustering built upon the idea of
using samples from the data to “express itself”. Rather than
local structure learning (Nie, Wang, and Huang 2014), this
approach extracts the global structure of data and can be
extended to kernel spaces. Unlike existing clustering algorithms that work in two separate steps, we simultaneously
learn similarity matrix and cluster indicators by imposing a
rank constraint on the Laplacian matrix of the learned similarity matrix. By leveraging the intrinsic interactions between learning similarity and cluster indicators, our proposed model seamlessly integrates them into a joint framework, where the result of one task is used to improve the
other one. To capture the nonlinear structure information
inherent in many real world data sets, we directly develop
our method in a kernel space, which is well known for its
ability to explore the nonlinear relation. We design an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd an optimal solution to our model, and
show the theoretical analysis on the connections to kernel
k-means, k-means, and spectral clustering methods.

Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental topic in data mining and machine learning (Peng et al. 2016). It partitions data points
into different groups, such that the objects within a group
are similar to one another and different from those in
other groups. Various methods have been proposed over the
past decades. Some well-known algorithms include k-means
clustering (MacQueen 1967), spectral clustering (Ng et al.
2002), and hierarchical clustering (Johnson 1967).
Thanks to the simplicity and the effectiveness, the kmeans algorithm is widely used. However, it fails to identify arbitrarily shaped clusters. Kernel k-means (Schölkopf,
Smola, and Müller 1998) has been developed to capture
nonlinear structure information hidden in data sets. Kernelbased learning methods requires one to specify a kernel,
which means one assumes a certain shape of the underlying
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2080

