Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

ARTY: Fueling Creativity through Art,
Robotics and Technology for Youth
Debra T. Burhans

Karthik Dantu

Computer Science
Canisius College
Buffalo, NY 14209
burhansd@canisius.edu

Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY 14260-2500.
kdantu@buffalo.edu
Support for the program, including funding for staff, supplies, food, as well as use of laboratory facilities, robots and
computer equipment, has been provided by both institutions.
Participants build Lego Mindstorms NXT robots and program them using NXT-G. Art projects are created on top
of the ﬂoat platform and employ a wide variety of art and
craft supplies. There is a structured curriculum, yet ﬂexibility provides students with the freedom to express their
individual creativity. The staff is multidisciplinary, drawn
from science/engineering and the arts.

Abstract
ARTY is a week-long program for middle school students to teach them programming of robots and allow
them to express themselves artistically. It was started in
2013 and ran its fourth edition in 2016. We describe the
ideas behind the inception of this program, its curriculum, our experiences during the 2016 workshop and challenges/future directions for the program. Our primary
intent in this paper is to convey the program curriculum
and its design, including the way in which robots can be
viewed as vehicles for artistic expression. Some results
from a brief attitudinal survey that was administered before and after the workshop are also included along with
a discussion of outcomes assessment and issues.

History
The collaboration that led to the creation of ARTY emerged
from a unique theater production: WoyUbu (Pape et al. 2015).
This performance involved a mash-up of two plays: Woyzek,
by Georg Buchner, and Ubu Roi, by Alfred Jarry, juxtaposed
with computer gaming, electronic music, video projection
and creation, and a robot war. The event included audience
participation, with the opportunity to engage in activities
such as ﬁring Nerf guns, dressing up, participating in the Ubu
play, and playing video games.
WoyUbu involved faculty and students (graduate and undergraduate) from computer science, media studies, theater,
and art, as well as professional actors, musicians, and artists.
We developed our technology outreach activities within a
similarly rich interdisciplinary context. In ARTY, we wanted
students to engage in robotics with the goal of developing a
performance piece for a robot they built themselves. In terms
of visual art, students would create something that would be
part of their robot’s performance. It might provide additional
insight about the robot as a component of the performance; it
could transform a robot visually into a novel creature; or it
might be an entirely unrelated creation to view alongside the
robot performance. The robot is speciﬁcally designed to carry
a wooden platform that serves as a ﬂoat for carrying the art.
In most years, the robots have participated in a robot parade
followed by individual performances and demonstrations by
the participants.
The following description, from our ﬁrst year ﬂyer,
captures our excitement and ideas:

Introduction
ARTY (Art, Robotics, and Technology for Youth) is a workshop for 9-12 year olds that introduces students to robotics
and computation in the context of visual and performance art.
The program was developed and ﬁrst offered in 2013. The
focus of this paper is on the 2016 edition of the workshop.
ARTY is free of charge to participants with the goal of
engaging as many underserved students as possible. The
workshop location is easily accessed by public transportation
and is centrally located in an urban area. The 2016 edition
had 16 students and ran for a week. Previous editions took
in between 15 and 20 students per week and were conducted
for two weeks during summer.
ARTY was developed collaboratively by faculty from the
University at Buffalo (Theater and Dance/Techne Institute)
and Canisius College (Computer Science). The program has
focused on the idea of robots as a vehicle for artistic expression. In this context, behaviors are construed as performative
acts, and students are encouraged to appreciate the visual and
entertainment aspects of robot movement and sound production while engaging in solving traditional problems such as
line following. In addition, activities present robots as artists
through the use of a drawing pen; as performers through student choreographed performances; and as moving displays
for artistic creations through the use of robot-carried wooden
platforms that serve as parade ﬂoats.

The Art, Robotics & Technology for Youth summer robot workshop will provide elementary school children (9-12 years old) with
an amazing opportunity to learn and experiment with robot art

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4765

