Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multiclass Capped p -Norm SVM for Robust Classiﬁcations
1

Feiping Nie,1,2 Xiaoqian Wang,2 Heng Huang2∗
School of Computer Science, OPTIMAL, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
feipingnie@gmail.com, xqwang1991@gmail.com, heng@uta.edu

and Vapnik 1992) is one of the most successful classiﬁcation
models and has been applied to solve various applications.
One of main reasons for SVM models (Mangasarian 2002;
Keerthi and DeCoste 2005; Lin, Weng, and Keerthi 2008;
Chang, Hsieh, and Lin 2008; Hsieh et al. 2008) to outperform other classiﬁcation methods is their unilateral loss
function, e.g. hinge loss or squared hinge loss. The unilateral
loss is more suitable for classiﬁcation tasks than the bilateral
loss, which has been used in regression models.
However, like most supervised learning algorithms, existing SVM models learn classiﬁers based on the labeled
data in training set without considering the noise problem.
In many real-world applications, we often have data outliers
in train set, e.g. the incorrectly labeled data, the data significantly different to other data in the same class, etc. These
data outliers could mislead the classiﬁers training task, such
that the learned classiﬁers are not optimal and the classiﬁcation performance is reduced. Thus, the robust classiﬁcation model is desired to deal with the classiﬁcation tasks
in real-world applications. Although sparse learning models
have been applied to SVM methods in literature, such as 1 SVM (Bradley and Mangasarian 1998), 2,1 -SVM (Cai et al.
2011), Hybrid Huberized SVM (Wang, Zhu, and Zou 2007),
Sparse SVM (Cotter, Shalev-Shwartz, and Srebro 2013),
these methods mainly focus on selecting signiﬁcant features
or reducing the number of support vectors to improve the
classiﬁcation tasks. None of them are speciﬁcally designed
to deal with the data outliers for robust classiﬁcations.
To address this challenging problem, we propose a novel
capped p -norm SVM classiﬁcation model by utilizing the
capped p -norm based loss function. Different to the hinge
loss and squared hinge loss used in existing SVM methods, which are not robust to data outliers, the capped p norm is theoretically robust to both light and heavy outliers.
Because the data outliers usually have large residues, the
capped norm can help the model eliminate these outliers in
model training process. In term of multiclass classiﬁcations,
the existing research often uses the one-vs-one or one-vsrest strategies to utilize the binary SVM classiﬁer for solving
multiclass classiﬁcation tasks, but the label ambiguity problem has been well-known for such situations. Thus, we also
introduce the new formulation for multiclass SVM model,
which can directly solve the multiclass classiﬁcation problem. Based on the new multiclass SVM formulation, we can

Abstract
Support vector machine (SVM) model is one of most successful machine learning methods and has been successfully applied to solve numerous real-world application. Because the
SVM methods use the hinge loss or squared hinge loss functions for classiﬁcations, they usually outperform other classiﬁcation approaches, e.g. the least square loss function based
methods. However, like most supervised learning algorithms,
they learn classiﬁers based on the labeled data in training set
without speciﬁc strategy to deal with the noise data. In many
real-world applications, we often have data outliers in train
set, which could misguide the classiﬁers learning, such that
the classiﬁcation performance is suboptimal. To address this
problem, we proposed a novel capped p -norm SVM classiﬁcation model by utilizing the capped p -norm based hinge
loss in the objective which can deal with both light and heavy
outliers. We utilize the new formulation to naturally build the
multiclass capped p -norm SVM. More importantly, we derive a novel optimization algorithms to efﬁciently minimize
the capped p -norm based objectives, and also rigorously
prove the convergence of proposed algorithms. We present
experimental results showing that employing the new capped
p -norm SVM method can consistently improve the classiﬁcation performance, especially in the cases when the data
noise level increases.

Introduction
As one of the most fundamental problems in data mining,
classiﬁcation has numerous applications in different areas
such as information retrieval (Cao et al. 2009; Sriram et
al. 2010), computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), bioinformatics (Brown et al. 2000), medical image computing (Chen, Daponte, and Fox 1989), natural language processing (Wang and Mannin 2012) etc. Given training data from multiple classes, the classiﬁcation task is to
learn the classiﬁers in a supervised way and ﬁnd the correct class to which a test example belongs. Many classiﬁcation models have been proposed in literature. Among
them, the support vector machine (SVM) (Boser, Guyon,
∗
Corresponding author. This work was partially supported by
the following grants: NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSFDBI 1356628, NSF-IIS 1619308, NSF-IIS 1633753, NIH R01
AG049371.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2415

