Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Fast Algorithm to Compute Maximum k-Plexes in Social Network Analysis
Mingyu Xiao,† Weibo Lin,† Yuanshun Dai,† Yifeng Zeng‡
†

School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
‡
School of Computing, Teesside University, UK

known as a k-plex (Seidman and Foster 1978). A simple
undirected graph with n vertices is a k-plex if the degree of
each vertex of the graph is at least n − k. When k = 1, a
1-plex is a clique. In the M AXIMUM k-P LEX problem, we
aim to ﬁnd a maximum vertex subset S of a given graph such
that the subgraph G[S] induced by S is a k-plex.
The applications and research on k-plex receive growing attention such as using k-plex to analyze social networks of terrorists (Krebs 2002), clustering and partitioning of graph-based data using k-plex (Du et al. 2007;
Newman 2001), etc. Note that the complement graph of a
k-plex is a graph of maximum degree at most k − 1. To ﬁnd
a maximum k-plex in a graph G is equivalent to ﬁnd a maximum induced subgraph of degree bounded by k − 1 in the
complement graph of G. The later problem is also known
as the k -B OUNDED -D EGREE V ERTEX D ELETION problem (to make the degree of a graph at most k  by deleting
a minimum number of vertices). k  -B OUNDED -D EGREE
V ERTEX D ELETION itself also has many applications in serval areas (Fellows et al. 2011; Xiao 2017).
The NP-completeness of M AXIMUM k-P LEX and k  B OUNDED -D EGREE V ERTEX D ELETION problems with
each ﬁxed k ≥ 1 (or k  ≥ 0) was established many years
ago (Lewis and Yannakakis 1980). For M AXIMUM 1-P LEX,
known as M AXIMUM C LIQUE or M AXIMUM I NDEPEN DENT S ET in the complement graph, it is a fundamental
problem in exact exponential algorithms and it can be solved
in O∗ (1.1996n ) time (Xiao and Nagamochi 2013) in an nvertex graph. For k = 2, M AXIMUM 2-P LEX can be solved
in O∗ (1.3656n ) time (Xiao and Kou 2016). A simple bruteforce algorithm for M AXIMUM k-P LEX by enumerating and
checking all vertex subsets of the graph runs in 2n nO(1)
time. We are not aware of any algorithm faster than the trivial exponential bound 2n for any k ≥ 3.
In parallel, Balasundaram et al. (2011) gave an integer
programming formulation and designed a branch-and-cut algorithm to solve M AXIMUM k-P LEX exactly. McClosky et
al. (2012) derived a new upper bound on the cardinality of
k-plexes and adapted some clique combinatorial algorithms
to ﬁnd maximum k-plexes, both of heuristic and exact nature. Moser et al. (2012) gave an exact algorithm with better
experimental results. All the above exact algorithms run in
2n nO(1) time theoretically.
Our Contributions. This paper contributes to the k-plex

Abstract
A clique model is one of the most important techniques
on the cohesive subgraph detection; however, its applications are rather limited due to restrictive conditions
of the model. Hence much research resorts to k-plex - a
graph in which any vertex is adjacent to all but at most
k vertices - which is a relaxation model of the clique. In
this paper, we study the maximum k-plex problem and
propose a fast algorithm to compute maximum k-plexes
by exploiting structural properties of the problem. In an
n-vertex graph, the algorithm computes optimal solutions in cn nO(1) time for a constant c < 2 depending
only on k. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst algorithm that breaks the trivial theoretical bound
of 2n for each k ≥ 3. We also provide experimental results over multiple real-world social network instances
in support.

Introduction
In computational social networks, ﬁnding a large cohesive
subgraph is an extensively studied topic with a large number of applications. Clique is one of the earliest and most
commonly used models in the ﬁeld of cohesive subgraphs
detection. A clique is a graph with an edge between any
pair of vertices, which can be regarded as the most cohesive
graph. The M AXIMUM C LIQUE problem, to ﬁnd a clique
of maximum size in a graph, is a fundamental problem in
graph algorithms not only having great applications in social
networks but also ﬁnding applications in ad hoc wireless networks (Chen, Liestman, and Liu 2004), data mining (Washio
and Motoda 2003), biochemistry and genomics (Butenko
and Wilhelm 2006), and many others.
Due to its overly restrictive (Alba 1973) and modeling disadvantages (Freeman 1992), the clique has been challenged
by many practical problems. Alternative approaches were
suggested that essentially relaxed the deﬁnition of cliques.
Researchers have relaxed a variety of clique properties including familiarity, reachability, and robustness (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011). In graph theoretic terms,
these properties correspond to vertex degree, path length,
and connectivity respectively. This paper focuses on a relaxation model of clique by relaxing its familiarty restriction
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

919

