Proceedings of the Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)

Application for AI-OCR Module: Auto Detection of Emails/Letter Images
Kelsey Fargas, Bingjie Zhou, Elizabeth Staruk, Sheila Tejada
University of Southern California
{ kfargas, binjiez, staruk, stejada } @usc.edu

training data consist of a set of training examples. Each
example is a pair consisting of an input object and a desired output value. A classification task is if the prediction
task is to classify the observations in a set of finite labels.
An example of this would be the game of chess. Once the
computer makes the move, it bases its next move off a finite set of possible moves on the board. It is using the data
from the users moving patterns as well as figuring out the
best possible move to make given its limited options. It’s
taking input (user data plus possible options for moves)
and spitting the output (finite prediction). A regression task
is to predict continuous target variable. Take for example a
website that predicts the price of houses in a certain location. It would take the input as the location of the house,
and output a price range. Since this is a spectrum of numbers, it is not finite, therefore it is a continuous target variable.

Abstract
The purpose of this project is to provide instructions for teaching
the Artificial Intelligence topic of supervised machine learning
for the task of Optical Character Recognition (OCR) at various
levels of a student’s undergraduate curriculum, such as basic
knowledge, novice, and intermediate. The levels vary from beginner with a slight background in computing and computer science to intermediate with a better understanding of computer
science fundamentals and algorithms.

Project Description
The Autobots (Tejada, et al. 2016) project uses a library
named PIL (Python Imaging Library) and Pytesser (Tesseract 2016) to do a simple text recognition task. The task
is to identify a sequence of letters from a given set of images by using pytesser.
This machine learning application will focus on Optical
Character Recognition. Optical Character Recognition
(OCR) is the mechanical or electronic conversion of images of typewritten or printed text into machine-encoded text.
It is widely used as a form of data entry from printed paper
data records such as passport documents, invoices, bank
statements, computerized receipts, business cards, mail,
printouts of static-data, or any suitable documentation. It is
a common method of digitizing printed texts so that it can
be electronically edited, searched, stored more compactly,
displayed on-line, and used in machine processes such as
machine translation, text-to- speech, key data and text mining. OCR is a field of research in pattern recognition, artificial intelligence and computer vision.

Evaluation. We now know that AI can be used to solve
different tasks. But how do we figure out how well our AI
solved the task? Does it have to get every answer right?
For some tasks, a human being can’t even do that! We use
different metrics in order to understand the performance of
our AI. This is called evaluation. We suggest using evaluation as an optional, advanced way to teach students. This is
a very important step to understanding AI, and should at
least be broadly touched upon. If the students are experienced programmers (exposure to data structures and algorithms experience), they may be ready to implement their
own evaluation metrics. At the beginner level, it is suggested to use the training/test data provided and ask the
students to check their results using a provided script. The
given Autobots script has restrictions on how the input/output should appear and automatically reports the
students’ accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. This
script is implemented in python2.7 and requires no dependencies. All possibilities of these given metrics are
provided, and it is encouraged to customize the script according to the students’ experience level.

Background
There are variety of types of AI, and we will focus on supervised machine learning at this level, and discuss two
important categories of supervised learning: classification
and regression. Supervised learning is the machine learning
task of inferring a function from labeled training data. The

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4813

