Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

SAT Encodings for Distance-Based Belief Merging Operators
Sébastien Konieczny and Jean-Marie Lagniez and Pierre Marquis
CRIL, U. Artois & CNRS, F-62300 Lens, France
{konieczny, lagniez, marquis}@cril.fr

pecially about the corresponding inference problem: given a
proﬁle of belief bases, an integrity constraint and a query,
determine whether the query is a logical consequence of
the merged base. More precisely, though the computational
complexity of the inference problem for several merging
operators has been identiﬁed (Konieczny, Lang, and Marquis 2004; Everaere, Konieczny, and Marquis 2010), very
few implementations of such operators exist. This is all
the more salient for distance-based belief merging operators since, as far as we know, no implementation has been
achieved for them, but the one reported in (Gorogiannis and
Hunter 2008), which is based on representations of the input
bases by ordered binary decision diagrams (OBDD) (Bryant
1986). Such representations facilitate the dilation of formulae, which is a key operation for some distance-based merging operators. (Gorogiannis and Hunter 2008) present some
empirical results showing that an OBDD representation of the
merged base can be computed, provided that the number of
propositional variables under consideration remains small
enough (up to 20 variables). However, the issue of determining how practical distance-based merging is when many
more variables are considered is still open, despite the fact
that being able to handle more variables is mandatory for
dealing with instances going beyond toy problems.

Abstract
We present SAT encoding schemes for distance-based belief
merging operators relying on the (possibly weighted) drastic distance or the Hamming distance between interpretations, and using sum, GMax (leximax) or GMin (leximin)
as aggregation function. In order to evaluate these encoding
schemes, we generated benchmarks of a time-tabling problem and translated them into belief merging instances. Then,
taking advantage of these schemes, we compiled the merged
bases of the resulting instances into query-equivalent CNF
formulae. Experiments have shown the beneﬁts which can be
gained by considering the SAT encoding schemes we pointed
out. Especially, thanks to them, we succeeded in computing query-equivalent formulae for merging instances based
on hundreds of variables, which are out of reach of previous
implementations.

Introduction
In this paper, we are concerned with propositional belief
merging. With a proﬁle of propositional belief bases (ﬁnite
sets of propositional formulae, interpreted conjunctively),
each of them representing the beliefs of an agent, and an
integrity constraint (a propositional formula representing
some laws which must be satisﬁed), a belief merging operator associates a propositional belief base which represents
the beliefs of the group of agents.
Propositional belief merging has received much attention for the past twenty years. Several belief merging operators have been deﬁned and investigated so far from a
logical standpoint, see e.g., (Lin 1996; Revesz 1997; Liberatore and Schaerf 1998; Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2002;
Konieczny and Pino Pérez 2011). An important subset of
propositional merging operators which have been studied in
depth consists of the distance-based operators (Konieczny,
Lang, and Marquis 2004; Everaere, Konieczny, and Marquis
2010). For such operators, the models of the merged base are
precisely the models of the integrity constraint which are at
a minimal distance of the input proﬁle. The distance to be
minimized is the aggregated distance of the constraint to the
bases of the proﬁle.
Contrastingly, far less studies have focused to date on the
computational aspects of propositional belief merging, es-

This paper contributes to ﬁll this gap. A ﬁrst contribution consists of SAT encoding schemes for belief merging
operators from the literature, namely those for which the
(possibly weighted) drastic distance or the Hamming distance between worlds is considered, and the aggregation
function is Σ (sum), GMax (leximax) or GMin (leximin)
(Konieczny, Lang, and Marquis 2004; Everaere, Konieczny,
and Marquis 2010). Encoding propositional merging into
SAT enables to take advantage of the recent and impressive
progress achieved in SAT solving, and related problems, especially the optimization problem known as weighted partial MAXSAT. Basically, the encoding schemes we point
out in this paper follow a two-step compilation process: (1)
the value of the distance of the integrity constraint to the
proﬁle is computed once using a solver for weighted partial MAXSAT (this amounts to an optimization problem),
(2) a hard constraint (i.e., the resulting encoding) is generated, stating that the distance of the integrity constraint
to the proﬁle must be equal to that value. Since this constraint is query-equivalent to the merged base and has a

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1163

