Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

CoCoA: A Non-Iterative Approach to a Local Search (A)DCOP Solver
Cornelis Jan van Leeuwen

Przemysław Pawełczak

TNO and Delft University of Technology
Eemsgolaan 3, Groningen, The Netherlands
coen.vanleeuwen@tno.nl

Delft University of Technology
Mekelweg 4, Delft, The Netherlands
p.pawelczak@tudelft.nl

for increasingly large-scale problems. Therefore, incomplete
DCOP algorithms trade a distance from the optimal solution
for convergence speed and are thus more suited for largescale problems. Examples of incomplete DCOP solvers are
DBA (Yokoo et al. 1998), DSA (Fitzpatrick and Meertens
2003), Max-Sum (Farinelli et al. 2008), MGM and MGM2 (Maheswaran, Pearce, and Tambe 2004).
Recently, an extension on the DCOP framework has been
described in which agents may value a set of constrained
assignments differently. In these Asymmetric DCOPs (ADCOPs) constraints have different costs for their agents. The
ACLS and MCS-MGM algorithms (Grubshtein et al. 2010;
Grinshpoun et al. 2013) have been proposed to enable solving this class of problems. More recently it has also been
shown that the Max-Sum ADVP algorithm can solve ADCOPs (Zivan, Parash, and Naveh 2015).
In this paper, a motivating case study is to ﬁnd an optimal
conﬁguration of a sensor network, tasked with monitoring
the cargo of a shipping container for an extensive period of
time. Since in sensor networks the communication between
nodes is of the largest inﬂuence on the battery lifetime, we
need to minimize the communication between nodes during
the optimization process, and require an algorithm that is
guaranteed to converge to a solution as quickly as possible.
However, most existing DCOP algorithms use an iterative
approach, which requires many rounds of message passing
during the optimization process making them unsuitable for
this case study.
In this paper we introduce a new DCOP algorithm, denoted as Cooperative Constraint Approximation (CoCoA),
which uses a non-iterative, semi-greedy approach with a
one-step look ahead. We show that it can not only cope with
asymmetric constraints, but also ﬁnds high quality solutions
much faster than other (A)DCOP solvers. Experimentally
we show that in some cases this leads to a reduction of up
to two orders of magnitude number of transmitted messages
and cost function evaluations, thus leading to superior running times.

Abstract
We propose a novel incomplete cooperative algorithm for distributed constraint optimization problems (DCOPs) denoted
as Cooperative Constraint Approximation (CoCoA). The key
strategy of the algorithm is to use a semi-greedy approach in
which knowledge is distributed amongst neighboring agents,
and assigning a value only once instead of an iterative approach. Furthermore, CoCoA uses a unique-ﬁrst approach to
improve the solution quality. It is designed such that it can
solve DCOPs as well as Asymmetric DCOPS, with only few
messages being communicated between neighboring agents.
Experimentally, through evaluating graph coloring problems,
randomized (A)DCOPs, and a sensor network communication problem, we show that CoCoA is able to very quickly
ﬁnd solutions of high quality with a smaller communication
overhead than state-of-the-art DCOP solvers such as DSA,
MGM-2, ACLS, MCS-MGM and Max-Sum. In our asymmetric use case problem of a sensor network, we show that
CoCoA not only ﬁnds the best solution, but also ﬁnds this
solution faster than any other algorithm.

Introduction
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs) is
a class of optimization problems in which discrete variables are controlled by distributed agents and the optimization function itself operates over the complete set of variables (Hirayama and Yokoo 1997). DCOPs are encountered
in many ﬁelds such as in wireless LAN channel allocation (Yeoh and Yokoo 2012), coordination of mobile sensing
teams (Yedidsion, Zivan, and Farinelli 2014) or coordination
of tasks (Farinelli et al. 2008). By deﬁnition of DCOP, the
involved agents are part of a team and need to cooperate in
order to perform well on the global task. Usually in DCOPs,
cooperation between agents is achieved by passing messages
from one agent to another.
A number of complete algorithms have been proposed
to ﬁnd the optimal solution of a DCOP, amongst which
are ADOPT (Modi et al. 2005), DPOP (Petcu and Faltings 2005), NCBB (Chechetka and Sycara 2006) and Asynchronous Forward Bounding (Gershman, Meisels, and Zivan
2009). However, DCOP problems are NP-hard (Modi 2003),
so the effort to ﬁnd the optimal solution becomes intractable

DCOP: Problem Statement and Challenges
DCOPs are deﬁned as a tuple T = A, X , D, R in which A
is a ﬁnite set of agents {A1 , A2 , . . . , An } and X is a ﬁnite set
of variables {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn } with ﬁnite discrete domains
{D1 , D2 , . . . , Dn } from D such that Xi ∈ Di . Each agent

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3944

