Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Multi-Agent Path Finding with Delay Probabilities∗
Hang Ma

T. K. Satish Kumar

Sven Koenig

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
hangma@usc.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
tkskwork@gmail.com

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
skoenig@usc.edu

Abstract

Start State

v1

Goal State

s2

Several recently developed Multi-Agent Path Finding
(MAPF) solvers scale to large MAPF instances by searching
for MAPF plans on 2 levels: The high-level search resolves
collisions between agents, and the low-level search plans
paths for single agents under the constraints imposed by
the high-level search. We make the following contributions
to solve the MAPF problem with imperfect plan execution
with small average makespans: First, we formalize the
MAPF Problem with Delay Probabilities (MAPF-DP),
deﬁne valid MAPF-DP plans and propose the use of
robust plan-execution policies for valid MAPF-DP plans
to control how each agent proceeds along its path. Second,
we discuss 2 classes of decentralized robust plan-execution
policies (called Fully Synchronized Policies and Minimal
Communication Policies) that prevent collisions during plan
execution for valid MAPF-DP plans. Third, we present a
2-level MAPF-DP solver (called Approximate Minimization
in Expectation) that generates valid MAPF-DP plans.

v2

s1
v3

g1
v4

g2
v5

Figure 1: A MAPF-DP instance.
an undirected graph (that models the environment) to move
from its start vertex to its goal vertex. At any discrete time
step, the agent can either execute 1) a wait action, resulting
in it staying in its current vertex, or 2) a move action with the
intent of traversing an outgoing edge of its current vertex,
resulting in it staying in its current vertex with the delay
probability and traversing the edge otherwise. The MAPFDP problem is the problem of ﬁnding 1) a MAPF-DP plan
that consists of a path for each agent from its start vertex
to its goal vertex (given by a sequence of wait and move
actions) and 2) a plan-execution policy that controls with GO
or STOP commands how each agent proceeds along its path
such that no collisions occur during plan execution. There
are 2 kinds of collisions, namely vertex collisions (where 2
agents occupy the same vertex at the same time step) and
edge collisions (where 2 agents traverse the same edge in
opposite directions at the same time step).
We make the following contributions to solve the MAPFDP problem with small average makespans: First, we formalize the MAPF-DP problem, deﬁne valid MAPF-DP
plans and propose the use of robust plan-execution policies for valid MAPF-DP plans to control how each agent
proceeds along its path. Second, we discuss 2 classes of
decentralized robust plan-execution policies (called Fully
Synchronized Policies and Minimal Communication Policies) that prevent collisions during plan execution for valid
MAPF-DP plans. Third, we present a 2-level MAPF-DP
solver (called Approximate Minimization in Expectation)
that generates valid MAPF-DP plans.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of ﬁnding
collision-free paths for a given number of agents from their
given start locations to their given goal locations in a given
environment. MAPF problems arise for aircraft towing vehicles (Morris et al. 2016), ofﬁce robots (Veloso et al. 2015),
video game characters (Silver 2005) and warehouse robots
(Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008), among others.
Several recently developed MAPF solvers scale to large
MAPF instances. However, agents typically cannot execute
their MAPF plans perfectly since they often traverse their
paths more slowly than intended. Their delay probabilities
can be estimated but current MAPF solvers do not use this
information, which often leads to frequent and runtimeintensive replanning or plan-execution failures.
We thus formalize the MAPF Problem with Delay Probabilities (MAPF-DP), where each agent traverses edges on
∗

Background and Related Work

Our research was supported by NSF under grant numbers
1409987 and 1319966. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied, of the
sponsoring organizations, agencies or the U.S. government.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The MAPF problem is NP-hard to solve optimally for
ﬂowtime minimization and to approximate within any constant factor less than 4/3 for makespan minimization (Ma
et al. 2016). Search-based MAPF solvers can be optimal,
bounded suboptimal or suboptimal (Standley 2010; Luna

3605

