Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Fully Convolutional Neural Networks with
Full-Scale-Features for Semantic Segmentation ∗
Tianxiang Pan, Bin Wang, Guiguang Ding, Jun-Hai Yong
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ptx9363@gmail.com, {wangbins,dinggg,yongjh}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel method to involve
full-scale-features into the fully convolutional neural
networks (FCNs) for Semantic Segmentation. Current
works on FCN has brought great advances in the task
of semantic segmentation, but the receptive ﬁeld, which
represents region areas of input volume connected to
any output neuron, limits the available information
of output neuron’s prediction accuracy. We investigate
how to involve the full-scale or full-image features into
FCNs to enrich the receptive ﬁeld. Specially, the fullscale feature network (FFN) extends the full-connected
network and makes an end-to-end uniﬁed training structure. It has two appealing properties. First, the introduction of full-scale-features is beneﬁcial for prediction. We build a uniﬁed extracting network and explore several fusion functions for concatenating features. Amounts of experiments have been carried out to
prove that full-scale-features makes fair accuracy raising. Second, FFN is applicable to many variants of FCN
which could be regarded as a general strategy to improve the segmentation accuracy. Our proposed method
is evaluated on PASCAL VOC 2012, and achieves a
state-of-art result.

FCNnetwork

Figure 1: The limited receptivity of FCN cannot effectively
segment the large objects. True scale of object is marked in
the red bounding box.
formation, there are two main successful methods to obtain
a better prediction results on large objects. The ﬁrst one
is employing multi-scale features from different layers of
DCNN (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015) or from resized
scale of input image to get a larger receptive ﬁeld (Chen
et al. 2016; Szegedy et al. 2014; Mostajabi, Yadollahpour,
and Shakhnarovich 2015; Ding et al. 2016). The second type
of methods is employing a global postprocessing technique,
like Conditional Random Field (CRF) (Liu et al. 2015;
Lin et al. 2015; Zheng et al. 2015), to fuse the entire image
features.
By employing multi-scale features, FCNs could achieve a
larger receptive ﬁeld and make a more accurate prediction.
Some of these FCNs (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015)
concatenate the different layers of network, combining the
deep, coarse layer’s semantic information with shallow, ﬁne
layer’s appearance information. This type of methods expand the receptive ﬁeld in a certain extent (enlarged from
128 pixels to 224 pixels) but are still insufﬁcient for large
objects (width up to 400 or 500 pixels) ﬁlled in the whole
image. Larger receptive ﬁelds will bring much more computation as well. By employing full-connected CRF (Chen et
al. 2016), the ﬁnal output results of FCN will be treated as
a prediction prior and then be integrated for the whole image segmentation. Because this type of methods often take a
two-step process, the training time is usually long.
From another aspect, detecting large-size objects is more
like locating the objects instead of segmentation. The stateof-art object detection methods (Redmon et al. 2015; Ren et
al. 2015; He et al. 2015; Jifeng Dai 2016) have achieved ex-

Introduction
Fully convolution network (FCN) has brought great breakthrough on semantic segmentation task (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015). By building the deep convolutional
neural network (DCNN) fully convolutional, FCN could
take input of arbitary size and produce pixel-wise predication. Recently, many FCN-based models are proposed and
achieve striking results on semantic segmentation benchmarks (Chen et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2015; Zheng et al. 2015;
Lin et al. 2016).
Looking into the current FCN models especially the failure examples, we found that most of the failure examples
have large or full-image objects. In these examples, large
objects cannot be efﬁciently detected because of the conﬁned receptive ﬁeld of FCN, as shown in Fig. 1. For enlarging the receptive ﬁeld and enriching the prediction in∗
This research was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61571269 and No. 61373071)
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4240

