Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

TextBoxes: A Fast Text Detector with
a Single Deep Neural Network
Minghui Liao,∗ Baoguang Shi,∗ Xiang Bai,† Xinggang Wang, Wenyu Liu
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{mhliao, xbai, xgwang, liuwy}@hust.edu.cn and shibaoguang@gmail.com

The ﬁnal outputs are the aggregation of all boxes, followed
by a standard non-maximum suppression process. To handle the large variation in aspect ratios of words, we design
several novel, inception-style (Szegedy et al. 2015) output
layers that utilize both irregular convolutional kernels and
default boxes. Our detector delivers both high accuracy and
high efﬁciency with only a single forward pass on singlescale inputs, and even higher accuracy with multiple passes
on multi-scale inputs.
Furthermore, we argue that word recognition is helpful to
distinguish texts from backgrounds, especially when words
are conﬁned to a given set, i.e. a lexicon. We adopt a successful text recognition algorithm, CRNN (Shi, Bai, and Yao
2015), in conjunction with TextBoxes. The recognizer not
only provides extra recognition outputs, but also regularizes
text detection with its semantic-level awareness, thus further boosting the accuracy of word spotting considerably.
The combination of TextBoxes and CRNN yields the stateof-the-art performance on word spotting and end-to-end text
recognition tasks, which appears to be a simple yet effective
solution to robust text reading in the wild.
To summarize, the contributions of this paper are threefold: First, we design an end-to-end trainable neural network model for scene text detection. Second, we propose a
word spotting/end-to-end recognition framework that effectively combines detection and recognition. Third, our model
achieves highly competitive results while keeping its computational efﬁciency.

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end trainable fast scene text
detector, named TextBoxes, which detects scene text with
both high accuracy and efﬁciency in a single network forward
pass, involving no post-process except for a standard nonmaximum suppression. TextBoxes outperforms competing
methods in terms of text localization accuracy and is much
faster, taking only 0.09s per image in a fast implementation.
Furthermore, combined with a text recognizer, TextBoxes
signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on word
spotting and end-to-end text recognition tasks.

Introduction
Scene text is one of the most general visual objects in natural scenes. It frequently appears on road signs, license plates,
product packages, etc. Reading scene text facilitates a lot of
useful applications, such as image-based geolocation. Despite the similarity to traditional OCR, scene text reading is
much more challenging, due to the large variations in both
foreground text and background objects, as well as uncontrollable lighting conditions, etc.
Owing to the inevitable challenges and complexities,
traditional text detection methods tend to involve multiple processing steps, e.g. character/word candidate generation (Neumann and Matas 2012; Jaderberg et al. 2016),
candidate ﬁltering, and grouping. They often end up struggling to get each module working properly, requiring much
effort in tuning parameters and designing heuristic rules,
also slowing down detection speed. Inspired by the recent developments in object detection (Liu et al. 2016;
Ren et al. 2015), we propose to detect texts by directly predicting word bounding boxes via a single neural network
that is end-to-end trainable.
Our key contribution in this paper is a fast and accurate text detector called TextBoxes, which is based on fullyconvolutional network (LeCun et al. 1998). TextBoxes directly outputs the coordinates of word bounding boxes at
multiple network layers by jointly predicting text presence
and coordinate offsets to default boxes (Liu et al. 2016).

Related Works
Intuitively, scene text reading can be further divided into
two sub-tasks: text detection and text recognition. The former aims to localize text in images, mostly in the form of
word bounding boxes; The latter transcripts cropped word
images into machine-interpretable character sequences. We
cover both tasks in this paper but pay more attention to detection.
Based on a basic detection target, previous methods for
text detection can be roughly categorized into three categories:
1) Character-based: Individual characters are ﬁrst detected
and then grouped into words (Neumann and Matas 2012;
Pan, Hou, and Liu 2011; Yao et al. 2012; Huang, Qiao, and
Tang 2014). For example, (Neumann and Matas 2012) lo-

∗

Authors contribute equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4161

