Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

PIVE: Per-Iteration Visualization Environment for
Real-Time Interactions with Dimension Reduction and Clustering∗
Hannah Kim,1 Jaegul Choo,2 Changhyun Lee,3 Hanseung Lee,3 Chandan K. Reddy,4 Haesun Park,1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA; hannahkim@gatech.edu, hpark@cc.gatech.edu
2
Korea University, Seoul, South Korea; jchoo@korea.ac.kr
3
Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA; khakice@gmail.com, hanseung@google.com
4
Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA, USA; reddy@cs.vt.edu
the following aspects: (1) humans’ perceptual precision and
(2) the iterative behavior of machine learning. First, we notice
that visual perception does not require highly precise outputs
from machine learning methods. For example, when perceiving the value of π, most people think of its approximate value,
e.g., 3.14, and knowing it more accurately, e.g., 3.1415926,
does not make much difference in practice. Second, modern
machine learning methods usually obtain the solution via
iterative processes. Their important characteristic is that a
major improvement of the solution typically occurs in early
iterations while only minor changes occur in the later iterations. It indicates that the approximate, low-precision outputs
can be obtained much earlier before the full iterations ﬁnish.
Motivated by these two crucial observations, we postulate
that, in visual analytics, there is no need for users to wait
utill the algorithms are completely ﬁnished and get the ﬁnal
precise result.
In response, we propose a novel approach called PIVE
(Per-Iteration Visualization Environment), which visualizes
the intermediate results from algorithm iterations as soon
as they become available, achieving an efﬁcient real-time
interactive visualization with machine learning. Unlike many
previous approaches that treat a machine learning method as
a black box, PIVE breaks it down to an iteration level and
tightly integrates them with visual analytics so that a user can
check and interact with the visualization of machine learning
outputs. To avoid any delays in this process, PIVE parallelizes
computation and visualization via multi-threading.
With PIVE, a user can efﬁciently perform multiple interactions with machine learning in real time since it drastically
reduces the turn-around time of a single interaction from full
iterations to a few. The main idea of our interaction methodology is to allow a user to interact with the intermediate output,
which then affects subsequent algorithm iterations. Since
such a methodology does not require any major algorithmic
modiﬁcations nor computational overhead, a user can efﬁciently perform multiple interactions with machine learning
in real time.

Abstract
One of the key advantages of visual analytics is its capability
to leverage both humans’s visual perception and the power
of computing. A big obstacle in integrating machine learning
with visual analytics is its high computing cost. To tackle this
problem, this paper presents PIVE (Per-Iteration Visualization
Environment) that supports real-time interactive visualization
with machine learning. By immediately visualizing the intermediate results from algorithm iterations, PIVE enables users
to quickly grasp insights and interact with the intermediate
output, which then affects subsequent algorithm iterations. In
addition, we propose a widely-applicable interaction methodology that allows efﬁcient incorporation of user feedback into
virtually any iterative computational method without introducing additional computational cost. We demonstrate the application of PIVE for various dimension reduction algorithms
such as multidimensional scaling and t-SNE and clustering
and topic modeling algorithms such as k-means and latent
Dirichlet allocation.

1

Introduction

The innate ability of humans to quickly acquire insights
through visualization has been a key factor in the growth
in visual analytics (Keim 2002; Thomas and Cook 2005).
To leverage humans’ visual perception in data analytics, an
increasing amount of effort has been made to utilize various
computational methods in visual analytics (Buja, Cook, and
Swayne 1996; Seo and Shneiderman 2002). However, the
signiﬁcant amount of computing time required to run these
methods has been a critical hurdle against the effective integration of machine learning in visual analytics. Even worse,
as machine learning becomes more advanced and capable,
they often require more computations, making it virtually impossible to perform real-time interactive visualizations with
them. Therefore, even the state-of-the-art in visual analytics
adopts only a few standard techniques and does not properly leverage the advantages of advanced machine learning
methods.
However, several important aspects have been largely overlooked in previous studies. Speciﬁcally, this paper focuses on

2

Related Work

Efﬁcient Interactive Visualization Numerous studies focused on the efﬁcient interactive visualization of largescale data. A straightforward approach is to use sampled
data (Fisher et al. 2012; Ellis and Dix 2006). Another type of

∗
This work extends a poster at IEEE VIS ’14 (Choo et al. 2014),
which won the VAST best poster award.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1001

