Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sequential Peer Prediction:
Learning to Elicit Effort using Posted Prices
Yang Liu, Yiling Chen
Harvard University, Cambridge MA, USA
{yangl,yiling}@seas.harvard.edu

More recent work (Witkowski et al. 2013; Dasgupta and
Ghosh 2013; Shnayder et al. 2016) on peer prediction concerns effort elicitation, where the goal is not only to induce
truthful report, but also to induce high quality answers by
incentivizing agents to exert effort. In such work, the mechanism designer is assumed to know workers’ expertise level
and their cost for effort exertion and designs reward rules
to induce optimal effort levels and truthful reporting at an
equilibrium.
This paper also focuses on the effort elicitation of peer
prediction. But different from prior work, our mechanism
designer knows neither workers’ expertise level nor their
cost for effort exertion. We introduce a sequential peer prediction problem, where the mechanism proceeds in rounds
and the mechanism designer wants to learn to set the optimal reward level (that balances the amount of effort elicited
and the total payment) while observing the elicited answers in previous rounds. There are several challenges to
this problem. First, effort exertion is not observable and no
ground-truth answers are available for evaluating contributions. Hence, it is not immediately clear what information
the mechanism designer can learn from the observed answers in a sequential mechanism. Second, forward-looking
workers may have incentives to mislead the learning process, hoping for better future returns.
The main contributions of this paper are the following:
(1) We propose a sequential peer prediction mechanism by
combining ideas from peer prediction with multi-armed bandit learning (Lai and Robbins 1985; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and
Fischer 2002). (2) In this mechanism, workers exerting effort according to a non-degenerate threshold policy and then
reporting truthfully in each round is an equilibrium that returns highest utility for every worker. (3) We show that the
regret of this mechanism w.r.t. offering the optimal reward
is upper bounded by Õ(T 3/4 ) where T is the learning horizon. We also show that under a “mean-ﬁeld” assumption, the
sequential learning mechanism can be extended to a setting
where workers may not be fully rational. (4) Our sequential
peer prediction mechanism is minimal in that reported labels
are the only information we need from workers.
In the rest of the paper, we ﬁrst survey the most related
work in Section . Section introduces our problem formulation. We then present a game-theoretic analysis of worker
behavior in a one-stage static setting in Section . Based on

Abstract
Peer prediction mechanisms are often adopted to elicit truthful contributions from crowd workers when no ground-truth
veriﬁcation is available. Recently, mechanisms of this type
have been developed to incentivize effort exertion, in addition to truthful elicitation. In this paper, we study a sequential
peer prediction problem where a data requester wants to dynamically determine the reward level to optimize the trade-off
between the quality of information elicited from workers and
the total expected payment. In this problem, workers have
homogeneous expertise and heterogeneous cost for exerting
effort, both unknown to the requester. We propose a sequential posted-price mechanism to dynamically learn the optimal
reward level from workers’ contributions and to incentivize
effort exertion and truthful reporting. We show that (1) in
our mechanism, workers exerting effort according to a nondegenerate threshold policy and then reporting truthfully is an
equilibrium that returns highest utility for every worker, and
(2) The regret of our learning mechanism w.r.t. offering the
optimal reward (price) is upper bounded by Õ(T 3/4 ) where
T is the learning horizon. We further show the power of our
learning approach when the reports of workers do not necessarily follow the game-theoretic equilibrium.

Introduction
Crowdsourcing has arisen as a promising option to facilitate
machine learning via eliciting useful information from human workers. For example, such a notion has been widely
used for labeling training samples, e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk. Despite its simplicity and popularity, one salient
feature or challenge of crowdsourcing is the lack of evaluation for the collected answers, because ground-truth labels often are either unavailable or too costly to obtain.
This problem is called information elicitation without veriﬁcation (IEWV) (Waggoner and Chen 2014). A class of
mechanisms, collectively called peer prediction, has been
developed for the IEWV problem (Prelec 2004; Miller,
Resnick, and Zeckhauser 2005; Jurca and Faltings 2007;
2009; Witkowski and Parkes 2012a; 2012b; Radanovic and
Faltings 2013). In peer prediction, an agent is rewarded according to how his answer compares with those of his peers
and the reward rules are designed so that everyone truthfully
reporting their information is a game-theoretic equilibrium.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

607

