Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Prerequisite Skills for Reading Comprehension:
Multi-Perspective Analysis of MCTest Datasets and Systems
Saku Sugawara

Hikaru Yokono

Akiko Aizawa

The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, Japan
sakus@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
4-1-1, Kamikodanaka, Nakahara-ku
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan
yokono.hikaru@jp.fujitsu.com

National Institute of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo, Japan
aizawa@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

Context:
James the Turtle was always getting in trouble. One day,
James went to the grocery store and pulled all the pudding
off the shelves and ate two jars. Then he walked to the fast
food restaurant and ordered 15 bags of fries.

One of the main goals of natural language processing (NLP)
is synthetic understanding of natural language documents, especially reading comprehension (RC). An obstacle to the further development of RC systems is the absence of a synthetic
methodology to analyze their performance. It is difﬁcult to
examine the performance of systems based solely on their results for tasks because the process of natural language understanding is complex. In order to tackle this problem, we
propose in this paper a methodology inspired by unit testing
in software engineering that enables the examination of RC
systems from multiple aspects. Our methodology consists of
three steps. First, we deﬁne a set of prerequisite skills for RC
based on existing NLP tasks. We assume that RC capability can be divided into these skills. Second, we manually annotate a dataset for an RC task with information regarding
the skills needed to answer each question. Finally, we analyze the performance of RC systems for each skill based on
the annotation. The last two steps highlight two aspects: the
characteristics of the dataset, and the weaknesses in and differences among RC systems. We tested the effectiveness of
our methodology by annotating the Machine Comprehension
Test (MCTest) dataset and analyzing four existing systems
(including a neural system) on it. The results of the annotations showed that answering questions requires a combination of skills, and clariﬁed the kinds of capabilities that systems need to understand natural language. We conclude that
the set of prerequisite skills we deﬁne are promising for the
decomposition and analysis of RC.

1

Q1: What is the name of the trouble making turtle?
A) Pudding, B) Jane, *C) James, D) Fries
Q2: Where did James go after he went to the grocery store?
A) His freezer, *B) A fast food restaurant, C) His room, D)
His desk

Figure 1: An example of reading comprehension tasks excerpted from MCTest (Richardson et al., 2013) with the answers (∗ ).
a critical problem in this regard is that the process of natural language understanding is so complicated that it is difﬁcult to examine the performance of RC systems based on
the results of tasks. Neural systems, in particular, are liable
to strengthen this trend due to their black-box architectures.
Therefore, an effective methodology is necessary to analyze
the performance of RC systems for their development.
Consider the example of the questions shown in Figure 2.
To solve Q1, an RC system must identify apposition (James
is the Turtle) and recognize James as a name. Similarly, Q2
requires an understanding of temporal relations among the
events (went to the grocery store → walked to the fast food
restaurant), and the understanding that the verb (walk to
means go to). These instances show that different types of
skills are required in RC tasks.
In this study, our goal is to establish a general methodology to assess the performance of RC systems. Our methodology involves decomposing the capability of RC and analyzing its performance from multiple points of view. This is
in stark contrast to simple accuracy-based analysis, the approach used to assess systems at present. Our methodology
consists of the following three steps:

Introduction

Reading comprehension (RC) is “the process of simultaneously extracting and constructing meaning through interaction and involvement with written language” (Snow 2002).
RC tasks require understanding natural language texts and
answering questions about them. In natural language processing (NLP), they are used as a method to evaluate natural
language understanding systems. Such tasks are challenging
because they involve a variety of activities, such as coreference resolution, discourse understanding, and commonsense
reasoning.
In the development of RC systems, it is important to identify what the systems can and cannot understand. However,

1. Deﬁne a set of basic prerequisite skills required to understand documents.
2. Annotate questions for an RC task using the deﬁned skills.
3. Analyze the performance of RC systems on annotated
questions to understand the differences among systems
and the limitations of each.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3089

