Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Video Recovery via Learning Variation and Consistency of Images
1

Zhouyuan Huo,1 Shangqian Gao,2 Weidong Cai,3 Heng Huang1∗

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
2
College of Engineering, Northeastern University, USA
3
School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
zhouyuan.huo@mavs.uta.edu, gao.sh@husky.neu.edu, tom.cai@sydney.edu.au, heng@uta.edu

2010). However, trace norm is not the best approximation
for rank minimization regularization. If a non-zero singular
value of a matrix varies, the trace norm value will change simultaneously, but the rank of the matrix keeps constant. So,
there is a big gap between trace norm and rank minimization, and a better model to approximate rank minimization
regularization is desired for learning a low-rank structure.
In a recent work (Liu et al. 2009), Liu applied low-rank
model to solve image recovery problem. He assumed that
video is in low-rank structure, however, videos are not homogeneous, and they may contain sequences of images from
different episodes. If we simply project all the video into a
low-rank subspace, it is very likely to lose important information in the original video. More recently, Wang et al. introduced a spatiotemporal consistency low-rank tensor completion method (Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014). They proposed to utilize the content continuity within videos by imposing a new 2 -norm smoothness regularization. However,
this 2 -norm smoothness regularization tends to force two
consecutive frames to be similar, and it can not capture spatiotemporal variation properly.
In this paper, we propose a novel video recovery model
Sectional Trace Norm with Variation and Consistency Constraints (STN-VCC). Our contributions are summarized as
following: ﬁrstly, we utilize capped 1 -norm smoothness
function to capture the spatiotemporal variation and consistency between consecutive frames in video clips; secondly,
we introduce a new sectional trace norm to capture the lowrank structure, which is a better approximation of rank minimization than the traditional trace norm. Thirdly, instead of
using Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM)
which was used by previous video recovery models, we use
proximal gradient descent method to optimize and prove that
our method is guaranteed to converge.

Abstract
Matrix completion algorithms have been popularly used to
recover images with missing entries, and they are proved
to be very effective. Recent works utilized tensor completion models in video recovery assuming that all video frames
are homogeneous and correlated. However, real videos are
made up of different episodes or scenes, i.e. heterogeneous.
Therefore, a video recovery model which utilizes both video
spatiotemporal consistency and variation is necessary. To
solve this problem, we propose a new video recovery method
Sectional Trace Norm with Variation and Consistency Constraints (STN-VCC). In our model, capped 1 -norm regularization is utilized to learn the spatial-temporal consistency
and variation between consecutive frames in video clips.
Meanwhile, we introduce a new low-rank model to capture
the low-rank structure in video frames with a better approximation of rank minimization than traditional trace norm. An
efﬁcient optimization algorithm is proposed, and we also provide a proof of convergence in the paper. We evaluate the
proposed method via several video recovery tasks and experiment results show that our new method consistently outperforms other related approaches.

Introduction
Image recovery task can be treated as a matrix completion
problem, and it is proved to be really effective (Buades,
Coll, and Morel 2005; Ji et al. 2010; Liu et al. 2009;
Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014). In this task, pixels in an image
are missing because of noise or occlusion, and we need to
make use of observed information to reconstruct the original
image without deviating too much from it. Rank minimization regularization is proposed to solve matrix completion
problems, and has already achieved great success in other
ﬁelds (Bennett and Lanning 2007). However, it leads to a
non-convex and NP-hard problem. To solve this problem,
trace norm is introduced to approximate rank minimization,
and since then many algorithms have been invented to solve
matrix completion problems using trace norm regularization
(Shamir and Shalev-Shwartz 2014; Cai, Candès, and Shen

Video Recovery with Capped Norm
Constrained Variation and Consistency
Capture Spatiotemporal Consistency and Variation
in Video Clip via Capped 1 -norm

∗

To whom all correspondence should be addressed. This work
was partially supported by the following grants: NSF-IIS 1302675,
NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NSF-IIS 1619308, NSF-IIS
1633753, NIH R01 AG049371.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

In (Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014), authors proposed a 2 norm regularization ||E||2 to maintain spatiotemporal consistency in video clips, it is reasonable to suppose that two
consecutive frames in video clips are alike. However, not

4082

