Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Preferences Single-Peaked on a Circle
Dominik Peters and Martin Lackner
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
{dominik.peters, martin.lackner}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce the domain of preferences that are singlepeaked on a circle, which is a generalization of the wellstudied single-peaked domain. This preference restriction is useful, e.g., for scheduling decisions, and for
one-dimensional decisions in the presence of extremist preferences. We give a fast recognition algorithm
of this domain, provide a characterisation by ﬁnitely
many forbidden subproﬁles, and show that many popular
single- and multi-winner voting rules are polynomialtime computable on this domain. In contrast, Kemeny’s
rule remains hard to evaluate, and several impossibility
results from social choice theory can be proved using
only proﬁles that are single-peaked on a circle.

1

a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h
Figure 1: Example of preferences single-peaked on a circle.
and guarantees the existence of Condorcet winners as well as
transitivity of the majority relation (Moulin 1991).
The usefulness of results of this type is limited by the
extent to which proﬁles in practice actually happen to be
single-peaked. One way of dealing with this is to consider less restrictive generalisations of single-peakedness.
Maybe the structure of the alternative space is not quite onedimensional, and in this case it might be useful to consider
preferences that are single-peaked on a tree (Demange 1982).
This domain is notably larger, yet still retains many desirable properties in social choice terms; however, its algorithmic usefulness is more mixed (Yu, Chan, and Elkind 2013;
Peters and Elkind 2016).
In this paper, we identify a new preference restriction:
being single-peaked on a circle. Here we assume that alternatives can be placed on a circle, with agents’ preferences again
being decreasing on both sides of their peaks. See Figure 1
for some example shapes that ‘preference curves’ might have
in this setting; higher points are more preferred. Note that
the circle wraps around, and so h and a are adjacent. Intuitively, a preference proﬁle is single-peaked on a circle if, for
every agent, we can ‘cut’ the cycle once so that the agent’s
preferences are single-peaked on the resulting line. Crucially,
the location of the cutting point may differ for each agent.
The aim of this paper is to explore this new preference domain in detail. We will ﬁnd that this domain is algorithmically
useful (it often allows for efﬁcient winner determination), but
it performs less convincingly in terms of axiomatic properties
(since voting paradoxes still occur and impossibility results
can still be proven). Interestingly, this is precisely opposite
to how the results turned out for single-peakedness on trees.

Introduction

A central problem in the study of multi-agent systems is the
aggregation of agents’ preferences in order to make group
decisions. Impossibility theorems and computational hardness result make this problem a hard one to solve. However,
a successful line of research going back to Black’s (1948)
seminal article has managed to circumvent many problems
in (computational) social choice for the special case when
agents’ preferences are single-peaked. Under this preference
restriction, we assume that agents have preferences over the
possible values of a one-dimensional quantity such as the timing of a deadline, a tax rate, a thermostat setting, or the price
of a new product. A preference ordering is single-peaked if
an agent has a certain most-preferred value of the quantity
and derives less and less satisfaction from values that are
further away from the subjective optimum. Another popular
application of this setting is in political elections, where it is
often held that candidates can be ordered on a left-to-right
spectrum making the voters’ preferences single-peaked.
Preference proﬁles that consist solely of single-peaked
preference orderings have attractive properties, both algorithmically and in terms of their social choice behaviour (Elkind,
Lackner, and Peters 2016). For example, winner determination problems that are computationally hard in the general
case tend to be easy when restricted to single-peaked proﬁles
(Brandt et al. 2015; Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann 2013), and
the single-peaked domain admits a strategyproof voting rule
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

649

