Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Representations of Context in Recognizing
the Figurative and Literal Usages of Idioms
Changsheng Liu, Rebecca Hwa
Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
{changsheng,hwa}@cs.pitt.edu
into considerations. Although some previous works do make
use of local context, they have not sufﬁciently taken into account the impact of context diversity and semantic analyzability.
We characterize representation choices into three categories: Lexical Representation (Rajani, Salinas, and
Mooney 2014; Birke and Sarkar 2006; Byrne, Fenlon,
and Dunnion 2013), Topical Representation (Li, Roth, and
Sporleder 2010; Peng, Feldman, and Vylomova 2014) and
Distributional Semantic Representation (Sporleder and Li
2009). Each has its own advantages and limitations. Consequently, previous systems tend to perform better for some
idioms than others.
We hypothesize that a more ﬂexible and adaptable representation of the context is necessary to account for both
context diversity and semantic analyzability. We propose a
supervised ensemble approach for learning to adapt multiple
contextual representations for different idioms. Our studies
compare leading methods against a diverse set of idioms and
analyze the effects of contextual representations. We ﬁnd
that by drawing knowledge from multiple representations
and adapting to different idioms, an automatic recognizer
can achieve better stability without loss of accuracy.

Abstract
Many idiomatic expressions can be interpreted literally or
ﬁguratively, depending on the context in which they occur.
Developing an appropriate computational model of the context is crucial for automatic idiom usage recognition. While
many existing methods incorporate some elements of context, they have not sufﬁciently captured the interactions between the linguistic properties of idiomatic expressions and
the representations of the context. In this paper we perform an
in-depth exploration of the role of representations of the context for idiom usage recognition; we highlight the advantages
and limitations of different representation choices in existing
methods in terms of known linguistic properties of idioms;
we then propose a supervised ensemble method that selects
representations adaptively for different idioms. Experimental
result suggests that the proposed method performs better for
a wider range of idioms than previous methods.

Introduction
A sophisticated natural language processing application
should be able to interpret ﬁgurative language. There has
been extensive work in both metaphor detection (Shutova
2010; Mason 2004) and idiom processing. While metaphors
are meant ﬁguratively, an indiomatic expression may be interpreted literally or ﬁguratively, depending on the context in
which they occur. Our work focuses on discriminating these
two interpretations. This problem is challenging because idioms do not conform to a set of linguistic patterns that can be
easily characterized. Idioms have varying degrees of context
diversity; some are only appropriate under speciﬁc situations (e.g., break the ice) while others might be more widely
applicable (e.g., rub it in). Idioms also vary in terms of their
semantic analyzability (Gibbs, Nayak, and Cutting 1989;
Cacciari and Levorato 1998; Nunberg, Sag, and Wasow
1994); some contain words that suggest their ﬁgurative interpretations (e.g.,in the fast lane) while others are more dissimilar (break a leg).
The local context of an idiom holds clues for discriminating between its literal and ﬁgurative usages (Katz and
Giesbrecht 2006). We argue that in order to fully exploit the
information offered by the local context, an idiom usage recognizer ought to take the linguistic properties of the idioms

Literal vs. Figurative Interpretations of Idioms
Despite the common perception that an idiomatic expression is mainly used in its ﬁgurative sense, an analysis of 60
idioms has revealed that about half of them also have a clear
literal meaning (Fazly, Cook, and Stevenson 2009). In some
cases, the literal usage of an idiom may even be dominant
(Li and Sporleder 2009).The distinction between literal and
ﬁgurative usages is important for NLP applications. For example, a machine translation system should translate break
the ice differently in the following two sentences:
(1) When they ﬁnally punched through the Arctic ice
cap just shy of the North Pole, it took them ﬁve hours
to break the ice off their submarine’s key hatches so
they could reach the fresh air.
(2) US President Barack Obama and Cuba’s Raul Castro will have a historic face-to-face encounter at the
Summit of the Americas this week, breaking the ice
after decades of glacial relations.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3230

