Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Computing Least Cores of Supermodular Cooperative Games
Daisuke Hatano

Yuichi Yoshida

National Institute of Informatics
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project
hatano@nii.ac.jp

National Institute of Informatics, and
Preferred Infrastructure, Inc.
yyoshida@nii.ac.jp

ative games (sometimes called convex cooperative games),
that is, cooperative games with supermodular utility functions (Shapley 1971). Indeed, a value division called the
Shapley value (Shapley 1967) is always in the core.

Abstract
One of the goals of a cooperative game is to compute a value
division to the players from which they have no incentive to
deviate. This concept is formalized as the notion of the core.
To obtain a value division that motivates players to cooperate to a greater extent or that is more robust under noise, the
notions of the strong least core and the weak least core have
been considered. In this paper, we characterize the strong and
the weak least cores of supermodular cooperative games using the theory of minimizing crossing submodular functions.
We then apply our characterizations to two representative
supermodular cooperative games, namely, the induced subgraph game generalized to hypergraphs and the airport game.
For these games, we derive explicit forms of the strong and
weak least core values, and provide polynomial-time algorithms that compute value divisions in the strong and weak
least cores.

It is natural to consider what is the “stablest” value division, rather than simply any stable value division. One reason is to motivate the players of the game to cooperate to
the greatest extent. From the perspective of a manager of
the game, this extent can be regarded as the tax that can be
imposed on players while still ensuring they play the game.
Of course, the manager aims to maximize the tax. A second
reason to identify the stablest value division is to enhance
robustness to noise. In practice, we cannot accurately measure the valuation of each group because of external noise.
In such a case, the loss incurred when a group deviates (with
respect to the observed valuations) should be regarded as the
safety margin for the group not to deviate (Li and Conitzer
2015). To address these issues, several extensions of the core
have been considered. Two well-known examples are the
strong least core and the weak least core (Shapley and Shubik 1966). Indeed, it is known that value divisions in these
cores are most robust against a certain type of noise (Li and
Conitzer 2015).

Introduction
Cooperation and the sharing of resources are crucial factors
in achieving a sustainable and resilient economy. Based on
these concepts, services such as vehicle sharing, ofﬁce sharing, house sharing, and skill sharing (Reisch and Thgersen
2015) can be realized. Individuals can reduce their own costs
by dividing the cost of services with other customers, instead of using these services alone. A crucial challenge in
such scenarios is to divide the cost so that all customers are
satisﬁed with the division and are motivated to cooperate.
In this paper, we tackle this problem from the gametheoretic perspective of cooperative games. We explain the
motivation underlying cooperative games using the example of sharing taxis. The total fare for a group of customers
taking a taxi is typically determined by the customer who
travels farthest in the group. Our task is to divide the total
fare among these customers. However, if some customers
can pay less by forming a smaller group and dividing the
total fare of the subgroup appropriately, they will leave the
larger group. Hence, we need to ﬁnd a stable division that
avoids such a deviation. This concept have been formalized
as the notion of the core (Gillies 1959).
It is known that the core exists for the taxi example.
More generally, there is a core within supermodular cooper-

In this paper, we consider computational aspects of the
strong and weak least cores. First, we provide theoretical
characterizations of those cores of supermodular cooperative
games using the theory of minimizing crossing submodular
functions. To see that our characterizations are useful to interpret those cores and design efﬁcient algorithms for computing a value division in them, we analyze two representative supermodular cooperative games, namely, the induced
subgraph game (Deng and Papadimitriou 1994) generalized
to hypergraphs and the airport game (Littlechild and Owen
1973). The induced subgraph game models the proﬁt among
countries from forming alliances, whereas the airport game
can model the sharing of a runway at an airport and the sharing of taxis. To the best of our knowledge, there has been
no computational analysis of the weak least core, and the
difference between the strong and weak least cores has not
been discussed. We emphasize that we obtain the strong and
weak least core values in a uniform manner, which helps us
to analyze the difference between them.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

551

