Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Inﬁnitely Many-Armed Bandits with Budget Constraints
Haifang Li

Yingce Xia

Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
lihaifang@amss.ac.cn

University of Science
and Technology of China
yingce.xia@gmail.com

(Garivier and Cappé 2011), and Bayes-UCB (Kaufmann,
Cappé, and Garivier 2012).
Recently, the MAB problem with budget constraints (i.e.,
budgeted MAB), has been utilized to model some new industrial situations, for example, online bidding optimization
in sponsored search (Amin et al. 2012; Tran-Thanh et al.
2014) and on-spot instance bidding in cloud computing (Agmon Ben-Yehuda et al. 2013; Ardagna, Panicucci, and Passacantando 2011). In budgeted MAB, besides the random reward, each arm is also associated with an unknown random
cost. At each round, the player pulls an arm, receives a random reward and pays a random cost, until his budget runs
out. Many algorithms have been developed under different
settings for the budgeted MAB. Tran-Thanh et al. (2010),
Tran-Thanh et al. (2012), and Vanchinathan et al. (2015) designed -ﬁrst, KUBE and GP-SELECT algorithms respectively to study the budgeted MAB with deterministic cost
of each arm. Ding et al. (2013) studied the problem with
unknown discrete cost distributions and proposed the UCBBV algorithm. Xia et al. (2015a) designed the budget-UCB
algorithm to investigate the random continuous costs. Another line of research, the best arm identiﬁcation problem
for budgeted MAB, was proposed in (Xia et al. 2016b).
Berry et al. (1997) ﬁrst addressed the MAB problem with
inﬁnitely many arms, where each arm is associated with a
Bernoulli reward distribution. They tried to characterize the
case in which the number of arms can be inﬁnite and much
larger than the possible number of experiments. The general
reward distribution problems are studied by Wang, Audibert,
and Munos (2009) and Carpentier and Valko (2015). Wang,
Audibert, and Munos (2009) proposed UCB-V(∞) algorithm to deal with this case. Carpentier and Valko (2015) addressed the optimal arm identiﬁcation problem for inﬁnitearm setting and provided SiRI algorithm. However, the costs
per round in the aforementioned works are all 1’s. In this paper, we introduce the random cost into the inﬁnitely manyarmed setting, and propose the inﬁnitely many-armed bandits problem with budget constraints (denoted as ∞-BMAB,
where the ﬁrst “B”refers to “Budgeted”.).
All prior works on budgeted MAB focus on the ﬁnite
number of arms, in which each arm will be sufﬁciently explored. These algorithms cannot be directly applied to an
inﬁnitely many-armed bandit problem, since it is impossible
to make exploration on each arm. We design efﬁcient algo-

Abstract
We study the inﬁnitely many-armed bandit problem with budget constraints, where the number of arms can be inﬁnite
and much larger than the number of possible experiments.
The player aims at maximizing his/her total expected reward under a budget constraint B for the cost of pulling
arms. We introduce a weak stochastic assumption on the ratio
of expected-reward to expected-cost of a newly pulled arm
which characterizes its probability of being a near-optimal
arm. We propose an algorithm named RCB-I to this new problem, in which the player ﬁrst randomly picks K arms, whose
order is sub-linear in terms of B, and then runs the algorithm
for the ﬁnite-arm setting on the selected arms. Theoretical
analysis shows that this simple algorithm enjoys a sub-linear
regret in term of the budget B. We also provide a lower bound
of any algorithm under Bernoulli setting. The regret bound of
RCB-I matches the lower bound up to a logarithmic factor.
We further extend this algorithm to the any-budget setting
(i.e., the budget is unknown in advance) and conduct corresponding theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a classical sequential decision problem, where a player receives a random reward by pulling one of the K arms of a slot machine at each round and wants to maximize the expected
cumulative reward. Each arm has an unknown reward distribution. The player can only observe the reward of the
pulled arm at each round. The core problem of MAB is
the tradeoff between exploration (i.e., pulling the less pulled
arms) and exploitation (i.e., sticking to the empirical best
arms). Numerous real-world applications can be described
by MAB models, such as personalized news recommendation (Li et al. 2010), auction mechanism design (Mohri
and Munoz 2014), online advertising (Tran-Thanh et al.
2014), crowdsourcing (Zhou, Chen, and Li 2014) and so
on. MAB problems have been extensively studied in machine learning and statistics community (Lai and Robbins
1985; Beygelzimer et al. 2011; Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi
2012). Many algorithms have been proposed, like UCB1,
n -Greedy (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002), UCBV (Audibert, Munos, and Szepesvári 2007; 2009), KL-UCB
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2182

