Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

ICU Mortality Prediction: A Classiﬁcation
Algorithm for Imbalanced Datasets
Sakyajit Bhattacharya, Vaibhav Rajan, Harsh Shrivastava
Xerox Research Centre India, Bangalore, India

evident; later algorithmic development on the benchmark
dataset has led to up to 170% improvement over traditional
risk scoring systems that are used in ICUs today (Johnson
et al. 2016). Several aspects of mining clinical data have
been examined in these algorithms such as data preprocessing, feature selection, imputation of missing values and the
design of new classiﬁers.
In this paper, we design an algorithm for predicting ICU
mortality that addresses the problem of class imbalance.
A dataset is called imbalanced if it contains signiﬁcantly
more samples from one class (the majority class) than the
other class (the minority class). Classiﬁcation on imbalanced datasets is an important problem in clinial data mining (Reddy and Aggarwal 2015). In many datasets, we also
ﬁnd that the sampling distributions of the (training) features
overlap signiﬁcantly, that exacerbates the problem of learning from imbalanced data (Denil and Trappenberg 2010).
Our new algorithm for supervised binary classiﬁcation addresses both the problems of imbalance and overlap in a
unique manner. It involves transforming Gaussian random
variables into χ2 random variables where the degree of freedom depends on the mean, variance as well as the class size
in the training data. The algorithm exploits the class imbalance in a dataset to achieve a transformation of the features such that the transformed features are well separated.
The more the class imbalance, the better the separation we
achieve – transforming a disadvantage into an opportunity.
The classiﬁcation problem is posed as a statistical hypothesis testing problem which involves the distribution of the
difference of two χ2 random variables. However, there is no
easily computable analytic expression for the density (PDF)
or distribution (CDF) of a linear combination of χ2 –random
variables. Approximations exist that can be used in our algorithm and this itself yields better classiﬁcation accuracy
than state–of–the–art methods. Furthermore, we derive new
approximations (given in appendix, due to lack of space) to
the density and distribution of the difference of two χ2 variables. These approximations not only improve the classiﬁcation accuracy further but also possess desirable properties –
they are easier to compute, are invertible and are more accurate over a larger range of the random variable – no previous
approximation has all these three properties.
To summarize our contributions in this paper,

Abstract
Determining mortality risk is important for critical decisions
in Intensive Care Units (ICU). The need for machine learning models that provide accurate patient-speciﬁc prediction
of mortality is well recognized. We present a new algorithm
for ICU mortality prediction that is designed to address the
problem of imbalance, which occurs, in the context of binary
classiﬁcation, when one of the two classes is signiﬁcantly
under–represented in the data. We take a fundamentally new
approach in exploiting the class imbalance through a feature
transformation such that the transformed features are easier
to classify. Hypothesis testing is used for classiﬁcation with
a test statistic that follows the distribution of the difference
of two χ2 random variables, for which there are no analytic
expressions and we derive an accurate approximation. Experiments on a benchmark dataset of 4000 ICU patients show
that our algorithm surpasses the best competing methods for
mortality prediction.

Introduction
An Intensive Care Unit (ICU) has the most critically ill patients who are continuously monitored to check for disease
progression and potential complications. As the need for
ICUs have grown worldwide (Halpern et al. 2013), more
ICUs have been created but the availability of resources,
both clinical staff and monitoring equipment, remain limited due to many practical constraints. ICU costs have risen
amounting to nearly 13% of hospital costs and 5% of the
total healthcare cost (Halpern and Pastores 2010).
Continuous monitoring of ICU patients generates a wealth
of clinical data presenting opportunities to build predictive
models for decision support. The importance of predicting
mortality (risk of death) in effective delivery of ICU care
is well recognized (Power and Harrison 2014). Identifying
high–risk patients can not only aid critical decisions during
ICU stay such as interrupting treatments or providing Do–
Not–Resuscitate orders but also enable triage, making ICU
resources available to other patients in need.
The PhysioNet ICU Mortality Challenge 2012 (Silva et
al. 2012) was hosted to encourage the development of new
algorithms for ICU mortality prediction. In the challenge
itself, the beneﬁts of machine learning algorithms became
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We design a new binary classiﬁer consisting of (1) A

1288

