Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Clinical Concept Extraction in Electronic Medical Records
Yufan Guo, Deepika Kakrania, Tyler Baldwin, Tanveer Syeda-Mahmood
IBM Research - Almaden
650 Harry Road
San Jose, California 95120

for UMLS concept identiﬁcation (Aronson and Lang 2010;
Savova et al. 2010; Divita et al. 2014), existing systems
mostly rely on exact match retrieval from original or lemmatized reports, and very few of them are scaled up to handle
large volumes of complex, diverse data. The importance of
system scalability cannot be overstated, due to the exponential growth of patient data, fueling the big data revolution in
healthcare.
In this demonstration we will showcase a new system for
real-time detection of clinical concepts in EMR (Figure 1).
The system features a large vocabulary of over 5.6 million
concepts. It achieves high precision and recall, with good
tolerance to typos through the use of a novel preﬁx indexing and subsequence matching algorithm, along with a recursive negation detector based on efﬁcient, deep parsing.
For instance, in contrast to existing algorithms, this more
ﬂexible search algorithm could detect the concept Chest CT
within the phrase “a subsequent CT scan of the chest”. Similarly, the deep parsing-based negation detector captures long
distance negations, such as for Fibromyalgia in the input
“There is no evidence suggesting the patient had been diagnosed with ﬁbromyalgia”. Our system has been tested on
over 12.9 million reports of more than 200 different types
collected from 800,000+ patients. A comparison with the
state of the art shows that it outperforms previous systems
in addition to being the ﬁrst system to scale to such large
collections.

Abstract
Automatic identiﬁcation of clinical concepts in electronic
medical records (EMR) is useful not only in forming a complete longitudinal health record of patients, but also in recovering missing codes for billing, reducing costs, ﬁnding more
accurate clinical cohorts for clinical trials, and enabling better
clinical decision support. Existing systems for clinical concept extraction are mostly knowledge-driven, relying on exact
match retrieval from original or lemmatized reports, and very
few of them are scaled up to handle large volumes of complex, diverse data. In this demonstration we will showcase
a new system for real-time detection of clinical concepts in
EMR. The system features a large vocabulary of over 5.6 million concepts. It achieves high precision and recall, with good
tolerance to typos through the use of a novel preﬁx indexing
and subsequence matching algorithm, along with a recursive
negation detector based on efﬁcient, deep parsing. Our system
has been tested on over 12.9 million reports of more than 200
different types, collected from 800,000+ patients. A comparison with the state of the art shows that it outperforms previous
systems in addition to being the ﬁrst system to scale to such
large collections.

Introduction
It is well known that the structured information in electronic method record (EMR) systems does not capture all
of the symptoms, diagnoses, medications, or measurements
recorded in clinical reports. Automatic identiﬁcation of
these concepts is therefore useful not only in forming a complete longitudinal health record of patients, but also in recovering missing codes for billing, reducing costs, ﬁnding more
accurate clinical cohorts for clinical trials, and enabling better clinical decision support.
The popular approach to clinical concept identiﬁcation is
knowledge driven, built upon various health and biomedical
vocabularies such as the well-known Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus. The performance of
a vocabulary-based system depends on three main factors:
(a) the size of the vocabulary, (b) the algorithm used for ﬁnding a match (including reliable detection of negations), and
(c) its scalability in the presence of large documents and vocabularies. While a number of systems have been developed

System highlights
In contrast to existing systems, the demonstrated system proposes to show advances in both concept matching and negation detection algorithms.

Longest common word sequence matching and
preﬁx indexing for concept extraction
We developed a novel algorithm for inexact matching of
clinical terms in reports which aims to identify the longest
common word sequence between a term and a sentence, an
extension of the traditional longest common subsequence
(LCS) problem (Maier 1978). The word sequence can be
non-contiguous, but has to cover a sufﬁcient number of
words in a term, and a word is considered as a match for
another if they share a preﬁx of sufﬁcient size, tunable with
respect to their length. Preﬁxes are then used for matching

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5089

