Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Discriminative Semi-Supervised Dictionary Learning
with Entropy Regularization for Pattern Classification
Meng Yang,1, 2 Lin Chen1

1

College of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China

Abstract

A basic model of sparse presentation can be roughly written as y ≈ Dx, which D is a dictionary and x is a sparse
coding vector. The dictionary D, which should faithfully
represent an input signal regardless of various variations,
plays an important role in the success of sparse representation (Rubinstein, Bruckstein and Elad 2010). Compared to
the handcrafted and off-the-shelf representation bases, dictionary learning has been reported leading performance in
image denoising (Bryt and Elad 2008; Zhou et al. 2010),
image compression (Bryt and Elad 2008), face recognition
(Wright et al. 2009; Zhang and Li 2010), and image classification (Huang and Aviyente 2006; Mairal et al. 2009;
Pham and Svetha 2008; Yang and Zhang 2014; Mairal,
Bach and Ponce 2012).
Unsupervised dictionary learning has been developed
and widely applied into image denoising (Bryt and Elad
2008; Zhou et al. 2010) and image compression (Bryt and
Elad 2008). The desired dictionary is expected to only have
a powerful representation ability since no class information
is used in the unsupervised dictionary learning. One representative unsupervised dictionary learning (DL) is the
KSVD algorithm (Aharon, Michael and Alfred 2006),
which has achieved promising abilities in image compression and image restoration by learning an over-complete
dictionary for local image patches.
Due to the lack of label information, unsupervised dictionary learning is powerful for data reconstruction, but not
advantageous for classification tasks. In the tasks of image
classification with labeled training data provided, how to
effectively explore the class information and design supervised discriminative dictionary becomes a hot topic in the
fields of image classification and sparse representation.
Supervised dictionary learning methods has been extensively studied in recent years for the case that enough labeled training samples are available. As reviewed in Section 2, supervised dictionary learning models usually explore the discrimination of dictionary by requiring the powerful classification ability of coding coefficients, the dis-

Dictionary learning has played an important role in the success of sparse representation, which triggers the rapid developments of unsupervised and supervised dictionary
learning methods. However, in most practical applications,
there are usually quite limited labeled training samples
while it is relatively easy to acquire abundant unlabeled
training samples. Thus semi-supervised dictionary learning
that aims to effectively explore the discrimination of unlabeled training data has attracted much attention of researchers. Although various regularizations have been introduced
in the prevailing semi-supervised dictionary learning, how
to design an effective unified model of dictionary learning
and unlabeled-data class estimating and how to well explore
the discrimination in the labeled and unlabeled data are still
open. In this paper, we propose a novel discriminative semisupervised dictionary learning model (DSSDL) by introducing discriminative representation, an identical coding of unlabeled data to the coding of testing data final classification,
and an entropy regularization term. The coding strategy of
unlabeled data can not only avoid the affect of its incorrect
class estimation, but also make the learned discrimination
be well exploited in the final classification. The introduced
regularization of entropy can avoid overemphasizing on
some uncertain estimated classes for unlabeled samples.
Apart from the enhanced discrimination in the learned dictionary by the discriminative representation, an extended
dictionary is used to mainly explore the discrimination embedded in the unlabeled data. Extensive experiments on face
recognition, digit recognition and texture classification
show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
Inspired by the sparsity mechanism of human vision system (Olshausen and Field 1996), sparse representation has
been widely applied to many tasks, such as image
processing (Aharon, Michael, and Alfred 2006; Elad and
Aharon 2006) and image classification (Mairal et al. 2008;
Wright et al. 2009; Wagner et al. 2010; Yang et al. 2009).
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1626

