Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Marrying Uncertainty and Time in Knowledge Graphs
Melisachew Wudage Chekol

Giuseppe Pirrò

Data and Web Science Group, University of Mannheim
mel@informatik.uni-mannheim.de

Rende(CS), Italy
pirro@icar.cnr.it

Joerg Schoenﬁsch

Heiner Stuckenschmidt

Data and Web Science Group
University of Mannheim
joerg@dwslab.de

Data and Web Science Group
University of Mannheim
heiner@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
facts to avoid maintenance costs and provide reliable content. A limitation of existing methods (e.g., (Schlobach et al.
2007; Sirin et al. 2007)) is the lack of capabilities to deal
with probabilistic and temporal information. This leads to
situations where statements that refer to objects at different points in time are assumed to be inconsistent. In addition, little has been done in terms of techniques to debug
uncertain KGs, with the exception of the preliminary results
in (Chekol et al. 2016; Huber, Meilicke, and Stuckenschmidt
2014; Chen and Wang 2014; Dylla, Sozio, and Theobald
2011). The second challenge is about providing temporal
information. Most of existing approaches have focused on
identifying static facts encoded as binary relations (Fionda,
Gutierrez, and Pirrò 2016). However, the vast majority of
facts are ﬂuents (dynamic relations whose truth is a function
of time), only holding during an interval of time. Facts like
(ClaudioRanieri, coach, Chelsea) loose relevance without a
temporal scope (2000–2004 in this case). Inference or deduction rules and consistency checking constraints are useful to both derive implicit/new facts from existing ones and
constrain or identify conﬂicting facts. As an example, the
date of birth of a person is functional. The broad goal of this
paper is to tackle the above challenges and study uncertain
temporal KGs. Speciﬁcally, we tackle the following general
problem:
Problem 1 Given an uncertain temporal KG G, a set of temporal inference rules F, and a set of temporal constraints C,
what is the most probable and error free temporal KG?
Related work. Preliminary results that highlight the use of
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) to debug temporal knowledge bases are presented in (Chekol et al. 2016; Huber, Meilicke, and Stuckenschmidt 2014). The idea is to use handcrafted temporal constraints to identify conﬂicts in knowledge bases containing date and time datatype values. However, this study: (i) does not provide a formal characterization in terms of syntax and semantics, (ii) only considers a
subset of RDF(S) inference rules, and (iii) does not consider
constraints for debugging numerical attributes.
Dylla et al (Dylla, Miliaraki, and Theobald 2013) extend
probabilistic databases with a temporal dimension. Besides,
in an earlier version (Dylla, Sozio, and Theobald 2011), authors proposed an approach for resolving temporal conﬂicts
in RDF knowledge bases. The idea is to use ﬁrst-order logic
Horn formulas with temporal predicates to express temporal

Abstract
The management of uncertainty is crucial when harvesting structured content from unstructured and noisy sources.
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are a prominent example. KGs
maintain both numerical and non-numerical facts, with the
support of an underlying schema. These facts are usually accompanied by a conﬁdence score that witnesses how likely
is for them to hold. Despite their popularity, most of existing KGs focus on static data thus impeding the availability
of timewise knowledge. What is missing is a comprehensive
solution for the management of uncertain and temporal data
in KGs. The goal of this paper is to ﬁll this gap. We rely on
two main ingredients. The ﬁrst is a numerical extension of
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) that provide the necessary
underpinning to formalize the syntax and semantics of uncertain temporal KGs. The second is a set of Datalog constraints with inequalities that extend the underlying schema
of the KGs and help to detect inconsistencies. From a theoretical point of view, we discuss the complexity of two important classes of queries for uncertain temporal KGs: maximum
a-posteriori and conditional probability inference. Due to the
hardness of these problems and the fact that MLN solvers
do not scale well, we also explore the usage of Probabilistic
Soft Logics (PSL) as a practical tool to support our reasoning
tasks. We report on an experimental evaluation comparing the
MLN and PSL approaches.

Introduction
Open Information Extraction (OIE) or machine reading has
been announced as a new paradigm for extracting domain independent knowledge from large Web corpora (Banko et al.
2007; Etzioni et al. 2008; Pujara et al. 2013). OIE is of particular interest for the creation of knowledge graphs (KGs)
and enriching existing ones (Pirrò 2015). KGs like Google’s
knowledge graph (Dong et al. 2014), NELL (Mitchell et
al. 2015), and ReVerb (Fader, Soderland, and Etzioni 2011)
store probabilistic facts, that is, facts along with their conﬁdence scores witnessing how likely they are to hold. Indeed,
the automated construction of KGs often produces noisy and
inaccurate facts and rules with errors that can propagate
upon inference or knowledge base expansion (Chen and
Wang 2014). The harvesting of KGs poses some key challenges. The ﬁrst concerns the need to clean KGs from noisy
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

88

