Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deep Collective Inference
John Moore, Jennifer Neville
Departments of Computer Science and Statistics
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
Email: moore269, neville@purdue.edu

tasks have produced signiﬁcant performance gains across
domains such as speech translation, image processing, and
natural language processing (Lipton, Berkowitz, and Elkan
2015; Chung et al. 2014; Graves and Jaitly 2014; Vinyals et
al. 2014; Ren, Kiros, and Zemel 2015). While research on
neural network models has been active for decades, recent
achievements with the models are due to the availability of
larger datasets, combined with several insights on how to
structure the form of the model, initialize the weights, guide
the optimization process to avoid overﬁtting, and ﬁx problems such as vanishing gradients.
However, in the majority of domains where RNNs have
been applied successfully, the examples are structured either as vectors, sequences, or matrices. Due to heterogeneous structure of graph data, it is still a relatively open
question as to how to best design and exploit RNNs for
learning in graphs with heterogeneous structure. There has
been work on using neural networks for unsupervised learning in networks (e.g., graph clustering (Tian et al. 2014),
node embeddings (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang
et al. 2015)). However, when these methods have been applied for classiﬁcation (e.g., link prediction (Li et al. 2014),
graph classiﬁcation (Yanardag and Vishwanathan 2015),
node classiﬁcation (Grover and Leskovec 2016)), it is typically based on using the output of unsupervised learning
as features in a basic predictive model (e.g., logistic regression). The majority of previous methods for collective classiﬁcation have been based on graphical models (e.g., Taskar,
Abbeel, and Koller 2002; Richardson and Domingos 2006;
Neville and Jensen 2007). There has been relatively little
work on neural network models for supervised, end-to-end
classiﬁcation in partially-labeled relational graphs. One exception is the work of Monner and Reggia (2013) on Recurrent Neural Collective Classiﬁcation (RNCC).
In this work, we develop an RNN for semi-supervised
collective inference in attributed networks. Speciﬁcally, we
consider the node classiﬁcation problem, where given a single partially-labeled attributed network, the goal is to learn
a model to jointly predict the remaining unlabeled nodes in
the network. We propose an RNN approach that uses semisupervised learning to jointly model relational structure and
attributes. Our main insights are: (1) to transform a node and
its set of neighbors into a random order (i.e., sequence of
varying length) and use an LSTM-based RNN (Hochreiter

Abstract
Collective inference is widely used to improve classiﬁcation in network datasets. However, despite recent advances
in deep learning and the successes of recurrent neural networks (RNNs), researchers have only just recently begun to
study how to apply RNNs to heterogeneous graph and network datasets. There has been recent work on using RNNs
for unsupervised learning in networks (e.g., graph clustering, node embedding) and for prediction (e.g., link prediction, graph classiﬁcation), but there has been little work on
using RNNs for node-based relational classiﬁcation tasks. In
this paper, we provide an end-to-end learning framework using RNNs for collective inference. Our main insight is to
transform a node and its set of neighbors into an unordered
sequence (of varying length) and use an LSTM-based RNN
to predict the class label as the output of that sequence. We
develop a collective inference method, which we refer to as
Deep Collective Inference (DCI), that uses semi-supervised
learning in partially-labeled networks and two label distribution correction mechanisms for imbalanced classes. We compare to several alternative methods on seven network datasets.
DCI achieves up to a 12% reduction in error compared to the
best alternative and a 25% reduction in error on average—
over all methods, for all label proportions.

Introduction
Collective inference is widely used to improve classiﬁcation
in network datasets (see e.g., Macskassy and Provost 2007).
This is because many network datasets have nodes with attributes values that are correlated across the links. For example, in protein-protein interaction networks, the functions of
interacting proteins in the cell are typically correlated. Similarly in social networks, friends tends to share similar interests and preferences. Thus in a partially labeled network
where the attribute values of some nodes are observed, but
others are unobserved, it is often helpful to learn a statistical relational model (see e.g., Getoor and Taskar 2007) and
apply the model using collective classiﬁcation (see e.g., Sen
et al. 2008) to jointly make predictions about the set of unlabeled nodes.
Recently, the use of recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
and deep learning for both supervised and unsupervised
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2364

