Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Achieving Privacy in the Adversarial Multi-Armed Bandit
Aristide C. Y. Tossou

Christos Dimitrakakis

Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden
aristide@chalmers.se

University of Lille, France
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
Harvard University, USA
christos.dimitrakakis@gmail.com

movie recommendations can be formalized similarly (Pandey
and Olston 2006).
Privacy can be a serious issue in the bandit setting (c.f.
(Jain, Kothari, and Thakurta 2012; Thakurta and Smith 2013;
Mishra and Thakurta 2015; Zhao et al. 2014)). For example,
in clinical trials, we may want to detect and publish results
about the best drug without leaking sensitive information,
such as the patient’s health condition and genome. Differential privacy (Dwork 2006) formally bounds the amount of
information that a third party can learn no matter their power
or side information.
Differential privacy has been used before in the stochastic
setting (Tossou and Dimitrakakis 2016; Mishra and Thakurta
2015; Jain, Kothari, and Thakurta 2012) where the authors
obtain optimal algorithms up to logarithmic factors. In the
adversarial setting, (Thakurta and Smith 2013) adapts an
algorithm called Follow The Approximate Leader to make it
private and obtain a regret bound of O(T 2/3 ). In this work,
we show that a number of simple algorithms can satisfy
privacy guarantees, while achieving nearly optimal regret (up
to logarithmic factors) that scales naturally with the level of
privacy desired.
Our work is also of independent interest for non-private
multi-armed bandit algorithms, as there are competitive with
the current state of the art against switching-cost adversaries
(where we recover the optimal bound). Finally, we provide
rigorous empirical results against a variety of adversaries.
The following section gives the main background and notations. Section 3.1 describes meta-algorithms that perturb the
gain sequence to achieve privacy, while Section 3.2 explains
how to leverage the privacy inherent in the EXP3 algorithm
by modifying the way gains are used. Section 4 compares
our algorithms with EXP3 in a variety of settings. The full
proofs of all our main results are in the full version.

Abstract
In this paper, we improve the previously best known regret
bound to achieve -differential privacy
in oblivious adversarial
√
bandits from O(T 2/3 /) to O( T ln T /). This is achieved
by combining a Laplace Mechanism with EXP3. We show that
though EXP3 is already differentially private, it leaks a linear
amount of information in T . However, we can improve this
privacy by relying on its intrinsic exponential
√mechanism for
selecting actions. This allows us to reach O( ln T )-DP, with
a regret of O(T 2/3 ) that holds against an adaptive adversary,
an improvement from the best known of O(T 3/4 ). This is
done by using an algorithm that run EXP3 in a mini-batch
loop. Finally, we run experiments that clearly demonstrate the
validity of our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

We consider multi-armed bandit problems in the adversarial
setting whereby an agent selects one from a number of alternatives (called arms) at each round and receives a gain that
depends on its choice. The agent’s goal is to maximize its total gain over time. There are two main settings for the bandit
problem. In the stochastic one, the gains of each arm are generated i.i.d by some unknown probability law. In the adversarial setting, which is the focus of this paper, the gains are generated adversarially. We are interested in ﬁnding algorithms
with a total gain over T rounds not much smaller than that of
an oracle with additional knowledge about the problem. In
both settings, algorithms that achieve
the optimal (problem√
independent) regret bound of O( T ) are known (Auer, CesaBianchi, and Fischer 2002; Burnetas and Katehakis 1996;
Pandey and Olston 2006; Thompson 1933; Auer et al. 2003;
Auer 2002; Agrawal and Goyal 2012).
This problem is a model for many applications where there
is a need for trading-off exploration and exploitation. This
is so because, whenever we make a choice, we only observe
the gain generated by that choice, and not the gains that we
could have obtained otherwise. An example is clinical trials,
where arms correspond to different treatments or tests, and
the goal is to maximize the number of cured patients over
time while being uncertain about the effects of treatments.
Other problems, such as search engine advertisement and

2
2.1

Preliminaries

The Multi-Armed Bandit problem

Formally, a bandit game is deﬁned between an adversary and
an agent as follows: there is a set of K arms A, and at each
round t, the agent plays an arm It ∈ A. Given the choice
It , the adversary grants the agent a gain gIt ,t ∈ [0, 1]. The
agent only observes the gain of arm It , and not that of any
other arms. The goal of this agent is to maximize its total gain

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2653

