Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Exact Penalty Method for Binary
Optimization Based on MPEC Formulation
Ganzhao Yuan, Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
yuanganzhao@gmail.com, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

(Shi and Malik 2000; Joulin, Bach, and Ponce 2010), image registration (Wang et al. 2016), and social network
analysis (e.g. subgraph discovery (Yuan and Zhang 2013;
Ames 2015), biclustering (Ames 2014), planted clique and
biclique discovery (Ames and Vavasis 2011), and community discovery (He et al. 2016; Chan and Yeung 2011)), etc.
The binary optimization problem is difﬁcult to solve,
since it is NP-hard. One type of method to solve this problem
is continuous in nature. The simple way is to relax the binary
constraint with Linear Programming (LP) relaxation constraints −1 ≤ x ≤ 1 and round the entries of the resulting
continuous solution to the nearest integer at the end. However, not only may this solution not be optimal, it may not
even be feasible and violate some constraint. Another type of
optimization focuses on the cutting-plane and branch-andcut method. The cutting plane method solves the LP relaxation and then adds linear constraints that drive the solution
towards integers. The branch-and-cut method partially develops a binary tree and iteratively cuts out the nodes having
a lower bound that is worse than the current upper bound,
while the lower bound can be found using convex relaxation,
Lagrangian duality, or Lipschitz continuity. However, this
class of method ends up solving all 2n convex subproblems
in the worst case. Our algorithm aligns with the ﬁrst research
direction. It relies on solving a convex LP relaxation subproblem iteratively, but it provably terminates in polynomial
iterations.
In non-convex optimization, good initialization is very
important to the quality of the solution. Motivated by this,
several papers design smart initialization strategies and establish optimality qualiﬁcation of the solutions for nonconvex problems. For example, the work of (Zhang 2010)
considers a multi-stage convex optimization algorithm to reﬁne the global solution by the initial convex method; the
work of (Candès, Li, and Soltanolkotabi 2015) starts with a
careful initialization obtained by a spectral method and improves this estimate by gradient descent; the work of (Jain,
Netrapalli, and Sanghavi 2013) uses the top-k singular vectors of the matrix as initialization and provides theoretical
guarantees for biconvex alternating minimization algorithm.
The proposed method also uses a similar initialization strategy since it reduces to convex LP relaxation in the ﬁrst iteration.
The contributions of this paper are three-fold. (a) We re-

Abstract
Binary optimization is a central problem in mathematical optimization and its applications are abundant. To solve this
problem, we propose a new class of continuous optimization techniques, which is based on Mathematical Programming with Equilibrium Constraints (MPECs). We ﬁrst reformulate the binary program as an equivalent augmented biconvex optimization problem with a bilinear equality constraint, then we propose an exact penalty method to solve
it. The resulting algorithm seeks a desirable solution to the
original problem via solving a sequence of linear programming convex relaxation subproblems. In addition, we prove
that the penalty function, induced by adding the complementarity constraint to the objective, is exact, i.e., it has the same
local and global minima with those of the original binary program when the penalty parameter is over some threshold. The
convergence of the algorithm can be guaranteed, since it essentially reduces to block coordinate descent in the literature.
Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
the problem of dense subgraph discovery. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms existing techniques,
such as iterative hard thresholding and linear programming
relaxation.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we mainly focus on the following binary optimization problem:
min f (x), s.t. x ∈ {−1, +1}n , x ∈ Ω.
x

(1)

where the objective function f : Rn → R is convex but
not necessarily smooth on some convex set Ω, and the nonconvexity of (1) is only caused by the binary constraints. In
addition, we assume {−1, 1}n ∩ Ω = ∅.
The optimization in (1) describes many applications of
interest in both computer vision and machine learning, including graph bisection (Goemans and Williamson 1995;
Keuchel et al. 2003), Markov random ﬁelds (Boykov, Veksler, and Zabih 2001), the permutation problem (Jiang, Liu,
and Wen 2016; Fogel et al. 2015), graph matching (Cour,
Srinivasan, and Shi 2007; Toshev, Shi, and Daniilidis 2007;
Zaslavskiy, Bach, and Vert 2009), image (co-)segmentation
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2867

