Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Progress and Challenges in
Research on Cognitive Architectures
Pat Langley
Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise
2164 Staunton Court, Palo Alto, CA 94306

2

Abstract

The cognitive architecture movement shares many ideas
with other branches of AI, but it has sufﬁciently different
emphases that we should clarify them before discussing its
status. In this section, we describe its basic aims, some recurring themes, and some well-known examples.

Research on cognitive architectures attempts to develop uniﬁed theories of the mind. This paradigm incorporates many
ideas from other parts of AI, but it differs enough in its aims
and methods that it merits separate treatment. In this paper,
we review the notion of cognitive architectures and some recurring themes in their study. Next we examine the substantial progress made by the subﬁeld over the past 40 years, after
which we turn to some topics that have received little attention and that pose challenges for the research community.

1

Previous Work on Cognitive Architectures

2.1

The Notion of a Cognitive Architecture

A cognitive architecture (Newell 1990) is a theory of intelligent behavior that speciﬁes those facets of cognition hypothesized to remain constant over time and across different
domains. This includes memory stores and the representations of elements in those memories, but not their contents,
which change as the result of external stimuli and internal
processing. In this sense, a cognitive architecture is analogous to a building architecture, which describes its ﬁxed
structure (e.g., ﬂoors, rooms, and doors), but not its replaceable elements (e.g., tables, chairs, and people).
However, such a framework incorporates more constraints
than the ‘software architectures’ used in mainstream computer science. It makes strong assumptions about the representations and mechanisms that underly cognition, typiclly incorporating ideas from psychology about the nature of
the human mind. Most cognitive architectures have distinct
modules, but these usually access and alter the same memories and representations. Moreover, they come with a programming language for constructing intelligent agents that
adopts a high-level syntax which reﬂects theoretical assumptions. Production systems (Klahr et al. 1987) were both the
ﬁrst and most common examples of the paradigm; they are
not the only variety, but many frameworks labeled as ‘cognitive architectures’ do not ﬁt the criteria we have speciﬁed.

Introduction and Overview

Most research in AI is analytic, in that it selects some facet
of intelligence and attempts to understand it in detail, typically in isolation from other elements. This is balanced by
a smaller movement, synthetic in character, that aims to discover how different aspects of intelligence interact. Without
efforts of this latter sort, AI may be able to create idiot savants that outperform people in narrow arenas, but it cannot create complete intelligent agents that show the same
breadth of abilities as seen in humans.
Theoretical physicists seek a grand uniﬁed theory that explains all known physical laws within a single consistent
framework. The analog in AI is a uniﬁed theory of cognition, which Newell (1990) linked to the notion of a cognitive architecture. The mapping is imperfect in that most AI
researchers focus on creating computational artifacts rather
than explaining observations. However, if we want systems
that exhibit the full range of human intelligence, they must
reproduce all major phenomena associated with the latter.
In the sections that follow, we review the cognitive architecture paradigm and its recurring themes, then discuss the
great strides it has made in the decades since its inception.
We will argue that, despite this progress, research has focused on some topics to the near exclusion of others, and we
examine a number of areas that deserve more attention. One
open question is whether replicating these abilities requires
changes to existing architectures or simply adding new types
of knowledge. Ultimately, this is an empirical question that
can only be answered by making the attempt, but we will
take some tentative stances on the issue.

2.2

Recurring Themes

The literature on cognitive architectures reﬂects a number of
common assumptions or recurring themes that give it a distinctive character, although it shares some with other areas
of artiﬁcial intelligence. These include postulates that:
• Short-term memories are distinct from long-term stores.
The former, often called working memories, include content that changes rapidly over time, such as the agent’s
beliefs and goals. The latter store stable elements that remain static or change slowly through learning. Short-term

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4870

