Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Evaluation of Answer Set Programs with
External Sources Based on External Source Inlining∗
Christoph Redl
Institut für Informationssysteme, Technische Universität Wien
Favoritenstraße 9-11, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
redl@kr.tuwien.ac.at

which are subsequently checked to ensure that the guessed
values coincide with the actual semantics of the external
atoms. Furthermore, an additional minimality check is necessary to exclude self-justiﬁed atoms, which involves even
more external calls. Although this approach has been reﬁned
by integrating advanced techniques for learning (Eiter et al.
2012) and efﬁcient minimality checking (Eiter et al. 2014a),
which tightly integrate the solver with the external sources
and reduce the number of external calls, the remaining calls
are still expensive. In addition to the complexity of the external sources themselves, also overhead on the implementation
side, such as calls of external libraries and cache misses after jumps out of core algorithms, may decrease efﬁciency
compared to programs without external calls.
In this paper we present a novel method for HEX-program
evaluation based on inlining of external atoms. In contrast to
existing approaches for DL-programs (Heymans, Eiter, and
Xiao 2010), ours is generic and can be applied to arbitrary
external sources. Therefore, it is interesting beyond HEXprograms and also applicable to specialized formalisms such
as constraint ASP (Gebser, Ostrowski, and Schaub 2009).
The approach uses support sets (cf. e.g. Darwiche and Marquis [2011]), i.e., sets of literals which deﬁne assignments of
input atoms that guarantee that an external atom is true. Support sets were previously exploited for HEX-program (Eiter
et al. 2014b); however, this was only for improving but not
for eliminating the necessary veriﬁcation step. In contrast,
our new approach compiles external atoms away altogether
such that there are no guesses at all which need to be veriﬁed. i.e., the semantics of external atoms is embedded in
the ASP program. We show that this can lead to signiﬁcant
performance improvements.
After the preliminaries in Section 2, we proceed as follows:
• In Section 3 we show how external atoms can be inlined
(embedded) into a program. To handle non-monotonicity,
we use a saturation encoding based on support sets.
• While Section 3 focuses on positive external atoms, Section 4 shows how our approach can be extended to the
negative case. To this end we make use of negative support sets, which can be gained from positive ones.
• In Section 5 we implement the approach in the DLVHEX
system. Experimental evaluation shows a signiﬁcant
speedup, both over traditional evaluation and over a previous approach based on support sets for guess veriﬁcation.

Abstract
HEX -programs are an extension of answer set programming
(ASP) towards external sources. To this end, external atoms
provide a bidirectional interface between the program and an
external source. Traditionally, HEX-programs are evaluated
using a rewriting to ordinary ASP programs which guess truth
values of external atoms; this yields answer set candidates
whose guesses are veriﬁed by evaluating the source. Despite
the integration of learning techniques into this approach, which
reduce the number of candidates and of necessary veriﬁcation
calls, the remaining external calls are still expensive. In this
paper we present an alternative approach based on inlining
of external atoms, motivated by existing but less general approaches for specialized formalisms such as DL-programs.
External atoms are then compiled away such that no veriﬁcation calls are necessary. To this end, we make use of support
sets, which describe conditions on input atoms that are sufﬁcient to satisfy an external atom. The approach is implemented
in the DLVHEX reasoner. Experiments show a signiﬁcant performance gain.

1

Introduction

HEX -programs are an extension of answer set programming

(ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991) towards external sources.
As ASP, HEX-programs are based on nonmonotonic programs and have multi-model semantics. External sources
are used to represent knowledge and computation sources
such as, for instance, description logic ontologies and Web
resources. To this end, so-called external atoms are used
to send information from the logic program to an external
source, which returns values to the program. Cyclic rules
that involve external atoms are allowed, such that recursive
data exchange between the program and external sources is
possible. Moreover, value invention allows for returning values which are not contained in the input program, i.e., which
expand the domain. A concrete example is the external atom
&edge[G](X, Y ) which returns for a ﬁlename G, pointing to
a ﬁle which stores a graph, the contained edges (X, Y ).
The traditional evaluation procedure for HEX-programs
is based on rewriting external atoms to ordinary atoms and
guessing their truth values. This yields answer set candidates,
∗
This research has been supported by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) project P27730.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1222

