Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

V for Veriﬁcation: Intelligent Algorithm of
Checking Reliability of Smart Systems
Anna Lukina
Cyber-Physical Systems Group
Technische Universität Wien
Treitlstrasse 3/3, Vienna, Austria
anna.lukina@tuwien.ac.at

Introduction

– Probability of RE (e.g., ﬂipping over, diverging from the
goal) is estimated with high conﬁdence.

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are intended to receive information from the environment through sensors and perform
appropriate actions using actuators of the controller.
In the last years world of intelligent technologies has
grown in an exponential fashion: from cruise control to
smart ecosystems. Next we are facing the future of CPS involved in almost every aspect of our lives bringing higher
comfortability and efﬁciency. Our goal is to help smart inventions adjust to this highly uncertain environment and
guarantee safety for its inhabitants.
The physical environment renders the problem of CPS
veriﬁcation extremely cumbersome. Due to a wealth of uncertainties introduced by physical processes, the system is
best described by stochastic models. Approximate prediction techniques, such as Statistical Model Checking (SMC),
have therefore recently become increasingly popular (Grosu
and Smolka 2005; Clarke and Zuliani 2011). As a result, veriﬁcation of a CPS boils down to quantitative analysis of how
close the system is to reaching bad states (safety property)
or desired goal (liveness property).
Controlling the systems, that is, computing appropriate
response actions depending on the environment, involves
probabilistic state estimation, as well as optimal action prediction, i.e., choosing the best next step by simulating the
future. In my thesis, I develop a novel intelligent algorithm
addressing existing deﬁciencies of SMC such as poor prediction of rare events (RE) and sampling divergence.

– Drones do not collide, crash into ﬂying objects or people.

Control. After we estimate the probability of such RE, it is
only logical to address the control question by developing a
policy that guarantees that the system avoids RE, satisfying
the requirements above. The control question I am addressing is motivated by nature itself (Chazelle 2012), namely, by
ﬂocks of birds organizing into V-formations while traveling
long distances. Every bird-like agent in our model (Grosu et
al. 2014) moves in 2-dimensional space locally governed by
the same control law. Any agent in the ﬂock can detect the
positions and velocities of all other agents through sensors,
and given this information, the agent’s controller calculates
an optimal acceleration for it: xi (t), v i (t) and ai (t) are the
vectors of 2-dimensional positions, velocities, and accelerations, respectively, of bird i at time t, 1 ≤ i ≤ N , for a
ﬁxed number of birds N . the following equations model the
behavior of bird i in discrete time with ai (t) as controlled
variables ∀ i = {1, . . . , N }: xi (t + 1) = xi (t) + v i (t + 1),
v i (t + 1) = v i (t) + ai (t).
Ultimately, we would like to synthesize an algorithm
providing analytical guarantees of agents getting into a Vformation starting from a random conﬁguration using a ﬂying drones simulation model and statistical model checking.
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy and Eberhart
1995) is a promising approach to address this problem. It
uniformly distributes the particles in space and adjusts their
velocities to lead the swarm to satisfying a given property
while using a random factor in the adjustment rule in order
to explore the space.
On the one hand, a V-formation provides the birds with
a clear view of the front ﬁeld and visibility of their lateral
neighbors. On the other hand, the latter is of great importance to ﬂocking birds for saving energy from the free lift
as a beneﬁcial effect of the upwash region generated off the
trailing edge of wings of the birds in front of them (Weimerskirch et al. 2001). We believe this approach can lead to a
breakthrough discovery in developing energy-efﬁcient and
reliable autonomous technologies.

– Stochastic environmental changes are correctly addressed.

Achievements and Planned Research

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

First and foremost, we strive to obtain a better understanding of the challenges we face when dealing with currently

Motivation
Veriﬁcation. We motivate the veriﬁcation question by the
challenges associated with automatic control for unmanned
vehicles, in particular ﬂying drones. First, we would like to
use ﬂying drones simulation models in order to investigate
the veriﬁcation question of their safety. It is essential that the
following properties are satisﬁed for ﬂying drones:

5046

