Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scalable Multitask Policy
Gradient Reinforcement Learning
Salam El Bsat

Haitham Bou Ammar

Matthew E. Taylor

Raﬁk Hariri University

American University of Beirut

Washington State University

ing units to share work. For example, a distributed version
of multitask support vector machines can signiﬁcantly outperform centralized solvers (Forero, Cano, and Giannakis
2010).
Centralized online solvers have been well studied under
the multitask learning setting (Ammar, Tutunov, and Eaton
2015; Bou Ammar et al. 2015; Gheshlaghi Azar, Lazaric,
and Brunskill 2013). For example, Bou Ammar et al. proposed PG-ELLA, an online multitask policy search algorithm. PG-ELLA decomposes a task’s policy parameters
into a shared latent repository, L, and task speciﬁc coefﬁcients, st , one per task. It allows for knowledge transfer
between tasks (using L) while streaming problems online.
The main drawback of PG-ELLA (and the like, e.g., (Kumar
and Daumé III 2012), (Bou Ammar et al. 2015), and (BouAmmar et al. 2012)) is apparent when considering a large
number of tasks or dimensions — determining the shared
knowledge-base L becomes intractable due to two inefﬁciencies. The ﬁrst inefﬁciency is that computing the expansion’s operating point amounts to solving a local RL problem described by the current task’s observed trajectories.
These RL optima must be computed online at each round
(i.e., time-step of the interaction between the agent and adversary) of PG-ELLA. This problem is remedied in the original paper by taking gradient steps in the local MDP’s objective function, while reducing the number of trajectories used.
Unfortunately, such a solution has multiple drawbacks.1 The
second inefﬁciency reducing PG-ELLA’s scalability arises
when updating the shared repository L. The update involves
an inversion of a dp × dp matrix, with d being
 the number
of features. This leads to a complexity of O d3 p2 at each
iteration of the algorithm. Consequently, such a method is
not scalable when the policy parameterization or latent dimensions p becomes high dimensional.
Moreover, as the number of tasks grows large, these centralized methods (used in updating L or computing θ̃j ) be-

Abstract
Policy search reinforcement learning (RL) allows agents to
learn autonomously with limited feedback. However, such
methods typically require extensive experience for successful behavior due to their tabula rasa nature. Multitask RL is
an approach, which aims to reduce data requirements by allowing knowledge transfer between tasks. Although successful, current multitask learning methods suffer from scalability
issues when considering large number of tasks. The main reasons behind this limitation is the reliance on centralized solutions. This paper proposes to a novel distributed multitask
RL framework, improving the scalability across many different types of tasks. Our framework maps multitask RL to an
instance of general consensus and develops an efﬁcient decentralized solver. We justify the correctness of the algorithm
both theoretically and empirically: we ﬁrst proof
  an improvement of convergence speed to an order of O k1 with k being
the number of iterations, and then show our algorithm surpassing others on multiple dynamical system benchmarks.

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) allows agents to solve sequential decision-making problems with limited feedback. Applications with these characteristics range from robotics control (Kober and Peters 2009) to personalized medicine (Murphy et al. 2007; Pineau et al. 2007). Though successful, typical RL methods require substantial experience before acquiring acceptable behavior. The cost of obtaining such experience can be prohibitively expensive in terms of time and
data.
Transfer learning (Taylor and Stone 2009) and multitask
learning (Lazaric and Ghavamzadeh 2010; Li, Liao, and
Carin 2009) have been developed to remedy these problems
by allowing agents to reuse knowledge across tasks. Unfortunately, both these techniques suffer from scalability problems as the number of tasks grows large.
Among the different methods proposed for handling scalability in supervised learning, two directions stand-out.
First, data (i.e., trajectories or tasks)
are streamed sequentially online, leading to regret minimization games where the learner plays against an adversary. Second, decentralized solvers allow multiple process-

1

Crucial to the success of PG-ELLA are “good-enough” local
policy parameters that are encoded by the shared repository. Following a policy gradient step, however, is not guaranteed to provide
informative
√ local parameters due to the
O(1/ k) convergence rate of gradient-based methods, which
is the fastest rate for gradient-based techniques (Wei and Ozdaglar
2012) known so far, reduction in the number of trajectories used,
and the local minima problems inherit to such techniques.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1847

