Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Query-Efﬁcient Imitation Learning for
End-to-End Simulated Driving
Jiakai Zhang

Kyunghyun Cho

Department of Computer Science
New York University
zhjk@nyu.edu

Department of Computer Science
Center for Data Science
New York University
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu
convolutional neural network for lane following based solely
on a front-facing camera. In all these cases, a deep neural network has been found to be surprisingly effective at learning a
complex mapping from a raw image to control.
A major learning paradigm behind all these previous attempts has been supervised learning. A human driver or
a rule-based AI driver in a simulator, to which we refer
as a reference policy drives a car equipped with a frontfacing camera and other types of sensors while collecting
image-action pairs. These collected pairs are used as training examples to train a neural network controller, called
a primary policy. It is however well known that a purely
supervised learning based approach to imitation learning
(where a learner tries to imitate a human driver) is suboptimal (see, e.g., (Daumé Iii, Langford, and Marcu 2009;
Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2010) and references therein.)
We therefore investigate a more advanced approach to imitation learning for training a neural network controller for
autonomous driving. More speciﬁcally, we focus on DAgger (Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2010) which works in a
setting where the reward is given only implicitly. DAgger improves upon supervised learning by letting a primary policy
collect training examples while running a reference policy
simultaneously. This dramatically improves the performance
of a primary policy. However, DAgger needs to constantly
query a reference policy, which is expensive especially when
a reference policy may be a human driver. It also uses an
exploration policy that may not be safe to itself or its environment. To reduce the cost of querying the reference policy, the
active imitation learning approach (Judah et al. 2014) allows
to choose most useful states where advice from the teacher
can be useful. Kim and Pineau (Kim and Pineau 2013) tried
to address the DAgger problems by proposing to learn multiple policies, each specializing in a particular region of state
space. They used a metric based on state distance to decide if
the reference policy needs to be queried. Instead of learning
multiple policies, Laskey et al. (Laskey et al. 2016) recently
introduced the SHIV approach (Svm-based reduction in Human InterVention) which converged to a single policy.
In this paper, we propose a query-efﬁcient extension of the
DAgger, called SafeDAgger. We ﬁrst introduce a safety classiﬁer that learns to predict the error made by a primary policy
without querying a reference policy. This safety classiﬁer is
incorporated into the DAgger’s iterations in order to select

Abstract
One way to approach end-to-end autonomous driving is to
learn a policy that maps from a sensory input, such as an image frame from a front-facing camera, to a driving action, by
imitating an expert driver, or a reference policy. This can be
done by supervised learning, where a policy is tuned to minimize the difference between the predicted and ground-truth
actions. A policy trained in this way however is known to suffer from unexpected behaviours due to the mismatch between
the states reachable by the reference policy and trained policy. More advanced algorithms for imitation learning, such as
DAgger, addresses this issue by iteratively collecting training
examples from both reference and trained policies. These algorithms often require a large number of queries to a reference
policy, which is undesirable as the reference policy is often expensive. In this paper, we propose an extension of the DAgger,
called SafeDAgger, that is query-efﬁcient and more suitable
for end-to-end autonomous driving. We evaluate the proposed
SafeDAgger in a car racing simulator and show that it indeed
requires less queries to a reference policy. We observe a signiﬁcant speed up in convergence, which we conjecture to be
due to the effect of automated curriculum learning.

Introduction
We deﬁne end-to-end autonomous driving as driving by a
single, self-contained system that maps from a sensory input,
such as a front-facing camera, to actions necessary for driving, such as the angle of steering wheel and braking. In this
approach, the autonomous driving system is often learned
from data rather than manually designed, mainly due to sheer
complexity of manually developing a such system.
This end-to-end approach to autonomous driving dates
back to late 80’s. ALVINN by Pomerleau (Pomerleau 1989)
was a neural network with a single hidden layer that takes
as inputs a frame from a front-facing camera and a response
map from a range ﬁnder sensor and returns a quantized steering wheel angle. The ALVINN was trained using a set of
training tuples (image, sensor map, steering angle) collected
from simulation. A similar approach was taken later in 2005
to train, this time, a convolutional neural network to drive
an off-road mobile robot (Muller et al. 2005). More recently,
Bojarski et al. (Bojarski et al. 2016) used a similar, but deeper,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2891

