Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Deep Reinforcement Learning with Knowledge Transfer∗
Ruben Glatt, Anna Helena Reali Costa
Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
{ruben.glatt,anna.reali}@usp.br

action taken in this state. RL algorithms can be used to ﬁnd
a solution for this kind of problem and already achieve excellent results in a variety of domains like the board-game
domain, autonomous helicopter ﬂight or robot soccer.
Although it is not a new idea to use Neural Networks
(NN) on RL problems (Riedmiller 2005), advances in algorithms for DL have brought up a new wave of successful applications as for example Atari game playing (Mnih et
al. 2015) and established the ﬁeld of Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL). In this context a trained Deep Neural Network (DNN) can be seen as a kind of end-to-end RL approach, where the agent learns a state abstraction and a policy approximation in a single network directly from her input data. The learned policy follows the optimal action-value
function Q∗ (s, a), which is approximated by the DNN and
therefore termed Deep Q-Network (DQN).
However, RL algorithms have three major weaknesses:
First, they need a long time and many examples to converge
to an acceptable result during training; Second, a model that
has been trained on one task can only be used on that same
task; and third, the possible state and action spaces are not
always fully observable.
One way to deal with those shortcomings, when learning
multiple tasks, is to reuse already gathered knowledge, as is
being researched in the ﬁeld of Transfer Learning (TL) (Taylor and Stone 2009). The challenges in TL are that the agent
has to decide, which knowledge she should transfer from
which source and in which way to speed up and improve the
training of a new task.

Abstract
Recent successes in applying Deep Learning techniques on
Reinforcement Learning algorithms have led to a wave of
breakthrough developments in agent theory and established
the ﬁeld of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). While DRL
has shown great results for single task learning, the multi-task
case is still underrepresented in the available literature. This
D.Sc. research proposal aims at extending DRL to the multitask case by leveraging the power of Transfer Learning algorithms to improve the training time and results for multi-task
learning. Our focus lies on deﬁning a novel framework for
scalable DRL agents that detects similarities between tasks
and balances various TL techniques, like parameter initialization, policy or skill transfer.

Introduction and Context
Deep Learning (DL) architectures became one of the most
powerful tools in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) research in recent years, beating long standing records in many domains
of Machine Learning like computer vision or language understanding (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). They allow
to learn abstract representations of high dimensional input
data and can be used to improve many existing algorithms.
One of the techniques that can beneﬁt from DL is the
well-researched area of Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto 1998). In RL, an agent explores the space of
possible strategies to solve a task in a given environment,
receives a feedback (reward or cost) on the outcome of the
actions she takes and deduces a behavior policy from her observations over time. The goal of the agent is to determine a
policy π that maps each state to an action, which maximizes
the accumulated reward over a given horizon.
This form of sequential decision-making can be considered a Markov Decision Process (MDP). The core of the
MDP is the Markov Property, which is given, if future states
of the process depend only upon the present state and the

Motivation and Proposal
We have seen impressive results in many domains utilizing
DRL over the last years but the main focus of the published
work seems to be heavily on single task learning while the
the multi-task case is still underrepresented, although it is
ﬁnally improving. It is our ﬁrm believe, that the combination of RL and DL together with TL will play a great role in
AI research towards building general AI agents. Since each
of the introduced techniques provides successful methods to
deal with different aspects of learning, but also has shortcomings in others, there is a great potential in combining
the various advantages to improve current methods.
Many challenges remain the same for transfer in RL and
DRL, as for example negative transfer, where the transferred

∗
We are grateful for the support from CAPES and CNPq (grant
311608/2014-0). The HPC resources for the computation are provided by the Superintendency of Information at the University of
São Paulo. We also thank Google for the support due to the Google
Research Awards 2016 for Latin-America and the Nvidia corporation for their hardware donation.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5036

