Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Implicit Tasks for Patient-Speciﬁc Risk Modeling in ICU
Nozomi Nori

Hisashi Kashima

Graduate School of Informatics,
Kyoto University

Graduate School of Informatics,
Kyoto University

Kazuto Yamashita

Susumu Kunisawa

Yuichi Imanaka

Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University

Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University

Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University

Furthermore, patients are usually associated with multiple
diseases; thus, together with the diversity of diseases, ICU
patients present rather varied and complicated clinical states.
To date, numerous studies have focused on mortality risk
predictive modeling in an attempt to enhance the severity assessment of ICU patients (Tabak et al. 2014; Ghassemi et al.
2014; 2015; Cai et al. 2015; Luo et al. 2016). The underlying
assumption is that mortality risk could be used as a surrogate
to describe the severity of a patient’s condition, and accurate
prediction of this risk could lead to preventive actions by, for
example, a medical alarm. Thus far, most studies on mortality risk prediction for ICU patients have implicitly assumed
that one common risk model could be developed and applied to all the patients; however, this approach might fail to
capture the diversity of ICU patients. For example, a kind
of stomach medicine can be administered to patients who
have received artiﬁcial respiration because artiﬁcial respiration frequently causes gastric ulcers, whereas the stomach
medicine is also directly administered to treat severe gastric
ulcers with bleeding; as a result, the corresponding prediction rule would differ depending on which type of disease a
patient has. In an attempt to address situations such as this,
a recent study explored disease-speciﬁc risk modeling for
ICU patients by employing multi-task learning where a task
corresponds to a disease (Nori et al. 2015). They assumed
that each disease has a speciﬁc prediction rule that explains
its mortality risk, and therefore, customizing the risk model
for each disease would enhance the predictive modeling.
Yet, their approach continues to be insufﬁcient to capture patient-speciﬁc aspects of mortality risk modeling for
ICU patients. Speciﬁcally, patients are usually associated
with multiple diseases, thereby further complicating ICU patients’ clinical states. In such a case, one straightforward approach might be to create a task corresponding to a combination of the diseases that each patient has; however, this
approach would be ineffective due to the combinatorial explosion among diseases. This problem is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows a histogram of a combination of diseases
that was created from an ICU dataset. This dataset consists
of about 200,000 patients from about 170 hospitals in Japan.
Each patient is associated with his or her main disease and
several comorbidities. A disease is identiﬁed by a three-digit
ICD-10 code, and the number of comorbidities is at most
four. It is observed that many combinations are identical to

Abstract
Accurate assessment of the severity of a patient’s condition
plays a fundamental role in acute hospital care such as that
provided in an intensive care unit (ICU). ICU clinicians are
required to make sense of a large amount of clinical data in a
limited time to estimate the severity of a patient’s condition,
which ultimately leads to the planning of appropriate care.
The ICU is an especially demanding environment for clinicians because of the diversity of patients who mostly suffer from multiple diseases of various types. In this paper, we
propose a mortality risk prediction method for ICU patients.
The method is intended to enhance the severity assessment
by considering the diversity of patients. Our method produces
patient-speciﬁc risk models that reﬂect the collection of diseases associated with the patient. Speciﬁcally, we assume a
small number of latent basis tasks, where each latent task is
associated with its own parameter vector; a parameter vector
for a speciﬁc patient is constructed as a linear combination
of these. The latent representation of a patient, namely, the
coefﬁcients of the combination, is learned based on the collection of diseases associated with the patient. Our method
could be considered a multi-task learning method where latent tasks are learned based on the collection of diseases. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method using a
dataset collected from a hospital. Our method achieved higher
predictive performance compared with a single-task learning
method, the “de facto standard,” and several multi-task learning methods including a recently proposed method for ICU
mortality risk prediction. Furthermore, our proposed method
could be used not only for predictions but also for uncovering
patient-speciﬁcity from different viewpoints.

Introduction
Accurate assessment of the severity of a patient’s condition
plays a fundamental role in acute hospital care such as in an
intensive care unit (ICU), where clinicians intensively attend
to seriously ill patients. The ICU is an especially demanding environment for clinicians due to the diversity of the patients: ICU clinicians are faced with patients with various
different types of diseases and who are all severely ill. For
instance, some patients are admitted to ICU due to infectious
diseases such as sepsis and pneumonia, whereas others are
postoperative patients admitted after some major surgery.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1481

