Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Going Beyond Primal Treewidth for (M)ILP
Robert Ganian, Sebastian Ordyniak, M. S. Ramanujan
Algorithms and Complexity group,
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
({ganian,ordyniak, ramanujan}@ac.tuwien.ac.at)

I NTEGER L INEAR P ROGRAMMING
Input:
A matrix A ∈ Zm×n and two vectors
b ∈ Zm and c ∈ Rn .
Question: Maximize cx for every x ∈ Zn with
Ax ≤ b.

Abstract
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) and its mixed variant
(MILP) are archetypical examples of NP-complete optimization problems which have a wide range of applications in various areas of artiﬁcial intelligence. However, we still lack a
thorough understanding of which structural restrictions make
these problems tractable. Here we focus on structure captured
via so-called decompositional parameters, which have been
highly successful in ﬁelds such as boolean satisﬁability and
constraint satisfaction but have not yet reached their full potential in the ILP setting. In particular, primal treewidth (an
established decompositional parameter) can only be algorithmically exploited to solve ILP under restricted circumstances.

Closely related to ILP is the mixed ILP (MILP) problem, which additionally partitions the variable set into integer and real variables. Given the signiﬁcance of both
problems, it is surprising that fairly little is known about
which structural restrictions make them tractable. After all,
problem inputs naturally tend to contain some form of
structure, and such structure can often be exploited to efﬁciently compute exact solutions. Over the past decade,
this line of research has been thoroughly investigated in
related areas such as boolean satisﬁability (Szeider 2003;
Ganian and Szeider 2015; Ganian, Hliněný, and Obdržálek
2013) and constraint satisfaction (Samer and Szeider 2010;
Ganian, Ramanujan, and Szeider 2016; Marx 2010), but has
yet to reach its full potential in the ILP setting.
The parameterized complexity paradigm (Downey and
Fellows 2013; Cygan et al. 2015) offers the perfect tools to
measure, quantify and exploit various forms of structure in
order to design efﬁcient algorithms. There, one associates
each instance I with a structural parameter k, and the goal
is to obtain algorithms which run in time f (k) · |I|O(1) for
some computable function f . Such algorithms are called
ﬁxed-parameter algorithms, and the underlying idea is that
well-structured instances (i.e., those where k is small) will
run in uniformly polynomial time. Whether such algorithms
can be obtained or not naturally depends on our choice of
parameter—corresponding to the choice of structure that we
wish to algorithmically exploit.
So-called decompositional parameters are by far the most
studied type of structural parameters: these seek to construct and exploit natural decompositions of graph representations of instances, and have been highly successful
in boolean satisﬁability (Szeider 2003), constraint satisfaction and optimization (Marx 2010; Gottlob et al. 2005;
Marinescu and Dechter 2010) and other areas. However, the
situation in the area of ILP is not as positive: already ILPFEASIBILITY remains NP-hard (Ganian and Ordyniak 2016)
even when the most popular decompositional parameters (in
particular, treewidth (Kloks 1994) and clique-width (Cour-

Our main contribution is the introduction and algorithmic exploitation of two new decompositional parameters for ILP
and MILP. The ﬁrst, torso-width, is speciﬁcally tailored to
the linear programming setting and is the ﬁrst decompositional parameter which can also be used for MILP. The latter, incidence treewidth, is a concept which originates from
boolean satisﬁability but has not yet been used in the ILP
setting; here we obtain a full complexity landscape mapping
the precise conditions under which incidence treewidth can
be used to obtain efﬁcient algorithms. Both of these parameters overcome previous shortcomings of primal treewidth for
ILP in unique ways, and consequently push the frontiers of
tractability for these important problems.

Introduction
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) is a widely used and
highly successful framework for solving difﬁcult computational problems. In particular, a wide variety of problems in
artiﬁcial intelligence are efﬁciently solved in practice via a
translation into an Integer Linear Program, including problems from areas such as planning (van den Briel, Vossen,
and Kambhampati 2005; Vossen et al. 1999), vehicle routing (Toth and Vigo 2001), process scheduling (Floudas and
Lin 2005), packing (Lodi, Martello, and Monaci 2002), and
network hub location (Alumur and Kara 2008). In its most
general form, the ILP optimization problem (ILP) can be
formalized as follows:
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

815

