Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Matrix Factorisation for Scalable Energy Breakdown
Nipun Batra,1 Hongning Wang,2 Amarjeet Singh,1 Kamin Whitehouse2
nipunb@iiitd.ac.in, hw5x@virginia.edu, amarjeet@iiitd.ac.in, whitehouse@virginia.edu
1
IIIT Delhi, India, 2 University of Virginia, USA

Most homes are not instrumented to produce an energy
breakdown because the instrumentation is expensive. A
high-frequency smart meter or sub-metering in a home costs
up to $500 per home1 . The research community has been
trying for decades to address the cost of instrumentation
through lower-cost sensor designs (DeBruin et al. 2015),
data fusion algorithms (Srinivasan, Stankovic, and Whitehouse 2013), and non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM):
the use of source separation techniques to estimate the energy consumption of individual loads based on the aggregate power consumption of the entire building (Hart 1992;
Armel et al. 2013). However, all of these approaches still
require hardware to be installed in every home and therefore have inherent scalability issues. Even if hardware costs
were reduced, the cost of labour for installation and maintenance would remain prohibitive. The scalability challenge
demands new instrumentation-free approaches.
In this paper, we propose an approach for energy breakdown
that does not require any additional hardware installation.
The basic premise of our approach is that common design
and construction patterns for homes create a repeating structure in their energy data. Thus, a sparse basis in a lower dimensional space can be learned and used to represent energy
data from a broad range of homes. A model of a home can
be constructed from this basis using only a small amount of
easy to collect data, such as utility meter readings, climate
zone, and square footage. This low-dimensionality model
can then be used to reconstruct sensor data for the home
based on high-ﬁdelity data collected in other homes. A recent work called Gemello (Batra, Singh, and Whitehouse
2016) demonstrated the validity of this intuition at small
scale.
Our proposed work leverages the advances in the domain
of collaborative ﬁltering through feature-based matrix factorisation (Rendle et al. 2011) to the problem of energy
breakdown. Since we rely only on monthly bills for energy
breakdown, our input for a test home consists of historical
monthly bills and some static household properties such as
area and the number of occupants. Given that energy is a
non-negative quantity, we perform non-negative matrix factorisation on a matrix containing the appliance energy consumption and the aggregate energy consumption across dif-

Abstract
Homes constitute more than one-thirds of the total energy
consumption. Producing an energy breakdown for a home has
been shown to reduce household energy consumption by up
to 15%, among other beneﬁts. However, existing approaches
to produce an energy breakdown require hardware to be installed in each home and are thus prohibitively expensive. In
this paper, we propose a novel application of feature-based
matrix factorisation that does not require any additional hardware installation. The basic premise of our approach is that
common design and construction patterns for homes create a
repeating structure in their energy data. Thus, a sparse basis
can be used to represent energy data from a broad range of
homes. We evaluate our approach on 516 homes from a publicly available data set and ﬁnd it to be more effective than ﬁve
baseline approaches that either require sensing in each home,
or a very rigorous survey across a large number of homes coupled with complex modelling. We also present a deployment
of our system as a live web application that can potentially
provide energy breakdown to millions of homes.

Introduction
Residential buildings are one of the largest energy consumers worldwide, constituting roughly one-thirds of total
energy usage (Pérez-Lombard, Ortiz, and Pout 2008). Some
of this energy could be saved by producing an energy breakdown that itemises the energy consumption of individual
loads in the home, such as heating/cooling, lighting, water
heating, and refrigeration. An energy breakdown enables informed decision making by several actors in the home’s energy ecosystem (Armel et al. 2013). For example, studies
show that occupants with access to an energy breakdown
can reduce their energy consumption by up to 15% (Kelly
and Knottenbelt 2016; Armel et al. 2013). Energy breakdown can also help power utilities and policy makers to improve load forecasting (Armel et al. 2013), to detect broken or misconﬁgured equipment (Katipamula and Brambley
2005), and to target the most inefﬁcient homes for energy efﬁciency programs (Armel et al. 2013). Despite the potential
beneﬁts, however, only a small number of homes currently
have the hardware necessary to create an energy breakdown.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4467

http://bit.ly/28UKP62;

