Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Positronic Economist:
A Computational System for Analyzing Economic Mechanisms
David Thompson, Neil Newman, Kevin Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia, Canada
{daveth, newmanne, kevinlb}@cs.ubc.ca

Jiang, Leyton-Brown, and Bhat 2011a). For example, ActionGraph Games (AGGs) can compute an agent’s expected
utility under an arbitrary mixed strategy proﬁle with a
polynomial-time dynamic programming algorithm, and this
expected utility problem constitutes the inner loop of many
game-theoretic algorithms. (The standard method of computing expected utility is polynomial in the size of the normal
form; since an AGG can be exponentially smaller, the AGG
representation can yield exponential speedups.)
We have used this approach of combining efﬁcient algorithms with compact representations to address open
problems in mechanism analysis ranging from bidding in
advertising auctions (Thompson and Leyton-Brown 2009;
2013) to strategic voting in plurality elections (Thompson
et al. 2013). The approach has the advantage that games
need not be approximated and that equilibria are computed
exactly; we leverage compact representations and sophisticated, exact-equilibrium-ﬁnding algorithms to manage computational demands. However, we have found it nontrivial
to produce the application-speciﬁc encodings into compact
game representations upon which this process depends.
This paper’s goal is to make CMA accessible to a broader
audience without reducing its ﬁdelity. We summarize our
desiderata as the “Three Laws of Positronic Economics,” inspired by Asimov’s [1942] “Three Laws of Robotics.”
1. Precision: Games are represented exactly. Equilibria are
either exact or are -equilibria with  roughly machine-.
2. Speed: Algorithms must be fast enough to be used in
practice, except when this is in conﬂict with the ﬁrst law.
3. Autonomy: Human effort should be minimized, except
when this conﬂicts with the ﬁrst two laws.
In this paper, we introduce a tool, Positronic Economist
(PosEc), that delivers on these goals, dramatically reducing the human effort required by CMA without compromising the analysis itself. Our paper makes two major contributions. The ﬁrst is a high-level Python-based declarative language for describing mechanisms in a form that
closely resembles their natural mathematical representations; the second is a pair of complementary algorithms
that automatically infer the structure of a game speciﬁed
in this language and produce a compact Bayesian AGG
(BAGG). We then draw on a portfolio of existing algorithms
to solve the game. We chose to use BAGGs because of the

Abstract
Computational mechanism analysis is a recent approach to
economic analysis in which a mechanism design setting is analyzed entirely by a computer. For games with non-trivial numbers of players and actions, the approach is only feasible when
these games can be encoded compactly, e.g., as Action-Graph
Games. Such encoding is currently a manual process requiring
expert knowledge; our aim is to simplify and automate it. Our
contribution, the Positronic Economist is a software system
having two parts: (1) a Python-based language for succinctly
describing mechanisms; and (2) a system that takes such descriptions as input, automatically identiﬁes computationally
useful structure, and produces a compact Action-Graph Game.

1

Introduction

A mechanism is a protocol for collective decision making
among self-interested agents. Mechanisms model many social processes from auctions to elections. They are widely
studied in computer science, both because the participants in
real-world mechanisms can be autonomous software systems
(e.g. algorithmic bidding and trading agents) and because
algorithms such as job schedulers give rise to mechanisms
when users have competing interests. Mechanisms are complicated to understand because participants respond to rule
changes strategically. Thus, although real-world mechanisms
are often fairly simple (e.g., plurality voting), a mechanism’s
outcome depends not just on its functional description but on
agents’ strategic choices. Game theory provides principled
methods for analyzing such choices. Unfortunately, game
theoretic analysis is a difﬁcult process requiring either substantial human effort or very large amounts of computation.
An alternative is offered by recent advances in algorithms
for efﬁciently computing game-theoretic solution concepts
(Roughgarden and Papadimitriou 2008; Jiang, Leyton-Brown,
and Bhat 2011a), and on using such algorithms to analyze
mechanisms (Thompson and Leyton-Brown 2009), an approach referred to as computational mechanism analysis
(CMA). While these algorithms can operate on normalform descriptions of games, applying them to computationally motivated compact game representations allows for
exponential speedups (Kearns, Littman, and Singh 2001;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

720

