Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Accelerating Multiagent Reinforcement
Learning through Transfer Learning
Felipe Leno da Silva and Anna Helena Reali Costa∗
Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
{f.leno,anna.reali}@usp.br

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a widely used solution for
sequential decision-making problems and has been used in
many complex domains. However, RL algorithms suffer from
scalability issues, especially when multiple agents are acting
in a shared environment. This research intends to accelerate learning in multiagent sequential decision-making tasks
by reusing previous knowledge, both from past solutions and
advising between agents. We intend to contribute a Transfer
Learning framework focused on Multiagent RL, requiring as
few domain-speciﬁc hand-coded parameters as possible.

sources. Even though we here focus on Multiagent RL Systems, the main ideas of our proposal are applicable in the
Multiagent Systems, Reinforcement Learning, and Machine
Learning areas in general. TL has already been used in Multiagent RL and presented promising results. However, there
are no consensual answers to many aspects that must be deﬁned to specify a suitable TL algorithm. Especially, we want
to develop algorithms that require as few domain-speciﬁc
hand-coded deﬁnitions as possible. This is a challenging
goal, as it is hard to autonomously generalize knowledge,
deﬁne task similarities, and reuse task solutions.

Context and Motivation

Research Goals and Expected Contributions

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Littman 2015) has been extensively used to solve sequential decision-making problems
with minimal input data. Despite the recent successes in
many complex domains, the classical RL approach is not
scalable and suffers from the curse of dimensionality. Scalability issues are further intensiﬁed in Multiagent domains, as
the decision maker may need to reason over the other agents
in the environment. In a world where more and more devices have computing power, many tasks can be solved by
Multiagent Systems (sometimes must). Therefore, scalable
and robust techniques are of utmost importance for Multiagent RL algorithms. One approach to accelerate the learning
process and scale RL to complex domains is to reuse previous knowledge in the new task. Transfer Learning (TL)
methods have been used to proﬁt from previous knowledge
in many ways (Taylor and Stone 2009). For example, a robot
learning how to play soccer may reuse previously acquired
skills, such as walking while carrying a ball. Additionally, a
more experienced teammate could advice the agent on when
to shoot to maximize the goal chance. Also, the agent may
observe its teammates’ behavior and imitate strategies and
moves to learn faster than when learning from scratch without any previous knowledge or guidance.
In this research we aim at accelerating learning in Multiagent RL Systems by reusing knowledge from multiple

This research aims to propose a Transfer Learning framework to accelerate Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
through knowledge reuse. Figure 1 depicts the proposed
framework. The agent has an Abstract Knowledge Base from
which it can extract previous solutions of tasks that are similar to the new one. Additionally, an Advisor Agent may provide advice helping the agent to achieve its goals. The agent
then is expected to learn the task faster than without TL.
When the task is solved, the new task solution can be abstracted and stored in the knowledge base for latter use.
Specifying an algorithm that integrates this framework
into the learning processes requires the deﬁnition of: (i) A
model which allows knowledge generalization; (ii) What information is transferred through tasks or agents; (iii) How to
identify which previous tasks are similar enough to be used;
(iv) How to deﬁne when the knowledge of a given agent
must be transferred to another; and (v) How to deﬁne if an
agent giving advice is trustworthy.

Abstract

Background and Related Work
RL is a popular solution for sequential decision-making
tasks modeled as Markov Decision Processes (MDP). An
MDP is described by the tuple S, A, T, R, where S is the
set of environment states, A is the set of available actions,
T is the transition function, and R is the reward function,
which gives a feedback toward task completion. At each decision step, the agent observes the state s and chooses an
action a (among the applicable ones in s). Then the next
state is deﬁned by T . The agent must learn a policy π that
maps the best action for each possible state. The solution of

∗

We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from CNPq
(grant 311608/2014-0) and São Paulo Research Foundation
(FAPESP), grant 2015/16310-4.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5034

