Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Entropic Causal Inference
Murat Kocaoglu, Alexandros G. Dimakis,
Sriram Vishwanath
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
The University of Texas at Austin, USA

A general solution to the causal inference problem is to
conduct experiments, also called interventions. An intervention forces the value of a variable without affecting the other
system variables. This removes the effect of its causes, effectively creating a new causal graph. These changes in the
causal graph create a post-interventional distribution among
variables, which can be used to identify some additional
causal relations in the original graph. The procedure can be
applied repeatedly to fully identify any causal graph (Hauser
and Bühlmann 2012a), (Hauser and Bühlmann 2012b), (Hyttinen, Eberhardt, and Hoyer 2013), (Shanmugam et al. 2015).
For many problems, it can be very difﬁcult to create interventions since they require additional experiments after
the original data collection. Researchers would still like to
discover causal relations between variables using only observational data, using so-called data-driven causality. Several
recent works (Chen et al. 2014; Shajarisales et al. 2015) have
developed such methods. To be able to make any conclusions
on causal directions in this case, additional assumptions must
be made about the mechanisms that generate the data.
In this paper we focus on the simplest causal discovery
problem that involves only two variables. The two causal
graphs X → Y and X ← Y are statistically indistinguishable so conditional independence tests cannot make any
causal inference from observational data without interventions. Statistical indistinguishability easily follows from the
fact that any joint distribution on two variables p(x, y) can
be factorized both as p(x)p(y/x) and p(y)p(x/y).
The most popular assumption for two-variable data-driven
causality is the additive noise model (ANM) (Shimizu et
al. 2006). In ANM, any outside factor is assumed to affect
the effect variable additively, which leads to the equation
Y = f (X) + E, E ⊥⊥ X. Although restrictive, this assumption leads to strong theoretical guarantees in terms of identiﬁability, and provides the state of the art accuracy in real
datasets. (Shimizu et al. 2006) showed that if f is linear and
the noise is non-Gaussian the causal direction is identiﬁable.
(Hoyer et al. 2008) showed that when f is non-linear, irrespective of the noise, identiﬁability holds in a non-adverserial
setting of system parameters. (Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf
2011) extended ANM to discrete variables.
Another approach is to exploit the postulate that the cause
and mechanism are in general independently assigned by nature. The notion of independence here is vague and one needs

Abstract
We consider the problem of identifying the causal direction between two discrete random variables using observational data.
Unlike previous work, we keep the most general functional
model but make an assumption on the unobserved exogenous
variable: Inspired by Occam’s razor, we assume that the exogenous variable is simple in the true causal direction. We
quantify simplicity using Rényi entropy. Our main result is
that, under natural assumptions, if the exogenous variable has
low H0 entropy (cardinality) in the true direction, it must have
high H0 entropy in the wrong direction. We establish several
algorithmic hardness results about estimating the minimum entropy exogenous variable. We show that the problem of ﬁnding
the exogenous variable with minimum H1 entropy (Shannon
Entropy) is equivalent to the problem of ﬁnding minimum
joint entropy given n marginal distributions, also known as
minimum entropy coupling problem. We propose an efﬁcient
greedy algorithm for the minimum entropy coupling problem,
that for n = 2 provably ﬁnds a local optimum. This gives
a greedy algorithm for ﬁnding the exogenous variable with
minimum Shannon entropy. Our greedy entropy-based causal
inference algorithm has similar performance to the state of
the art additive noise models in real datasets. One advantage
of our approach is that we make no use of the values of random variables but only their distributions. Our method can
therefore be used for causal inference for both ordinal and also
categorical data, unlike additive noise models.

1

Babak Hassibi
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology, USA

Introduction

Causality has been studied under several frameworks including potential outcomes (Rubin 1974) and structural equation
modeling (Pearl 2009). Under the Pearlian framework (Pearl
2009) it is possible to discover some causal directions between variables using only observational data with conditional independence tests. The PC algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2001) and its variants fully characterize
which causal directions can be learned in the general case.
For large graphs, GES algorithm (Chickering 2002) provides
a score-based test to greedily identify the highest scoring
causal graph given the data. Unfortunately, these approaches
do not guarantee the recovery of true causal direction between every pair of variables, since typically data could be
generated by several statistically equivalent causal graphs.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1156

