Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Polynomially Bounded Logic Programs with Function Symbols:
A New Decidable Class
Vernon Asuncion, Yan Zhang

Heng Zhang

Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Group
School of Computer Science and Technology
Western Sydney University, Australia
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
Email:{v.asuncion, yan.zhang}@westernsydney.edu.au
Email: hengzhang@hust.edu.cn

al. 2015), in which it was shown that although this class
does not contain the argument-restricted and GMT-bounded
classes, the underlying technique may be combined with
other approaches and eventually to identify more ﬁnitely
ground programs (see next section of an overview on this).
However, it comes to our attention that some simple programs which are ﬁnitely ground but do not belong to either of the class of GMT-bounded programs or size-restricted
programs. Let us consider a scenario of an online photo
gallery, where each paid member can view any image in
the gallery, but a restriction is imposed for guest members:
Although a guest member is allowed to view the gallery images, he/she can only view no more than two images in either
large or thumbnail form each time. This may be expressed
by the following two rules:

Abstract
A logic program with function symbols is called ﬁnitely
ground if there is a ﬁnite propositional logic program whose
stable models are exactly the same as the stable models of
this program. Finite groundability is an important property
for logic programs with function symbols because it makes
feasible to compute such program’s stable models using traditional ASP solvers. In this paper, we introduce a new decidable class of ﬁnitely ground programs called POLY-bounded
programs, which, to the best of our knowledge, strictly contains all decidable classes of ﬁnitely ground programs discovered so far in the literature. We also study the related complexity property for this class of programs. We prove that
deciding whether a program is POLY-bounded is EXPTIMEcomplete.



r1 : viewLarge(X, Y ) ∨ viewThumbnail next(X), Y
← viewThumbnail(X,
),
 Y), guestMember(Y
 
r2 : ⊥ ← viewThumbnail next next(X) , Y .

Introduction
A logic program with function symbols Π is called ﬁnitely
ground if there is a ﬁnite propositional logic program Π
such that Π and Π have the same collection of stable models. Therefore, a ﬁnitely ground logic program will have a
ﬁnite number of stable models and each stable model is of a
ﬁnite size. Finite groundability is an important property for
programs with function symbols because this makes feasible to compute such programs’ stable models using traditional ASP solvers (Calimeri et al. 2008; Baselice, Bonatti,
and Criscuolo 2009a; Alviano, Faber, and Leone 2010).
Unfortunately, in general, checking whether a program
is ﬁnitely ground is undecidable. In recent years, several
decidable classes of ﬁnitely ground programs have been
discovered under the stable model semantics (Gelfond and
Lifschitz 1988): ω-restricted programs (Syrjänen 2001), λrestricted programs (Gebser, Schaub, and Thiele 2007), ﬁnite domain programs (Calimeri et al. 2008), argumentrestricted programs (Lierler and Lifschitz 2009), safe programs (Greco, Spezzano, and Trubitsyna 2012), Γ-acyclic
programs (Greco, Spezzano, and Trubitsyna 2012), and
what we refer as GMT-bounded programs, which has been
shown to be a proper superclass of all other previous classes
(Greco, Molinaro, and Trubitsyna 2013). More recently, another decidable class of ﬁnitely ground programs called sizerestricted programs was further introduced in (Calautti et

Let Π1 = {r1 , r2 }. Then it follows that program Π1 is
ﬁnitely ground because program Π1 ∪D will only have ﬁnite
stable models for any given input database D.
Surprisingly, Π1 is not bounded under the deﬁnition
of (Greco, Molinaro, and Trubitsyna 2013), nor is sizerestricted as speciﬁed in (Calautti et al. 2015). Motivated
from this example, in this paper, we propose yet another decidable class of logic programs with function symbols called
POLY -bounded programs, which strictly contains both GMT bounded and size restricted programs. The reason we are
able to obtain such a strict class is that we give explicit treatments to “disjunctions”, “negations” and “constraints” in the
underlying programs.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section
2 presents necessary terminologies and background knowledge we will need throughout the paper. Section 3 deﬁnes
a ﬁxpoint upper bound of all stable models for a given program with function symbols. Based on this upper bound definition, Section 4 then speciﬁes a new decidable class of programs called polynomially bounded programs, and proves
its main properties. Section 5 studies the complexity property of this new decidable class of programs, and ﬁnally Section 6 concludes the paper with some remarks.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1041

