Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Pairwise HITS: Quality Estimation from Pairwise Comparisons
in Creator-Evaluator Crowdsourcing Process
Takeru Sunahase, Yukino Baba, Hisashi Kashima
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology, Kyoto University
stakeru@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, {baba, kashima}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
A common technique for improving the quality of crowdsourcing results is to assign a same task to multiple workers redundantly, and then to aggregate the results to obtain
a higher-quality result; however, this technique is not applicable to complex tasks such as article writing since there is
no obvious way to aggregate the results. Instead, we can use
a two-stage procedure consisting of a creation stage and an
evaluation stage, where we ﬁrst ask workers to create artifacts, and then ask other workers to evaluate the artifacts to
estimate their quality. In this study, we propose a novel quality estimation method for the two-stage procedure where pairwise comparison results for pairs of artifacts are collected at
the evaluation stage. Our method is based on an extension of
Kleinberg’s HITS algorithm to pairwise comparison, which
takes into account the ability of evaluators as well as the ability of creators. Experiments using actual crowdsourcing tasks
show that our methods outperform baseline methods especially when the number of evaluators per artifact is small.

1

Figure 1: Two-stage procedure with pairwise comparison

Welinder et al. 2010; Lin, Mausam, and Weld 2012; Demartini, Difallah, and Cudré-Mauroux 2013).
These aggregation methods have been widely applied to
simple crowdsourcing tasks such as multiple-choice questions; however, these methods are not applicable for general crowdsourcing tasks such as article writing or graphic
designing, in which agreement between the results may
not be possible. Many tasks fall into this category, and a
study showed that the top requesters on Amazon Mechanical Turk (based on the total rewards posted) typically request
such general tasks, including content generation and website
feedback (Ipeirotis 2010). A natural strategy for controlling
the work quality on general crowdsourcing tasks is to introduce a two-stage procedure, whereby workers (called creators) ﬁrst create artifacts, and then another set of workers
(called evaluators) evaluate the results. This procedure allows us to estimate the quality level of each artifact based
on the evaluations from the workers.
In this paper, we focus on a two-stage procedure with pairwise comparison (Figure 1), wherein evaluators are asked
to compare a pair of artifacts and vote for one of them in
the evaluation stage. Pairwise comparison has several advantages over rating single artifacts; it can capture a small
difference in quality between artifacts, and evaluators do not
need to calibrate their standards over time.
Our proposed methods are extensions of the HITS algorithm (Kleinberg 1999) to pairwise comparison, which take
into account the ability of evaluators as well as the ability

Introduction

With the recent growth of crowdsourcing platforms such
as Amazon Mechanical Turk, crowdsourcing has become a
popular approach for accomplishing a wide variety of tasks,
including audio transcription, article writing, and graphic
designing. Crowdsourcing has been successfully used in
various areas of computer science research such as natural language processing (Snow et al. 2008), computer vision (Sorokin and Forsyth 2008), and human–computer interaction (Bernstein et al. 2015; Bigham et al. 2010).
Quality of results is one of the critical issues with crowdsourcing. Since crowdsourcing workers have different levels of expertise and diligence, there is no guarantee that
all workers complete the offered tasks with a satisfactory
level of quality. A convenient quality control approach is
to assign the same task to multiple workers and aggregate
their results to obtain more reliable outputs. Majority voting and averaging are examples of simple aggregation methods, and several statistical methods considering the ability of each worker or the difﬁculty of each task have been
proposed (Dawid and Skene 1979; Whitehill et al. 2009;
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

977

