Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cost-Sensitive Feature Selection via F-Measure Optimization Reduction
Meng Liu,† Chang Xu,‡ Yong Luo,§‡ Chao Xu,† Yonggang Wen,§ Dacheng Tao‡
†

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, PKU, Beijing 100871, China
‡
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UTS, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
§
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU, 639798, Singapore
mengliu@pku.edu.cn, chang.xu@uts.edu.au, yluo180@gmail.com,
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, ygwen@ntu.edu.sg, dacheng.tao@uts.edu.au
Wrapper methods utilize predeﬁned classiﬁers as a black
box to evaluate the selected features. Support vector machine recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) (Guyon et
al. 2002) and correlation-based feature selection (CFS) (Hall
and Smith 1999) are representative wrapper methods. Embedded methods embed the feature selection process into
classiﬁer training. Regularized regression-based feature selection methods (Nie et al. 2010; Han and Kim 2015) are
typical embedded methods.
The methods mentioned above are demonstrated effective in most situations. However, almost all of these methods neglect the inﬂuence of class imbalance issue. They are
designed under the implicit assumption that the data distribution or sampling are balanced, i.e., the sample sizes for
different classes are about the same. The class imbalance
issue is quite common in real-world datasets, which will
negatively impact the traditional feature selection methods
since they are inclined to choose the features that characterize the majority classes rather than those describe the minority classes. The neglect of class imbalance issue will make it
more difﬁcult to obtain better results for the subsequent machine learning tasks since the selected features are already
biased towards the majority classes.
Feature selection methods which are dependent on classiﬁers also have the class imbalance problem (Nie et al. 2010;
Han and Kim 2015). Taking regularized regression-based
feature selection for example, these regularization models
aim to minimize the ﬁtting errors of the objective functions
where the misclassiﬁcation costs for different classes are
treated equally (Tang, Alelyani, and Liu 2014). Therefore
the feature subset is chosen to achieve the highest classiﬁcation accuracy, which is not an appropriate performance
under the imbalanced setting. Consequently, these types of
methods can be referred as cost-blind feature selection methods.
High and balanced pair values of precision and recall result in high F-measure performance (Parambath, Usunier,
and Grandvalet 2014). Therefore F-measure is a more suitable measure compared with accuracy in the imbalanced
classes scenario (Pillai, Fumera, and Roli 2012; Dembczynski et al. 2011). Besides F-measure in binary classiﬁcation,
its variants in multi-class and multi-label classiﬁcation are
receiving much attention recently (Dembczynski et al. 2013;
2011; Ye et al. 2012; Pillai, Fumera, and Roli 2012). There

Abstract
Feature selection aims to select a small subset from the
high-dimensional features which can lead to better learning performance, lower computational complexity, and better model readability. The class imbalance problem has been
neglected by traditional feature selection methods, therefore
the selected features will be biased towards the majority
classes. Because of the superiority of F-measure to accuracy for imbalanced data, we propose to use F-measure as
the performance measure for feature selection algorithms.
As a pseudo-linear function, the optimization of F-measure
can be achieved by minimizing the total costs. In this paper,
we present a novel cost-sensitive feature selection (CSFS)
method which optimizes F-measure instead of accuracy to
take class imbalance issue into account. The features will be
selected according to optimal F-measure classiﬁer after solving a series of cost-sensitive feature selection sub-problems.
The features selected by our method will fully represent the
characteristics of not only majority classes, but also minority classes. Extensive experimental results conducted on synthetic, multi-class and multi-label datasets validate the efﬁciency and signiﬁcance of our feature selection method.

Introduction
Feature selection has been one of the most popular dimensionality reduction techniques. It is a process of choosing a
subset of relevant features from the high-dimensional data
according to certain performance measure (Tang, Alelyani,
and Liu 2014). Feature selection can further beneﬁt the machine learning tasks such as classiﬁcation and cluster by
speeding up the learning process, improving the model generalization capability, and alleviating the effect of the curse
of dimensionality (Nie et al. 2010). A considerable amount
of research has been done during the last decade (Villela,
de Castro Leite, and Neto 2015; Wang, Tang, and Liu 2015;
Luo et al. 2016; Qian and Zhai 2013; Zhao et al. 2010; Xu,
Tao, and Xu 2015), which can be divided into three groups:
ﬁlter methods, wrapper methods and embedded methods.
Filter methods, such as ReliefF (Kononenko 1994), mRMR
(Peng, Long, and Ding 2005), F-statistic (Liu and Motoda
2012) and Information Gain (Raileanu and Stoffel 2004),
choose features only relying the characteristics of data.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2252

