Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Modeling Skewed Class Distributions
by Reshaping the Concept Space
Kyle D. Feuz

Diane J. Cook

School of Computing
Weber State University

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Washington State University

more balanced distribution. One beneﬁt of applying ICC is
that it can also help solve other issues that arise in supervised machine learning. For example, several researchers
have found that class imbalance is especially problematic
when there exist different sub-clusters within the classes
(Stefanowski 2013). ICC can be used to identify these subclusters and to model them as new distinct classes. Additionally, by creating more sub-classes, we increase the expressive power of certain hypothesis spaces. As an example, when using a standard support vector machine (SVM(
without employing a specialized kernel, SVMs can only correctly classify linearly separable classes. By creating subclasses through clustering, the likelihood of a class to be linearly separable increases with the increase in the number of
decision boundaries. Increasing the expressive power of the
hypothesis space may lead to over-ﬁtting or increased runtimes and does not guarantee better results.
We hypothesize that decomposing the majority class(es)
into smaller sub-classes prior to training a classiﬁer will 1)
lead to improved performance of the learned model by 2)
creating a more balanced class distribution, 3) creating the
potential for more decision boundaries, and 4) ﬁnding intrinsic sub-class boundaries. We validate this novel approach
using a set of existing machine learning datasets as well
as two new pervasive computing datasets, all with extreme
class imbalance.

Abstract
We introduce an approach to learning from imbalanced class
distributions that does not change the underlying data distribution. The ICC algorithm decomposes majority classes into
smaller sub-classes that create a more balanced class distribution. In this paper, we explain how ICC can not only address
the class imbalance problem but may also increase the expressive power of the hypothesis space. We validate ICC and analyze alternative decomposition methods on well-known machine learning datasets as well as new problems in pervasive
computing. Our results indicate that ICC performs as well or
better than existing approaches to handling class imbalance.

Introduction
Skewed class distributions present a challenge in many
different domains. Speciﬁcally, most supervised machine
learning algorithms exhibit poor performance when faced
with skewed class distributions. This is referred to as the
class imbalance problem.
Class imbalance often occurs in real-life datasets involving rare events such as detecting certain medical conditions
(Mazurowski et al. 2008), fraudulent transactions (Bhattacharyya et al. 2011), or providing prompts in contextaware situations (Feuz et al. 2015). Additionally, class imbalance occurs on datasets with several classes of all different sizes such as location prediction or activity recognition
(Feuz and Cook 2015).
Several approaches have been developed to address class
imbalance including sampling, re-weighting the instances,
applying cost-sensitive learning or developing specialized
learning algorithms. Sampling techniques can be used in
conjunction with any learning algorithm because they only
alter what information is provided to the learning algorithm.
This is convenient for the learning algorithm but can lead to
duplicated information, removal of important information,
or creation of false information. The last three approaches
do not alter the training instances and are not affected by
these problems but instead require altering the learning algorithm itself.
Intra-class clustering (ICC) uses clustering to decompose
a large majority class into smaller sub-classes leading to a

Methods
ICC is applied as a pre-processing step prior to learning a
classiﬁcation model. First, a class or classes are individually decomposed into sub-classes. The training instances
are assigned new class labels corresponding to their respective sub-class. For example, a class ci might be decomposed
into three sub-classes ci1 , ci2 , and ci3 and the corresponding training data is mapped to the new subclass labels. This
training data is then used to build a classiﬁcation model according to the standard supervised machine learning procedure. New instances can now be classiﬁed using the trained
classiﬁcation model. Note that the classiﬁer will predict
class labels using the discovered sub-class labels. However,
these new labels can be converted back into the original class
labels. Figure 1 outlines the entire process.
More formally, we use the following notation throughout
rest of this paper.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1891

