Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Maximum Reconstruction Estimation
for Generative Latent-Variable Models
Yong Cheng,# Yang Liu,†∗ Wei Xu#

#

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
†
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
chengyong3001@gmail.com
{liuyang2011, weixu}@tsinghua.edu.cn
guide the model to focus on explaining irrelevant but common correlations in the data (Ganchev et al. 2010). For example, in unsupervised POS induction, estimating tag probabilities are often prone to be disrupted by high-frequency
words such as “,” and “is” (see Table 3).
In this work, we introduce maximum reconstruction estimation (MRE) (Hinton, Osindero, and Teh 2006; Vincent et
al. 2008; Bengio 2009; Vincent et al. 2010; Socher et al.
2011; Ammar, Dyer, and Smith 2014; Alain et al. 2015)
for learning generative latent-variable models. The basic
idea is to circumvent irrelevant but common correlations by
maximizing the probability of reconstructing observed data.
The new objective is based on an encoding-reconstruction
framework: ﬁrst generating a latent structure conditioned on
the observed data (encoding) and then re-generating the observation based on the latent structure (reconstruction). Our
approach has the following advantages:

Abstract
Generative latent-variable models are important for natural
language processing due to their capability of providing compact representations of data. As conventional maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is prone to focus on explaining irrelevant but common correlations in data, we apply maximum reconstruction estimation (MRE) to learning generative
latent-variable models alternatively, which aims to ﬁnd model
parameters that maximize the probability of reconstructing
the observed data. We develop tractable algorithms to directly
learn hidden Markov models and IBM translation models using the MRE criterion, without the need to introduce a separate reconstruction model to facilitate efﬁcient inference. Experiments on unsupervised part-of-speech induction and unsupervised word alignment show that our approach enables
generative latent-variable models to better discover intended
correlations in data and outperforms maximum likelihood estimators signiﬁcantly.

1. Direct learning of model parameters. As we are only interested in learning the parameters of data distribution
(i.e., P (x; θ)), it is challenging to deﬁne the reconstruction distribution (i.e., P (x|x; θ)) using data distribution
parameters (i.e., θ) due to the intricate dependencies between sub-structures in generative latent-variable models. While previous work has to maintain separate sets
of model parameters for encoding and reconstruction to
facilitate efﬁcient inference (Ammar, Dyer, and Smith
2014), our approach is capable of directly learning intended model parameters.

Introduction
The need to learn latent structures from unlabeled data arises
in many different problems in natural language processing
(NLP), including part-of-speech (POS) induction (Merialdo
1994; Johnson 2007), word alignment (Brown et al. 1993;
Vogel, Ney, and Tillmann 1996), syntactic parsing (Klein
and Manning 2004; Smith and Eisner 2005), and semantic parsing (Poon and Domingos 2009). Generative latentvariable models such as hidden Markov models (HMMs)
and latent-variable probabilistic context-free grammars (LPCFGs) have been widely used for unsupervised structured
prediction due to their capability of providing compact representations of data.
Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is the standard
criterion for training generative latent-variable models: maximizing the likelihood of observed data by marginalizing
over latent variables, typically via the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm. However, recent studies have revealed that MLE suffers from a signiﬁcant problem: it may

2. Tractable inference. Our approach keeps the same
tractability of learning generative latent-variable models
as its MLE counterpart. In this work, we apply MRE
to learning two classic generative latent-variable models
(i.e., HMMs and IBM translation models) and design efﬁcient dynamic programming algorithms to calculate expectations exactly.
We evaluate our approach on unsupervised POS induction and unsupervised word alignment. Experiments show
that MRE enables generative latent-variable models to better discover intended correlations in data and thus leads to
signiﬁcant improvements over MLE.

∗

Yang Liu is the corresponding author: liuyang2011@ tsinghua. edu.cn.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3173

