Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Teams in Online Scheduling Polls: Game-Theoretic Aspects∗
1

3

Robert Bredereck,1 Jiehua Chen,2 Rolf Niedermeier2
University of Oxford, United Kingdom, robert.bredereck@cs.ox.ac.uk
2
TU Berlin, Germany, {jiehua.chen, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de

Svetlana Obraztsova,3 Nimrod Talmon4
I-CORE, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, svetlana.obraztsova@gmail.com
4
I-CORE, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, nimrodtalmon77@gmail.com
9am or at 10am. Two members from t1 , one member
from t2 , and three members from t3 are available at 9am,
c 1 c2
while exactly two members of


each team are available at 10am.
2
2
t1
The availabilities of the teams can A := 1
2
t2
be illustrated as an integer matrix
3
2
t3
(illustrated on the right hand side):
A time slot is a winner if it receives the maximum sum of
declared availabilities. Thus, if the three teams declare their
true availabilities, then both 9am and 10am co-win (since six
people in total are available at 9am and 10am each), and the
meeting will be scheduled at either 9am or 10am.
Now, if a team (i.e. people with the same interest) wants
to inﬂuence any decision made during the meeting, then it
will want to send as many of its available team members to
the meeting as possible because this will maximize its relative power—the proportion of its own attendees. For our
simple example, if the meeting is to be held at 9am, then
the relative powers of teams t1 , t2 , and t3 are 1/3, 1/6, and
1/2, respectively. A team may change its availabilities declared in the poll from time to time. However, teams must
not report a number which is higher than their true availability since it cannot send more members than available. Given
this constraint, it is interesting to know whether any team
can increase its relative attendance by misreporting its availability, possibly changing the winning time slot to one where
their relative powers are maximized.
For the case where several time slots co-win, it is not clear
which co-winning time slot will be used. To be on the safe
side, the teams must maximize the relative power of each cowinning time slot. In other words, our teams are pessimistic
and consider their pay-off as the minimum over all the relative powers at each co-winning time slot. In our example,
this means that the pay-off of team t2 would be 1/6, since
this is its relative power at 9am, which is smaller than its
relative power, 1/3, at 10am. The pay-offs of teams t1 and
t3 are both 1/3. In this case, team t2 can be strategic by updating its availability and declare zero availability at 9am; as
a result, the meeting would be held at 10am, where team t2
has better pay-off with relative number of 1/3.
We do not allow arbitrary deviations from the real availabilities of teams; speciﬁcally, we do not allow a team to
declare as available a higher number than actually available.
Further, we do not allow a team to send more team members

Abstract
Consider an important meeting to be held in a team-based
organization. Taking availability constraints into account, an
online scheduling poll is being used in order to decide upon
the exact time of the meeting. Decisions are to be taken during
the meeting, therefore each team would like to maximize its
relative attendance (i.e. the proportional number of its team
members attending the meeting). We introduce a corresponding game, where each team can declare a lower total availability in the scheduling poll in order to improve its relative
attendance—the pay-off. We are especially interested in situations where teams can form coalitions.
We provide an efﬁcient algorithm that, given a coalition, ﬁnds
an optimal way for each team in a coalition to improve its
pay-off. In contrast, we show that deciding whether such a
coalition exists is NP-hard. We also study the existence of
Nash equilibria: Finding Nash equilibria for various small
sizes of teams and coalitions can be done in polynomial time
while it is coNP-hard if the coalition size is unbounded.

1

Introduction

An organization is going to hold a meeting, where people
are to attend. Since people come from different places and
have availability constraints, an open online scheduling poll
is taken to decide upon the meeting time. Each individual
can approve or disapprove of each of the suggested time
slots. In order to have the highest possible attendance, the organization will schedule the meeting at a time slot with the
maximum sum of declared availabilities. During the meeting, proposals will be discussed and decisions will be made.
Usually, people have different interests in the decision making, e.g. they are from different teams who each want their
own proposals to be put through. We consider people with
the same interest as members of the same team and as a result, each team (instead of each individual) may declare the
number of its members that can attend the meeting at each
suggested time slot.
For a simple illustration, suppose that three teams,
t1 , t2 , and t3 , are about to hold a meeting, either at
∗

R. Bredereck is supported by the DFG fellowship BR 5207/2.
N. Talmon is supported by an I-CORE ALGO fellowship. Main
work done while R. Bredereck and N. Talmon were with TU Berlin.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

390

