Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Proﬁt-Driven Team Grouping in Social Networks
Shaojie Tang
Naveen Jindal School of Management
University of Texas at Dallas

load balance. Nowadays many major platforms in this area
such as Upwork has provided team-hiring services to their
enterprise customers.
In this paper, we formalize the proﬁt-driven team grouping problem as follows: we assume a set of m individuals V
and a set of n skills S. Each individual u ∈ V, is represented
by a subset of skills, i.e., u ⊆ S; these are the skills that the
individual possesses. We also assume a set of tasks T , every
task t ∈ T can also be represented by the set of skills that are
required in order for the task to be completed (i.e., t ⊆ S).
Finally, every task t is associated with a proﬁt λt , this could
be the beneﬁt that the completion of a task will yield for
the platform. The team grouping problem is to group individuals to different teams and assign them to different tasks
satisfying the following three conditions: (i) each team possesses all skills required by the task, (ii) individuals within
the same team have high social compatibility, and (iii) each
individual is not overloaded. Our goal is to maximize the
sum of proﬁts from all tasks that can be performed. We refer to this as the T EAM G ROUPING problem. It was worth
noting that the social compatibility among individuals can
be interpreted in many ways. In this work, we model the social compatibility by means of a social network. One natural
and popular option with respect to capturing the underlying
social compatibility of a team is connectivity. This follows
the approach of (Lappas, Liu, and Terzi 2009) and requires
that each team forms a connected graph. Other options to
measure social compatibility include the diameter of a team
(Anagnostopoulos et al. 2012), i.e., the induced graph of any
team in G must have small diameter. Fortunately, our results
are not restricted to any speciﬁc measures of social compatibility, instead, we propose a general framework that works
for any reasonable measure.
Contributions: To the best of our knowledge we are the
ﬁrst to deﬁne and study the T EAM G ROUPING problem and
its variants. We summarize our contributions as follows:
(1) We show that this problem is 1/ ln m hard to approximate, i.e., it is NP-Hard to ﬁnd a solution with approximation ratio larger than 1/ ln m.
(2) We propose a LP-based
algorithm with approximation
√
ratio max{μ/Δ, μ/2 m} where Δ denotes the size of the
largest minimal team and 1/μ is the approximation ratio of
M INCOST T EAM S ELECTION problem (deﬁned formally in
Deﬁnition 1). If there is no constraint on social compatibil-

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the proﬁt-driven team grouping
problem in social networks. We consider a setting in which
people possess different skills and compatibility among these
individuals is captured by a social network. Here, we assume
a collection of tasks, where each task requires a speciﬁc set of
skills, and yields a different proﬁt upon completion. Active
and qualiﬁed individuals may collaborate with each other in
the form of teams to accomplish a set of tasks. Our goal is
to ﬁnd a grouping method that maximizes the total proﬁt of
the tasks that these teams can complete. Any feasible grouping must satisfy the following three conditions: (i) each team
possesses all skills required by the task, (ii) individuals within
the same team are social compatible, and (iii) each individual is not overloaded. We refer to this as the T EAM G ROUP ING problem. Our work presents a detailed analysis of the
computational complexity of the problem, and propose a LPbased approximation algorithm to tackle it and its variants.
Although we focus on team grouping in this paper, our results
apply to a broad range of optimization problems that can be
formulated as a cover decomposition problem.

Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem of grouping teams
on a networked community of people with diverse skill sets.
We consider a setting in which people possess different skills
and compatibility among these individuals is captured by a
social network. Here, we assume a collection of tasks, where
each task requires a speciﬁc set of skills, and yields a different proﬁt upon completion. Active and qualiﬁed individuals may collaborate with each other in the form of teams to
accomplish a set of tasks. Our goal is to ﬁnd a grouping
method that maximizes the total proﬁt of the tasks that these
teams can complete. One relevant example is from the domain of online labor markets, such as Freelancer, Upwork ,
and Guru. In these online platforms, freelancers with various skills can be hired to work on different types of projects.
Instead of just working independently, more and more freelancers are realizing that it is more beneﬁcial to work as a
team, together with other solo freelancers who have complementary skills (Golshan, Lappas, and Terzi 2014). This
allows them to expand their talent pool and achieve better
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

45

