Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Salience Estimation via Variational Auto-Encoders
for Multi-Document Summarization∗
Piji Li,† Zihao Wang,† Wai Lam,† Zhaochun Ren,‡ Lidong Bing§
†

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
‡
University College London, London, UK
§
AI Platform Department, Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, China
†
{pjli, zhwang, wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, ‡ zhaochun.ren@ucl.ac.uk, § lyndonbing@tencent.com
Song et al. 2017). After investigating these works, we observe that they mainly use Bag-of-Words (BoWs) vectors in
sentence representation and reconstruction loss function. On
the other hand, some research works (Le and Mikolov 2014;
Kim 2014) have demonstrated that distributed representations outperform BoWs in modeling sentence and document
semantics. In this paper, instead of using BoWs vectors, we
explore a distributed representation for modeling the latent
semantics of sentences for the MDS task. We propose a
framework based on probabilistic generative models to describe the observed sentences and latent semantic vectors.
Given a topic (event) composed of a set of documents,
we build a distributed latent semantic vector to model
each sentence with a generative framework, where each
sentence is generated from an unobserved latent semantic space. Another characteristic is that the generative process employs a neural network conditioned on the input
text approximating the distributions over the latent semantic vector. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling
and Variational Inference (VI) are the most common methods used in generative models (Jordan et al. 1999; Wainwright and Jordan 2008; Blei, Kucukelbir, and McAuliffe
2016). Nevertheless, some integrals of the marginal likelihood are intractable due to the continuous latent variables
and neural network based generative modeling. Standard
variational inference methods such as mean-ﬁeld algorithms
(Xing, Jordan, and Russell 2002) cannot be used. Moreover, MCMC based sampling methods are too slow to extend to large-scale machine learning tasks. Recently, Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015) have been proposed
that can handle the inference problem associated with complex generative modeling frameworks. In our work, we
employ VAEs as the basic framework for the generative
model. In fact, some works (Miao, Yu, and Blunsom 2015;
Chung et al. 2015) have demonstrated that VAEs outperform
the general Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) in generating high-level
semantic representations.
To address the sentence salience estimation problem
for MDS, we propose an unsupervised data reconstruction
framework which jointly reconstructs the latent semantic

Abstract
We propose a new unsupervised sentence salience framework
for Multi-Document Summarization (MDS), which can be
divided into two components: latent semantic modeling and
salience estimation. For latent semantic modeling, a neural
generative model called Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) is
employed to describe the observed sentences and the corresponding latent semantic representations. Neural variational
inference is used for the posterior inference of the latent variables. For salience estimation, we propose an unsupervised
data reconstruction framework, which jointly considers the
reconstruction for latent semantic space and observed term
vector space. Therefore, we can capture the salience of sentences from these two different and complementary vector
spaces. Thereafter, the VAEs-based latent semantic model is
integrated into the sentence salience estimation component in
a uniﬁed fashion, and the whole framework can be trained
jointly by back-propagation via multi-task learning. Experimental results on the benchmark datasets DUC and TAC
show that our framework achieves better performance than
the state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
Multi-Document Summarization (MDS), aiming at automatically generating a brief, well-organized summary for
a topic which describes an event with a set of documents
from different sources, has been studied extensively. (Goldstein et al. 2000; Erkan and Radev 2004; Wan, Yang, and
Xiao 2007; Nenkova and McKeown 2012; Min, Chew, and
Tan 2012; Bing et al. 2015). Summarization approaches can
be grouped into two classes: extraction-based methods and
abstraction-based methods. For both classes, salience estimation plays a critical role in improving the performance.
Considering the scalability restriction of labeling MDS
datasets, some works adopt unsupervised data reconstruction methods to conduct salience estimation and achieve
comparable results (He et al. 2012; Liu, Yu, and Deng 2015;
Yao, Wan, and Xiao 2015; Li et al. 2015; Ren et al. 2016;
∗

The work described in this paper is supported by grants from
the Research and Development Grant of Huawei Technologies Co.
Ltd (YB2015100076/TH1510257) and the Grant Council of the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project Code:
14203414).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3497

