Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Modeling the Intensity Function of
Point Process via Recurrent Neural Networkss
1

Shuai Xiao,1 Junchi Yan,2,3∗ Xiaokang Yang,1 Hongyuan Zha,4 Stephen M. Chu3

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 East China Normal University 3 IBM Research – China 4 Georgia Tech
{benjaminforever,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, jcyan@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, schu@us.ibm.com, zha@cc.gatech.edu

event sequence fundamentally different from the time series
(Montgomery, Jennings, and Kulahci 2015) with equal and
ﬁxed time interval, whereby the time point only serves as
a role for index {yt }Tt=1 . A major line of research (Aalen,
Borgan, and Gjessing 2008) has been devoted to study event
sequence, especially exploring the timestamp information
to model the underlying dynamics of the system, whereby
point process (Snyder and Miller 2012) has been a powerful
and compact framework in this direction.
Recently there are many machine learning based models for scalable point process modeling. We attribute the
progressions in this direction in part to the smart mathematical reformulations and optimization techniques e.g.
(Lewis and Mohler 2011; Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013b;
2013a), as well as novel parametric forms for the conditional intensity function (Shen et al. 2014; Ertekin, Rudin,
and McCormick 2015; Xu et al. 2016) as carefully designed
by researchers’ prior knowledge to capture the character of
the dataset in study. However, one major limitation of the
parametric forms of point process is due to their specialized and restricted expression capability for arbitrary distributed event data which trends to be oversimpliﬁed or even
infeasible for capturing the problem complexity in real applications. Moreover, it runs at the risk of model underﬁtting
due to the misjudgement on model choice. Recent works e.g.
(Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013b) start to turn to non-parametric
form to ﬁt the structure of a point process, but their method
is under the Hawkes process formulation,while this formulation runs at the risk of model mis-choice.
In this paper, we view the conditional intensity of a point
process as a nonlinear mapping between the predicted transient occurrence intensity of events with different types, and
the model input information of event participators, event
proﬁle and the system history. Such a nonlinear mapping is
expected to be complex and ﬂexible enough to model various characters of real event data for its application utility.
In fact, deep learning models, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1998), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013)
have attracted wide attention in recent vision, speech and
language communities, and many of them has dominated the
competing results on perceptual benchmark tasks e.g. (Russakovsky et al. 2015). In particular, we turn to RNNs as a
natural way to encode such nonlinear and dynamic mapping,

Abstract
Event sequence, asynchronously generated with random
timestamp, is ubiquitous among applications. The precise and
arbitrary timestamp can carry important clues about the underlying dynamics, and has lent the event data fundamentally
different from the time-series whereby series is indexed with
ﬁxed and equal time interval. One expressive mathematical
tool for modeling event is point process. The intensity functions of many point processes involve two components: the
background and the effect by the history. Due to its inherent spontaneousness, the background can be treated as a time
series while the other need to handle the history events. In
this paper, we model the background by a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) with its units aligned with time series indexes while the history effect is modeled by another RNN
whose units are aligned with asynchronous events to capture the long-range dynamics. The whole model with event
type and timestamp prediction output layers can be trained
end-to-end. Our approach takes an RNN perspective to point
process, and models its background and history effect. For
utility, our method allows a black-box treatment for modeling the intensity which is often a pre-deﬁned parametric form
in point processes. Meanwhile end-to-end training opens the
venue for reusing existing rich techniques in deep network for
point process modeling. We apply our model to the predictive
maintenance problem using a log dataset by more than 1000
ATMs from a global bank headquartered in North America.

Introduction
Event sequence is becoming increasingly available in a variety of applications such as e-commerce transactions, social network activities, conﬂicts, and equipment failures etc.
The event data can carry rich information not only about the
event attribute (e.g. type, participator) but also the timestamp
{zi , ti }N
i=1 indicating when the event occurs. Being treated
as a random variable when the event is stochastically generated in an asynchronous manner, the timestamp makes the
∗

Correspondence author is Junchi Yan. This research was
partially supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB1001003), NSFC (61602176,
61672231, 61527804, 61521062), STCSM (15JC1401700,
14XD1402100), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded
Project (2016M590337), the 111 Program (B07022) and NSF
(IIS-1639792, DMS-1620345).
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1597

