Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Learning Residual Alternating Automata
Sebastian Berndt, Maciej Liśkiewicz,∗ Matthias Lutter, Rüdiger Reischuk
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science, University of Lübeck
Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23562 Lübeck, Germany
{berndt,liskiewi,lutter,reischuk}@tcs.uni-luebeck.de

mismatch to receive a counterexample. This model has been
introduced in (Angluin 1987) that launched a tremendous
amount of subsequent research yielding many effective algorithms of relevance in machine learning and other areas.
Angluin (1987) has provided an algorithm, named L that
learns a minimal DFA in polynomial time. The minimality
of the resulting DFA plays an important role here since this
condition makes it unique (up to naming of states). Thus, L
learns precisely the target automaton if this is minimal.
Beside uniqueness, minimal DFAs have also another nice
property termed residuality. An automaton A accepting a
language L is residual if every state q of A can be associated
with a word wq such that the language accepted by Aq – the
automaton A that starts in q, is exactly the set of words v for
which wq v is in L. Thus, every state q of A corresponds to
the residual language of L determined by wq .
For many learning algorithms the residuality property
plays an essential role in inferring the target automaton.
Angluin’s L algorithm makes heavy use of this concept:
The states of a hypothesized automaton are represented by a
preﬁx-closed set of strings such that for every state qs corresponding to a string s, the language accepted from qs is
residual with respect to s and the target language. Unfortunately, non-deterministic automata, in general do not satisfy
the residuality property. Even worse, for an NFA A languages accepted by Aq , for states q of A, have no natural interpretation and two minimal NFAs can be non-isomorphic.
The disadvantageous properties may lead to ambiguity problems and difﬁculties in learning automata. Moreover the
goal is to learn automata containing a certain structure, that
may be helpful for later use in speciﬁc applications, like e. g.
in model checking. Residuality is one such structural property that allows to assign a natural semantic to the states of
a complex automaton. This allows a simpler analysis of the
(possibly) involved behaviour of the automaton.
Denis, Lemay, and Terlutte (2001) introduced the class of
residual NFA (RNFA). For every regular language L there is
a unique RNFA AL called canonical such that the number of
states is minimal, the number of transitions between states is
maximal, and for every state q of AL the language accepted
L
by AL
q is residual. In addition, A can be exponentially more
succinct than the equivalent minimal DFA. Using the residuality property, Bollig et al. (2009) proposed a sophisticated
extension of Angluin’s algorithm named NL that learns a

Abstract
Residuality plays an essential role for learning ﬁnite automata. While residual deterministic and non-deterministic
automata have been understood quite well, fundamental questions concerning alternating automata (AFA) remain open.
Recently, Angluin, Eisenstat, and Fisman (2015) have initiated a systematic study of residual AFAs and proposed an
algorithm called AL – an extension of the popular L algorithm – to learn AFAs. Based on computer experiments
they have conjectured that AL produces residual AFAs, but
have not been able to give a proof. In this paper we disprove this conjecture by constructing a counterexample. As
our main positive result we design an efﬁcient learning algorithm, named AL , and give a proof that it outputs residual
AFAs only. In addition, we investigate the succinctness of
these different FA types in more detail.

1

Introduction

Learning ﬁnite automata is an important issue in machine
learning and of great practical signiﬁcance to solve substantial learning problems like pattern recognition, robot’s navigation, automated veriﬁcation, and many others (see e. g.
the textbook (De la Higuera 2010)). Depending on applications, different types of automata might be required as desirable targets of learning. The ones of particular concern are
deterministic (DFA), non-deterministic (NFA), the dual of
NFAs – the universal ﬁnite automata (UFA), and their generalization – the alternating ﬁnite automata (AFA). Though
they are of the same expressive power, the automata have
different modeling capabilities and succinctness properties.
A minimal (w. r. t. the number of states) DFA might be exponentially larger than an NFA and double-exponentially
larger than an AFA. Thus, for many applications, e. g. in
automated veriﬁcation, it is desirable to work directly with
AFAs rather than with the other types as the membershipproblem for AFAs is still efﬁciently solvable.
In the common exact learning framework for FA the
learner can ask membership queries to test if a word is accepted by the unknown target automaton and equivalence
queries to compare his current hypothesis and, if there is a
∗
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) grant LI 634/4-1.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1749

