Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

A Framework of Online Learning
with Imbalanced Streaming Data
1

Yan Yan,1 Tianbao Yang,2 Yi Yang,1 Jianhui Chen3

QCIS, University of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway, Ultimo NSW 2007, Australia
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
3
Yahoo! Labs, Sunnyvale, CA 94089, USA
yan.yan-3@student.uts.edu.au, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu, yi.yang@uts.edu.au, jianhuic@gmail.com
2

mance of a learner is a critical concern in online learning,
since it measures how much the predictions are consistent
with the true label.
In most existing studies of online learning, a challenge
for mining large-scale streaming data is that examples are
usually skew-distributed over different classes. Particularly
for binary problems, the number of positive examples is
usually signiﬁcantly smaller than that of negative ones in
many applications. Therefore, the zero-one loss and its surrogates commonly used in traditional online learning algorithms are not appropriate for imbalanced data. This issue
has been long recognized as cost asymmetry, i.e., the cost
for a false negative should be different from that for a false
positive. To deal with it, cost-sensitive algorithms, one of the
most popular approaches for tackling imbalanced data, have
been recently studied in the online setting (Wang, Zhao, and
Hoi 2012), which usually assign ﬁxed costs, or ad-hoc costs
based on the distribution of data received so far to different classes. However, it would not necessarily achieve superior performance measures including F-measure, area under
ROC curve (AUROC), area under precision and recall curve
(AUPRC).
Another line of research for learning with the imbalanced
streaming data is to directly optimize target measures in
an online fashion, which attracts increasing attention recently (Gao et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2011). However, there
are two main limitations. Firstly, measures applied in imbalanced problems, e.g., F-measure, AUROC and AUPRC,
are usually not decomposable, which makes it sigﬁnicantly
challenging to directly optimize these measures in the online
setting. Moreover, an algorithm designed for optimizing a
speciﬁc measure (e.g., F-measure) is usually not applicable
for optimizing another certain measure (e.g., AUROC).
To address these issues, in this work, we present a uniﬁed framework for learning with imbalanced streaming data
that is easily adapted to different performance measures. The
proposed framework simultaneously learns multiple classiﬁers with various cost vectors. In particular, at each iteration, the prediction is made by a classiﬁer which is selected
randomly according to a sampling distribution, which is updated based on the current performance measures of classiﬁers, similarly to the well-know exponential weighted average algorithm (Littlestone and Warmuth 1994). The selection of the optimal classiﬁer is adaptive and evolving ac-

Abstract
A challenge for mining large-scale streaming data overlooked
by most existing studies on online learning is the skewdistribution of examples over different classes. Many previous works have considered cost-sensitive approaches in an
online setting for streaming data, where ﬁxed costs are assigned to different classes, or ad-hoc costs are adapted based
on the distribution of data received so far. However, it is
not necessary for them to achieve optimal performance in
terms of the measures suited for imbalanced data, such as Fmeasure, area under ROC curve (AUROC), area under precision and recall curve (AUPRC). This work proposes a general framework for online learning with imbalanced streaming data, where examples are coming sequentially and models
are updated accordingly on-the-ﬂy. By simultaneously learning multiple classiﬁers with different cost vectors, the proposed method can be adopted for different target measures for
imbalanced data, including F-measure, AUROC and AUPRC.
Moreover, we present a rigorous theoretical justiﬁcation of
the proposed framework for the F-measure maximization.
Our empirical studies demonstrate the competitive if not better performance of the proposed method compared to previous cost-sensitive and resampling based online learning algorithms and those that are designed for optimizing certain
measures.

Introduction
Streaming data are pervasive in many domains, including
online social media (Lukasik and Cohn 2016; Akbari et
al. 2016), clickbait prediction (Biyani, Tsioutsiouliklis, and
Blackmer 2016), ad placement (Liu and Liu 2016), etc.. In
these scenarios, data are coming sequentially. Mining the
streaming data requires the learner to make a prediction
instantly after receiving an example and update the model
based on the received true label. As the increasing popularity of streaming data, it becomes critical to design effective
learning algorithms for mining streaming data and making
accurate predictions on the ﬂy.
Online learning has emerged to be an important learning
paradigm due to its ability to handle streaming data. Different from traditional batch learning, in online learning, data
arrive sequentially, and the prediction is made before getting a feedback about the true label. Thus, the online perforc 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2817

