Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Computational Issues in Time-Inconsistent Planning
Pingzhong Tang,∗ Yifeng Teng,† Zihe Wang,‡ Shenke Xiao,∗ Yichong Xu
∗Tsinghua University, † University of Wisconsin-Madison,
‡Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Carnegie Mellon University

or some additional daily cost for not shipping the package.
Clearly, the optimal strategy for the agent is to ship the package right away, avoiding any additional daily cost. However,
as the story goes, the agent chooses to procrastinate and to
send the package in one of the last few days. Similar examples abound, ranging from golf club members that never
play golf (abandonment) to investors that rent an apartment
for years before making a purchase (procrastination).
The interpretation to all these phenomena lies in that
agents value current cost more than the cost in the future. Researchers in the literature have developed various
models to capture this observation and to interpret the inconsistencies (Strotz 1955; Akerlof 1991; Laibson 1997;
Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’donoghue 2002; Ockenfels
and Roth 2002; Osogami and Morimura 2012). In what
follows, we describe the coined time-inconsistent planning
model in (Kleinberg and Oren 2014).

Abstract
Time-inconsistency refers to a paradox in decision making
where agents exhibit inconsistent behaviors over time. Examples are procrastination where agents tend to postpone easy
tasks, and abandonments where agents start a plan and quit in
the middle. To capture such behaviors and to quantify inefﬁciency caused by such behaviors, Kleinberg and Oren (2014)
propose a graph model with a certain cost structure and initiate the study of several interesting computation problems: 1)
cost ratio: the worst ratio between the actual cost of the agent
and the optimal cost, over all the graph instances; 2) motivating subgraph: how to motivate the agent to reach the goal
by deleting nodes and edges; 3) Intermediate rewards: how
to incentivize agents to reach the goal by placing intermediate rewards. Kleinberg and Oren give partial answers to these
questions, but the main problems are open.
In this paper, we give answers to all three open problems.
First, we show a tight upper bound of cost ratio for graphs,
and conﬁrm the conjecture by Kleinberg and Oren that Akerlof’s structure is indeed the worst case for cost ratio. Second, we prove that ﬁnding a motivating subgraph is NP-hard,
showing that it is generally inefﬁcient to motivate agents
by deleting nodes and edges in the graph. Last but not
least, we show that computing a strategy to place minimum
amount of total reward is also NP-hard and we provide a 2napproximation algorithm.

1

1.1

The time-inconsistent planning model

Roughly put, the time-inconsistent planning model is no
different from the standard planning model (Pollak 1968;
Russell and Norvig 2003), except for a slight twist on the
cost structure. The standard planning model is a directed
graph (aka. task graph) where each node in the graph represents a state, each directed edge denotes an action that transits one state to another and each action incurs a certain cost,
marked as the weight on the edge. The planner’s goal is to
ﬁnd a shortest (min-cost) path between the initial state and
target state. While the time-inconsistent planning model redeﬁnes the cost of a path:
 instead of summing the costs of
all edges on that path: i=1 c(ei ) where c(ei ) is the cost of
the i-th edge on the path, a time-inconsistent agent applies a
multiplicative factor 0 < β < 1 to the costs
of all the edges
except for the ﬁrst edge in the path c(e1 )+β i=2 c(ei ). The
interpretation is that the time-inconsistent agent evaluates
the current actions by its true cost, while discounts the costs
(rewards) of all future actions by β. The time-inconsistent
planning model is deﬁned as a time-inconsistent agent who
looks for a discounted shortest path at any state in the task
graph. The cost model above is also a special case of the
quasi-hyperbolic discounting model (Laibson 1997).
The model is general enough to capture a range of interesting time-inconsistent behaviors. In particular, Kleinberg
and Oren (2014) show that:

Introduction

In behavioral economics, an important theme has been to understand individual behaviors that are inconsistent over time.
There are at least two types of inconsistencies investigated
in the literature. The ﬁrst type is procrastination (Akerlof
1991; O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999; Kleinberg and Oren
2014): agents tend to postpone costly actions even though
such delay may incur further cost. The second type is abandonment (O’Donoghue and Rabin 2008): agents plan for a
multi-phase task (usually with rewards in the end), spend efforts in the initial phases and decide to quit in the middle.
Both types of behaviors have been widely observed in
reality. Akerlof (1991) describes a story of procrastination
where an agent must ship a package within the next a few
days, incurs an immediate cost for shipping the package
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3665

