Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Image Cosegmentation via Saliency-Guided
Constrained Clustering with Cosine Similarity
1

Zhiqiang Tao,∗1 Hongfu Liu,∗1 Huazhu Fu,2 Yun Fu1,3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 02115.
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore.
3
College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA, 02115.

over multiple images, while their computing was burdened
by using the expectation-minimization (EM) algorithm to
solve an energy minimization problem. Lee et al. (Lee et
al. 2015) employed the multiple random walker clustering
algorithm to cosegment images, which still costs much on a
two-stage clustering process. Different from these methods,
we solve the cosegmentation task in a highly efﬁcient way,
that is, a one-step clustering framework.
Image clustering is not an easy task, due to the different
illumination, arbitrary poses, various object shapes and cluttered backgrounds. Thus, without giving any prior knowledge about foreground objects, the most existing clustering
methods do not perform well for cosegmentation task directly. Inspired by the constrained clustering (Wagstaff et
al. 2001), we aim to improve clustering based cosegmentation by using prior knowledge. The work in (Liu and Fu
2015) proposed a clustering method by using partition-level
side information. It formulates given labels as a partial partition to facilitate the clustering process. However, the existing work (Liu and Fu 2015) cannot be applied to image
cosegmentation directly. First, its side information is from
ground-truth or human interaction, which is not suitable for
unsupervised cosegmentation task. Second, it only provides
solution by computing feature similarity with the Euclidean
distance, which does not perform well for the histogram-like
feature descriptors (e.g., bag-of-word) that are widely used
in computer vision community.
To address above problems, we propose a novel SaliencyGuided Constrained Clustering method with Cosine similarity (SGC3 ) for the image cosegmentation task (see
Fig. 1). Under a partial observation strategy, the unsupervised saliency prior is derived as a partition-level side information to give the knowledge of foreground and alleviate the misleading from common backgrounds. To guarantee the robustness to noise and outlier in the given prior, we
jointly compute the similarity at both an instance-level and
partition-level. Speciﬁcally, we calculate the feature similarity between data point and its cluster centroid by using cosine distance; and measure the similarity between clustering
result and the side information with a cosine utility function (Wu et al. 2015). Moreover, when calculating the feature similarity, our approach integrates multiple feature descriptors to further improve the clustering performance. Finally, by introducing a concatenated matrix, these two level

Abstract
Cosegmentation jointly segments the common objects from
multiple images. In this paper, a novel clustering algorithm, called Saliency-Guided Constrained Clustering approach with Cosine similarity (SGC3 ), is proposed for the
image cosegmentation task, where the common foregrounds
are extracted via a one-step clustering process. In our method,
the unsupervised saliency prior is utilized as a partition-level
side information to guide the clustering process. To guarantee
the robustness to noise and outlier in the given prior, the similarities of instance-level and partition-level are jointly computed for cosegmentation. Speciﬁcally, we employ cosine distance to calculate the feature similarity between data point
and its cluster centroid, and introduce a cosine utility function to measure the similarity between clustering result and
the side information. These two parts are both based on the
cosine similarity, which is able to capture the intrinsic structure of data, especially for the non-spherical cluster structure.
Finally, a K-means-like optimization is designed to solve our
objective function in an efﬁcient way. Experimental results on
two widely-used datasets demonstrate our approach achieves
competitive performance over the state-of-the-art cosegmentation methods.

Introduction
Cosegmentation aims to obtain the similar foreground objects from multiple images simultaneously (Rother et al.
2006; Joulin, Bach, and Ponce 2010; Rubinstein et al.
2013; Fu et al. 2015a). Existing cosegmentation methods are divided into two categories: graph-based methods
and clustering-based ones. Graph-based methods generate
a graph model to connect the image elements (e.g., superpixels and object proposals), and select the common objects
by optimizing the problem. However, these methods heavily
depend on the graph construction, which are usually sensitive to the edge deﬁnition. To alleviate such negative effect,
clustering-based methods try to achieve cosegmentation by
using the clustering manner (Joulin, Bach, and Ponce 2010;
2012; Lee et al. 2015). However, these works may suffer from a high time complexity. For example, Joulin et
al. (Joulin, Bach, and Ponce 2012) partitioned image elements by combining spectral and discriminative clustering
∗

Equal contributions
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4285

