Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

One-Step Spectral Clustering via Dynamically
Learning Afﬁnity Matrix and Subspace
1

Xiaofeng Zhu,1 Wei He,1 Yonggang Li,1∗ Yang Yang,2
Shichao Zhang,1† Rongyao Hu,1 Yonghua Zhu3
Guangxi Key Lab of Multi-source Information Mining & Security, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, 541004, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731, China
3
Guangxi University, Nanning, 530004, China
seanzhuxf@gmail.com, zhangsc@gxnu.edu.cn
among data points, i.e., large coefﬁcient indicates close relationship between two data points while small coefﬁcient
indicates distant relationship.
Representation methods for the construction of the afﬁnity matrix include global representation methods (Lu et al.
2012; Liu et al. 2013) and local representation methods (Ng
et al. 2002; Luo et al. 2011; Nie et al. 2016). Global representation methods represent each data point by all data
points, such as the low-rank representation method (Liu et
al. 2013) and the least square representation method (Lu et
al. 2012; Peng, Zhang, and Yi 2013). Local representation
methods represent each data point by its nearest neighbors,
with the assumption that high-dimensional data usually lie
on a low-dimensional space, i.e., an intrinsic subspace. For
example, a global representation method in (Elhamifar and
Vidal 2013) and a local representation method in (Nie et al.
2016) used an 1 -norm sparse model and a k Nearest Neighbor (kNN) graph, respectively, to conduct the afﬁnity matrix.
In a nutshell, the previous representation methods conduct
the afﬁnity matrix learning step by sharing a common strategy, i.e., representing each data point by other data points
with different criteria.
However, the previous spectral clustering methods still
have drawbacks to be overcome. First, the afﬁnity matrix
learning is sensitive to the data quality. The previous spectral clustering methods (Ng et al. 2002; Lu et al. 2012;
Liu et al. 2013; Elhamifar and Vidal 2013) learn the afﬁnity matrix from original data, which are often corrupted by
noise and outliers, thus unavailable to correctly disclose the
similarity among data points. Second, the k-means method
is well-known as sensitive to the initialization of clustering centers (Ng et al. 2002). Lastly, even though each step
achieves their individual optimum, the two-step strategy easily leads to suboptimal result since individual optimum cannot ensure the global optimum of the two-step strategy.
In this paper, we propose a one-step spectral learning
method to learn an intrinsic afﬁnity matrix from the intrinsic subspace. Moreover, the intrinsic afﬁnity matrix is actually the clustering result without conducting the k-means
clustering step. Different from the previous spectral clustering methods learning a ﬁxed afﬁnity matrix from original
data, our proposed method learns the intrinsic afﬁnity matrix by: 1) the alignment of the initial afﬁnity matrix learnt
from the original feature space. The motivation is that these

Abstract
This paper proposes a one-step spectral clustering method by
learning an intrinsic afﬁnity matrix (i.e., the clustering result)
from the low-dimensional space (i.e., intrinsic subspace) of
original data. Speciﬁcally, the intrinsic afﬁnity matrix is learnt
by: 1) the alignment of the initial afﬁnity matrix learnt from
original data; 2) the adjustment of the transformation matrix, which transfers the original feature space into its intrinsic subspace by simultaneously conducting feature selection
and subspace learning; and 3) the clustering result constraint,
i.e., the graph constructed by the intrinsic afﬁnity matrix has
exact c connected components where c is the number of clusters. In this way, two afﬁnity matrices and a transformation
matrix are iteratively updated until achieving their individual
optimum, so that these two afﬁnity matrices are consistent
and the intrinsic subspace is learnt via the transformation matrix. Experimental results on both synthetic and benchmark
datasets veriﬁed that our proposed method outputted more effective clustering result than the previous clustering methods.

Introduction
Spectral clustering has drawn growing concern due to ﬁnding the cluster membership of the data by considering the inherent structure among data points to naturally reﬂect the relationships of the data (Wang et al. 2011; Lu et al. 2012). The
previous spectral clustering is a two-step strategy, i.e., ﬁrst
learning an afﬁnity matrix to measure the similarity among
data points (i.e., the afﬁnity matrix learning step) and then
conducting a k-means clustering on the resulting afﬁnity
matrix to output ﬁnal clustering result (i.e., the k-means
clustering step). Usually, the afﬁnity matrix (i.e., similarity
graph) learning step, i.e., transferring the ﬁnding of cluster
membership to an optimal graph partition problem, is the
most key step of spectral clustering (Nie and Huang 2016;
Wang and Siskind 2003). Representation methods have been
well-known as the most popular methods for the afﬁnity matrix learning, by assuming that each data point may be represented by other data points (Peng, Zhang, and Yi 2013;
Zhu et al. 2013). Speciﬁcally, representation methods use the
resulting representation coefﬁcient to measure the similarity
∗

Wei He and Yonggang Li equally contributed to this work.
Corresponding author: Shichao Zhang.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2963

