Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁcient Non-Oblivious Randomized Reduction for
Risk Minimization with Improved Excess Risk Guarantee
1

Yi Xu,1 Haiqin Yang,2 Lijun Zhang,3 Tianbao Yang1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
2
Department of Computing, Hang Seng Management College, Hong Kong
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{yi-xu, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, hqyang@ieee.org, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn
dimensionality reduction. Nowadays, randomized reduction
methods are emerging to be attractive for dimensionality reduction. Compared with traditional dimensionality reduction methods (e.g., PCA and LDA), randomized reduction
methods (i) can lead to simpler algorithms that are easier to
analyze (Mahoney 2011); (ii) can often be organized to exploit modern computational architectures better than classical dimensional reduction methods (Halko, Martinsson, and
Tropp 2011); (iii) can be more efﬁcient without loss in efﬁcacy (Paul et al. 2013).
Generally, randomized reduction methods can be cast into
two types: the ﬁrst type of methods reduces a set of highdimensional vectors into a low dimensional space independent of each other. These methods usually sample a random
matrix independent of the data and then use it to reduce
the dimensionality of the data. The second type of methods
projects a set of vectors (in the form of a matrix) onto a subspace such that the original matrix can be well reconstructed
from the projected matrix and the subspace. Therefore, the
subspace to which the data is projected depends on the original data. These methods have been deployed for solving
many numerical problems related to matrices, e.g., matrix
product approximation, low-rank matrix approximation, approximate singular value decomposition (Boutsidis and Gittens 2013; Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp 2011). To differentiate these two types of randomized reduction methods, we
refer to the ﬁrst type as oblivious randomized reduction, and
refer to the second type as non-oblivious randomized reduction. We note that in literature oblivious and non-oblivious
are used interchangeably with data-independent and datadependent. Here, we use the terminology commonly appearing in matrix analysis and numerical linear algebra due to
that the general excess risk bound depends on the matrix approximation error.
However, we have not seen any comprehensive study on
the statistical property (in particular the excess risk bound)
of these randomized reduction methods applied to risk minimization in machine learning. The excess risk bound measures the generalization performance of a learned model
compared to the optimal model from a class that has the
best generalization performance. The excess risk bounds
facilitate a better understanding of different learning algorithms and have the potential to guide us to design better algorithms (Kukliansky and Shamir 2015). It is worth

Abstract
In this paper, we address learning problems for high dimensional data. Previously, oblivious random projection based
approaches that project high dimensional features onto a random subspace have been used in practice for tackling highdimensionality challenge in machine learning. Recently, various non-oblivious randomized reduction methods have been
developed and deployed for solving many numerical problems such as matrix product approximation, low-rank matrix approximation, etc. However, they are less explored for
the machine learning tasks, e.g., classiﬁcation. More seriously, the theoretical analysis of excess risk bounds for risk
minimization, an important measure of generalization performance, has not been established for non-oblivious randomized reduction methods. It therefore remains an open problem what is the beneﬁt of using them over previous oblivious
random projection based approaches. To tackle these challenges, we propose an algorithmic framework for employing non-oblivious randomized reduction method for general
empirical risk minimizing in machine learning tasks, where
the original high-dimensional features are projected onto a
random subspace that is derived from the data with a small
matrix approximation error. We then derive the ﬁrst excess
risk bound for the proposed non-oblivious randomized reduction approach without requiring strong assumptions on the
training data. The established excess risk bound exhibits that
the proposed approach provides much better generalization
performance and it also sheds more insights about different
randomized reduction approaches. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world benchmark
datasets, whose dimension scales to O(107 ), to demonstrate
the efﬁcacy of our proposed approach.

Introduction
Recently, the scale and dimensionality of data associated with machine learning and data mining applications have seen unprecedented growth, spurring the BIG
DATA research and development. Learning from large-scale
ultrahigh-dimensional data remains a computationally challenging problem. The big size of data not only increases
the memory footprint but also increases the computational
costs pertaining to optimization. A popular approach for
addressing the high-dimensionality challenge is to perform
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2796

