Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Advising Framework for Multiagent Reinforcement Learning Systems
Felipe Leno da Silva, Ruben Glatt, Anna Helena Reali Costa∗
Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
{f.leno,ruben.glatt,anna.reali}@usp.br

(MAS) composed of simultaneously learning agents.

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning has long been employed to solve sequential decision-making problems with minimal input data.
However, the classical approach requires a long time to
learn a suitable policy, especially in Multiagent Systems. The
teacher-student framework proposes to mitigate this problem
by integrating an advising procedure in the learning process,
in which an experienced agent (human or not) can advise a
student to guide her exploration. However, the teacher is assumed to be an expert in the learning task. We here propose an
advising framework where multiple agents advise each other
while learning in a shared environment, and the advisor is not
expected to necessarily act optimally. Our experiments in a
simulated Robot Soccer environment show that the learning
process is improved by incorporating this kind of advice.

Preliminaries
RL solves sequential decision-making problems modeled as
Markov Decision Processes (MDP). An MDP is described
by the tuple S, A, T, R, where S is the set of environment states, A is the set of available actions, T is the transition function, and R is the reward function. The agent goal
is to learn an optimal policy π ∗ , that maps the best action
for each possible state. However, learning π ∗ may take a
very long time, and the teacher-student framework alleviates
this problem by receiving advice from a more experienced
teacher (Taylor and others 2014). At every learning step, the
teacher observes the student’s current state and may provide
a suggested action. However, advice is limited by a budget
b. After b is spent, the teacher is unable to provide further
advice. Hence deﬁning when to give advice is critical to accelerate learning. In the Importance Advising, the advice is
triggered by the teacher when the importance metric I(s) is
above a predeﬁned threshold:
I(s) = max Qteacher (s, a) − min Qteacher (s, a). (1)

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Littman 2015) is a widely
used tool to autonomously learn how to solve sequential decision problems, but RL agents are known to take a long
time to reach convergence. The teacher-student framework
(Taylor and others 2014) is one approach to alleviate this
problem. A more experienced agent (teacher) advises actions to a learning agent (student), which results in faster
learning. However, the teacher-student framework assumes
that teachers follow a ﬁxed (and good) policy. This means
that, in order to apply this idea in a Multiagent RL domain,
advising relations could only be established after teachers
converged to a ﬁxed policy. Agents could play both the roles
of advisor and advisee during the learning process, as they
may have explored different areas of the state-action space
at a given time step. In this case, the advisor’s current policy is most likely not optimal. Hence, agents must be able
to evaluate how conﬁdent they are in their current policy to
receive and give advice. We here propose a new framework
for advice taking in which multiple simultaneously learning agents can share advice between them. To the best of
our knowledge our proposal is the ﬁrst policy advice framework intended to accelerate learning in a Multiagent System

a

a

However, notice that Equation (1) is only efﬁcient if the
teacher has a ﬁxed policy, because if she is still learning the
Q-values estimates may be unreliable. As multiple agents in
the same environment may be learning together, this importance metric is likely to be misleading in our setting.

Proposal
We are interested in MAS composed of multiple autonomous agents simultaneously learning in a shared environment. Although we focus on RL agents, our framework
is formulated more general and applicable for agents using
any learning algorithm. Unfortunately, identifying which of
the agents have a good policy is not easy, since some (or
all) of them may be simultaneously learning in the same environment. Hence, instead of providing a ﬁxed teacher like
in the previous works, we propose to build ad hoc advisoradvisee relations. These relations are established for a single
step according to each agent’s conﬁdence in her own policy
for the current state. At each step, before choosing their action, agents evaluate a conﬁdence function Υ and calculate a
probability for broadcasting a request for advice to all reachable agents. All agents are restricted by the budgets bask

∗

We are grateful for the support from CAPES, CNPq (grant
311608/2014-0), Google, Nvidia corporation, and São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP), grant 2015/16310-4.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4913

