Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Natural Language Dialogue for Building and Learning Models and Structures

1

2

Ian Perera,1 James F. Allen,1,2 Lucian Galescu,1 Choh Man Teng,1
Mark Burstein,3 Scott Friedman,3 David McDonald,3 , Jeffrey Rye3

Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC), 40 S. Alcaniz, Pensacola, FL 32502
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, 500 Joseph C. Wilson Blvd., Rochester, NY 14627
3
SIFT, LLC, 319 1st Ave North, Suite 400, Minneapolis, MN 55401

interactions effortlessly towards completing a shared goal,
while also allowing the system to recover from errors or obstacles towards completing goals. Our emphasis on robust
dialogue management and modular integration of domaindependent and domain-independent components is one of
the ﬁrst steps towards better collaboration with AI systems.

Abstract
We demonstrate an integrated system for building and learning models and structures in both a real and virtual environment. The system combines natural language understanding,
planning, and methods for composition of basic concepts into
more complicated concepts. The user and the system interact
via natural language to jointly plan and execute tasks involving building structures, with clariﬁcations and demonstrations
to teach the system along the way.
We use the same architecture for building and simulating
models of biology, demonstrating the general-purpose nature
of the system where domain-speciﬁc knowledge is concentrated in sub-modules with the basic interaction remaining
domain-independent. These capabilities are supported by our
work on semantic parsing, which generates knowledge structures to be grounded in a physical representation, and composed with existing knowledge to create a dynamic plan for
completing goals. Prior work on learning from natural language demonstrations enables learning of models from very
few demonstrations, and features are extracted from deﬁnitions in natural language. We believe this architecture for interaction opens up a wide possibility of human-computer interaction and knowledge transfer through natural language.

Related Work
Our work has similarities to SHRDLU (Winograd 1971), especially in the domain and use of natural language as an
interface. However, we go beyond reference resolution and
handle dialogues as a progression towards a goal, not as a
series of question-answer pairs. Our system also learns from
interaction and can guide the user to carry out various tasks.
The Playmate system (Skocaj et al. 2011) and SALL-E (Perera and Allen 2013) also incorporate learning through dialogue and demonstration, but do not place as much emphasis on the turn taking behavior needed as the robotic systems
developed by Chao and Thomaz (2011).

Interface and Hardware
Our system consists of two possible operating modes, a virtual mode and a physical mode. In the ﬁrst, the user interacts
with the system in a web interface with a 2D representation
of blocks on a table. This virtual environment is imbued with
basic physics, but there is no rotation. Each block is a single
color, with multiple blocks available in each color.
In the physical mode, the system consists of a TV monitor on a table, two Kinect 2.0 cameras for RGB+depth and
audio recording, a central server, a smaller computer for
Kinect processing, a Microsoft Surface as an interface for
the ”proxy” (a person to act in the computer’s stead to move
blocks), and a router for communication between the two
computers and the Surface. The Kinect cameras are mounted
on either side of the table and calibrated to generate a single point ﬁeld for the table environment. Blocks are 5-inch
cubes with a logo on each face and a different color on each
side. The logo is used to generate a unique identiﬁer as well
as provide a means for the user to reference certain blocks.
The blocks can be placed and stacked on the table in any orientation. The system currently supports more than 12 blocks
on the table at once, although often occlusion limits the number of blocks that can be practically recognized.

While great advances are being made in the ability of AI systems to process large amounts of data and learn complex decision processes for analysis, interaction with such systems
is mostly limited to users with years of experience building
such systems. AI-Human collaboration with domain experts,
opening a wide variety of opportunities for groundbreaking
research, is limited by the lack of a natural interface to convey concepts and work alongside such systems rather than
simply using them as analytics tools.
While this system architecture is also used in a separate
domain, Biocuration (where the user interacts with the system to build biological models), we demonstrate our system in the Blocks World domain to show ease of interaction
without prior knowledge, operating in both a physical implementation and a virtual 2D implementation. The user can
interact with the system to teach the system new structures,
query its knowledge, and build a structure with constraints in
a mixed-initiative dialogue. Maintaining dialogue and problem solving state allows the user to switch between these
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5103

