Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Opacity of Backbones
Lane A. Hemaspaandra

David E. Narváez

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627, USA

College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623, USA

subset of. Backbone variables have been called “frozen variables,” because each of them is the same over all satisfying
assignments.)
As Williams, Gomes, and Selman (2003) note, “backbone
variables are useful in studying the properties of the solution
space of a... problem.”1
And that surely is so. But it is natural to hope to go beyond that and suspect that if formulas have backbones, we
can use those to help SAT solvers. After all, if one is seeking to get one’s hands on a satisfying assignment of an F
that has a backbone, one need but substitute in the value
of the backbone to have put all its variables to bed as to
one’s search, and thus to “only” have all the other variables
to worry about.
The goal of the present paper is to understand, at least in a
theoretical sense, the difﬁculty of—the potential obstacles to
doing—what we just suggested. We will argue that even for
cases when one can quickly (i.e., in polynomial time) recognize that a formula has at least one nontrivial backbone,
it can be intractable to ﬁnd one such backbone. And we
will argue that even for cases when one can quickly (i.e., in
polynomial time) ﬁnd a large, nontrivial backbone, it can be
intractable to ﬁnd the value of that backbone. In particular,
we will show that if integer factoring is hard, then both the
just-made claims hold. Integer factoring is widely believed
to be hard; indeed, if it were in polynomial time, RSA (the
Rivest-Shamir-Adleman cryptosystem) itself would fall.
In fact, integer factoring is even believed to be hard on
average. And we will be inspired by that to go beyond the
strength of the results mentioned above. Regarding our results mentioned above, one might worry that the “intractability” might be very infrequent, i.e., merely a rare, worst-case
behavior. But we will argue that if integer factoring—or indeed any problem in NP ∩ coNP—is frequently hard, then
the bad behavior types we mention above happen “almost”
as often: If the frequency of hardness of integer factoring

Abstract
A backbone of a boolean formula F is a collection S of
its variables for which there is a unique partial assignment
aS such that F [aS ] is satisﬁable (Monasson et al. 1999;
Willams, Gomes, and Selman 2003). This paper studies
the nontransparency of backbones. We show that, under the
widely believed assumption that integer factoring is hard,
there exist sets of boolean formulas that have obvious, nontrivial backbones yet ﬁnding the values, aS , of those backbones is intractable. We also show that, under the same assumption, there exist sets of boolean formulas that obviously
have large backbones yet producing such a backbone S is intractable. Further, we show that if integer factoring is not
merely worst-case hard but is frequently hard, as is widely
believed, then the frequency of hardness in our two results is
not too much less than that frequency.

1

Introduction

An important concept in the study of the SAT problem is the
notion of backbones. The term was ﬁrst used by Monasson
et al. (1999), and the following formal deﬁnition was provided by Williams, Gomes, and Selman (2003).
Deﬁnition 1. Let F be a boolean formula. A collection S
of the variables of F is said to be a backbone if there is a
unique partial assignment aS such that F [aS ] is satisﬁable.
In that deﬁnition, aS assigns a value (true or false) to each
variable in S, and F [aS ] is a shorthand meaning F except
with each variable in S assigned the value speciﬁed for it in
aS . A backbone S is nontrivial if S = ∅. The size of a backbone S is the number of variables in S. For a backbone S
(for formula F ), we say that aS is the value of the backbone
S.
For example, every satisﬁable formula has the trivial
backbone S = ∅. The formula x1 ∧ x2 has four backbones,
∅, {x1 }, {x2 }, and {x1 , x2 }, with respectively the values
(listing values as bit-vectors giving the assignments in the
lexicographical order of the names of the variables in S) ,
1, 0, and 10. The formula x1 ∨ x2 has no nontrivial backbones. (Every formula that has a backbone will have a maximum backbone—a backbone that every other backbone is a

1
We mention in passing that backbones also are very interesting for problems even harder than SAT, such as model counting
(see Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman, 2009)—i.e., #SAT (Valiant
1979): counting the number of satisfying assignments of a propositional boolean formula—especially given the currently huge runtime differences between SAT-solvers and model counters. After
all, a backbone for a formula helpfully pinpoints into a particular
subspace all the solutions that one is seeking to count.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3900

