Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Sarcasm Suite: A Browser-Based Engine for Sarcasm Detection and Generation
Aditya Joshi,1,2,3 Diptesh Kanojia,1,2,3 Pushpak Bhattacharyya,1 Mark Carman2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India
2
Monash University, Australia
3
IITB-Monash Research Academy, India
{adityaj, diptesh, pb}@cse.iitb.ac.in, mark.carman@monash.edu

Abstract
Sarcasm Suite is a browser-based engine that deploys ﬁve of
our past papers in sarcasm detection and generation. The sarcasm detection modules use four kinds of incongruity: sentiment incongruity, semantic incongruity, historical context
incongruity and conversational context incongruity. The sarcasm generation module is a chatbot that responds sarcastically to user input. With a visually appealing interface that
indicates predictions using ‘faces’ of our co-authors from our
past papers, Sarcasm Suite is our ﬁrst demonstration of our
work in computational sarcasm.

Introduction
Sarcasm detection gained attention from the sentiment analysis (SA) community for the challenges that sarcasm poses
to typical SA systems. Several approaches to detect sarcasm have been reported (Joshi, Bhattacharyya, and Carman 2016). This demonstration deploys ﬁve of our papers
on sarcasm detection and generation. The demonstration titled ‘Sarcasm Suite’ is a browser-based engine that allows
users to test these systems. At the time of writing this paper, Sarcasm Suite is available at: https://www.cﬁlt.iitb.ac.
in/sarcasmsuite/.
Sarcasm Suite deploys four sarcasm detection modules
and one sarcasm generation module. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst demonstration related to computational sarcasm. The demonstration will prove to be interesting as well as useful. We expect Sarcasm Suite to be
pushed to its limits. However, errors made by Sarcasm Suite
will provide ideas for future research in computational sarcasm.

Figure 1: A Schematic Diagram of Sarcasm Suite

2. In (Joshi et al. 2016b), we capture semantic incongruity
via word embeddings in order to detect sarcasm. We experiment with two kinds of features: regular features and
distance-weighted features.
3. In (Khattri et al. 2015), we use an author’s historical context in the form of their twitter timeline to detect sarcasm
in their tweets. This is a rule-based technique that calculates surface sentiment of a tweet and compares it with
the author’s sentiment towards phrases in the tweet, in the
past.
4. In (Joshi et al. 2016a), we use conversational context using sequence labeling algorithms. The paper uses a dataset
of transcripts from the TV show ‘Friends’.

Related Work

5. In (Joshi et al. 2015), we present a sarcasm generation
module that responds sarcastically to user input. The module implements eight sarcasm generators, each covering a
peculiar form of sarcasm.

Sarcasm Suite is a deployment of the following past works
by three out of four authors of this paper:
1. In (Joshi, Sharma, and Bhattacharyya 2015), we use
sentiment incongruity to detect sarcasm. We experiment
with two sets of features: explicit incongruity features
(which capture number of sentiment ﬂips, sentiment subsequence lengths, etc.), and implicit incongruity features
(which are phrases with implicit sentiment).

Architecture
Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of Sarcasm Suite. There
are a total of ﬁve modules in Sarcasm Suite. A video of Sarcasm Suite is attached. This section describes different aspects of Sarcasm Suite.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5095

