Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Column Networks for Collective Classiﬁcation
Trang Pham, Truyen Tran, Dinh Phung, Svetha Venkatesh
Deakin University, Australia
{phtra,truyen.tran, dinh.phung, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

learning (Choetkiertikul et al. 2015; Kou and Cohen 2007;
Macskassy and Provost 2007; Neville and Jensen 2000).
Existing models designed for collective classiﬁcation are
mostly shallow and do not emphasize learning of local and
relational features. Deep neural networks, on the other hand,
offer automatic feature learning, which is arguably the key
behind recent record-breaking successes in vision, speech,
games and NLP (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Mnih et
al. 2015). With known challenges in relational learning, can
we design a deep neural network that is efﬁcient and accurate
for collective classiﬁcation? There has been recent work
that combines deep learning with structured prediction but
the main learning and inference problems for general multirelational settings remain open (Belanger and McCallum
2016; Do, Arti, and others 2010; Tompson et al. 2014; Yu,
Wang, and Deng 2010; Zheng et al. 2015).
In this paper, we present Column Network (CLN), an efﬁcient deep learning model for multi-relational data, with
emphasis on collective classiﬁcation. The design of CLN is
partly inspired by the columnar organization of neocortex
(Mountcastle 1997), in which cortical neurons are organized
in vertical, layered mini-columns, each of which is responsible for a small receptive ﬁeld. Communications between
mini-columns are enabled through short-range horizontal
connections. In CLN, each mini-column is a feedforward net
that takes an input vector – which plays the role of a receptive
ﬁeld – and produces an output class. Each mini-column net
not only learns from its own data but also exchanges features with neighbor mini-columns along the pathway from
the input to output. Despite the short-range exchanges, the interaction range between mini-columns increases with depth,
thus enabling long-range dependencies between data objects.
To be able to learn with hundreds of layers, we leverage
the recently introduced highway nets (Srivastava, Greff, and
Schmidhuber 2015) as models for mini-columns. With this
design choice, CLN becomes a network of interacting highway nets. But unlike the original highway nets, CLN’s hidden
layers share the same set of parameters, allowing the depth to
grow without introducing new parameters (Liao and Poggio
2016; Pham et al. 2016). Functionally, if feedforward nets
and highway nets are functional approximators for an input
vector, CLN can be thought as an approximator of a grand
function that takes a complex network of vectors as input and
returns multiple outputs. CLN has many desirable theoretical

Abstract
Relational learning deals with data that are characterized by
relational structures. An important task is collective classiﬁcation, which is to jointly classify networked objects. While
it holds a great promise to produce a better accuracy than
non-collective classiﬁers, collective classiﬁcation is computationally challenging and has not leveraged on the recent
breakthroughs of deep learning. We present Column Network
(CLN), a novel deep learning model for collective classiﬁcation
in multi-relational domains. CLN has many desirable theoretical properties: (i) it encodes multi-relations between any two
instances; (ii) it is deep and compact, allowing complex functions to be approximated at the network level with a small
set of free parameters; (iii) local and relational features are
learned simultaneously; (iv) long-range, higher-order dependencies between instances are supported naturally; and (v)
crucially, learning and inference are efﬁcient with linear complexity in the size of the network and the number of relations.
We evaluate CLN on multiple real-world applications: (a) delay
prediction in software projects, (b) PubMed Diabetes publication classiﬁcation and (c) ﬁlm genre classiﬁcation. In all of
these applications, CLN demonstrates a higher accuracy than
state-of-the-art rivals.

1

Introduction

Relational data are characterized by relational structures between objects or data instances. For example, research publications are linked by citations, web pages are connected
by hyperlinks and movies are related through same directors or same actors. Using relations may improve performance in classiﬁcation as relations between entities may
be indicative of relations between classes. A canonical
task in learning from this data type is collective classiﬁcation in which networked data instances are classiﬁed
simultaneously rather than independently to exploit the
dependencies in the data (Macskassy and Provost 2007;
Neville and Jensen 2007; Richardson and Domingos 2006;
Sen et al. 2008). Collective classiﬁcation is, however, highly
challenging. Exact collective inference under general dependencies is intractable. For tractable learning, we often resort to surrogate loss functions such as (structured)
pseudo-likelihood (Sutton and McCallum 2007), approximate gradient (Hinton 2002), or iterative schemes, stacked
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2485

