Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Security Games on a Plane
Jiarui Gan,1 Bo An,1 Yevgeniy Vorobeychik,2 Brian Gauch2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235
1
{jrgan, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, 2 {yevgeniy.vorobeychik, brian.gauch}@vanderbilt.edu

include security tasks in large open areas, such as protection
of ships or natural resources over a sea area, or aerial monitoring by airplanes or drones. Better defense solutions could
be potentially achieved by placing resources in a space outside of actual targets (e.g., between targets).
A natural example is a simple game on a plane with one
resource capable of covering a circular area of radius 1 and
two identical targets in a distance of 1.5 from each other.
To protect both targets simultaneously, we need to move the
resource away from the targets to a point between them. If
we only consider the targets as candidate locations for resource allocation, we lose half of the coverage and as much
of the utility (this can be even worse: consider ﬁve targets
distributed uniformly along a ring of radius 1). With this motivating example in mind, we aim to extend existing work
with an assumed topology of the game space. As we note
that most security scenarios are fundamentally planar, we
develop a novel model called Security Game on a Plane
(SGP), in which targets are distributed on a 2-dimensional
plane, and resources, to be allocated on the same plane, protect targets within a certain effective distance.
We investigate the algorithmic aspects of SGP. We ﬁnd
that computing a Strong Stackelberg Equilibrium (SSE) of
an SGP is NP-hard even for zero-sum games. Despite the
negative results, we provide an exact solution which discretizes the continuous space into regions of equivalent effects and, based on an existing approach, uses column generation to tackle the scalability issue. To more fundamentally
overcome the complexity barrier, we investigate approximation approaches. We develop a polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) for zero-sum SGP so that a solution within any given factor of being optimal can be computed in polynomial time. Notably, unlike approximation
schemes used in many existing works which are designed
only for certain sub-procedures, such as slave problems in
the column generation framework or defender/attacker oracles in the double oracle framework (e.g., Jain, Conitzer, and
Tambe 2013; Gan, An, and Vorobeychik 2015; Wang, Yin,
and An 2016), the PTAS we propose approximates the entire problem. For general-sum SGP, we show that they are
generally hard to approximate due to the inherent lack of robustness of the SSE solution concept. To work around this
issue, we explore several realistic restrictions of the problem and ﬁnd that under these considerations, solutions with

Abstract
Most existing models of Stackelberg security games ignore
the underlying topology of the space in which targets and
defence resources are located. As a result, allocation of resources is restricted to a discrete collection of exogenously
deﬁned targets. However, in many practical security settings,
defense resources can be located on a continuous plane. Better defense solutions could therefore be potentially achieved
by placing resources in a space outside of actual targets (e.g.,
between targets). To address this limitation, we propose a
model called Security Game on a Plane (SGP) in which targets are distributed on a 2-dimensional plane, and security
resources, to be allocated on the same plane, protect targets
within a certain effective distance. We investigate the algorithmic aspects of SGP. We ﬁnd that computing a strong
Stackelberg equilibrium of an SGP is NP-hard even for zerosum games, and these are inapproximable in general. On the
positive side, we ﬁnd an exact solution technique for general
SGPs based on an existing approach, and develop a PTAS
(polynomial-time approximation scheme) for zero-sum SGP
to more fundamentally overcome the computational obstacle.
Our experiments demonstrate the value of considering SGP
and effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Security games have attracted much research attention and
have been widely adopted to assist with real security tasks
in recent years (Tambe 2011). Much of the research has focused on Stackelberg games—games played between a defender and an attacker in which the attacker is assumed to
know the defender’s strategy when choosing his own (e.g.,
Conitzer and Sandholm 2006; Kiekintveld et al. 2009; Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009; An et al. 2011; Vorobeychik
et al. 2014). The goal, from the defender’s perspective, is to
ﬁnd a strategy (a probability distribution over resource allocations) that maximizes her utility.
A limitation of existing models of Stackelberg security
games is that they ignore the underlying topology of the
space in which targets and defence resources are located.
As a result, allocation of resources is restricted to a discrete
collection of exogenously deﬁned targets. However, in many
practical settings, resources can be located on a plane. These
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

530

