Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Community-Based Question Answering via
Asymmetric Multi-Faceted Ranking Network Learning
Zhou Zhao,1 Hanqing Lu,1 Vincent W. Zheng,2 Deng Cai,3 Xiaofei He,3 Yueting Zhuang1
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
{zhaozhou, lhq110, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, vincent.zheng@adsc.com.sg, {dengcai, xiaofeihe}@gmail.com
question based on their semantic relevance. Although existing question answering methods have achieved promising
performance, they mainly focus on developing the deep semantic matching models for the problem, while ignoring the
importance of answerers’ authority on the given question.
Unlike the previous studies, we consider the problem of
community-based question answering as high-quality answer ranking task, which is based on the answers’ deep semantic relevance and the answerers’ authority to the given
question. Let us take the question “what are some recent
and upcoming breakthrough in deep learning?” in Quora
as an example. We notice that the answer provided by
Yann-LeCun receives the most thumb-ups voted by the CQA
community, due to its semantic relevance and the expertise authority of Yann-LeCun on the area of deep learning. It is also observed that the experts in CQA sites usually provide the high-quality answers (Zhao et al. 2015;
Bouguessa, Dumoulin, and Wang 2008).
On the other hand, with the prevalence of online social
networks in CQA sites (Zhao et al. 2015), we introduce the
multi-faceted ranking network for community-based question answering by jointly exploiting the deep semantic relevance between question-answer pairs and the answerers’
authority in CQA sites. Currently, most of the existing network learning works (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014;
Tang et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2016a) follow the symmetric assumption that the user model learning will be symmetric for
any two connected users in networks. However, the symmetry assumption will not be always beneﬁcial for learning
users’ expertise authority model in the directed CQA networks. One user follows another user in CQA networks does
not mean that their expertise authorities are similar. Thus, it
is natural to develop the asymmetric multi-faceted ranking
network learning for the problem.
In this paper, we formulate the problem of communitybased question answering from the viewpoint of asymmetry
multi-faceted ranking network learning. Speciﬁcally, we design the multi-faceted ranking function for question answering based on the deep semantic relevance of question-answer
pairs and the users’ expertise authority. We then integrate
the multi-faceted ranking function and users’ asymmetric
following relations in CQA sites into a uniﬁed asymmetric
multi-faceted ranking network learning framework, named
as AMRNL. We then develop an asymmetric network learn-

Abstract
Nowadays the community-based question answering (CQA)
sites become the popular Internet-based web service, which
have accumulated millions of questions and their posted answers over time. Thus, question answering becomes an essential problem in CQA sites, which ranks the high-quality
answers to the given question. Currently, most of the existing
works study the problem of question answering based on the
deep semantic matching model to rank the answers based on
their semantic relevance, while ignoring the authority of answerers to the given question. In this paper, we consider the
problem of community-based question answering from the
viewpoint of asymmetric multi-faceted ranking network embedding. We propose a novel asymmetric multi-faceted ranking network learning framework for community-based question answering by jointly exploiting the deep semantic relevance between question-answer pairs and the answerers’ authority to the given question. We then develop an asymmetric
ranking network learning method with deep recurrent neural
networks by integrating both answers’ relative quality rank
to the given question and the answerers’ following relations
in CQA sites. The extensive experiments on a large-scale
dataset from a real world CQA site show that our method
achieves better performance than other state-of-the-art solutions to the problem.

Introduction
Nowadays the community-based question answering
(CQA) sites become the popular Internet-based web service, which have accumulated millions of questions and
their posted answers over time (Zhao et al. 2016b). The
beneﬁts of CQA have been well-recognized today. We have
witnessed the popular CQA sites such as Yahoo ! Answer
and Quora. The community-based question answering has
become an essential problem in CQA sites, which ranks the
high-quality answers to the given questions.
Currently, the problem of community-based question answering has attracted considerable attention (Ji et al. 2012;
Qiu and Huang 2015; Shen et al. 2015; Wang and Nyberg
2015; Dong et al. 2015; Fang et al. 2016). Most of the existing works consider the problem as text matching task, which
learn the deep semantic matching model (Hu et al. 2014;
Qiu and Huang 2015), and then rank the answers to the given
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3532

