Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Cross-Domain Sentiment Classiﬁcation via Topic-Related TrAdaBoost
Xingchang Huang,1 Yanghui Rao,1∗ Haoran Xie,2 Tak-Lam Wong,2 Fu Lee Wang3
2

1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Department of Mathematics and Information Technology, The Education University of Hong Kong,
Tai Po, New Territories, Hong Kong
3
Caritas Institute of Higher Education, Tseung Kwan O, Hong Kong
+86-13750023601, huangxch3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
raoyangh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, hrxie2@gmail.com, tlwong@eduhk.hk, pwang@cihe.edu.hk
∗
The Corresponding Author

Abstract

Related Work

Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation aims to tag sentiments
for a target domain by labeled data from a source domain.
Due to the difference between domains, the accuracy of a
trained classiﬁer may be very low. In this paper, we propose
a boosting-based learning framework named TR-TrAdaBoost
for cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation. We ﬁrstly explore
the topic distribution of documents, and then combine it
with the unigram TrAdaBoost. The topic distribution captures
the domain information of documents, which is valuable for
cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation. Experimental results
indicate that TR-TrAdaBoost represents documents well and
boost the performance and robustness of TrAdaBoost.

Cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation has drawn much attention in researchers. Zhang et al. (Zhang et al. 2014) developed a framework to adapt two domains with the same or
different emotion categories using probabilistic models. Pan
et al. (Pan et al. 2010) proposed the spectral feature alignment algorithm that uses some domain-independent words
as a bridge to cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation. Li et
al. (Li, Jin, and Long 2012) employed the topic correlation
analysis method to group words into topics, and used these
topics to bridge domains with a well-deﬁned probabilistic
topic model. However, the limitation of these approaches is
that they require a sufﬁcient collection of target domain samples to guarantee improvements.
Given a small amount of labeled data from the target domain (T rs ), the TrAdaBoost (Dai et al. 2007) tries to decrease the weights of training instances that have different
feature distributions with the target domain. However, the
effectiveness of TrAdaBoost depends on the quality of T rs ,
and it can not deal with multiple different domains simultaneously. To this end, we extract the domain information for
sentimental documents from both source and target domains
by unsupervised topic modeling. Our method not only improves the performance of TrAdaBoost framework, but also
adapts to multi-domain sentiment classiﬁcation.

Introduction
Detecting the sentimental category of documents can help
understand the feeling of users towards products or events.
Thus, sentiment classiﬁcation is widely studied nowadays.
However, a sentiment classiﬁer trained in one domain may
not perform as well in others. This is because users often
use domain speciﬁc words to express sentiments in different
domains, which may lead to the word distribution of documents differs between the source and the target domain.
Due to the problem caused by domain-speciﬁc words, the
TrAdaBoost (Dai et al. 2007) is developed to improve the
generalization ability of classiﬁers. Given a large number
of labeled data from the source domain (T rd ), and a small
amount of labeled data from the target domain (T rs ), the
idea of TrAdaBoost is to use boosting method to adjust the
weights of training instances from T rd and T rs . Compared
to the target domain, feature distributions of T rd are often more different than T rs . Thus, instances of T rd should
have smaller weights than T rs . However, the effectiveness
of TrAdaBoost is highly dependent on T rs if applied to
cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation. For instance, the performance of TrAdaBoost decreased when T rs mainly contain domain-independent words. This is because T rs can
not well represent the target domain with a few domainspeciﬁc words. To tackle this issue, we propose a topicrelated boosting model to represent and classify sentimental
documents. Experimental results validate the effectiveness
of our method on cross-domain sentiment classiﬁcation.

Topic-Related TrAdaBoost
To extract both domain-speciﬁc and shared topics between
source and target domains, we employ the Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003) and generate
topic distributions of documents. Given the document-topic
matrix θ̂it , we can get the topic-level representation of each
document i as φi = [θ̂i1 , θ̂i2 , ..., θ̂it , ..., θ̂iT ], where φi represents the topic distribution of the i-th document and θ̂it
denotes the topic mixture proportion on topic t for document
i. Then, we append the topical distribution φi to the unigram
model to construct a new representation of document i. With
this new representation, each document is transformed into a
new feature space that is represented by both words and topics, which is more adaptive than unigram-based methods to
the framework of TrAdaBoost for cross-domain sentiment
classiﬁcation tasks. Note that we can also apply the above
feature space to other classiﬁers (e.g., SVM).

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4939

