Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Evolutionary Machine Learning for RTS Game StarCraft
Lianlong Wu, Andrew Markham
University of Oxford
Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QD
lianlong.wu@acm.org, andrew.markham@cs.ox.ac.uk

Building Order Research for RTS Game

Abstract

For the building order of RTS games, different approaches
have been investigated, e.g. Means-End Analysis scheduling (MEA), Best-First Search (BFS) or A* search (Chan
et al. 2007). The BTHAI bot uses a ﬁxed building order
(Hagelback 2012). The UAlbertaBot uses StarCraft Build
Order Search System (BOSS) with Depth First Search
(DFS)(Churchill and Buro 2011). These approaches take
minutes during the game play, and they do not ensure the
best solution.

Real-Time Strategy (RTS) games involve multiple agents acting simultaneously, and result in enormous state dimensionality. In this paper, we propose an abstracted and simpliﬁed
model for the famous game StarCraft, and design a dynamic
programming algorithm to solve the building order problem,
which takes minimal time to achieve a speciﬁc target. In addition, Genetic Algorithms (GA) are used to ﬁnd an optimal
target for the opening stage.

RTS Game StarCraft Introduction
Dynamic Programming for Building Order

StarCraft is one of the most classical RTS games which
has been immensely popular since its release in 1998. It is
based on a military science ﬁction. Players start with gathering resources: minerals and vespene gas. Resources are
used for building, army and technologies. Some buildings
enhance the economy, and others are used to train combat
units. Advanced unit types are unlocked by speciﬁc building
or technologies. Units could be sent for attack, defense, patrol or scout all around the map. All moves are “real-time”
with 42ms intervals, while the actions are durative and nondeterministic. Furthermore, there is only partial information
on the map available to players.
The complexity of RTS games is huge in terms of statespace size and number of actions available at each decision
cycle. For a typical board game Go, the total number of
states are 10170 , while in the StarCraft game, the conservatively estimated number is 101685 (Ontanon et al. 2013).

For a certain number of units and buildings, the best building order is the action sequence that uses the least time to
complete in game. The time for the ﬁrst squad is critical to
the game results, as the earlier the ﬁrst attack, the weaker the
enemy defense strength, and consequently the more advantages to gain in the opening stage.
We propose a Dynamic Programming method for constructing the optimal building order. Compared with previous heuristics search methods, the DP method has much
lower time complexity for computation, so the execution
time is reduced signiﬁcantly.

State Representation and Abstractions
The game state is represented as an integer vector, while the
value of each element represents the number of each unit
type.
S = (W orker, M arine, M edic, F irebat, Centre,
(1)
Barrack, Bunker, Depot, Academic)

RTS Game Artiﬁcial Intelligence
In the past few years Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has been
used to design an autonomous system acting as a player
of RTS games. StarCraft presents a much greater challenge
than traditional board games, due to its complexity and the
requirement for simultaneous actions.
The AI application area can be divided into low level micro operations and high level macro strategies. In micro control, it requires quick reaction for attack, retreat, positioning
and use of special abilities of advance units. In the macro
level, most research has focused on modeling the enemy and
predictions.

The state space of StarCraft is enormous, and modeling
is impossible without certain abstraction and simpliﬁcation.
The total number of frames is 14400 for the opening stage
that takes about 10 minutes in StarCraft.
We deﬁne constant vector rmine (x) representing the rate
of mine gathered when there are x Worker units. The ﬁgures are predeﬁned based on measurements in the real game
plays. There is no resource dimension required in this representation, so that total states number is reduced.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Resource Constraints: Deﬁne static function Tbuild (t)
representing the building time required for unit type t.

5007

