Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Collaborative Dynamic Sparse Topic Regression
with User Proﬁle Evolution for Item Recommendation
Li Gao,∗ Jia Wu,† Chuan Zhou,∗‡ Yue Hu∗‡

∗

†

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Quantum Computation & Intelligent Systems Centre, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
‡
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{gaoli, zhouchuan, huyue}@iie.ac.cn, jia.wu@uts.edu.au
example, a user falling in love may start to purchase romantic gifts, while she has never behaved like that before.
Moreover, the contents of items in online platforms, such
as blogs and social networking sites, may also change over
time (Zhang, Kim, and Xing 2015; Wang and Klabjan 2016;
Dai et al. 2016). For example, in product recommender systems with a wealth of online consumer-generated data, different users may add comments or product reviews over
time. As another example, bloggers in the blogosphere may
pursue hot topics to meet current users’ interests to increase
their followings.
Thus, to provide timely item recommendation, it is essential to capture users’ dynamic interests and temporal changes
in contents of items. A straightforward way to model a user’s
dynamic interests is to build an individual matrix factorization model (Gao et al. 2016) to proﬁle the user’s interests learned from the data set at each time interval, then
discover its evolutionary patterns using time series analysis or sequential pattern mining (Lu et al. 2016). To analyze text data stream, dynamic topic models have been proposed by a large number of works (Blei and Lafferty 2006;
Kurashima et al. 2013; Zhang, Kim, and Xing 2015; Gad et
al. 2015). However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous work has jointly considered both temporal evolutionary
factors via topic dynamics for time-aware item recommendation.
In this paper, we propose a novel method CDUE for item
recommendation that combines the dual evolutions of both
item topics and user proﬁles. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a
vector autoregressive model to capture the users’ temporal
proﬁles that reﬂect their interests, and we propose a dynamic
sparse topic model to track the dynamic topics in an item’s
contents that change over time. We jointly learn users’ interests and sparse topic modeling of items in a collaborative
ﬁltering fashion. Then we model the evolutions of users’
proﬁles and sparse topics of the items to further guide iterative learning of both in the future. Based on the predicted
user’s interests and item’s sparse topics, we can provide recommendations at a certain future time interval.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows.

Abstract
In many time-aware item recommender systems, modeling
the accurate evolution of both user proﬁles and the contents of
items over time is essential. However, most existing methods
focus on learning users’ dynamic interests, where the contents
of items are assumed to be stable over time. They thus fail to
capture the dynamic changes in the item’s contents. In this
paper, we present a novel method CDUE for time-aware item
recommendation, which captures the evolution of both user’s
interests and item’s contents information via topic dynamics. Speciﬁcally, we propose a dynamic sparse topic model
to track the evolution of topics for changes in items’ contents
over time and adapt a vector autoregressive model to proﬁle
users’ dynamic interests. The item’s topics and user’s interests and their evolutions are learned collaboratively and simultaneously into a uniﬁed learning framework. Experimental results on two real-world data sets demonstrate the quality
and effectiveness of the proposed method and show that our
method can be used to make better future recommendations.

Introduction
Many recommendation applications, such as Netﬂix’s movie
recommendation and scientiﬁc article recommendation, provide item recommendation based on a user’s interests and
the contents of item (such as its descriptions and attributes).
Currently, methods for learning users’ interests through
combining contents information have proven to be promising for tackling this issue (Purushotham, Liu, and Kuo 2012;
Wang, Chen, and Li 2013; Chen et al. 2014; Bansal, Das,
and Bhattacharyya 2015; Lu et al. 2015; Wang, Wang, and
Yeung 2015). For example, collaborative topic regression
(Wang and Blei 2011) combines traditional collaborative
ﬁltering with topic modeling, which represents users with
topic interests and assumes item contents are generated by
a topic model. However, all these models assume that users
have constant interests toward the item set and item contents
do not change once formulated, which is only true in the
off-line settings.
In deed, in many real-world scenarios, a user’s interests
toward some items may drift over time since they may be
affected by moods, contexts, and pop culture trends (Li et
al. 2011; Aly et al. 2013; Liu 2015; Du et al. 2015). For

• We propose a new item recommendation problem by
jointly considering the evolution of both item topics and
user proﬁles over time.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1316

