Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Estimating the Maximum Expected Value
in Continuous Reinforcement Learning Problems
Carlo D’Eramo, Alessandro Nuara, Matteo Pirotta, Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133, Milano, Italy
carlo.deramo@polimi.it, alessandro.nuara@mail.polimi.it, matteo.pirotta@polimi.it, marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Estimator (DE) (Van Hasselt 2013) approximates the maximum by splitting the sample set into two disjoint sample
sets. One of this set is used to pick the element with the
maximum approximate value and its value is picked from
the other set. This has to be done the opposite way switching the role of the two sets. Eventually, the average (or a
convex combination) of the two values is considered. This
approach has been proven to have negative bias (Van Hasselt 2013) which, in some applications, allows to overcome
the problem of ME. Finally, the recently proposed Weighted
Estimator (WE) (D’Eramo, Restelli, and Nuara 2016) approximates the maximum value by a sum of different values
weighted by their probability of being the maximum. WE
can have both negative and positive bias, but its bias always
stays in the range between the ME and DE biases.
All the mentioned approaches are limited to ﬁnite random
variables and, as far as we know, the continuous case is unexplored in literature. In this paper, we leverage on the WE
formalism to provide the ﬁrst approach for the estimation of
the maximum expected value with inﬁnitely many random
variables. WE needs to estimate the probability distribution
of each random variable. By exploiting the central limit theorem, such distribution are approximated as normal distributions whose means and variance are estimated from sample
observations. When moving to an inﬁnite number of random variables, we cannot observe samples for each random
variable, but we need to generalize the information collected
from samples to similar variables using regression techniques. Differently from ME and DE, WE requires to measure the uncertainty of the mean estimate. Despite many regression techniques have such capability, the natural choice
is to use Gaussian Process (GP) regression (Rasmussen and
Williams 2005). Using GPs the distribution of each random
variable is modeled as a normal distribution whose mean and
variance are computed from training samples by leveraging
on the spatial correlation. Finally, we leverage on the product integral (Grossman and Katz 1972) to compute the joint
probability of an inﬁnite set of events (it is required for the
weights in WE).
As mentioned above, a standard applicative domain of
these techniques is represented by sequential decision problems. Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches have made
wide use of these techniques. RL leverages on Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) to provide a mathematical frame-

Abstract
This paper is about the estimation of the maximum expected
value of an inﬁnite set of random variables. This estimation
problem is relevant in many ﬁelds, like the Reinforcement
Learning (RL) one. In RL it is well known that, in some
stochastic environments, a bias in the estimation error can increase step-by-step the approximation error leading to large
overestimates of the true action values. Recently, some approaches have been proposed to reduce such bias in order
to get better action-value estimates, but are limited to ﬁnite
problems. In this paper, we leverage on the recently proposed
weighted estimator and on Gaussian process regression to derive a new method that is able to natively handle inﬁnitely
many random variables. We show how these techniques can
be used to face both continuous state and continuous actions
RL problems. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach we perform empirical comparisons with related approaches.

Introduction
The computation of the maximum expected value is fundamental in several applications. For example, almost any
process of acting involves the optimization of an expected
utility function. While sometimes only the ordering of these
alternatives matters, many applications require an explicit
computation of the maximal utility. This value is often required to calibrate other variables. For examples, in a ﬁnancial trading system we are not only interested in detecting
which is the best strategy, but we may also be interested in
how much such strategy is proﬁtable in order to evaluate
the risk of a market operation or to deﬁne a proper business plan. Another example is the medical treatment strategy where it is important to compute the expected efﬁcacy
of the best therapy in order to provide accurate prognosis or
to manage the hospitalization.
The most widespread approach to this estimation problem is the Maximum Estimator (ME) that simply takes the
maximum estimated utility. As proved in (Smith and Winkler 2006), this estimate is positively biased and, if used
in iterative algorithms, can increase the approximation error step-by-step (Van Hasselt 2010). More effective estimators have been proposed in the recent years. The Double
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1840

