Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Using Superpixel Pooling Network
1

Suha Kwak,1,2 Seunghoon Hong,2 Bohyung Han2
Department of Information and Communication Engineering, DGIST, Korea
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
skwak@dgist.ac.kr, {maga33, bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

maintain good quality of labels in terms of accuracy and
consistency. For this reason, existing datasets often suffer
from lack of annotated examples and class diversity, and it
is not straightforward to learn DNNs for semantic segmentation that can handle various object classes in real world
images.
Weakly supervised approaches for semantic segmentation have been proposed to alleviate the challenge (Dai,
He, and Sun 2015; Papandreou et al. 2015; Pinheiro and
Collobert 2015; Pathak, Krähenbühl, and Darrell 2015). Instead of pixel-level annotations, they make use of weaker
annotations such as bounding boxes (Dai, He, and Sun
2015; Papandreou et al. 2015), scribbles (Lin et al. 2016a),
and image-level class labels (Pinheiro and Collobert 2015;
Pathak, Krähenbühl, and Darrell 2015), all of which are
much less expensive to obtain than pixelwise segmentation annotations and readily available in various large-scale
datasets such as PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al. 2010)
and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015). The main challenge in training a model based on weak supervision is the
step to generate pixelwise label maps from incomplete information through self-supervision. The most popular choice
for this task is to employ discriminative objectives for the
identiﬁcation of local image regions relevant to each semantic category. However, although such strategy is useful to
roughly localize objects, it often concentrates on small discriminative parts of an object and is not sufﬁcient to cover
entire object areas; it leads to poor segmentation performance compared to fully supervised approaches.
We believe that weakly supervised semantic segmentation
can be improved by considering low-level structures of individual images and shape information commonly observed
in multiple images. We realize this idea using two DNNs
with an iterative optimization procedure. Speciﬁcally, our
approach alternates between 1) generating segmentation annotations and 2) learning a semantic segmentation network
using the generated annotations, where the learned network
is in turn used to generate annotations for the next round.
The success of this framework relies on the capability to
generate dependable initial annotations given image-level
class labels only. For the purpose, we propose Superpixel
Pooling Network (SPN), which employs superpixel segmentation as a pooling layout to reﬂect low-level image structure
for learning and inferring semantic segmentation in a weakly

Abstract
We propose a weakly supervised semantic segmentation algorithm based on deep neural networks, which relies on imagelevel class labels only. The proposed algorithm alternates between generating segmentation annotations and learning a
semantic segmentation network using the generated annotations. A key determinant of success in this framework is
the capability to construct reliable initial annotations given
image-level labels only. To this end, we propose Superpixel
Pooling Network (SPN), which utilizes superpixel segmentation of input image as a pooling layout to reﬂect low-level
image structure for learning and inferring semantic segmentation. The initial annotations generated by SPN are then
used to learn another neural network that estimates pixelwise semantic labels. The architecture of the segmentation
network decouples semantic segmentation task into classiﬁcation and segmentation so that the network learns classagnostic shape prior from the noisy annotations. It turns out
that both networks are critical to improve semantic segmentation accuracy. The proposed algorithm achieves outstanding performance in weakly supervised semantic segmentation
task compared to existing techniques on the challenging PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark.

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a computer vision task that assigns a semantic label (e.g., object class) to every pixel in
an image. This task is particularly challenging when objects
involve substantial appearance variations due to changes in
pose, scale and illumination, or objects boundaries are distracted by occlusion and background clutter. Recently, Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) have been extensively studied to
tackle this problem, and some algorithms demonstrate impressive performance (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015;
Noh, Hong, and Han 2015; Chen et al. 2015; Vemulapalli et
al. 2016; Lin et al. 2016b; Qi 2016)
However, the data-hungry nature of DNNs restricts their
applications to semantic segmentation in an uncontrolled
and realistic environment. Training DNNs for semantic segmentation demands a large number of pixel-level segmentation annotations. However, the collection of large-scale annotations is dreadfully labor-intensive and it is difﬁcult to
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4111

