Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semantic Representation
Using Explicit Concept Space Models
Walid Shalaby, Wlodek Zadrozny
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
{wshalaby, wzadrozn}@uncc.edu

ral embeddings of concept words. However, this mechanism
disregards the fact that the concepts already have implicit associations/similarities which could be generated from their
corresponding articles or from the structure of the employed
knowledge base (e.g., its link graph).
Additionally, explicit concept models are restricted to
Wikipedia as the main source of concepts. And it is unclear
how domain speciﬁc knowledge could be utilized to generate domain speciﬁc conceptual representations.

Abstract
Explicit concept space models have proven efﬁcacy for text
representation in many natural language and text mining applications. The idea is to embed textual structures into a semantic space of concepts which captures the main topics
of these structures. Despite their wide applicability, existing
models have many shortcomings such as sparsity and being restricted to Wikipedia as the main knowledge source
from which concepts are extracted. In this paper we highlight some of these limitations. We also describe Mined Semantic Analysis (MSA); a novel concept space model which
employs unsupervised learning in order to uncover implicit
relations between concepts. MSA leverages the discovered
concept-concept associations to enrich the semantic representations. We evaluate MSA’s performance on benchmark data
sets for measuring lexical semantic relatedness. Empirical results show superior performance of MSA compared to prior
state-of-the-art methods.

Mined Semantic Analysis
We call our approach Mined Semantic Analysis (MSA) as it
utilizes unsupervised data mining techniques in order to discover the concept space of a given textual structure. The motivation behind our approach is to mitigate a notable gap in
prior concept space models which are limited to direct associations between texts and concepts. Therefore those models
lack the ability to transfer the association relation to other latent concepts which contribute to the meaning of these texts.
In a nutshell, MSA generates the concept space of a given
text by utilizing two repositories created ofﬂine: 1) the
Wikipedia search index, and 2) the concept-concept associations repository. First, the explicit concept space is constructed by retrieving concepts (titles of articles) explicitly
mentioning the given text. Second, latent concepts associated with each of the explicit concepts are retrieved from the
associations repository.

Several semantic representation models have been proposed
in the literature. Most of them utilize textual corpora from
which world knowledge is acquired and used to represent
textual structures as high-dimensional ”meaning” vectors.
Explicit concept space models such as ESA (Gabrilovich
and Markovitch 2007) and SSA (Hassan and Mihalcea 2011)
construct bag-of-concepts (BOC) vectors to represent textual structures (terms, phrases, documents) using concepts
in encyclopedic knowledge source such as Wikipedia. Those
BOC embeddings capture the main topics of the given text
and therefore are useful for understanding its semantics.
The BOC representations have proven efﬁcacy for semantic analysis of textual data especially short texts where
contextual information is missing or insufﬁcient. For example, measuring lexical semantic similarity/relatedness
(Gabrilovich and Markovitch 2007), text categorization
(Song and Roth 2014), search and relevancy ranking (Egozi,
Markovitch, and Gabrilovich 2011), and others.
Existing concept space models such as ESA suffer many
shortcomings. For example, the generated BOC vectors are
sparse causing low similarity between texts in the concept
space even when they are semantically similar. (Song and
Roth 2015) proposed a densiﬁcation mechanism by combining ESA and concept-concept similarity based on the neu-

Concept-Concept Association Mining
We employ rule mining (Agrawal, Imieliński, and Swami
1993) in order to learn implicit concept-concept associations
using the ”See also” link graph of Wikipedia.
Formally, given a set of concepts C = {c1 , c2 , ..., cN } of
size N (i.e., all Wikipedia article titles). We build a dictionary of transactions T = {t1 , t2 , t3 , ..., tM } of size M such
that M ≤ N . Each transaction t in T contains a subset of
concepts in C. t is constructed from each article in Wikipedia
that contains at least one entry in its ”See also” section. For
example, if an article representing concept c1 with entries in
its ”See also” section referring to concepts {c2 , c3 , ..., cn }, a
transaction t = {c1 , c2 , c3 , ..., cn } will be created and added
to T. A set of rules R are then learned by mining T. Each rule
r in R is deﬁned as
r(s, f ) = {(X ⇒ Y ) : X, Y ⊆ C and X ∩Y = ∅} (1)

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4983

