Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Attention Correctness in Neural Image Captioning
Chenxi Liu,1 Junhua Mao,2 Fei Sha,2,3 Alan Yuille1,2
Johns Hopkins University1
University of California, Los Angeles2
University of Southern California3

Abstract

A little boy playing with a yellow shovel.

Attention mechanisms have recently been introduced in deep
learning for various tasks in natural language processing and
computer vision. But despite their popularity, the “correctness” of the implicitly-learned attention maps has only been
assessed qualitatively by visualization of several examples. In
this paper we focus on evaluating and improving the correctness of attention in neural image captioning models. Specifically, we propose a quantitative evaluation metric for the
consistency between the generated attention maps and human
annotations, using recently released datasets with alignment
between regions in images and entities in captions. We then
propose novel models with different levels of explicit supervision for learning attention maps during training. The supervision can be strong when alignment between regions and
caption entities are available, or weak when only object segments and categories are provided. We show on the popular
Flickr30k and COCO datasets that introducing supervision of
attention maps during training solidly improves both attention correctness and caption quality, showing the promise of
making machine perception more human-like.

LSTM
Generated
Attention
Maps
CNN
Evaluation
Supervision

Human’s
Judgment
(Groundtruth)

Figure 1: Image captioning models (Xu et al. 2015) can attend to different areas of the image when generating the
words. However, these generated attention maps may not
correspond to the region that the words or phrases describe
in the image (e.g. “shovel”). We evaluate such phenomenon
quantitatively by deﬁning attention correctness, and alleviate this inconsistency by introducing explicit supervision.
In addition, we show positive correlation between attention
correctness and caption quality.

Introduction
Although impressive visualization results of the attention
maps for image captioning are shown in (Xu et al. 2015), the
authors do not provide quantitative evaluations of the attention maps generated by their models. Since deep network attention can be viewed as a form of alignment from language
space to image space, we argue that these attention maps in
fact carry important information in understanding (and potentially improving) deep networks. Therefore in this paper,
we study the following two questions:

Recently, attention based deep models have been proved effective at handling a variety of AI problems such as machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), object
detection (Mnih et al. 2014; Ba, Mnih, and Kavukcuoglu
2014), visual question answering (Xu and Saenko 2015;
Chen et al. 2015), and image captioning (Xu et al. 2015). Inspired by human attention mechanisms, these deep models
learn dynamic weightings of the input vectors, which allow
for more ﬂexibility and expressive power.
In this work we focus on attention models for image
captioning. The state-of-the-art image captioning models
(Kiros, Salakhutdinov, and Zemel 2014; Mao et al. 2015;
Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Donahue et al. 2015; Vinyals
et al. 2015) adopt Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
to extract image features and Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) to decode these features into a sentence description.
Within this encoder-decoder framework (Cho et al. 2014),
the models proposed by (Xu et al. 2015) apply an attention mechanism, i.e. attending to different areas of the image
when generating words one by one.

• How often and to what extent are the attention maps consistent with human perception/annotation?
• Will more human-like attention maps result in better captioning performance?
Towards these goals, we propose a novel quantitative metric to evaluate the “correctness” of attention maps. We deﬁne
“correctness” as the consistency between the attention maps
generated by the model and the corresponding region that
the words/phrases describe in the image. More speciﬁcally,
we use the alignment annotations between image regions
and noun phrase caption entities provided in the Flickr30k
Entities dataset (Plummer et al. 2015) as our ground truth

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4176

