Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Achieving Sustainable Cooperation in
Generalized Prisoner’s Dilemma with Observation Errors∗
Fuuki Shigenaka,1 Tadashi Sekiguchi,2 Atsushi Iwasaki,3 Makoto Yokoo1

1: Kyushu University, Motooka 744, Fukuoka, Japan. {shigenaka@agent., yokoo@}inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
2: Kyoto University, Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. sekiguchi@kier.kyoto-u.ac.jp
3: University of Electro-Communications, Chofugaoka 1-5-1, Chofu, Tokyo, Japan. iwasaki@is.uec.ac.jp

player’s outcome, can be either good (g) or bad (b). If the
opponent plays C, a player usually observes g, but she may
observe b with a small probability. An important feature of
this model is that a player’s observation is her private information that is not known to the opponent. This is an example
of imperfect private monitoring, where each player privately
receives signals about the actions of other players.
In private monitoring, verifying an equilibrium becomes
hard since we need to check that no player has an incentive to deviate under any possible belief she might have on
the past histories of other players. To overcome this difﬁculty, a special type of equilibrium called belief-free equilibrium is identiﬁed, where checking whether a proﬁle of
strategies forms such an equilibrium is more tractable (Ely
and Välimäki 2002; Piccione 2002). Also, what kinds of cooperative relations can be sustainable in the repeated PD
is examined (Ely, Hörner, and Olszewski 2005). However,
these works show that cooperative relations can be sustainable only in ideal cases where the discount factor (δ) is close
to 1 and/or the observation error rate () is close to 0.
The original contributions of this paper are the following. We deal with a generic problem that can model both
the repeated PD and the team production problem.1 In the
team production problem for two players, playing (C, D) or
(D, C) maximizes players’ total welfare, i.e., players should
work (i.e., play C) and rest (i.e., play D) in turns. When
there exist more than two players, players’ total welfare is
maximized when a certain number of players work and the
other players rest.
Furthermore, we introduce an additional action that we
call C  as well as an associated signal g  for this action.
This action is dominated by another action, and playing it
decreases the players’ total welfare. Thus, adding it is irrelevant in a one-shot game, i.e., it does not affect equilibria at all; the probability that the action is taken is zero.
As far as we are aware, we are the ﬁrst to introduce such a
dominated action and theoretically analyze equilibria in the
generic game with imperfect private monitoring. Note that
introducing such an action is not interesting with perfect or
imperfect public monitoring, since it is well-known that co-

Abstract
A repeated game is a formal model for analyzing cooperation
in long-term relationships, e.g., in the prisoner’s dilemma. Although the case where each player observes her opponent’s
action with some observation errors (imperfect private monitoring) is difﬁcult to analyze, a special type of an equilibrium
called belief-free equilibrium is identiﬁed to make the analysis in private monitoring tractable. However, existing works
using a belief-free equilibrium show that cooperative relations can be sustainable only in ideal situations.
We deal with a generic problem that can model both the prisoner’s dilemma and the team production problem. We examine a situation with an additional action that is dominated by
another action. To our surprise, by adding this seemingly irrelevant action, players can achieve sustainable cooperative
relations far beyond the ideal situations. More speciﬁcally,
we identify a class of strategies called one-shot punishment
strategy that can constitute a belief-free equilibrium in a wide
range of parameters. Moreover, for a two-player case, the obtained welfare matches a theoretical upper bound.

Introduction
A repeated game, where players repeatedly play the same
stage game over an inﬁnite time horizon, is a formal model
for analyzing cooperation in long-term relationships and has
received considerable attention in AI, multi-agent systems,
and economics literature. The case of perfect monitoring,
where each player can observe other players’ actions, is now
well understood. There is also a large body of literature on
the imperfect monitoring case, where players’ actions are
only imperfectly observed through some signals. Such imperfect monitoring cases are further classiﬁed into public
and private monitoring cases.
If all players observe the same set of signals that imperfectly indicate players’ actions, we have an imperfect
public monitoring case. An example is the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) game with action-errors, investigated
by Nowak and Sigmund (1993). In contrast, suppose that
each player observes her opponent’s action with some observation errors. Assume that each player chooses cooperation (C) or defection (D), and a signal, which determines a
∗
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 24220003, 26280081, and 26380238.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

The works on the team production problem are scarce.
Kobayashi, Ohta, and Sekiguchi (2014) study such a model, assuming public monitoring.

677

