Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Improving Surveillance Using Cooperative Target Observation
Rashi Aswani, Sai Krishna Munnangi and Praveen Paruchuri
Machine Learning Lab, Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems
International Institute of Information Technology - Hyderabad, India
{rashi.aswani, krishna.munnangi}@research.iiit.ac.in, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in

spend all the time on a speciﬁc target who may not turn out
to be problematic or dangerous.

Abstract
The Cooperative Target Observation (CTO) problem has been
of great interest in the multi-agents and robotics literature due
to the problem being at the core of a number of applications
including surveillance. In CTO problem, the observer agents
attempt to maximize the collective time during which each
moving target is being observed by at least one observer in the
area of interest. However, most of the prior works for the CTO
problem consider the targets movement to be Randomized.
Given our focus on surveillance domain, we modify this assumption to make the targets strategic and present two target
strategies namely Straight-line strategy and Controlled Randomization strategy. We then modify the observer strategy
proposed in the literature based on the K-means algorithm to
introduce ﬁve variants and provide experimental validation.
In surveillance domain, it is often reasonable to assume that
the observers may themselves be a subject of observation for
a variety of purposes by unknown adversaries whose model
may not be known. Randomizing the observers actions can
help to make their target observation strategy less predictable.
As the ﬁfth variant, we therefore introduce Adjustable Randomization into the best performing observer strategy where
the observer can adjust the expected loss in reward due to
randomization depending on the situation.

(Microdrones 2016) also discusses the notion of risk free
surveillance. The motors of UAV micro-drones typically allow for a discrete and almost silent surveillance unlike helicopters and planes which are noisy. In addition, microdrones can use camouﬂage colors to minimize the risk of being sighted. In this paper, we develop a strategic component
to obfuscate the aim of micro-drone wherein the surveillance strategy is inherently randomized with the amount
of randomization being adjustable according to the situation. The Cooperative Target Observation problem has been
of great interest in both multi-agents (Hu et al. 2013) (Jacobi et al. 2005) and robotics (Rysdyk 2006) (Werger and
Matarić 2000) (Parker 1999) literature due to the problem
being at the core of many applications. (Parker 2002) introduces the Cooperative Multi-Robot Observation of Multiple
Moving Targets (CMOMMT) formalism which is similar to
CTO problem. The paper focuses on developing on-line distributed control strategies that allow the robot team to attempt to minimize the total time in which targets escape observation by some robot team member in the area of interest.
(Luke et al. 2005) studies the CTO problem and compares
the performance of K-means and Hill Climbing algorithms
on centralized, partly-decentralized and fully decentralized
agent strategies under different levels of target speeds, sensor ranges and update rates. The paper shows that K-means
performs quite well over a large part of the parameter space
tested and is pretty robust to the degree of decentralization.

Introduction
Performing surveillance of targets (Chakrabarty et al. 2002)
(Tang and Ozguner 2005) is an important task that security
agencies across the world perform on regular basis. The key
difﬁculty here is that there are typically limited security resources for performing the Cooperative Target Observation
(referred to as CTO in the literature). The difﬁculty is exacerbated since targets themselves may have a variety of behaviors. It is therefore important that the security resources
are used in an efﬁcient fashion. (Microdrones 2016) presents
an application where micro-drones are useful to perform
surveillance. In particular, with large gatherings and protests
(or even when monitoring a set of individuals or wildlife),
it is possible that there would be a number of people (or
events) who could possibly be considered suspicious (called
targets). Here, the aim of micro-drone would be to perform
surveillance of the maximum number of targets (i.e. maintain an overview) instead of doing deep probe of a target i.e.

(Kolling and Carpin 2007) presents an algorithm for the
CMOMMT problem which utilizes information from sensors, communication and a mechanism to predict the minimum time before a robot loses a target. (Jung and Sukhatme
2006) proposes an algorithm that accounts for densities of
observers and targets as properties of the environment. By
manipulating these densities, a control law for each observer
is proposed. In this paper, we build upon the CTO problem
formulation presented in (Luke et al. 2005) and adapt it for
Surveillance domain which needs us to focus on the following aspects: (a) Model realistic behavior for targets (b)
Develop strategy for the observers to perform optimal target observation and (c) Randomize the observers actions to
make their target observation strategy less predictable.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2985

