Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

An Integrated Model for Effective Saliency Prediction
1

Xiaoshuai Sun,1,2 Zi Huang,1 Hongzhi Yin,1 Heng Tao Shen1,3

The University of Queensland, Brisbane 4067, Australia. 2 Harbin Institute of Tehcnology, Heilongjiang 150001, China.
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China.
xiaoshuaisun.hit@gmail.com, huang@itee.uq.edu.au, h.yin1@uq.edu.au, shenht@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we proposed an integrated model of both
semantic-aware and contrast-aware saliency (SCA) combining both bottom-up and top-down cues for effective eye ﬁxation prediction. The proposed SCA model contains two pathways. The ﬁrst pathway is a deep neural network customized
for semantic-aware saliency, which aims to capture the semantic information in images, especially for the presence of
meaningful objects and object parts. The second pathway is
based on on-line feature learning and information maximization, which learns an adaptive representation for the input and
discovers the high contrast salient patterns within the image
context. The two pathways characterize both long-term and
short-term attention cues and are integrated using maxima
normalization. Experimental results on artiﬁcial images and
several benchmark dataset demonstrate the superior performance and better plausibility of the proposed model over both
classic approaches and recent deep models.

/ŶƉƵƚ ;WĂŶĞƚĂů͘ϮϬϭϲͿKƵƌƐ

Introduction

Figure 1: Illustration of our model. For each row, we show
the input image (left), the saliency prediction result of (Pan
et al. 2016) (middle) and our proposed SCA model (right).
The red dot in each saliency map indicates the location of
the maximum value. Compared to traditional deep model,
our method highlights both the semantic-aware top-down
saliency and the contrast-aware bottom-up saliency.

The last two decades have witnessed enormous development in the ﬁeld of computational visual attention modeling
and saliency detection (Borji and Itti 2013). Various models, datasets, and evaluation metrics are proposed to help
machines better understand and predict human viewing behavior. By producing a 2D or 3D saliency map that predict
where human look, a computational model can be applied
to many low-level computer vision applications, e.g. detecting abnormal pattern(Itti, Koch, and Niebur 1998), segmenting proto objects(Hou and Zhang 2007), generating object
proposals (Alexe, Deselaers, and Ferrari 2012) etc. The concept of “saliency” were investigated not only in early vision
modeling but also in many engineering applications such
as image compression (Itti 2004), object recognition (Salah,
Alpaydin, and Akarun 2002) and tracking (Frintrop 2010),
robot navigation (Siagian and Itti 2009), design and advertising (Rosenholtz, Dorai, and Freeman 2011) etc.
In the early stage, the research works are mostly motivated by biological priors (Koch and Ullman 1987; Itti,
Koch, and Niebur 1998), statistical assumptions(Gao, Mahadevan, and Vasconcelos 2008) and information theory(Bruce and Tsotsos 2006; Hou and Zhang 2008). Some

papers also draw their inspirations by analyzing the statistical property of ground-truth eye-tracking data (Sun et al.
2014; Leboran et al. 2016).
Driven by the great success of deep neural networks, the
deep learning scheme were recently introduced to saliency
research and undoubtfully achieved ground-break success
in predicting human eye-ﬁxations (Kümmerer, Theis, and
Bethge 2014; Huang et al. 2015; Pan et al. 2016). The remarkable performance of deep models relies very much on
their ability of characterizing semantic information in the inputs. However, they do not explain the psychophysical evidence, and often produce unreasonable responses to obvious
salient patterns. For instance, in Figure 1), the saliency maps
produced by (Pan et al. 2016) only characterize the presence
of meaningful objects, e.g. faces and ﬁsh, but fail to localize
the most salient pattern in the image.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

274

