Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Solving Constrained Combinatorial Optimization Problems
via MAP Inference Without High-order Penalties

1

Zhen Zhang,1 Qinfeng Shi,2 Julian McAuley,3 Wei Wei,1
Yanning Zhang,1 Rui Yao,4 Anton van den Hengel2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
3
Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California, San Diego, USA
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, China

introducing very high order potentials. However, their approaches require exact solutions of a series of unconstrained
MAP inference problems, which is, in general, intractable.
Thus their approaches are again only applicable to a particular
class of potentials and constraints.
To tackle general constrained combinatorial problems, our
overall idea is to formulate the unconstrained combinatorial problem as a linear program (LP) with local marginal
polytope constraints only (which corresponds to a classical
MAP inference problem), and then add the “real” constraints
from the original combinatorial problem to the existing LP
to form a new LP. Duality of the new LP absorbs the “real”
constraints naturally, and yields a convenient message passing procedure. The proposed algorithm is guaranteed to ﬁnd
feasible solutions for a quite general set of constraints.
We apply our method to problems including foreground
detection, image reconstruction, quadratic knapsack, and the
M-best solutions problem, and show several situations in
which it outperforms the commercial optimization solver
CPLEX. We also test our method against more restrictive
approaches including Aguiar et al. (2011) and Lim, Jung, and
Kohli (2014) on the subsets of our applications to which they
are applicable. Our method outperforms these methods in
most cases even in settings that favor them.

Abstract
Solving constrained combinatorial optimization problems via
MAP inference is often achieved by introducing extra potential functions for each constraint. This can result in very high
order potentials, e.g. a 2nd -order objective with pairwise potentials and a quadratic constraint over all N variables would
correspond to an unconstrained objective with an order-N potential. This limits the practicality of such an approach, since
inference with high order potentials is tractable only for a few
special classes of functions.
We propose an approach which is able to solve constrained
combinatorial problems using belief propagation without increasing the order. For example, in our scheme the 2nd -order
problem above remains order 2 instead of order N . Experiments on applications ranging from foreground detection,
image reconstruction, quadratic knapsack, and the M-best solutions problem demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency
of our method. Moreover, we show several situations in which
our approach outperforms commercial solvers like CPLEX
and others designed for speciﬁc constrained MAP inference
problems.

Introduction
Maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference for graphical models
can be used to solve unconstrained combinatorial optimization problems, or constrained problems by introducing extra
potential functions for each constraint (Ravanbakhsh, Rabbany, and Greiner 2014; Ravanbakhsh and Greiner 2014;
Frey and Dueck 2007; Bayati, Shah, and Sharma 2005;
Werner 2008). The main limitation of this approach is that it
often results in very high order potentials. Problems with
pairwise potentials, for example, are very common, and
adding a quadratic constraint (order 2) over N variables
results in an objective function of order N . Optimizing over
such high-order potentials is tractable only for a few special classes of functions (Tarlow, Givoni, and Zemel 2010;
Potetz and Lee 2008; Komodakis and Paragios 2009; Mézard,
Parisi, and Zecchina 2002; Aguiar et al. 2011), such as linear
functions.
Recently, Lim, Jung, and Kohli (2014) proposed cuttingplane based methods to handle constrained problems without

Preliminaries
Here we consider factor graphical models with discrete variables. Denote the graph G = (V, C), where V is the set of
nodes, and C is a collection of subsets of V. Each c ∈ C is
called a cluster. If we associate one random variable xi with
each node, and let x = [xi ]i∈V , then it is often assumed that
the joint distribution
 of x belongs
 to the exponential family
p(x) = Z1 exp
θ
(x
)
, where xc denotes the vecc
c
c∈C
tor [xi ]i∈c . The real-valued function θc (xc ) is known as a
potential function. Without loss of generality we make the
following assumption to simplify the derivation:
Assumption 1. For convenience we assume that: (1) C includes every node, i.e., ∀i ∈ V, {i} ∈ C; (2) C is closed under
intersection, i.e., ∀c1 , c2 ∈ C, it is true that c1 ∩ c2 ∈ C.

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

MAP and its LP relaxations The goal of MAP inference
is to ﬁnd the most likely assignment of values to the random

3804

