Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Participatory Art Museum: Collecting and Modeling Crowd Opinions
1

Xiaoyu Zeng,1 Ruohan Zhang2
Department of Art and Art History, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712, USA
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712, USA
1
edith.xiaoyu.zeng@utexas.edu (512-998-4072), 2 zharu@utexas.edu
https://goo.gl/JyZYbq

2

summarize visitor feedback does not scale to the amount of
data collected via online crowdsourcing. Second, museum
curators may look for different things in the data: some are
interested in popular opinions, while others look for outliers
– potentially innovative ideas that contribute to art historical analyses. Modeling and visualizing crowd opinion as a
distribution in semantic space can make information easily
accessible for both needs.

Abstract
We collect public opinions on museum artworks using
online crowdsourcing techniques. We ask two research
questions. First, do crowd opinions on artworks differ
from expert interpretations? Second, how can museum
manage large amount of crowd opinions, such that users
can efﬁciently retrieve useful information? We address
these questions through opinion modeling via semantic
embedding and dimension reduction.

Data
We crowdsourced non-expert interpretations of 21 artworks
by artists with distinct periodic styles. To reduce prejudice,
all artwork used for this experiment were famous artists’
relatively less well-known works with factual information
hidden from participants. We ran the task on Amazon Mechanical Turk for its large and representative subject pool
(Paolacci, Chandler, and Ipeirotis 2010). Each participant received an average of $0.096 for answering these questions:
Write a couple sentences to describe the mood of this
image and your interpretation: how does this image
make you feel? What do you think it is about? Why?
We collected a total of 2116 sentences from crowd. For
all 21 works, we also collected corresponding articles from
Wikipedia pages. Then, we asked art history experts to provide canonical articles from books and museum catalogs.
This results in a total of 832 sentences from Wikipedia, and
603 sentences from scholarly writings.

Introduction
As a secular temple of high culture, the traditional art museum has been dominated by expert-generated contents that
help visitors to “decipher” ﬁne art: labels and docent-led
tours, while providing necessary guidance, often establish
a one-way communication in which non-expert visitors are
perceived as a passive body of recipient and educatee. With
the rise of the general public as an anonymous “crowd” in
the past decade, many professionals began to re-evaluate
the role of non-expert audiences in museum experiences
(Antrobus 2010). More art museums are now encouraging means for public engagement, ranging from discussionbased gallery tours to crowdsourcing tagging and transcription tasks online (Simon 2010; Ridge 2014).
The main purpose of our work is to facilitate the Participatory Museum movement (Simon 2010) through introducing recent technologies from crowdsourcing and natural language processing. We propose that collecting interpretations
of artworks from the crowd can beneﬁt both experts and nonexperts. For the connoisseurs, crowd judgments help to correct homogeneity-generated biases by introducing diverse
perspectives. For the non-expert viewers, the crowd interpretation presents an interesting alternative that invites an
open and dynamic dialogue.
The lack of crowd participation and difﬁculties in organizing collected opinions remain issues in many art museums. In this work, we propose to use current online crowdsourcing tools to collect crowd opinions on artworks. We
then model and visualize collected data as opinion clouds
in semantic space. There are two motivations for doing this.
First, the traditional practice to have museum staff read and

Semantic Embedding and Visualization
Our goal is to model the crowd opinions as distributions in
semantic space, so that one can tell the distance between expert and crowd opinions, and can then easily identify popular
interpretations by clusters and unique interpretations by outliers. We follow Algorithm 1 to produce the opinion clouds.
The word2vec model (Mikolov et al. 2013) we use is a pretrained one on Google News corpus. The t-SNE algorithm
(Van Der Maaten 2014) is initialized using PCA.
Figure 1 Left shows opinion clouds for crowd responses
to 5 artworks (Marcel Duchamp, L.H.O.O.Q.; Rembrandt
van Rijn’s The Anatomy Lecture of Dr. Nicolae Tulp; Jeff
Koons, Michael Jackson and Bubbles; Joseph Cornell, Soap
Bubble Set; Michelangelo Merisi di Caravaggio, Boy with A
Basket of Fruit), where different colors represent different

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5017

