Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Regularization in Hierarchical Time Series Forecasting
with Application to Electricity Smart Meter Data
Souhaib Ben Taieb

Jiafan Yu

Mateus Neves Barreto

Ram Rajagopal

Monash Business School
Monash University

Dept. of CEE
Stanford University

FEEC
Universidade Estadual de Campinas

Dept. of CEE
Stanford University

Hyndman 2014). The literature on forecasting the smart meter electricity demand is much more sparse (Mirowski et al.
2014).
We focus on electricity demand forecasting where the data
is represented in a hierarchical structure. The most disaggregated level usually contains a huge amount of time series,
and there are additional series at higher levels of aggregation. The various time series of a hierarchy can interact in
varying and complex ways. In particular, time series at different levels of the hierarchy can contain very different patterns. For example, electricity demand at the bottom level
is typically very noisy sometimes exhibiting intermittency,
while aggregated demand at higher levels is much smoother.
When forecasting these hierarchical structures, we must
ensure that the forecasts satisfy the aggregation constraints,
i.e. the forecasts must add up consistently between levels of
aggregation. The simplest approach to generate hierarchical
forecasts entails summing the individual bottom series forecasts. However, the high level of noise at the bottom level
and the error correlations often imply poor prediction accuracy at upper levels in the hierarchy. Instead, it is also possible to forecast all series of the hierarchy independently, but
it has the undesirable property of not satisfying the aggregation constraints.
Hyndman et al. (2011) proposed to compute revised forecasts from independent forecasts of different levels to match
the aggregation constraints. Their approach is based on optimal forecasts combination obtained by solving a linear regression problem using information of the error forecast covariances. Williams et al. (2016) used similar regressionbased forecasts combination to adaptively combine temperature forecasts in a non-hierarchal setting. Mijung and Marcel
(2014) proposed a top-down forecasting method based on
forecast disaggregation in a Bayesian framework. However,
Hyndman et al. (2011) showed that any top-down method
introduces bias in the forecasts even if the base forecasts are
unbiased.
By making strong assumptions on the covariance structure of the forecast errors, Hyndman et al. (2011) computed
the revised forecasts using ordinary least squares. Extensions to the method of Hyndman et al. (2011) have been proposed in Hyndman, Lee, and Wang (2016) and Wickramasuriya, Athanasopoulos, and Hyndman (2015) with relaxed
assumption on the error covariance matrix and better com-

Abstract
Accurate electricity demand forecast plays a key role in sustainable power systems. It enables better decision making
in the planning of electricity generation and distribution for
many use cases. The electricity demand data can often be represented in a hierarchical structure. For example, the electricity consumption of a whole country could be disaggregated
by states, cities, and households. Hierarchical forecasts require not only good prediction accuracy at each level of the
hierarchy, but also the consistency between different levels.
State-of-the-art hierarchical forecasting methods usually apply adjustments on the individual level forecasts to satisfy the
aggregation constraints. However, the high-dimensionality of
the unpenalized regression problem and the estimation errors
in the high-dimensional error covariance matrix can lead to
increased variability in the revised forecasts with poor prediction performance. In order to provide more robustness to
estimation errors in the adjustments, we present a new hierarchical forecasting algorithm that computes sparse adjustments while still preserving the aggregation constraints. We
formulate the problem as a high-dimensional penalized regression, which can be efﬁciently solved using cyclical coordinate descent methods. We also conduct experiments using
a large-scale hierarchical electricity demand data. The results
conﬁrm the effectiveness of our approach compared to stateof-the-art hierarchical forecasting methods, in both the sparsity of the adjustments and the prediction accuracy. The proposed approach to hierarchical forecasting could be useful for
energy generation including solar and wind energy, as well as
numerous other applications.

Introduction
Recently, massive amounts of detailed individual electricity consumption data has been collected by newly deployed
smart meters in households (Zheng, Gao, and Lin 2013). A
key technical challenge nowadays is to analyze such data
to better predict the electricity generation and demand to
achieve a more sustainable future (Ramchurn et al. 2012).
For example, demand forecasting is critical in understanding the effect of demand response actions (Siano 2014).
There is a rich literature on forecasting the aggregated electricity demand (Hong 2010; Ba et al. 2012; Ben Taieb and
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4474

