Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Poisson Sum-Product Networks: A Deep Architecture
for Tractable Multivariate Poisson Distributions
Alejandro Molina

Sriraam Natarajan

Kristian Kersting

TU Dortmund University, Germany
alejandro.molina@tu-dortmund.de

Indiana University, USA
natarasr@indiana.edu

TU Dortmund University, Germany
kristian.kersting@cs.tu-dortmund.de

its probability histogram is markedly asymmetrical, making a Normal-approximation ill-suited. If we model the data
using a multinomial assumption, then there are two key
issues. First is that they assume an upper bound on the
count which may not be reasonable in many domains. Second, there is not necessarily an order among the different
counts, implying that two very close values can have widely
different probabilities. Poisson Graphical Models (PGMs)
aim at overcoming these limitations. The Poisson MRF distribution (PMRF) (Yang et al. 2012) assumes that every
conditional distribution is 1D Poisson. Unfortunately, the
original formulation allowed only for negative dependencies between count variables. Consequently several modiﬁcations were proposed to allow for positive dependencies. Consider for instance, the Truncated PMRF (Yang et
al. 2013) and the Fixed-Length PMRF (Inouye, Ravikumar, and Dhillon 2015). However, they assume an upper
bound on the counts. Alternatively, one can drop the requirement of a consistent joint distribution. The resulting Poisson
Dependency Network (PDN) model (Allen and Liu 2013;
Hadiji et al. 2015) permits an efﬁcient structure learning
approach using gradient tree boosting, which was proven
competitive to other Poisson GMs. Nevertheless, none of
the Poisson GMs naturally provide tractable inference. This
also holds for the recent Square Root GMs (Inouye, Ravikumar, and Dhillon 2016), the recent deep models for count
data such as the Deep Exponential Family (Ranganath et al.
2015), Deep Poisson Factor Modeling (Henao et al. 2015),
and Poisson Gamma Belief Networks (Zhou, Cong, and
Chen 2015). The difﬁculties in achieving tractable inference
arise in modelling, as the number of parameters of log-linear
models (Lauritzen 1996) in the context of contingency tables
grows exponentially with the number of variables. And from
the general problem of inference in graphical models, which
is known to be #P even for binary random variables. We, on
the other hand, propose the ﬁrst tractable Poisson GM.
Inspired by the successes of deep models, we present
Poisson Sum-Product Networks (PSPNs)1 . They allow for
tractable inference based on polynomials of univariate Poissons and symbolic evaluation. They require, however, novel
decomposition and conditioning steps tailored towards Poissons. Overall, we make a few important contributions: (1)

Abstract
Multivariate count data are pervasive in science in the form
of histograms, contingency tables and others. Previous work
on modeling this type of distributions do not allow for fast
and tractable inference. In this paper we present a novel Poisson graphical model, the ﬁrst based on sum product networks,
called PSPN, allowing for positive as well as negative dependencies. We present algorithms for learning tree PSPNs from
data as well as for tractable inference via symbolic evaluation.
With these, information-theoretic measures such as entropy,
mutual information, and distances among count variables can
be computed without resorting to approximations. Additionally, we show a connection between PSPNs and LDA, linking the structure of tree PSPNs to a hierarchy of topics. The
experimental results on several synthetic and real world datasets demonstrate that PSPN often outperform state-of-the-art
while remaining tractable.

Introduction
Count data is at the center of many scientiﬁc endeavors from citation counts to web page hit counts, from counts of
procedures in medicine to the count of births and deaths in
census, from counts of words in a document to the count
of gamma rays in physics. Count data is omnipresent and
in many cases interconnected. Modeling one event such as
the number of times a certain lab test yields a particular
result can provide an idea of the number of potentially invasive procedures that need to be performed on a patient.
Thus, modeling such data faithfully can yield great insights
into the properties of these domains. However, most prior
learning and modeling methods view these problems using
the lens of univariate distributions. Thus, they essentially
assume that these events are not connected to one another.
More recent approaches on Poisson Graphical Models treat
these as the exponential family of distributions allowing for
modeling the dependencies between the count variables.
More precisely, making the assumption of normality of
count data poses difﬁculties. In cases of low counts, the
left tail of a Gaussian distribution can become negative allowing for predicting counts with negative values. Also, if
the mean λ of a Poisson is small, say less than 5, then
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2357

http:// www-ai.cs.uni-dortmund.de/ weblab/ code.html

