Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Classiﬁcation with Minimax Distance Measures
Morteza Haghir Chehreghani
Xerox Research Centre Europe - XRCE
6 chemin de Maupertuis
38240 Meylan, France
morteza.chehreghani@xrce.xerox.com

A category of distance measures, called link-based measure (Fouss et al. 2007; Chebotarev 2011), consider all the
paths between the objects represented in a graph. The pathspeciﬁc distance between nodes i and j is computed by
summing the edge weights on this path (Yen et al. 2008).
Their link-based distance is then obtained by summing up
the path-speciﬁc measures of all paths between them. Such
a distance measure is known to better capture the arbitrarily shaped patterns compared to the basic representations such as Euclidean or Mahalobis distances. Link-based
measures are often obtained by inverting the Laplacian of
the distance matrix, in the context of regularized Laplacian kernel and Markov diffusion kernel (Yen et al. 2008;
Fouss et al. 2012). However, computing all-pairs link-based
distances requires O(N 3 ) runtime, where N is the number
of objects; thus it is not applicable to large datasets.
A rather similar distance measure, called Minimax measure, selects the minimum largest gap among all possible
paths between the objects. This measure, known also as
Path-based distance measure (Fischer and Buhmann 2003),
has been ﬁrst investigated on clustering applications. It was
later proposed as an axiom for evaluating clustering methods (Zadeh and Ben-David 2009), as well as for K-nearest
neighbor search (Kim and Choi 2007; 2013). A straightforward approach to compute all-pairs Minimax distances is
to use an adapted variant of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
The runtime of this algorithm is O(N 3 ) (Aho and Hopcroft
1974; Cormen et al. 2001). This distance measure is also
integrated into an adapted variant of K-means providing
an agglomerative algorithm whose runtime is O(N 2 |E| +
N 3 log N ) (Fischer and Buhmann 2003) (|E| indicates the
number of edges in the corresponding graph).
In this paper, we consider classiﬁcation with Minimax
distance measures. Minimax distances have been so far
applied only to a very limited type of classiﬁcation, i.e.
to K-nearest neighbor search. The method in (Kim and
Choi 2007) presents a message passing algorithm with forward and backward steps, similar to the sum-product algorithm (Kschischang, Frey, and Loeliger 2006). The method
takes O(N ) time, which is in theory equal to the standard
K-nearest neighbor search, but the algorithm needs several visits of the training dataset. Moreover, this method requires computing a minimum spanning tree (MST) in advance which might require O(N 2 ) runtime. Later on, a

Abstract
Minimax distance measures provide an effective way to capture the unknown underlying patterns and classes of the
data in a non-parametric way. We develop a general-purpose
framework to employ Minimax distances with any classiﬁcation method that performs on numerical data. For this purpose, we establish a two-step strategy. First, we compute the
pairwise Minimax distances between the objects, using the
equivalence of Minimax distances over a graph and over a
minimum spanning tree constructed on that. Then, we perform an embedding of the pairwise Minimax distances into
a new vector space, such that their squared Euclidean distances in the new space are equal to their Minimax distances
in the original space. We also consider the cases where multiple pairwise Minimax matrices are given, instead of a single
one. Thereby, we propose an embedding via ﬁrst summing up
the centered matrices and then performing an eigenvalue decomposition. We experimentally validate our framework on
different synthetic and real-world datasets.

Introduction
Data is usually described by a set of objects and a corresponding representation. The representation can be for example the vectors in a vector space or the pairwise distances between the objects. In real-world applications, the
data is often very complicated and a priori unknown. Thus,
the basic representation, e.g., Euclidean distance, Mahalanobis distance, cosine similarity and Pearson correlation,
might fail to correctly capture the underlying patterns or
classes. Thereby, the raw data needs to be processed further in order to obtain a more sophisticated representation. Kernel methods are a common approach to enrich
the basic representation of the data and model the underlying patterns (Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini 2004; Hofmann,
Schlkopf, and Smola 2006). However, the applicability of
this approach is conﬁned by several limitations, such as,
i) ﬁnding the optimal parameter(s) of a kernel function is
often very critical and nontrivial (Nadler and Galun 2007;
Luxburg 2007), and ii) as we will see in Section 4.1, kernels assume a global structure which does not distinguish
between different type of classes in the data.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1784

