Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Bilinear Probabilistic Canonical Correlation
Analysis via Hybrid Concatenations
Yang Zhou,1 Haiping Lu,2 Yiu-ming Cheung1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China1
Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld, UK2
yangzhou@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, h.lu@shefﬁeld.ac.uk, ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

variable z ∈ Rq (1 ⩽ q ⩽ min(d1 , d2 )) as follows:

Abstract

z ∼ N (0, I), x(v) |z ∼ N (W(v) z, Σ(v) ),

Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) is a classical technique for two-view correlation analysis, while Probabilistic
CCA (PCCA) provides a generative and more general viewpoint for this task. Recently, PCCA has been extended to bilinear cases for dealing with two-view matrices in order to
preserve and exploit the matrix structures in PCCA. However, existing bilinear PCCAs impose restrictive model assumptions for matrix structure preservation, sacriﬁcing generative correctness or model ﬂexibility. To overcome these
drawbacks, we propose BPCCA, a new bilinear extension of
PCCA, by introducing a hybrid joint model. Our new model
preserves matrix structures indirectly via hybrid vector-based
and matrix-based concatenations. This enables BPCCA to
gain more model ﬂexibility in capturing two-view correlations and obtain close-form solutions in parameter estimation.
Experimental results on two real-world applications demonstrate the superior performance of BPCCA over competing
methods.

(1)

where we have assumed that data are centered with zero
means, v ∈ {1, 2} denotes the view, W(v) ∈ Rdv ×q is the
factor loading matrix, and Σ(v) ∈ Rdv ×dv is the covariance
matrix.
The key idea of PCCA is to construct a joint model to
capture the correlations of the two views. This is achieved
via vector-based concatenation as follows:

  (1)

 (1) 
0
W(1)
Σ
x
|z ∼ N (
z,
), (2)
x(2)
W(2)
0
Σ(2)
where x(1) and x(2) are concatenated as a joint observation generated by the common latent variable z. With the
same idea of two-view combination, several PCCA extensions have been proposed, including Bayesian CCA (Klami,
Virtanen, and Kaski 2013) and nonlinear Bayesian CCA
(Damianou, Lawrence, and Ek 2016).
CCA and PCCA are designed for vector inputs, while
many real-world data are naturally in the form of tensors.
Recently, some multilinear extensions of CCA have been
proposed to learn correlations from tensors rather than vectors (Lee and Choi 2007; Yan et al. 2012; Gang et al. 2011;
Lu 2013). These works show that exploiting the tensor structures in CCA could lead to compact subspace representation
and robustness against the small sample size problem (Lu,
Plataniotis, and Venetsanopoulos 2013).
In contrast, extending PCCA to its multilinear version is
more challenging and has not been well-studied yet. One
of the main challenges is how to construct a joint model
for two-view combination while preserving the tensor structures. Of course, two-view tensors can be reshaped into
vectors and then combined via vector-based concatenation.
However, the resultant joint variable is a vector rather than a
tensor whose structures have been lost in this way.
To preserve tensor structures in two-view combination, several bilinear PCCAs have been proposed. Twodimensional Probabilistic CCA (2DPCCA) (Afrabandpey,
Safayani, and Mirzaei 2014) takes partially projected (matrix) observations rather than the original ones as inputs,
so that two views can be combined via matrix-based concatenation with preserved matrix (2D tensor) structures.
However, this modiﬁcation violates the generative nature of

Introduction
Today’s data are commonly collected from diverse sources
or views that could represent different properties of the same
object. For example, face images can be captured in different poses or illumination conditions, and webpage contents
often include text, images, and hyperlinks. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1936) is a classical method
to learn the (linear) relationships between two sets of variables, i.e., data from two views. It seeks two transformations,
one for each view, to project data into a common subspace
in which the two views are maximally correlated. CCA has
wide applications including information retrieval (Hardoon,
Szedmak, and Shawe-Taylor 2004), multi-view clustering
(Chaudhuri et al. 2009), and multi-label learning (Zhang and
Schneider 2011).
CCA can also be viewed from a probabilistic perspective. Bach and Jordan (2005) gave a probabilistic interpretation of CCA, namely Probabilistic CCA (PCCA). Beneﬁting from the probabilistic framework, PCCA can capture
data uncertainty, deal with missing values, and incorporate
priori knowledge. Speciﬁcally, PCCA relates two-view observations x(1) ∈ Rd1 and x(2) ∈ Rd2 to a common latent
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2949

