Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

S2JSD-LSH: A Locality-Sensitive Hashing Schema for Probability Distributions
Xian-Ling Mao,♠ Bo-Si Feng,♠ Yi-Jing Hao,♠ Liqiang Nie,♥ Heyan Huang,♠∗ , Guihua Wen♣
♠

Department of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Department of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
♣
Department of Computer Science and Technology, South China University of Technology, China
{maoxl, 2120160986, 2220150504, hhy63}@bit.edu.cn
nieliqiang@gmail.com, crghwen@scut.edu.cn
♥

original space is preserved. More speciﬁcally, the Hamming
distance between the binary codes of two points should be
small if these two points are similar in the original space.
Otherwise, the Hamming distance should be as large as possible. With the binary-code representation, the storage cost
can be substantially reduced and the query speed can be dramatically improved for ANN search (Indyk and Motwani
1998; ODonnell, Wu, and Zhou 2014). For example, if we
encode each image with 256 bits, we can store a data set of
1 million images with only 32M memory.
The existing hashing methods can be mainly divided
into two categories (ODonnell, Wu, and Zhou 2014; Andoni and Razenshteyn 2015): data-independent methods and
data-dependent methods. Data-dependent hashing methods
(Liu et al. 2014a; Zhang et al. 2015) learn hash functions
from the training data; Data-independent hashing methods
like locality sensitive hashing (LSH), use simple random
projections which are independent of the training data for
hash functions. More details refer to (Wang et al. 2014;
2016) for a brief survey. Compared with the data-dependent
methods, data-independent methods are dynamic, and allow
dynamically updates to the point set. The dynamic feature
of data-independent methods facilitates many tasks such as
image retrieval where crawled images are feed persistently.
Existing data-independent hashing methods depend on
two crucial elements: 1) Data type; 2) Distance metric. For
vector-type data, we can use Euclidean distance (l2 ), Manhattan distance (l1 ), and angular metric (arccos) etc., to
measure the distance between two vectors. Based on these
metrics, various hashing methods are developed. Particularly, based on lp distance with p ∈ [0, 2), lots of LSH methods have been proposed, such as p-stable LSH (Datar et al.
2004), Leech lattice LSH (Andoni and Indyk 2006), Spherical LSH (Terasawa and Tanaka 2007), and Beyond LSH
(Andoni et al. 2014). Also, angular metric (arccos) is a popular measure for vectors, and many LSH methods based on
angular metric have been developed, e.g. Random Projection
(PR) (Charikar 2002; Andoni and Indyk 2006), Super-bit
LSH (Ji et al. 2012), Kernel LSH (Kulis and Grauman 2012),
Concomitant LSH (Eshghi and Rajaram 2008), and Hyperplane hashing (Jain, Vijayanarasimhan, and Grauman 2010).
Moreover, Chi-squared Distance and Bregman divergence
have also been used as similarity functions to develop corresponding hashing algorithms for vectors (Gorisse, Cord,

Abstract
To compare the similarity of probability distributions, the
information-theoretically motivated metrics like KullbackLeibler divergence (KL) and Jensen-Shannon divergence
(JSD) are often more reasonable compared with metrics for
vectors like Euclidean and angular distance. However, existing locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) algorithms cannot support the information-theoretically motivated metrics for probability distributions. In this paper, we ﬁrst introduce a new approximation formula for S2JSD-distance, and then propose a
novel LSH scheme adapted to S2JSD-distance for approximate nearest neighbors search in high-dimensional probability distributions. We deﬁne the speciﬁc hashing functions, and
prove their local-sensitivity. Furthermore, extensive empirical
evaluations well illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed
hashing schema on six public image datasets and two text
datasets, in terms of mean Average Precision, Precision@N
and Precision-Recall curve.

In the past decade, we have witnessed an explosive growth
of data on the Internet. Billions of data are publicly available
on the Web, and it brings both challenges and opportunities to traditional algorithms developed on small to median
scale data sets. Particularly, nearest neighbor search has become a key ingredient in many large-scale machine learning
and data management tasks. In large-scale applications, it
is usually time-consuming or impossible to return the exact nearest neighbors to a given query. Fortunately, approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) (Indyk and Motwani 1998;
Liu et al. 2014b) are enough to achieve satisfactory performance in many applications, such as the image retrieval task
in search engines. Moreover, ANN search is usually more
efﬁcient than exact nearest neighbor search to solve largescale problems. Hence, ANN search has attracted more and
more attention in this big data era (Heo et al. 2015).
Due to the low storage cost and fast retrieval speed, hashing is one of the popular solutions for ANN search (Liu
et al. 2014a; Andoni et al. 2014; Zhen et al. 2016). The
hashing techniques used for ANN search are usually called
similarity-preserving hashing, and its basic idea is to transform the data points from the original feature space into
a binary-code Hamming space, where the similarity in the
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3244

