Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Recurrent Attentional Topic Model
Shuangyin Li ∗

Yu Zhang

Department of Computer Science and Engineering Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
Hong Kong University of
shuangyinli@cse.ust.hk
Science and Technology, China
zhangyu@cse.ust.hk

Rong Pan

Mingzhi Mao

School of Data and Computer Science School of Data and Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University, China
Sun Yat-sen University, China
panr@sysu.edu.cn
mcsmmz@mail.sysu.edu.cn

iPIN
Shenzhen, China
yangyang@ipin.com

language modeling (Sutskever, Martens, and Hinton 2011;
Frinken et al. 2012). Moreover, some works consider the
syntactic structure of sentences over words to model the document (Boyd-Graber and Blei 2009).
Although topic models have been widely used for document modeling, the topic coherence between sentences,
which does exist in natural language, is ignored in existing
works. To see this, let us consider the following four sentences describing “Machine Learning” from the Wikipedia:
(1) Machine learning is closely related to and often overlaps with computational statistics, a discipline which also
focuses in prediction-making through the use of computers.
(2) It has strong ties to mathematical optimization, which delivers methods, theory and application domains to the ﬁeld.
(3) Machine learning is employed in a range of computing
tasks where designing and programming explicit algorithms
is infeasible. (4) Example applications include spam ﬁltering, optical character recognition, search engines and computer vision. Obviously, sentence (4) is about the applications of machine learning, whose topics are highly coherent with those of the three preceding sentences and so the
topics in a sentence could recurrently aﬀect the following
sentences. Moreover, the topics of sentence (4) are more
relevant to those of sentences (2) and (3) since they all discuss the applications of machine learning. Thus, besides
the topic relevance among sentences, it is intuitive that a
sentence is related to the preceding sentences with diﬀerent
weights, which are called attention signals just like the attentional mechanism in deep neural networks (Mnih et al. 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Gregor et al. 2015).
To the best of our knowledge, there is no work to consider
sentence coherence and attention signals in Bayesian modeling. To ﬁll this gap, we develop a Recurrent Attentional
Topic Model (RATM). Based on a proposed Recurrent Attentional Bayesian Process (RABP), the RATM can model
sequences of sentences by considering the dependency between sentences as well as attention signals.
Speciﬁcally, the contributions of this work are follows.
Firstly, We propose a novel RABP to handle sequential

Abstract
In a document, the topic distribution of a sentence depends
on both the topics of preceding sentences and its own content, and it is usually aﬀected by the topics of the preceding
sentences with diﬀerent weights. It is natural that a document can be treated as a sequence of sentences. Most existing works for Bayesian document modeling do not take these
points into consideration. To ﬁll this gap, we propose a Recurrent Attentional Topic Model (RATM) for document embedding. The RATM not only takes advantage of the sequential orders among sentence but also use the attention mechanism to model the relations among successive sentences. In
RATM, we propose a Recurrent Attentional Bayesian Process
(RABP) to handle the sequences. Based on the RABP, RATM
fully utilizes the sequential information of the sentences in a
document. Experiments on two copora show that our model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on document modeling
and classiﬁcation.

1

Yang Yang

Introduction

Probabilistic topic models provide a suite of algorithms to
obtain good representations when facing a collection of documents. The representation obtained by a topic model often corresponds to latent topics in an interpretable space,
which is an advantage over other models. Topic models have improved document classiﬁcation and information
retrieval (Wei and Croft 2006) on unstructured text, and
many extended models have been applied to many structured text data and non-text data in computer vision (Fei-Fei
and Perona 2005) and collaborative ﬁltering (Marlin 2003).
Topic models usually assume that words are interchangeable, which is helpful for eﬃcient inference on large corpora (Blei 2012). Actually, documents are sequences of
words, sentences, and paragraphs in a hierarchical manner and some works have modeled a document as a sequence of words, including the n-gram language modeling (Brown et al. 1992) and recurrent neural networks for
∗

Part of this work was performed at iPIN.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3223

