Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Disambiguating Spatial Prepositions
Using Deep Convolutional Networks
Kaveh Hassani, Won-Sook Lee
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Canada
kaveh.hassani@uottawa.ca and wslee@uottawa.ca

tions or prepositional phrases. The spatial prepositions
appear in locative expressions which convey information
about the spatial configuration of two or more objects in
some space, and consist of a preposition, its objects, and
the subject that the prepositional phrase modifies (Herskovits 1985). The object of the preposition is called landmark or relatum and the subject is called trajectory or locatum. A locative expression can be formalized as a predicate-argument structure. For instance, an utterance such as
the laptop is on the desk can be represented as on(laptop,
desk). At first sight, the formalization process appears relatively straightforward using the following heuristic. The
word with preposition Part-Of-Speech (POS) tag within the
prepositional phrase is the predicate, the noun phrase occurring before the preposition is the relatum, and the noun
phrase following the preposition is the locatum. However,
beside the challenges of locating the relatum and locatum
(i.e., co-references, compound prepositions, compound
locative expressions, etc.), it is not a trivial task to decide
whether the preposition conveys spatial information.
Spatial prepositions can be classified into locative and
directional prepositions. Locative prepositions describe the
position of a located object in relation to a set of reference
objects whereas directional prepositions describe a change
of position or direction of the located object. Locative
prepositions are categorized to projective and topological
prepositions. Projective prepositions such as above, in
front of, and to the left of stipulate the information regarding the direction of a located object in respect to a reference object whereas topological prepositions such as in,
on, and near convey information about the topological
arrangements among the objects, and can be further classified to simple topological prepositions such as in and on
and proximity topological prepositions such as near and
far from (Coventry and Garrod 2004).
Polysemy (i.e., capacity of a word to have multiple semantically relevant but distinct senses) is a common feature of the prepositions. The task of deciding the sense of a
word in a given context is called word sense disambiguation and is considered as an AI-complete problem (Navigli

Abstract
We address the coarse-grained disambiguation of the spatial
prepositions as the first step towards spatial role labeling using deep learning models. We propose a hybrid feature of
word embeddings and linguistic features, and compare its
performance against a set of linguistic features, pre-trained
word embeddings, and corpus-trained embeddings using
seven classical machine learning classifiers and two deep
learning models. We also compile a dataset of 43,129 sample sentences from Pattern Dictionary of English Prepositions (PDEP). The comprehensive experimental results suggest that the combination of the hybrid feature and a convolutional neural network outperforms state-of-the-art methods and reaches the accuracy of 94.21% and F1-score of
0.9398.

Introduction
Evolution has shaped complex visual-spatial processing
capabilities such as object recognition, object search and
navigation through space almost in all advanced species. It
has also equipped humans with the discriminative ability of
expressing and communicating spatial knowledge through
language (Landau and Jackendoff 1993). One of the ambitious goals of Artificial Intelligence is to simulate this cognitive process to improve the applications of spatial
knowledge. These applications include human-robot interactions, natural language interfaces, machine vision, textto-scene conversion systems, geographical information
systems, question answering systems, search engines, and
spatial databases. This process entails various underlying
sub-processes such as detecting, representing, grounding,
planning, and inferring the spatial relations. The first step
in simulating this process is to detect the spatial signals
embedded within a given utterance.
In English, these signals can employ various syntactic
categories such as verbs, adverbs, adjectives, nouns, pronouns, and prepositions. Nevertheless, most of the spatial
relations in English are canonically lexicalized as preposiCopyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3209

