Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Community-Based Question Answering via
Contextual Ranking Metric Network Learning
Hanqing Lu, Ming Kong

{lhq110, zjukongming}@zju.edu.cn
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
No.38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 310027

Metric Network Learning framework, named as CRMNL.
We then develop a random-walk based learning method with
deep recurrent neural networks to learn the representations
of questions, answers, and users, such that the ranking metric is implicitly embedded in the representations. When a
certain user asks a question, CRMNL can rank the answers
for this user based on the trained ranking metric embedding.

Abstract
The exponential growth of information on Community-based
Question Answering (CQA) sites has raised the challenges
for the accurate matching of high-quality answers to the
given questions. Many existing approaches learn the matching model mainly based on the semantic similarity between
questions and answers, which can not effectively handle the
ambiguity problem of questions and the sparsity problem of
CQA data. In this paper, we propose to solve these two problems by exploiting users’ social contexts. Speciﬁcally, we
propose a novel framework for CQA task by exploiting both
the question-answer content in CQA site and users’ social
contexts. The experiment on real-world dataset shows the effectiveness of our method.

The Framework
We denote the proposed heterogeneous CQA network by
G = (V, E) where the set of nodes V is composed of questions X, answers Y and users’ social contexts Z, and the
set of edges consists of relative quality rank T and social
relations S. We illustrate a simple example of ranking metric heterogeneous CQA network modeling in Figure 1(a).
The question q1 asked by user u1 has a high-quality answer
a1 (i.e., marked with + on the answering relation) and a
low-quality answer a2 (i.e., marked with − on the answering relation). The matching quality is voted through thumbups/downs, which indicates the community’s long term review. We also illustrate the following relation between users
u1 and u2 in Figure 1(a).
Inspired by DeepWalk (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena
2014), we sampled the paths from the heterogeneous CQA
network by using random-walk method. We considered
them as the context windows for the vertex embedding in
networks. For example, the context of vertex vi with the cth sampled window is Wc = {vi− w2 , . . . , vi−1 , vi+1 , vi+ w2 },
where the length of sampled path is w.
To leverage the supervised information, we integrate the
random-walk method in DeepWalk with the recurrent neural
networks based learning into a uniﬁed CQA network learning framework. Speciﬁcally, we train the LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) networks for questions, answers
and users’ textual content, which are named Q-LSTM, ALSTM, and U-LSTM, respectively. As illustrated in Figure 1(c), to handle the question ambiguity problem, we introduce the concatenation layer for question representation
under users’ social context, which concatenates the representation of a given question and the representation of the
user’s textual content into one embedding vector.
Given the context windows W and embedding vectors for
all vertices in W , for each vertex vi in the context window
W , its loss function is given by:

Introduction
The beneﬁts of CQA have been well-recognized today.
The problem of automatic question answering in CQA sites
is to rank the relevant answers to the given questions posted
by the users, which has attracted a lot of attention recently.
Most of the existing works consider the problem of question answering as the short-text matching task. Although existing question answering methods have achieved promising performance, most of them still suffer from the following two problems: 1. The sparsity of the CQA data: The
links between questions and answers are sparse. 2. The ambiguity of questions: Questions can be ambiguous and may
be ill-received by users. However, existing methods, which
only utilize the content of questions and answers, can hardly
solve the above two problems.
Fortunately, with the prevalence of online social media,
many social media platforms host much data that can be used
to improve the performance of CQA, such as users’ social
connection and their posted social content (e.g., tweets and
retweets) in various online social networks (e.g., Twitter).
By using the available information, we are able to alleviate
the above two problems of CQA. In this paper, we introduce
the problem of question answering in CQA site from the
viewpoint of contextual ranking metric network embedding.
Speciﬁcally, we propose the heterogeneous CQA network
that integrates both question-answer content in CQA site
and users’ social contexts into a uniﬁed Contextual Ranking
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4963

