Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Generalization Analysis for Ranking Using Integral Operator
Yong Liu,1 Shizhong Liao,2 Hailun Lin,1 Yinliang Yue,1∗ Weiping Wang1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University
{liuyong,linhailun,yueyinliang,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn, {szliao,yongliu}@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Generalization bound

0.2

The study on generalization performance of ranking
algorithms is one of the fundamental issues in ranking learning theory. Although several generalization
bounds have been proposed based on different measures, the convergence rates
 of the existing bounds
are usually at most O √1n , where n is the size of
data set. In this paper, we derive novel generalization
bounds for the regularized ranking in reproducing kernel Hilbert space via integral operator of kernel function. We prove
 that
 the rates of our bounds are much
faster than O √1n . Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce a notion of local Rademacher complexity for ranking, called
local ranking Rademacher complexity, which is used to
measure the complexity of the space of loss functions of
the ranking. Then, we use the local ranking Rademacher
complexity to obtain a basic generalization bound. Finally, we establish the relationship between the local
Rademacher complexity and the eigenvalues of integral
operator, and further derive sharp generalization bounds
of faster convergence rate.

eigenvalue bound
Rademacher bound
stability bound
U−process bound

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

500

1000

1500

2000

Size of data set

Figure 1: Our eigenvalue-based bound in Theorem 4, the
standard stability-based bound (Agarwal and Niyogi 2009)
and Rademacher bound (Clémençon, Lugosi, and Vayatis
2005), and U -process-based bound (Rejchel 2012).

generalization ability of ranking algorithms. A sharper generalization bound usually implies more consistent performances on the training set and the test set. In recent years,
some generalization bounds have been developed to estimate the ability of ranking algorithms based on different
measures, such as VC-dimension (Freun et al. 2003), cover
number (Rudin and Schapire 2009; Rejchel 2012), algorithmic stability (Agarwal and Niyogi 2009), Rademacher
complexity (Clémençon, Lugosi, and Vayatis 2005; 2008;
Lan et al. 2008; 2009; Chen, Liu, and Ma 2010), etc. Although there have been several recent advances in the studying of generalization bounds of ranking algorithms, the orders of the convergence ratesof 
the existing generalization
bounds are usually at most O √1n .

Introduction
Ranking is an important problem in various applications,
such as information retrieval, natural language processing,
computational biology and social sciences (Freun et al.
2003; Cortes, Mohri, and Rastogi 2007). In ranking, one
learns a real-valued function that assigns scores to instances,
but the scores themselves do not matter; instead, what is important is the relative ranking of instances induced by those
scores. From different perspectives, various ranking algorithms have been proposed including Ranking SVM (Herbrich, Graepel, and Obermayer 1999), PRanking(Crammer
and Singer 2001), RankNet (Burges et al. 2005; Burges,
Ragno, and Le 2007), RankBoost (Freun et al. 2003), P norm push ranking (Rudin 2009), subset ranking (Cossock
and Zhang 2008), ListNet (Cao et al. 2007), ListMLE (Xia
et al. 2008), kernel-based regularized ranking (Agarwal and
Niyogi 2009), etc.
To understand existing ranking algorithms and guide the
development of new ones, people have to investigate the

In this paper, we consider the regularized ranking algorithms in reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and derive sharper generalization bounds
  with convergence rates
that are much faster than O √1n . Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce a notion of local ranking Rademacher complexity
for ranking, which is an extension of the traditional local Rademacher complexity for classiﬁcation or regression
problems. We then use this notion as a tool to perform generalization analysis for ranking, and derive sharper generalization bounds with the eigenvalues of the integral operator
associated with kernel function. We ﬁnally conduct experiments to empirically analyze the performance of our pro-

∗

Corresponding author
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2273

