Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Team–Maxmin Equilibrium: Efﬁciency Bounds and Algorithms
Nicola Basilico

Andrea Celli, Giuseppe De Nittis, Nicola Gatti

University of Milan
Via Comelico, 39/41
Milano, Italy
nicola.basilico@unimi.it

Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
Milano, Italy
{andrea.celli, giuseppe.denittis, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it

games between a team and an adversary. The team is deﬁned as a set of players with the same utility function UT
and without the capability of synchronizing their actions.
The adversary is a single player with utility function ´UT .
These games can model many realistic security scenarios,
for example those where multiple non–coordinating agents
share the common objective of defending an environment
against a malicious attacker. In (Jiang et al. 2013), a security
setting of such type is studied and an analysis of the price
of mis–coordination in the proposed security games is conducted. The Team–maxmin equilibrium plays a crucial role
also in inﬁnitely repeated games and role assignment problems (Moon and Conitzer 2016), where it is necessary to
compute threat points. The current approach to tackle these
problems, in games with more than two players, is considering the correlated threat point (Kontogiannis and Spirakis
2008) or employing approximation algorithms to avoid the
use of mathematical programming (Andersen and Conitzer
2013). Our techniques allow the computation of punishment
strategies (leading to the threat points) in the general scenario in which players, other than the defector, cannot coordinate strategy execution.

Abstract
The Team-maxmin equilibrium prescribes the optimal strategies for a team of rational players sharing the same goal
and without the capability of correlating their strategies in
strategic games against an adversary. This solution concept
can capture situations in which an agent controls multiple
resources—corresponding to the team members—that cannot
communicate. It is known that such equilibrium always exists
and it is unique (except degenerate cases) and these properties
make it a credible solution concept to be used in real–world
applications, especially in security scenarios. Nevertheless,
to the best of our knowledge, the Team–maxmin equilibrium is almost completely unexplored in the literature. In this
paper, we investigate bounds of (in)efﬁciency of the Team–
maxmin equilibrium w.r.t. the Nash equilibria and w.r.t. the
Maxmin equilibrium when the team members can play correlated strategies. Furthermore, we study a number of algorithms to ﬁnd and/or approximate an equilibrium, discussing
their theoretical guarantees and evaluating their performance
by using a standard testbed of game instances.

Introduction
The computational study of game–theoretic solutions concepts is among the most important challenges addressed
in the last decade of Computer Science (Deng, Papadimitriou, and Safra 2002). These problems acquired particular relevance in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, where the goal is
to design physical or software agents that must behave
optimally in strategic situations. In addition to the well–
known Nash equilibrium (Nash 1951), other solution concepts received attention in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence literature thanks to their application in security domains. Examples include Maxmin equilibrium for zero–sum games under various forms of constraints over the actions of the players (Jain et al. 2010) and Stackelberg (a.k.a. leader–follower)
equilibrium (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006).
While a large part of the literature focuses on 2–player
games, few results are known about games with more
players—except for games with a very speciﬁc structure, for
example, congestion games (Nisan et al. 2007). In this paper, we focus on the Team–maxmin equilibrium proposed
by (von Stengel and Koller 1997). It applies to zero–sum

The study of Team–maxmin equilibrium is almost completely unexplored. It is known that it always exists, it is
unique except for degeneracies, and it is the best Nash equilibrium for the team, but, to the best of our knowledge, only
two computational works deal with this solution concept.
(Borgs et al. 2010) show that the Minmax value (equivalently the Team–maxmin value) is inapproximable in additive sense within m32 even in 3–player games with m actions per player and binary payoffs (but nothing is known
about the membership to the APX class or some super class);
(Hansen et al. 2008) strengthen the previous complexity result and provide a quasi–polynomial time –approximation
(in additive sense) algorithm. Only (Lim 1997; Alpern and
Lim 1998) deal with the mathematical derivation for a speciﬁc class of games with an adversary, i.e., rendezvous–
evasion games. Instead, a number of works deal with team
games without adversary. We just cite a few for the sake
of completeness. Team games were ﬁrst proposed in (Palfrey and Rosenthal 1983) as voting games, then studied in
repeated and absorbing games to understand the interaction among the players (Bornstein, Erev, and Goren 1994;
Solan 2000) and more recently in Markov games with noisy

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

356

