Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Deﬁnition Modeling: Learning to Deﬁne
Word Embeddings in Natural Language
Thanapon Noraset, Chen Liang, Larry Birnbaum, Doug Downey
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60208, USA
{nor, chenliang2013}@u.northwestern.edu, {l-birnbaum,d-downey}@northwestern.edu

Word
brawler
butterﬁsh
continually
creek
feminine
juvenility
mathematical

Abstract
Distributed representations of words have been shown to capture lexical semantics, as demonstrated by their effectiveness
in word similarity and analogical relation tasks. But, these
tasks only evaluate lexical semantics indirectly. In this paper,
we study whether it is possible to utilize distributed representations to generate dictionary deﬁnitions of words, as a more
direct and transparent representation of the embeddings’ semantics. We introduce deﬁnition modeling, the task of generating a deﬁnition for a given word and its embedding. We
present several deﬁnition model architectures based on recurrent neural networks, and experiment with the models over
multiple data sets. Our results show that a model that controls
dependencies between the word being deﬁned and the deﬁnition words performs signiﬁcantly better, and that a characterlevel convolution layer designed to leverage morphology can
complement word-level embeddings. Finally, an error analysis suggests that the errors made by a deﬁnition model may
provide insight into the shortcomings of word embeddings.

1

negotiate
prance
resent
similar
valueless

Generated deﬁnition
a person who ﬁghts
a marine ﬁsh of the atlantic coast
in a constant manner
a narrow stream of water
having the character of a woman
the quality of being childish
of or pertaining to the science of
mathematics
to make a contract or agreement
to walk in a lofty manner
to have a feeling of anger or dislike
having the same qualities
not useful

Table 1: Selected examples of generated deﬁnitions. The
model has been trained on occurrences of each example
word in running text, but not on the deﬁnitions.

Introduction

word similarity and analogical relation tasks, deﬁnition generation can be considered a more transparent view of the
syntax and semantics captured by an embedding. We introduce deﬁnition modeling: the task of estimating the probability of a textual deﬁnition, given a word being deﬁned
and its embedding. Speciﬁcally, for a given set of word embeddings, a deﬁnition model is trained on a corpus of word
and deﬁnition pairs. The models are then tested on how well
they model deﬁnitions for words not seen during the training, based on each word’s embedding.
The deﬁnition models studied in this paper are based
on recurrent neural network (RNN) models (Elman 1990;
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). RNN models have established a new state-of-the-art performance on many sequence prediction and natural language generation tasks
(Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Karpathy
and Fei-Fei 2014; Wen et al. 2015a). An important characteristic of dictionary deﬁnitions is that only a subset of the
words in the deﬁnition depend strongly on the word being
deﬁned. For example, the word “woman” in the deﬁnition
of “feminine” in Table 1 depends on the word being deﬁned
than the rest. To capture the varying degree of dependency,
we introduce a gated update function that is trained to control information of the word being deﬁned used for generat-

Distributed representations of words, or word embeddings,
are a key component in many natural language processing
(NLP) models (Turian, Ratinov, and Bengio 2010; Huang
et al. 2014). Recently, several neural network techniques
have been introduced to learn high-quality word embeddings from unlabeled textual data (Mikolov et al. 2013a;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Yogatama et al.
2015). Embeddings have been shown to capture lexical
syntax and semantics. For example, it is well-known that
nearby embeddings are more likely to represent synonymous words (Landauer and Dumais 1997) or words in the
same class (Downey, Schoenmackers, and Etzioni 2007).
More recently, the vector offsets between embeddings have
been shown to reﬂect analogical relations (Mikolov, Yih, and
Zweig 2013). However, tasks such as word similarity and
analogy only evaluate an embedding’s lexical information
indirectly.
In this work, we study whether word embeddings can be
used to generate natural language deﬁnitions of their corresponding words. Dictionary deﬁnitions serve as direct and
explicit statements of word meaning. Thus, compared to the
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3259

