Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Resource Constrained Structured Prediction
Tolga Bolukbasi,∗ Kai-Wei Chang,+ Joseph Wang,∗ Venkatesh Saligrama∗
∗

Boston University, Boston, MA
University of Virginia, Chancellorsville, VA
tolgab@bu.edu, kw@kwchang.net, joewang@bu.edu, and srv@bu.edu
+

a structured prediction problem, where inference concerns
ﬁnding the maximum spanning trees (MSTs) in a directed
graph (McDonald et al. 2005). Each node in the graph represents a word and a directed edge (xi , xj ) represents how
likely xj is to depend on xi . Fig. 1 shows an example of our
selective feature acquisition scheme for this task. Intuitively,
our goal is to learn a system that identiﬁes the parts in each
example that are incorrectly parsed using “cheap” features.
Acquiring “expensive” features for these parts yields large
reduction in error over the entire structure due to improved
distinguishability and relationships to other parts.
We consider two forms of the budgeted structured learning problem, prediction under expected budget constraints
and anytime prediction. For both cases, we consider the
streaming test-time scenario where the system operates on
each test example without observation or interaction of other
test examples. For both settings, we propose a novel ERM
formulation to learn the policy function and reduce this
problem to a weighted structured learning problem.
Our proposed approach is general and can be applied to
any structured prediction task. Given a structured prediction
model, we demonstrate that our approach yields state-of-theart speedup while maintaining predictive power. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• Novel ERM formulation of structured prediction under
expected budget constraints and anytime prediction.
• Reduction of the ERM problem for both these settings to
conventional structured prediction problems.
• State of the art speedup of existing structured prediction
models on two real-world data sets.
Implementation details and proofs are at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1602.08761.

Abstract
We study the problem of structured prediction under test-time
budget constraints. We propose a novel approach based on
selectively acquiring computationally costly features during
test-time in order to reduce the computational cost of prediction with minimal performance degradation. We formulate a novel empirical risk minimization (ERM) for policy
learning. We show that policy learning can be reduced to a
series of structured learning problems, resulting in efﬁcient
training using existing structured learning algorithms. This
framework provides theoretical justiﬁcation for several existing heuristic approaches found in literature. We evaluate
our proposed adaptive system on two structured prediction
tasks, optical character recognition and dependency parsing
and show signiﬁcant reduction in the feature costs without
degrading accuracy.

Introduction
Structured prediction is a powerful and ﬂexible framework
for making a joint prediction over mutually dependent output variables. It has been successfully applied to a wide
range of computer vision and natural language processing
tasks ranging from text classiﬁcation to human detection.
However, the superior performance and ﬂexibility of structured predictors come at the cost of increased computational
cost. In order to construct computationally efﬁcient algorithms, a trade-off must be made between the expressiveness
and speed of structured models.
The cost of inference in structured prediction can be broken down into three parts: acquiring the features, evaluating
the part responses, and solving a combinatorial optimization
problem to make a prediction based on part responses. Much
of the past research has focused on efﬁcient inference algorithms for speciﬁc structures (e.g., Viterbi and CKY parsing algorithms) and general structures (e.g., variational inference (Jordan et al. 1999)). However, these methods overlook feature acquisition and part response, which are bottlenecks when the underlying structure is relatively simple or
can be efﬁciently solved.
Consider the dependency parsing task, where the goal is
to create a directed tree that describes semantic relations between words in a sentence. The task can be formulated as

Budgeted Structured Learning
In this section we formulate the problem of budgeted structured prediction for the expected and anytime budget settings. We describe each approach in more detail in the following sections.
Structured Prediction: The goal in structured prediction
is to learn a function, F , that maps from an input space, X ,
to a structure space, Y. In contrast to multi-class classiﬁcation, the space of outputs Y is not simply categorical but
instead is assumed to be some exponential space of outputs
(often of varying size dependent on the feature space) con-

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1756

