Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Bernstein Mechanism:
Function Release under Differential Privacy
Francesco Aldà

Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein

Horst Görtz Institute for IT Security
and Faculty of Mathematics
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany
francesco.alda@rub.de

Dept. Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Australia
brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au

by an iterative algorithm. Our generic mechanism is based
on functional approximation by Bernstein basis polynomials,
speciﬁcally via an iterated Bernstein operator. Privacy is guaranteed by sanitizing the coefﬁcients of approximation, which
requires only function evaluation. It is the very limited oracle
access required by our mechanism—to non-private function
evaluation and sensitivity—that grants it broad applicability
akin to the Laplace mechanism.
The Bernstein polynomials central to our mechanism are
used in the Stone-Weierstrass theorem to uniformly approximate any continuous function on a closed interval. Moreover,
the Bernstein operator offers several advantages such as dataindependent bounds, no requirement of access to target function derivatives, and yields approximations that are pointwise
convex combinations of the function evaluations on a cover.
As a result, applying privacy-preserving perturbations to the
approximation’s coefﬁcients permits us to control utility and
achieve fast convergence rates.
In addition to being analyzed in full, the Bernstein mechanism is easy to use. We demonstrate this with a variety of
example analyses of the mechanism applied to learners. Finally, we provide a lower bound that fundamentally limits
utility under private function release, partly resolving a question posed by Hall, Rinaldo, and Wasserman (2013). This
matches (up to logarithmic factors) our upper bound in the
linear case.

Abstract
We address the problem of general function release under differential privacy, by developing a functional mechanism that
applies under the weak assumptions of oracle access to target
function evaluation and sensitivity. These conditions permit
treatment of functions described explicitly or implicitly as
algorithmic black boxes. We achieve this result by leveraging
the iterated Bernstein operator for polynomial approximation
of the target function, and polynomial coefﬁcient perturbation.
Under weak regularity conditions, we establish fast rates on
utility measured by high-probability uniform approximation.
We provide a lower bound on the utility achievable for any
functional mechanism that is ε-differentially private. The generality of our mechanism is demonstrated by the analysis of
a number of example learners, including naive Bayes, nonparametric estimators and regularized empirical risk minimization. Competitive rates are demonstrated for kernel density
estimation; and ε-differential privacy is achieved for a broader
class of support vector machines than known previously.

1

Introduction

In recent years, differential privacy (Dwork et al. 2006) has
emerged as a leading paradigm for privacy-preserving statistical analyses. It provides formal guarantees that aggregate
statistics output by a randomized mechanism are not signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the presence or absence of an individual
datum. Where the Laplace mechanism (Dwork et al. 2006) is
a de facto approach for converting vector-valued functions to
differential privacy, in this paper we seek an equivalent approach for privatizing function-valued mappings. We achieve
our goal through the development of a novel Bernstein functional mechanism. Unlike existing mechanisms, ours applies
to releasing explicitly and implicitly deﬁned functions, and
is characterized by a full theoretical analysis.
Our setting is the release of functions that depend on
privacy-sensitive training data, and that can be subsequently
evaluated on arbitrary test points. This non-interactive setting
matches a wide variety of learning tasks from naive Bayes
classiﬁcation, non-parametric methods (kernel density estimation and regression) where the function of train and test
data is explicit, to generalized linear models, support vector machines where the function is only implicitly deﬁned

Related Work. Polynomial approximation has proven useful in differential privacy outside function release (Thaler,
Ullman, and Vadhan 2012; Chandrasekaran et al. 2014). Few
previous attempts have been made towards private function
release. Hall, Rinaldo, and Wasserman (2013) add Gaussian
process noise which only yields a weaker form of privacy,
namely (ε, δ)-differential privacy, and does not admit general
utility rates. Zhang et al. (2012) introduce a functional mechanism for the more speciﬁc task of perturbing the objective
in private optimization, but they assume separability in the
training data and do not obtain rates on utility.
Wang et al. (2013) propose a mechanism that releases a
summary of data in a trigonometric basis, able to respond to
queries that are smooth as in our setting, but are also required
to be separable in the training dataset as assumed by Zhang et
al. (2012). A natural application is kernel density estimation,

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1705

