Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Adverse Drug Reaction Prediction
with Symbolic Latent Dirichlet Allocation
Cao Xiao,* Ping Zhang,* W. Art Chaowalitwongse,† Jianying Hu,* Fei Wang¶
*IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
†
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AK 72701
¶
Healthcare Policy and Research, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065

cycle could recommend targeted safety tests and thus help reduce time and ﬁnancial costs in drug safety trials. As a proofof-concept, (Bender, Scheiber, and Glick 2007) explored the
chemical space of drugs and established its correlation for
ADR prediction. (Scheiber, Jenkins, and Sukuru 2009) presented a global analysis that identiﬁed chemical substructures
associated with ADRs. However, given millions of marketed
drugs or experimental lead compounds and thousands of candidate ADRs, accurate prediction of ADRs at early stage still
remains a challenging task.

Abstract
Adverse drug reaction (ADR) is a major burden for patients
and healthcare industry. It usually causes preventable hospitalizations and deaths, while associated with a huge amount
of cost. Traditional preclinical in vitro safety proﬁling and
clinical safety trials are restricted in terms of small scale, long
duration, huge ﬁnancial costs and limited statistical signiﬁcance. The availability of large amounts of drug and ADR data
potentially allows ADR predictions during the drugs’ early
preclinical stage with data analytics methods to inform more
targeted clinical safety tests. Despite their initial success, existing methods have trade-offs among interpretability, predictive
power and efﬁciency. This urges us to explore methods that
could have all these strengths and provide practical solutions
for real world ADR predictions. We cast the ADR-drug relation structure into a three-layer hierarchical Bayesian model.
We interpret each ADR as a symbolic word and apply latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) to learn topics that may represent
certain biochemical mechanism that relates ADRs with drug
structures. Based on LDA, we designed an equivalent regularization term to incorporate the hierarchical ADR domain
knowledge. Finally, we developed a mixed input model leveraging a fast collapsed Gibbs sampling method that the complexity of each iteration of Gibbs sampling proportional only
to the number of positive ADRs. Experiments on real world
data show our models achieved higher prediction accuracy and
shorter running time than the state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

State-of-the-art The aforementioned challenges motivate
a series of works that apply data analytics methods to seek
co-occurring patterns between drugs and ADRs. From the
perspective of representation learning, CCA (Hotelling 1936)
was applied to identify projections of drug features and ADRs
that are maximally correlated (Liu et al. 2012). Kernel CCA
is also adopted in a similar fashion. (Pauwels, Stoven, and Yamanishi 2011) treated k-nearest neighbors (Altman 1992) results from different similarity measures as kernels and developed a sparse canonical correlation analysis (CCA) method
to predict high-dimensional ADR proﬁles of drug molecules
based on drug structures. While (Yamanishi, Pauwels, and
Kotera 2012) developed a multiple kernel regression method
that integrates drug and biological features to predict ADRs.
On the other hand, from the perspective of relational modeling, lasso (Tibshirani 1994) was a popular method for ADR
prediction. For example, (Caster 2007) built a multivariate
lasso framework to simultaneously treat all drugs as predictors for the presence of the ADRs and showed good prediction
results. In addition, inductive matrix-completion methods
were also developed, but they often need to be combined
with drug-target interactions (Li et al. 2015) or other side
information.

Introduction

An adverse drug reaction (ADR) is a harmful or unpleasant
reaction caused by taking a medication. ADRs become a huge
public health concern as they result in 100, 000 fatalities per
year and incur morbidity and mortality related cost ∼ $177
billion annually (Giacomini et al. 2007). Traditional ADR
detection strategies include preclinical in vitro safety proﬁling
and clinical drug safety trials, however, both are restricted in
terms of small scale, long duration, huge ﬁnancial costs and
limited statistical signiﬁcance (Whitebread et al. 2005).
Meanwhile, the availability of large amount of drug and
ADR data provides a unique opportunity to address the challenges with predictive modeling methods. Accurate prediction of potential ADRs at the early stage of drug development

Challenges Despite their initial success, each of existing
data analytics method requires some trade-offs among performance, interpretability and efﬁciency. For example, the
canonical variates in CCA or sparse CCA do not have particular meaning other than linear transformation. It may also be
sensitive to noise or collinearity in the data (McCune 1997).
In our case, the drug features are highly correlated, thus we
observed poor generalization power and results in poor prediction performance on target drugs. Nonlinear CCA or other
kernel based methods further lack interpretability since it is

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1590

