Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Joint Identification of Network Communities and Semantics via
Integrative Modeling of Network Topologies and Node Contents
Dongxiao He,1 Zhiyong Feng,2 Di Jin,1 Xiaobao Wang,2 Weixiong Zhang3,4
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China, 2School of Computer Software, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China, 3College of Math and Computer Science, Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056,
China, 4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
{hedongxiao, zyfeng, jindi, xiaobao}@tju.edu.cn, weixiong.zhang@wustl.edu

Abstract

individual modules function. It is equally important to
identify the underlying semantics of communities so as to
explain the meaning or extract the functions of the communities, i.e., to functionally annotate the communities.
Most conventional community detection algorithms only
use network topologies. The premise is that functional
communities have structural signatures (Yang and Leskovec 2014). Many community detection methods have been
proposed (Fortunato 2010; Fortunato and Hric 2016) based
on various assumptions and using different techniques,
including hierarchical clustering (Girvan and Newman
2002; Newman 2004), modularity optimization (Blondel et
al. 2008; Duch and Arenas 2005), spectral partition (White
and Smyth 2005), Markov dynamics (Rosvall and Bergstrom 2008), and statistical inference (Karrer and Newman
2011; He et al. 2015; Yang and Leskovec 2013).
Node contents, particularly the attributes of nodes, have
been recently used in finding communities. It is believed
that individuals or objects with similar attributes or features are likely to belong to the same community. Different
from network structures that specify node connectivities,
node contents provide semantic information of nodes and
underlying network. Such semantics may capture deep
knowledge of the nature of communities and are orthogonal and complementary to structural information. When
used together, missing structural information may be compensated by content information, and vice versa, to improve community detection. Indeed, methods using these
two types of information have been proposed (Balasubramanyan and Cohen 2011; Sun, Aggarwal and Relation 2012; Xu et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2009; Mcauley and
Leskovec 2014; Pei, Chakraborty and Sycara 2015; Ruan,
Fuhry and Parthasarathy 2013).
In addition to improving community detection, node
contents may also provide semantic descriptions of communities. Such descriptions may help explain why certain
nodes belong to a community, or help reveal the functions

The objective of discovering network communities, an essential step in complex systems analysis, is two-fold: identification of functional modules and their semantics at the
same time. However, most existing community-finding
methods have focused on finding communities using network topologies, and the problem of extracting module semantics has not been well studied and node contents, which
often contain semantic information of nodes and networks,
have not been fully utilized. We considered the problem of
identifying network communities and module semantics at
the same time. We introduced a novel generative model
with two closely correlated parts, one for communities and
the other for semantics. We developed a co-learning strategy to jointly train the two parts of the model by combining a
nested EM algorithm and belief propagation. By extracting
the latent correlation between the two parts, our new method
is not only robust for finding communities and semantics,
but also able to provide more than one semantic explanation
to a community. We evaluated the new method on artificial
benchmarks and analyzed the semantic interpretability by a
case study. We compared the new method with eight stateof-the-art methods on ten real-world networks, showing its
superior performance over the existing methods.

1. Introduction
Complex systems, which are best represented as networks,
are often organized in functional modules that directly or
indirectly interact with one another. For example, large
companies are typically organized in units with designated
functions, and proteins in the cell typically form complexes
to exert their functions. Therefore, it is essential to identify
communities or modules in networks of interest, where
nodes within a community are densely connected (Fortunato 2010). Identification of communities of a network
helps understand how the system is organized and how
Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

116

