Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

The Symbolic Interior Point Method
Martin Mladenov

Vaishak Belle

Kristian Kersting

TU Dortmund University, Germany
martin.mladenov@cs.tu-dortmund.de

University of Edinburgh, UK
vaishak@ed.ac.uk

TU Dortmund University, Germany
kristian.kersting@cs.tu-dortmund.de

Concrete problems arising in applications, however, are
easier to express in terms of an algebraic modeling language
of parametrized sums, multiplications and set operations,
which we refer to as symbolic. For example, to specify that
the ﬂow in a directed graph G must be conserved, we use the
constraint:


∀v ∈ Vertex(G) :
x
−
xvw = 0.
uv
+
−

Abstract
Numerical optimization is arguably the most prominent computational framework in machine learning and AI. It can be
seen as an assembly language for hard combinatorial problems
ranging from classiﬁcation and regression in learning, to computing optimal policies and equilibria in decision theory, to
entropy minimization in information sciences. Unfortunately,
specifying such problems in complex domains involving relations, objects and other logical dependencies is cumbersome
at best, requiring considerable expert knowledge, and solvers
require models to be painstakingly reduced to standard forms.
To overcome this, we introduce a rich modeling framework
for optimization problems that allows convenient codiﬁcation of symbolic structure. Rather than reducing this symbolic
structure to a sparse or dense matrix, we represent and exploit it directly using algebraic decision diagrams (ADDs).
Combining eﬃcient ADD-based matrix-vector algebra with a
matrix-free interior-point method, we develop an engine that
can fully leverage the structure of symbolic representations to
solve convex linear and quadratic optimization problems. We
demonstrate the ﬂexibility of the resulting symbolic-numeric
optimizer on decision making and compressed sensing tasks
with millions of non-zero entries.

u∈Nb (v)

This can be read as follows: for every vertex v, if we add the
ﬂow xuv from each incoming neighbor u ∈ Nb+ (v) of v and
subtract the ﬂow xvw to each outgoing neighbor w ∈ Nb− (v)
of v, we get the number 0. On the one hand, such symbolic
forms provide a compact representation of structured problems; of course, any problem can also be expressed as a
standard form in matrix-vector algebra. However, describing
a problem in terms of, say, the coeﬃcients of its constraint
matrix is unintuitive and a tedious exercise. On the other hand,
symbolic forms are the starting point for designing specialized algorithms. Through ingenuity, the AI, machine learning
and operations researchers can make inferences about the
structure of a given constraint and leverage them to design a
more eﬃcient algorithm (e.g., optimizers for ﬂow problems
(Chardaire and Lisser 2002)).
This notational convenience of symbolic forms has been
widely recognized within the literature. For example, (Fourer,
Gay, and Kernighan 1993; Wallace and Ziemba 2005) are
interested in intuitive modeling languages for optimization,
and allow sets of objects to index LP variables. Disciplined
programming (Grant and Boyd 2008) provides an objectoriented environment in a high-level programming language
to enable a structured interface between the model and the
solver. However, these and other works address the notational
convenience of symbolic forms only: the language is used
to simplify the problem speciﬁcation, but it is eventually
converted to a matrix-vector normal form for solving. This is
unlike the situation in statistical relational learning (Getoor
and Taskar 2007; De Raedt et al. 2016) where symbolic
structure is being used extensively.
In this paper, triggered by relational mathematical programming (Kersting, Mladenov, and Tokmakov 2015; Cussens
2015), we take the view that symbolic forms can and should
inform the solver without any expert intervention. The main
goal of this paper is to demonstrate that structure in linear and
quadratic programs can be eﬃciently detected and exploited

Introduction
A convex quadratic program (QP) is an optimization problem
in which a convex quadratic function is minimized over the
solution set of a system of linear inequalities. In this paper,
we assume that a QP takes on the following standard form
minimize
subject to

w∈Nb (v)

cT x + 1/2xT Qx
Ax = b, x ≥ 0,

where, Q is a symmetric positive semi-deﬁnite matrix. Whenever Q = 0, we speak of linear programs (LPs). Convex QPs
are commonly solved by numerical solvers (Mattingley and
Boyd 2012; Grant and Boyd 2008).
In the broad discussion of quadratic programs, normal
forms as the one above are the representation of choice,
as they abstract away problem speciﬁcs. They are widely
used to provide insight into the geometric properties of these
problems and design solution techniques. Most solvers are
designed to take normal forms as input.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1199

