Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Semi-Supervised Multi-View Correlation Feature
Learning with Application to Webpage Classification
Xiao-Yuan Jing,1,2,* Fei Wu,2,* Xiwei Dong,2 Shiguang Shan,3 Songcan Chen4
1

State Key Laboratory of Software Engineering, School of Computer, Wuhan University, China
2
College of Automation, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Process of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
*
Corresponding authors: {jingxy_2000@, wufei_8888@}126.com

a class that describes its contents (Qi and Davison 2009;
Gollapalli et al. 2013). As stated in (Jing et al. 2015),
webpage classification has three characteristics: (1)
Webpage is a kind of multi-view data (Wang and Zhou
2008; Zhang et al. 2013; Xu et al. 2013; Kan et al. 2016),
since it usually contains two or more types of data, e.g.,
text, hyperlinks and images, where each type of data can
be regarded as a view. These multiple views describe the
same webpage. (2) Webpage classification is a semisupervised application (Zhou et al. 2007; Zhu and Goldberg 2009), since labeled pages are harder to collect compared to unlabeled pages in practice. (3) Webpage data is
high-dimensional, since webpages usually contain much
information. Considering these three characteristics, it is
crucial to design effective semi-supervised multi-view feature learning (SMFL) methods for wHESDJH FODVVL¿FDWLRQ.
To our knowledge, two webpage classification methods
taking these three characteristics into account have been
developed, namely semi-paired and semi-supervised generalized correlation analysis (SSGCA) (Chen et al. 2012)
and uncorrelated semi-supervised intra-view and interview manifold discriminant (USI2MD) (Jing et al. 2015).
For other applications, a few SMFL methods have also
been presented, such as multi-view metric learning with
global consistency and local smoothness (MVML-GL)
(Zhai et al. 2012), vector-valued reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (VRKHS) (Minh et al. 2013), multi-view hypergraph learning (MHL) (Hong et al. 2013), semisupervised multi-view canonical correlation analysis based
on label propagation (LPbSMCCA) (Shen and Sun 2014),
and manifold-regularized semi-supervised kernel canonical
correlation analysis (MR-skCCA) (Volpi et al. 2014).

Abstract
Webpage classification has attracted a lot of research interest. Webpage data is often multi-view and high-dimensional,
and the webpage classification application is usually semisupervised. Due to these characteristics, using semisupervised multi-view feature learning (SMFL) technique to
deal with the webpage classification problem has recently
received much attention. However, there still exists room
for improvement for this kind of feature learning technique.
How to effectively utilize the correlation information among
multi-view of webpage data is an important research topic.
Correlation analysis on multi-view data can facilitate extraction of the complementary information. In this paper, we
propose a novel SMFL approach, named semi-supervised
multi-view correlation feature learning (SMCFL), for
webpage classification. SMCFL seeks for a discriminant
common space by learning a multi-view shared transformation in a semi-supervised manner. In the discriminant
space, the correlation between intra-class samples is maximized, and the correlation between inter-class samples and the
global correlation among both labeled and unlabeled samples are minimized simultaneously. We transform the matrix-variable based nonconvex objective function of SMCFL
into a convex quadratic programming problem with one real
variable, and can achieve a global optimal solution. Experiments on widely used datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of the proposed approach.

Introduction
The last several years have witnessed a rapid increase of
information available on the World Wide Web, making it
difficult to find web pages that contain the information in
which one is interested. In order to make an effective and
efficient search, we need to classify webpages. Webpage
FODVVL¿FDWLRQUHIHUVWRWKHSUREOHPRIDVVLJQLQJ a webpage

Motivation and Contribution

Copyright © 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

The correlation information from inter-view and intra-view

1374

