Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Dynamic Thresholding and Pruning for Regret Minimization
Noam Brown, Christian Kroer, Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University, Computer Science Department,
noamb@cmu.edu, ckroer@cs.cmu.edu, sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

carry over to non-zero-sum games and to general regret minimization. Furthermore, the results apply to both extensiveform and normal-form representations.
Imperfect-information extensive-form games are a way to
model strategic multi-step interactions between players that
have hidden information, such as negotiations, auctions, cybersecurity settings, and medical settings. A Nash equilibrium in relatively small two-player zero-sum games containing around 108 nodes can be found precisely using a linear
program (Gilpin and Sandholm 2007). For larger games,
iterative algorithms are used to converge to an -Nash equilibrium. There are a number of such iterative algorithms,
the most popular of which is Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al. 2007). CFR minimizes
regret independently at each decision point (called an information set) in the game tree using any regret-minimizing
algorithm. By far the most popular regret-minimizing algorithm to use within CFR is regret matching (RM) and variants of RM (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000; Gibson et al. 2012;
Gibson 2014; Brown, Ganzfried, and Sandholm 2015).
CFR+, a variant of CFR with RM, was recently used to essentially solve Limit Texas Hold’em, the largest imperfectinformation game ever to be essentially solved and the ﬁrst
that is played competitively by humans (Bowling et al. 2015;
Tammelin et al. 2015). That game (after lossless abstraction (Gilpin and Sandholm 2007) as a preprocessor) has over
1013 information sets.
When computing strategies for large imperfectinformation games, repeatedly traversing the entire
game tree with an iterative algorithm may be prohibitively
slow. For this reason, pruning—in which parts of the game
tree are not traversed on every iteration—has emerged as an
essential method for dealing with large games. The ability
to prune is a primary reason why the Counterfactual Regret
Minimization algorithm (CFR) that uses Regret Matching
(RM) at each information set is the most popular algorithm
for
imperfect-information games, despite its relatively poor
O( |A|T ) cumulative regret.
While regret-minimizing algorithms other than RM can
be used within CFR, and iterative algorithms other than
CFR exist with better convergence bounds in terms of the
number of iterations needed (Hoda et al. 2010; Pays 2014;
Gilpin, Peña, and Sandholm 2012), CFR with RM exhibits
superior empirical performance in large games (Kroer et al.

Abstract
Regret minimization is widely used in determining strategies
for imperfect-information games and in online learning. In
large games, computing the regrets associated with a single
iteration can be slow. For this reason, pruning – in which
parts of the decision tree are not traversed in every iteration –
has emerged as an essential method for speeding up iterations
in large games. The ability to prune is a primary reason why
the Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) algorithm using regret matching has emerged as the most popular iterative
algorithm for imperfect-information games, despite its relatively poor convergence bound. In this paper, we introduce
dynamic thresholding, in which a threshold is set at every
iteration such that any action in the decision tree with probability below the threshold is set to zero probability. This enables pruning for the ﬁrst time in a wide range of algorithms.
We prove that dynamic thresholding can be applied to Hedge
while increasing its convergence bound by only a constant
factor in terms of number of iterations. Experiments demonstrate a substantial improvement in performance for Hedge as
well as the excessive gap technique.

1

Introduction

We introduce dynamic thresholding for online learning algorithms, in which a threshold is set at every iteration such
that any action with probability below the threshold is set to
zero probability. This enables pruning for the ﬁrst time in a
wide range of algorithms. The theory that we derive applies
to each of the two central goals in the area:
1. Regret minimization in any setting, where there can be
any number of players in a general-sum game, and our
agent may not even know what the game is (except that
the agent knows the available actions when it is her turn
to move).
2. Converging to an -Nash equilibrium in a two-player
zero-sum game. Results for (1) immediately imply results
for this setting by having our algorithm be used by both
agents.
We will introduce this ﬁrst for the application of solving
zero-sum imperfect-information games (that is, games like
heads-up poker), and then explain how the results directly
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

421

