Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Scalable Algorithm for Higher-Order
Co-Clustering via Random Sampling
Daisuke Hatano,† Takuro Fukunaga,† Takanori Maehara,‡ Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi†
†National Institute of Informatics, Japan, JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project, Japan
{hatano, takuro, k keniti}@nii.ac.jp
‡Shizuoka University, Japan
maehara.takanori@shizuoka.ac.jp

tensors, i.e., multi-dimensional matrices, which are becoming increasingly important in machine learning and data
mining. The main challenges are the following: most of the
problems for tensor computations are signiﬁcantly harder
than their matrix counterparts. For example, eigenvectors are
a key concept for spectral clustering and it is not hard to ﬁnd
them for matrices. However, ﬁnding tensor eigenvectors is
NP-hard (Hillar and Lim 2013).
A matrix can be viewed as a bipartite graph with the
bipartition (V1 , V2 ) of the vertex set, where V1 and V2
correspond to rows and columns, respectively. Therefore,
it makes sense to apply some graph algorithms to matrices for biclustering. Indeed, several works have adapted
this approach (Dhillon 2001; Wieling and Nerbonne 2011;
Zha et al. 2001).
Viewing order-m tensors with m-uniform hypergraphs,
we propose a hypergraph-based approach for co-clustering1 .
We formulate the co-clustering of a tensor as a problem of
partitioning the corresponding hypergraph. Then, we ﬁnd a
k-way cut of the hypergraph by an algorithm based on random sampling (or random contraction) technique, which was
introduced by Karger (1993) for the minimum cut problem
of graphs, and was extended by Karger and Stein (1996)
for the k-way cut problem. A k-way cut is an edge set
that partitions a given (hyper)graph into k parts. Karger and
Stein (1996) introduced a random sampling technique for a
minimum cut computation of a given undirected graph. Simultaneously, they show that this technique can also be applied for computing a minimum k-way cut of a graph. Their
algorithm iteratively contracts randomly sampled edges until only k vertices remain. These k vertices represent a kway cut in the original graph. Karger and Stein proved that
this random sampling approach leads to ﬁnding a minimum k-way cut with high probability, provided that we take
O(n2k−1 ) trials from this graph with n vertices. Karger and
Stein’s technique demonstrates the power of randomized algorithms, and their algorithm leads to an important building
block for development of numerous randomize algorithms.
Karger and Stein’s algorithm only deals with graphs, but
this is not enough for our purpose. Thus, we extend their

Abstract
We propose a scalable and efﬁcient algorithm for coclustering a higher-order tensor. Viewing tensors with hypergraphs, we propose formulating the co-clustering of a tensor
as a problem of partitioning the corresponding hypergraph.
Our algorithm is based on the random sampling technique,
which has been successfully applied to graph cut problems.
We extend a random sampling algorithm for the graph multiway cut problem to hypergraphs, and design a co-clustering
algorithm based on it. Each iteration of our algorithm runs in
polynomial on the size of hypergraphs, and thus it performs
well even for higher-order tensors, which are difﬁcult to deal
with for state-of-the-art algorithm.

1

Introduction

Clustering is the task of grouping together similar objects,
and it is one of the main tasks in machine learning and data
mining. It is also considered to be an important technique
in statistics, bioinformatics, database, pattern recognition,
among others. A starting point for a clustering algorithm
would apply to “matrix,” because the most basic setting of
data is represented by a matrix (e.g., words and documents,
click and query in a search engine).
In a matrix, it is sometimes convenient to allow simultaneous clustering of rows and columns. Consider a matrix
with the rows corresponding to words and the columns corresponding to documents. It has been observed that words
appearing in two documents on similar topics should have
similar concepts. Conversely, documents including words of
similar concepts should cover similar topics. Therefore, it is
useful for precise clustering to group both words and documents simultaneously. This clustering is called biclustering
and was originally introduced by Hartigan (1972). Formally,
given a set of n1 rows in n2 columns of a matrix, biclustering
is the task of generating a subset of rows with similar behaviors across a subset of columns, or vice versa. Biclustering
has several equivalent names in different areas, including coclustering, two-order clustering, and block clustering.
Recently, data analysis has developed to need not only
two-dimensional data but also higher-dimensional data.
These higher-dimensional structures are often encoded in

1

Biclustering is meant for only two dimensional structures
(i.e., matrix). For higher dimensional structures, we shall use “coclustering.”

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1992

