Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Rigging Nearly Acyclic Tournaments
Is Fixed-Parameter Tractable
M. S. Ramanujan and Stefan Szeider
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
[ramanujan,sz]@ac.tuwien.ac.at

seeding exists. We take the search for tractable instances of
this problem in a different direction by studying the parameterized complexity of this problem.
A parameterized problem P is a problem whose instances
are tuples (I, k), where k ∈ N is called the parameter. The
central notion of tractability in parameterized complexity
is that of ﬁxed parameter tractability. We say that a parameterized problem is ﬁxed parameter tractable (FPT in
short) if it can be solved by an algorithm which runs in time
f (k) · |I|O(1) for some computable function f ; algorithms
with running time of this form are called FPT algorithms. We
refer the reader to other sources (Downey and Fellows 2013;
Flum and Grohe 2006; Cygan et al. 2015) for an in-depth
introduction into parameterized complexity.
Numerous graph problems, when studied in the parameterized complexity setting with parameter k, turn out to be
easily solvable in time nf (k) for some function f and the
main goal in these situations is to achieve an FPT running
time. However, this is not true in the case of ‘graph layout’
problems where the goal is to compute a permutation of the
vertex set which optimizes an objective function. Even on
tournaments, an algorithm with running time nf (k) for some
of these problems is very non-trivial and highly technical
(see, e.g., Fradkin and Seymour 2013).
The TFP problem is yet another graph layout problem
where it is not at all obvious how one would go about designing even an algorithm that runs in time nf (k) where k is the
size of the smallest feedback arc set in the tournament. Recently, Aziz et al. (2014) gave a clever dynamic programming
algorithm with this running time, which relies on the bounded
index of a certain equivalence relation induced by the feedback arc set on the set of players. In this paper, we show
that the TFP problem is in fact ﬁxed-parameter tractable
parameterized by the size of the smallest feedback arc set by
proving the following theorem.

Abstract
Single-elimination tournaments (or knockout tournaments)
are a popular format in sports competitions that is also widely
used for decision making and elections. In this paper we study
the algorithmic problem of manipulating the outcome of a
tournament. More speciﬁcally, we study the problem of ﬁnding a seeding of the players such that a certain player wins the
resulting tournament. The problem is known to be NP-hard in
general. In this paper we present an algorithm for this problem
that exploits structural restrictions on the tournament. More
speciﬁcally, we establish that the problem is ﬁxed-parameter
tractable when parameterized by the size of a smallest feedback arc set of the tournament (interpreting the tournament as
an oriented complete graph). This is a natural parameter because most problems on tournaments (including this one) are
either trivial or easily solvable on acyclic tournaments, leading
to the question—what about nearly acyclic tournaments or
tournaments with a small feedback arc set? Our result signiﬁcantly improves upon a recent algorithm by Aziz et al. (2014)
whose running time is bounded by an exponential function
where the size of a smallest feedback arc set appears in the
exponent and the base is the number of players.

Introduction
Single-elimination tournaments, also known as knockout
tournaments, are a popular format in sports competitions. It
is used, for instance, at the Wimbledon tennis tournament
and is widely applied in decision making and elections. As
a result, the study of manipulating the results of knockout
tournaments in various ways has received a lot of attention.
In the T OURNAMENT F IXING P ROBLEM (TFP), we are
given the results of a round-robin tournament in the form
of a tournament graph on n vertices, and a special player.
The objective is to decide whether there is a seeding of the n
players such that the special player is the winner of the resulting knockout tournament, given the same match outcomes
between each pair of players.
Aziz et al. (2014) showed that this problem is NP-hard in
general while there are several results (Vassilevska Williams
2010; Stanton and Vassilevska Williams 2011; Kim and
Vassilevska Williams 2015; Kim, Suksompong, and Vassilevska Williams 2016) identifying certain structural properties of the input tournament which guarantee that the required

Theorem 1. The T2OURNAMENT F IXING P ROBLEM can be
solved in time 2O(k log k) nO(1) on tournaments of size n with
a feedback arc set of size k.
This theorem implies that when the given tournament has
a feedback arc set of size k, where k 2 log k = O(log n) then
it can be decided in polynomial time whether the tournament
can be ﬁxed to make a given player win. Our algorithm relies on a combination of certain new structural properties of

c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3929

