Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Parametric Dual Maximization for Non-Convex Learning Problems
Yuxun Zhou

Zhaoyi Kang

Costas J. Spanos

Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
yxzhou@berkeley.edu

Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
kangzy@berkeley.edu

Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
spanos@berkeley.edu

solving standard SVM and updating latent variables. Another widely applied technique is the concave-convex Procedure (CCCP) (Yuille, Rangarajan, and Yuille 2002). Among
many others, (Yu and Joachims 2009; Ping, Liu, and Ihler
2014) used CCCP for latent structural SVM training. Direct
application of the gradient-based method is especially attractive for large scale problems owing to its low computational
cost (Bottou 2010). Such examples include the stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) for large margin polytope machine
(Kantchelian et al. 2014; Zhou, Jin, and Spanos 2015) and
S3 VM (Chapelle and Zien 2005). Combinatorial optimization methods, e.g., the local search method (Joachims 1999)
and branch and bound (B & B) (Chapelle, Sindhwani, and
Keerthi 2006), were also implemented for small-scale problems. It’s worth mentioning that other heuristic approaches
and relaxations such as continuation method (Chapelle, Chi,
and Zien 2006) and semideﬁnite program (SDP) relaxation
(Bei and Cristianini 2006)(Xu, Crammer, and Schuurmans
2006) have also been examined for several applications.
Yet except B & B, all of the aforementioned methods, i.e.,
AO, CCCP, and SGD, only converge to local minimums and
could be very sensitive to initial conditions. Although SDP
approximation yields a convex problem, the quality of the
relaxation is still an open question in both theory and practice (Park and Boyd 2015). On the other hand, it has long
been realized that global optimal solution can return excellent generalization performance in situations where local optimal solutions fail completely (Chapelle, Sindhwani, and
Keerthi 2006). The major issue with B & B is its scalability:
the size of the search tree can grow exponentially with the
number of integer variables (Krishnamoorthy 2008), making
it only suitable for small scale problems. Interested readers
are referred to (Chapelle, Sindhwani, and Keerthi 2008) for
a thorough discussion.
In this work, we propose a learning procedure, namely
Parametric Dual Maximization (PDM), based on a different
view of the problem. We ﬁrst demonstrate that the learning
objectives can be rewritten into jointly optimizing regularized hinge loss and a set of auxiliary variables. Then we
show that they are equivalent to non-smooth convex maximization through a series of parametric analysis techniques.
Finally, we establish PDM by exploiting a necessary and
sufﬁcient global optimality condition. Our contributions are
highlighted as follows. (1) The equivalence to non-smooth

Abstract
We consider a class of non-convex learning problems that can
be formulated as jointly optimizing regularized hinge loss and
a set of auxiliary variables. Such problems encompass but are
not limited to various versions of semi-supervised learning,
learning with hidden structures, robust learning, etc. Existing
methods either suffer from local minima or have to invoke a
non-scalable combinatorial search. In this paper, we propose
a novel learning procedure, namely Parametric Dual Maximization (PDM), that can approach global optimality efﬁciently with user speciﬁed approximation levels. The building
blocks of PDM are two new results: (1) The equivalent convex maximization reformulation derived by parametric analysis. (2) The improvement of local solutions based on a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for global optimality. Experimental results on two representative applications demonstrate
the effectiveness of PDM compared to other approaches.

1

Introduction

To enhance the performance on more challenging tasks, variations of the classic large margin learning formulation are
proposed to incorporate additional modeling ﬂexibility. To
name a few, semi-supervised SVM (S3 VM) is introduced
in (Bennett, Demiriz, and others 1999; Joachims 1999) to
combine labeled and unlabeled samples together for overall
risk minimization. To learn a classiﬁer for datasets having
unobserved information, SVM with latent variables is proposed in (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010) for object detection and
in (Yu and Joachims 2009; Zhou, Hu, and Spanos 2016) for
structural learning. Inasmuch as the traditional large margin classiﬁer with hinge loss can be sensitive to outliers, the
authors of (Xu, Crammer, and Schuurmans 2006) suggest a
ramp loss with which a robust version of SVM is proposed.
Nonetheless, unlike classic SVM learning objective that
possesses amiable convexity, those variations introduce nonconvex learning objectives, hindering their generalization
performance and scalable deployment due to optimization
difﬁculties. In literature, much effort has been made to obtain at least a locally optimal solution: Viewing the problem as a biconvex optimization leads to a series of alternating optimization (AO) algorithms. For example, in (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010), latent SVM was trained by alternately
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2956

