Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Dynamically Constructed (PO)MDPs
for Adaptive Robot Planning
Shiqi Zhang,1,2 Piyush Khandelwal,2 Peter Stone2
1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Cleveland State University
2 Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin

s.zhang9@csuohio.edu; {piyushk,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu

value iteration (Sutton and Barto 1998), Monte Carlo tree
search (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006) and SARSOP (Kurniawati, Hsu, and Lee 2008), help compute a policy that enables planning toward maximizing long-term rewards. MDPs
and POMDPs have been used in a variety of robot applications (Khandelwal, Barrett, and Stone 2015; Young et al.
2013; Goldhoorn et al. 2014). However, ( PO ) MDP models
are not designed to reason about commonsense knowledge,
e.g., ofﬁce doors are normally closed on holidays and typically have a strong assumption that the acting agent to be the
only one that can make changes to the world.
Existing work has investigated modeling exogenous
events, e.g., sunlight reduces success rate of a robot navigating through an area (due to the limitations of range-ﬁnder
sensors), within decision-theoretic models (Boutilier, Dean,
and Hanks 1999; Hoey et al. 2005). However, it is often difﬁcult to predict how an exogenous change will affect the
system state, and what the distribution for the occurrence
of these exogenous events will be. Doing so also presents
a trade-off between model correctness and computational
tractability (as more domain variables are modeled). Although it is possible to implement domain-speciﬁc planners
to efﬁciently handle the exogenous events, we argue that,
from a practical perspective, using commonsense reasoning
to shield exogenous domain attributes from ( PO ) MDPs is relatively a much more easy-to-use approach than directly manipulating ( PO ) MDPs’ graphical representations.
Answer set programming (ASP) is a logic programming
language that is good at representing and reasoning with
logical commonsense knowledge (Baral 2003; Gelfond and
Kahl 2014) and has been used in robot applications (Chen et
al. 2012; Erdem, Patoglu, and Saribatur 2015). Probabilistic extensions of ASP (Baral, Gelfond, and Rushton 2009;
Lee and Wang 2015) further enable reasoning with probabilistic commonsense knowledge. As a result, ASP’s probabilistic extensions can easily represent facts such as ofﬁce doors are normally closed on holidays and probabilistic
models such as a robot has a lower success rate of navigating through an area under sunlight. However, ASP and
its extensions do not support probabilistic planning toward
maximizing long-term rewards, e.g., techniques in the ASP
family are not suitable for the robot navigation problem
(§ 3.2), whereas ( PO ) MDPs are.
Contemporaneously with ASP, another family of pro-

Abstract
To operate in human-robot coexisting environments, intelligent robots need to simultaneously reason with commonsense
knowledge and plan under uncertainty. Markov decision processes (MDPs) and partially observable MDPs (POMDPs),
are good at planning under uncertainty toward maximizing
long-term rewards; P - LOG, a declarative programming language under Answer Set semantics, is strong in commonsense reasoning. In this paper, we present a novel algorithm
called iCORPP to dynamically reason about, and construct
( PO ) MDPs using P - LOG. iCORPP successfully shields exogenous domain attributes from ( PO ) MDPs, which limits computational complexity and enables ( PO ) MDPs to adapt to the
value changes these attributes produce. We conduct a number
of experimental trials using two example problems in simulation and demonstrate iCORPP on a real robot. Results show
signiﬁcant improvements compared to competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

In order to be fully robust and responsive in real-world
environments, intelligent robots need a variety of simultaneous reasoning modalities that were separately developed in the past. In this paper, we focus on robots’ needs
for: i) commonsense reasoning (both logical and probabilistic), ii) modeling quantitative uncertainties from action
outcomes and observations, and iii) planning under such
uncertainties toward maximizing long-term rewards. This
work uses (logical and probabilistic) commonsense reasoning techniques to dynamically construct probabilistic graphical models (such as MDPs and POMDPs). While traditional
hand-coded models implicitly assume the acting agent is
the only one that can make changes to the world, we introduce the interleaved commonsense reasoning and probabilistic planning (iCORPP) algorithm to leverage dynamically constructed ( PO ) MDPs to enable probabilistic planning
to be adaptive to exogenous world changes.
An MDP describes a probabilistic transition system under the assumption of full observability. A POMDP extends
an MDP by assuming partial observability of underlying
states (Kaelbling, Littman, and Cassandra 1998), and hence
models the quantitative uncertainties from robot observations and action outcomes well. ( PO ) MDP algorithms, e.g.,
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3855

