Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Recognising Multidimensional Euclidean Preferences
Dominik Peters
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
dominik.peters@cs.ox.ac.uk

choice aims to solve (such as preference aggregation, committee selection, or fair and efﬁcient allocation) are computationally hard. However, if we manage to identify underlying, hopefully low-dimensional structure in the input proﬁle, we can exploit this structure to guide algorithms. This
approach has been successful, particularly for the domain
of single-peaked preferences: once we have identiﬁed an
axis on which an input proﬁle is single-peaked, we can efﬁciently ﬁnd Kemeny, Young, and Dodgson winners (Brandt
et al. 2015), identify an optimal committee according to
the Chamberlin–Courant rule (Betzler, Slinko, and Uhlmann
2013), control elections (Faliszewski et al. 2011), and solve
the stable roommates problem (Bartholdi and Trick 1986).
This leaves the question of whether we can, in fact,
efﬁciently ﬁnd a certiﬁcate for single-peakedness (or another desired domain restriction) that such algorithms can
use. The answer is often positive: there are efﬁcient and
certiﬁcate-producing recognition algorithms for preferences
that are single-peaked (Escofﬁer, Lang, and Öztürk 2008),
single-crossing (Elkind, Faliszewski, and Slinko 2012), onedimensional Euclidean (Doignon and Falmagne 1994), or
single-peaked on a tree (Trick 1989). Indeed, each of
these preference domains is quite well-understood, for example in terms of forbidden-substructure characterisations
(Ballester and Haeringer 2011), concise representations of
all certiﬁcates (Peters and Elkind 2016; Bartholdi and Trick
1986), containment relations between the different domains
(Elkind, Faliszewski, and Skowron 2014), and the probability with which a random preference proﬁle falls within a
given domain (Bruner and Lackner 2015).
Intriguingly, there is another preference domain for which
we do not have a comparable amount of understanding, yet
it is an extremely popular modelling choice across disciplines. Known as spatial preferences, or as the d-Euclidean
domain, or as multidimensional unfolding, this preference
domain contains proﬁles that can be ‘embedded’ into ddimensional Euclidean space. Precisely, a preference proﬁle is d-Euclidean if we can assign every voter and every
alternative a point in Rd such that voters prefer those alternatives that are closer to them (according to the usual Euclidean metric) to those that are further away. This characterisation of preferences has intuitive appeal: considering
Rd as a continuous ‘policy space’, within which alternatives
can vary along multiple dimensions, each voter is identiﬁed

Abstract
Euclidean preferences are a widely studied preference
model, in which decision makers and alternatives are
embedded in d-dimensional Euclidean space. Decision
makers prefer those alternatives closer to them. This
model, also known as multidimensional unfolding, has
applications in economics, psychometrics, marketing,
and many other ﬁelds. We study the problem of deciding whether a given preference proﬁle is d-Euclidean.
For the one-dimensional case, polynomial-time algorithms are known. We show that, in contrast, for every
other ﬁxed dimension d > 1, the recognition problem
is equivalent to the existential theory of the reals (ETR),
and so in particular NP-hard. We further show that
some Euclidean preference proﬁles require exponentially many bits in order to specify any Euclidean embedding, and prove that the domain of d-Euclidean preferences does not admit a ﬁnite forbidden minor characterisation for any d > 1. We also study dichotomous
preferences and the behaviour of other metrics, and survey a variety of related work.

1

Introduction

The study of preferences spans a multitude of ﬁelds: economics (and particularly game theory and social choice),
political science, psychology, multi-agent systems, marketing, and others. An important element of working with preferences is understanding them by constructing models for
them and identifying underlying structure. For example, in
a psychological model of preferences, we aim to discover
which underlying psychological process has generated the
preferences we now observe (Coombs 1964). In political
science, one might wonder about the underlying structure
of ‘political space’ by analysing voter preferences (Merrill and Grofman 1999). In economics, working with wellstructured preferences often allows a model to become analytically tractable.
This paper will use the lens and language of computational social choice. In recent years, much work in computational social choice has focussed on identifying structure in a
given preference proﬁle (Elkind, Lackner, and Peters 2016).
The reason for this is simple: many of the problems social
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

642

