Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Reasoning about Cognitive Trust
in Stochastic Multiagent Systems∗
Xiaowei Huang, Marta Kwiatkowska
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

as a subjective evaluation of a truster on a trustee about
something in particular, e.g., the completion of a task
(Hardin 2002). A classical deﬁnition from organisation theory (Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman 1995) deﬁnes trust as
the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of
another party based on the expectation that the other will
perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that party. The
importance of being able to correctly evaluate and calibrate
trust to guide reliance on automation was recognised by Lee
and See (2004). Trust (and trustworthiness) have also been
actively studied in many application contexts such as security (Kagal, Finin, and Joshi 2001) and e-commerce (Corbitt, Thanasankit, and Yi 2003). However, in this paper we
are interested in trust that governs social relationships between humans and autonomous systems, and therefore consider cognitive trust that captures the human notion of trust.
Human trust is inﬂuenced by culture and evolves over
time. It is updated similarly to belief, based on social interactions and past experience, and increases in response to positive experiences but and may be negatively aﬀected by failures. Trust is also based on opinions, which entails the need
to incorporate subjective judgment that may diﬀer for each
agent depending on their individual experience. By understanding how human trust in an autonomous system evolves
and being able to reason about it, we oﬀer guidance for selecting an appropriate level of reliance on autonomy. We can
also provide means to explain trust-based decisions.
We therefore aim to develop foundations for automated
quantitative reasoning about trust between (human and
robotic) agents, which can be employed to support decision
making in dynamic, stochastic environments endowed with
cognitive architecture. We work in the setting of stochastic multiagent systems, where stochasticity can be used to
model, e.g., component failure or environmental uncertainty,
and agents are endowed with individual goals and preferences. Inspired by the concepts of social trust of Falcone
and Castelfranchi (2001), we formulate a probabilistic rational temporal logic PRTL∗ as a combination of the probabilistic temporal logic PCTL* (Hansson and Jonsson 1994;
Bianco and de Alfaro 1995) with cognitive attitude operators (belief, goal, intention and capability) and a collection
of novel trust operators (competence, disposition and dependence). The logic is able to express properties informally de-

Abstract
We consider the setting of stochastic multiagent systems and
formulate an automated veriﬁcation framework for quantifying and reasoning about agents’ trust. To capture human trust,
we work with a cognitive notion of trust deﬁned as a subjective evaluation that agent A makes about agent B’s ability to
complete a task, which in turn may lead to a decision by A
to rely on B. We propose a probabilistic rational temporal
logic PRTL∗ , which extends the logic PCTL∗ with reasoning about mental attitudes (beliefs, goals and intentions), and
includes novel operators that can express concepts of social
trust such as competence, disposition and dependence. The
logic can express, for example, that “agent A will eventually
trust agent B with probability at least p that B will behave
in a way that ensures the successful completion of a given
task”. We study the complexity of the automated veriﬁcation
problem and, while the general problem is undecidable, we
identify restrictions on the logic and the system that result in
decidable, or even tractable, subproblems.

Introduction
Mobile autonomous robots are rapidly entering the fabric of
our society, to mention driverless cars and home assistive
robots. Since robots are expected to work with or alongside
humans in our society, they need to form partnerships with
humans, as well as other robots, understand the social context, and behave, and be seen to behave, according to the
norms of that context. Human partnerships such as cooperation are based on trust, which is inﬂuenced by a range of
subjective factors that include preferences and experience.
As the degree of autonomy of mobile robots increases and
the nature of partnerships becomes more complex, and includes also shared autonomy, understanding and reasoning
about social trust and the role it plays in decisions whether
to rely on autonomous systems is of paramount importance.
A pertinent example is the recent Tesla fatal car accident
while on autopilot mode (Lee 2016), which is a result of
over-reliance (“overtrust”) by the driver, likely inﬂuenced
through his personal motivation and preferences.
Trust is a complex notion, viewed as a belief, attitude,
intention or behaviour, and is most generally understood
∗
This work is supported by ERC AdG VERIWARE and EPSRC
Mobile Autonomy Programme Grant EP/M019918/1.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3768

