Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-17)

Efﬁciently Answering Technical Questions
— A Knowledge Graph Approach
Shuo Yang,§∗ Lei Zou,§† Zhongyuan Wang,‡† Jun Yan,‡ Ji-Rong Wen#
§

Peking University † Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
‡
Microsoft Research Asia
#
Renmin University of China & Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{yangshuo1991,zoulei}@pku.edu.cn; wzhy@outlook.com; junyan@microsoft.com; jrwen@ruc.edu.cn
the search engines, it will provide convenience not only for
users but also for companies that provide technical supports.
However, understanding technical questions is not trivial for
machines. There are several inherent challenges posed:

Abstract
More and more users prefer to ask their technical questions
online. For machines, understanding a question is nontrivial. Current approaches lack explicit background knowledge.
In this paper, we introduce a novel technical question understanding approach to recommending probable solutions to
users. First, a knowledge graph is constructed which contains
abundant technical information, and an augmented knowledge graph is built on the basis of the knowledge graph, to
link the knowledge graph and documents. Then we develop
a light weight question driven mechanism to select candidate
documents. To improve the online performance, we propose
an index-based random walk to support the online search. We
use comprehensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness
of our approach on a large scale of real-world query logs.
Our system outperforms main-stream search engine and the
state-of-art information retrieval methods. Meanwhile, extensive experiments conﬁrm the efﬁciency of our index-based
online search mechanism.

1. Lack of background knowledge
It is difﬁcult for machines to understand a question for
which they lack the technical knowledge required. For
example, if we don’t know that the “outbox” is the place
that stores emails users have sent, when a question “sent
e-mails disappear when using Outlook” comes, machines
cannot recognize it as an error about outbox in Outlook.
2. Hard to understand query intention
We cannot understand the query intention according to
surface meaning of the words. For example, question
“unable to view security event logs” asks for the “access control” rules of the security event logs. i.e. “view”
means “access” or “permission” rather than “see”.
Traditional information retrieval methods only focus on keywords appearing in a question, which cannot really understand user query intentions. To understand a question,
humans usually resort to their knowledge in the technical
area. For example, when one tries to understand the question “some speciﬁc custom forms get stuck in outbox when
users send it”, she will ﬁrst focuses on the “custom form”,
“outbox” and words describing phenomena like “stuck” and
“send”. She also knows that “custom form” and “outbox”
are components of “Outlook”, a mailbox product. Then she
deduces that the question is about an error of Outlook.
As shown by the analysis above, the background knowledge plays a critical role in understanding questions for humans. Intuitively, we need a background knowledge base for
machines to understand user technical questions. Many existing knowledge bases are about lexical knowledge or about
open domain facts. A typical example of the former is WordNet (Miller 1995), a lexical knowledge base for the English
language. The latter examples focus on general knowledge
(Auer et al. 2007; Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007;
Wu et al. 2012). In this paper, we build a large scale technique knowledge base covering the full series of Microsoft
products. To improve the precision of answering technical questions, we propose a novel two-step framework—
candidates selection and re-ranking. In the ﬁrst step, a light
weight question-driven method is applied to candidate doc-

Introduction
An emerging trend is the growth need to ask questions online. It has become a popular part of Web search services on
main-stream search engines. Some promising intelligent assistants on mobile devices, such as Siri and Cortana, provide
similar question answering services. In this paper, we focus
on answering “technical questions”. Given a large technical
corpus (such as HELP documents) and a natural language
question, our goal is to return some relevant documents with
regard to the technical question. For example, users usually confront some technical problems when using Microsoft
products, such as “how to uninstall ofﬁce” and “how can I
check the edition and version of the SQL server”. They post
their questions on search engines or technical forums. Then,
search engines or experts will recommend relevant technical
documents to them. However, results from search engines
usually turn out to have low accuracy and experts cannot
reply immediately. Taking these circumstances into consideration, if we can improve the precision of search results on
∗

This work was partially done when Shuo visited MSRA.
Zhongyuan is currently with Facebook Inc. at Menlo Park,
USA. His email is zhy@fb.com.
c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3111

