High Dimensional Bayesian Optimisation and Bandits via Additive Models

Kirthevasan Kandasamy
Jeff Schneider
Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Abstract
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) is a technique used
in optimising a D-dimensional function which
is typically expensive to evaluate. While there
have been many successes for BO in low dimensions, scaling it to high dimensions has been notoriously difficult. Existing literature on the topic
are under very restrictive settings. In this paper,
we identify two key challenges in this endeavour.
We tackle these challenges by assuming an additive structure for the function. This setting is substantially more expressive and contains a richer
class of functions than previous work. We prove
that, for additive functions the regret has only linear dependence on D even though the function
depends on all D dimensions. We also demonstrate several other statistical and computational
benefits in our framework. Via synthetic examples, a scientific simulation and a face detection
problem we demonstrate that our method outperforms naive BO on additive functions and on several examples where the function is not additive.

1. Introduction
In many applications we are tasked with zeroth order optimisation of an expensive to evaluate function f in D dimensions. Some examples are hyper parameter tuning in
expensive machine learning algorithms, experiment design,
optimising control strategies in complex systems, and scientific simulation based studies. In such applications, f is
a blackbox which we can interact with only by querying
for the value at a specific point. Related to optimisation is
the bandits problem arising in applications such as online
advertising and reinforcement learning. Here the objective
is to maximise the cumulative sum of all queries. In either
case, we need to find the optimum of f using as few queries
as possible by managing exploration and exploitation.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

KANDASAMY @ CS . CMU . EDU
SCHNEIDE @ CS . CMU . EDU
BAPOCZOS @ CS . CMU . EDU

Bayesian Optimisation (Mockus & Mockus, 1991) refers
to a suite of methods that tackle this problem by modeling
f as a Gaussian Process (GP). In such methods the challenge is two fold. At time step t, first estimate the unknown
f from the query value-pairs. Then use it to intelligently
query at xt where the function is likely to be high. For
this, we first we use the posterior GP to construct an acquisition function ϕt which captures the value of the experiment. Then we maximise ϕt to determine xt .
Gaussian process bandits and Bayesian optimisation (GPB/
BO) have been successfully applied in many applications
such as tuning hyperparameters in learning algorithms
(Snoek et al., 2012; Bergstra et al., 2011; Mahendran et al.,
2012), robotics (Lizotte et al., 2007; Martinez-Cantin et al.,
2007) and object tracking (Denil et al., 2012). However,
all such successes have been in low (typically < 10) dimensions (Wang et al., 2013). Expensive high dimensional
functions occur in several problems in fields such as computer vision (Yamins et al., 2013), antenna design (Hornby
et al., 2006), computational astrophysics (Parkinson et al.,
2006) and biology (Gonzalez et al., 2014). Scaling GPB/
BO methods to high dimensions for practical problems has
been challenging. Even current theoretical results suggest
that GPB/ BO is exponentially difficult in high dimensions
without further assumptions (Srinivas et al., 2010; Bull,
2011). To our knowledge, the only approach to date has
been to perform regular GPB/ BO on a low dimensional
subspace. This works only under strong assumptions.
We identify two key challenges in scaling GPB/ BO to high
dimensions. The first is the statistical challenge in estimating the function. Nonparametric regression is inherently difficult in high dimensions with known lower bounds
depending exponentially in dimension (Györfi et al., 2002).
The often exponential sample complexity for regression is
invariably reflected in the regret bounds for GPB/ BO. The
second is the computational challenge in maximising
ϕt . Commonly used global optimisation heuristics used
to maximise ϕt themselves require computation exponential in dimension. Any attempt to scale GPB/ BO to high
dimensions must effectively address these two concerns.

