Double Nyström Method:
An Efficient and Accurate Nyström Scheme for Large-Scale Data Sets

Woosang Lim
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea
Minhwan Kim
LG Electronics, Seoul, Korea

QUASAR 17@ KAIST. AC . KR

MINHWAN 1. KIM @ LGE . COM

Haesun Park
HPARK @ CC . GATECH . EDU
School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
Kyomin Jung
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
The Nyström method has been one of the most
effective techniques for kernel-based approach
that scales well to large data sets. Since its introduction, there has been a large body of work
that improves the approximation accuracy while
maintaining computational efficiency. In this paper, we present a novel Nyström method that
improves both accuracy and efficiency based on
a new theoretical analysis. We first provide a
generalized sampling scheme, CAPS, that minimizes a novel error bound based on the subspace
distance. We then present our double Nyström
method that reduces the size of the decomposition in two stages. We show that our method is
highly efficient and accurate compared to other
state-of-the-art Nyström methods by evaluating
them on a number of real data sets.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix approximation is one of the core techniques to mitigate the space requirement that arises in
large-scale machine learning and data mining. Consequently, many methods in machine learning involve a lowrank approximation of matrices that represent data, such as
manifold learning (Fowlkes et al., 2004; Talwalkar et al.,
2008), support vector machines (Fine & Scheinberg, 2002)
and kernel principal component analysis (Zhang et al.,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

KJUNG @ SNU . AC . KR

2008). These methods typically involve spectral decomposition of a symmetric positive semi-definite (SPSD) matrix, but its exact computation is prohibitively expensive for
large data sets.
The standard Nyström method (Williams & Seeger, 2001)
is one of the popular methods for approximate spectral decomposition of a large kernel matrix K ∈ Rn×n (generally
a SPSD matrix), due to its simplicity and efficiency (Kumar et al., 2009). One of the main characteristics of the
Nyström method is that it uses samples to reduce the original problem of decomposing the given n × n kernel matrix
to the problem of decomposing a s × s matrix, where s
is the number of samples much smaller than n. The standard Nyström method has time complexity O(ksn + s3 )
for rank-k approximation and is indeed scalable. However,
the accuracy is typically its weakness, and there have been
many studies to improve its accuracy. Most of the recent
work in this line of research can be roughly categorized
into the following two types of approaches:
Refining Decomposition Exemplar works in this category
are one-shot Nyström method (Fowlkes et al., 2004), modified Nyström method (Wang & Zhang, 2013), ensemble Nyström method (Kumar et al., 2012) and standard
Nyström method using randomized SVD (Li et al., 2015).
All of these methods redefine the intersection matrix that
appears in the reconstructed form of the input matrix, of
which we provide details in Section 2.
The motivation of the one-shot Nyström method (Fowlkes
et al., 2004) is to obtain an orthonormal set of approximate
eigenvectors of the given kernel matrix via diagonalization
of the standard Nyström approximation in one-shot with
O(s2 n) running time. Because of the orthonormality, the

