MADE: Masked Autoencoder for Distribution Estimation
Mathieu Germain
Université de Sherbrooke, Canada
Karol Gregor
Google DeepMind

MATHIEU . GERMAIN 2@ USHERBROOKE . CA

KAROL . GREGOR @ GMAIL . COM

Iain Murray
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Hugo Larochelle
Université de Sherbrooke, Canada

Abstract
There has been a lot of recent interest in designing
neural network models to estimate a distribution
from a set of examples. We introduce a simple
modification for autoencoder neural networks that
yields powerful generative models. Our method
masks the autoencoder’s parameters to respect
autoregressive constraints: each input is reconstructed only from previous inputs in a given ordering. Constrained this way, the autoencoder
outputs can be interpreted as a set of conditional
probabilities, and their product, the full joint probability. We can also train a single network that
can decompose the joint probability in multiple
different orderings. Our simple framework can be
applied to multiple architectures, including deep
ones. Vectorized implementations, such as on
GPUs, are simple and fast. Experiments demonstrate that this approach is competitive with stateof-the-art tractable distribution estimators. At test
time, the method is significantly faster and scales
better than other autoregressive estimators.

1. Introduction
Distribution estimation is the task of estimating a joint distribution p(x) from a set of examples {x(t) }Tt=1 , which is by
definition a general problem. Many tasks in machine learning can be formulated as learning only specific properties of
a joint distribution. Thus a good distribution estimator can
be used in many scenarios, including classification (Schmah
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

I . MURRAY @ ED . AC . UK

HUGO . LAROCHELLE @ USHERBROOKE . CA

et al., 2009), denoising or missing input imputation (Poon
& Domingos, 2011; Dinh et al., 2014), data (e.g. speech)
synthesis (Uria et al., 2015) and many others. The very
nature of distribution estimation also makes it a particular
challenge for machine learning. In essence, the curse of
dimensionality has a distinct impact because, as the number
of dimensions of the input space of x grows, the volume of
space in which the model must provide a good answer for
p(x) exponentially increases.
Fortunately, recent research has made substantial progress
on this task. Specifically, learning algorithms for a variety of neural network models have been proposed (Bengio
& Bengio, 2000; Larochelle & Murray, 2011; Gregor &
LeCun, 2011; Uria et al., 2013; 2014; Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Bengio et al., 2014; Gregor
et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Dinh et al., 2014).
These algorithms are showing great potential in scaling to
high-dimensional distribution estimation problems. In this
work, we focus our attention on autoregressive models (Section 3). Computing p(x) exactly for a test example x is
tractable with these models. However, the computational
cost of this operation is still larger than typical neural network predictions for a D-dimensional input. For previous
deep autoregressive models, evaluating p(x) costs O(D)
times more than a simple neural network point predictor.
This paper’s contribution is to describe and explore a simple
way of adapting autoencoder neural networks that makes
them competitive tractable distribution estimators that are
faster than existing alternatives. We show how to mask the
weighted connections of a standard autoencoder to convert it
into a distribution estimator. The key is to use masks that are
designed in such a way that the output is autoregressive for a
given ordering of the inputs, i.e. that each input dimension is
reconstructed solely from the dimensions preceding it in the

