Ordered Stick-Breaking Prior for Sequential MCMC Inference of Bayesian
Nonparametric Models

Mrinal Das†
Trapit Bansal†
Chiranjib Bhattacharyya†
†Department of Computer Science and Automation,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
This paper introduces ordered stick-breaking
process (OSBP), where the atoms in a stickbreaking process (SBP) appear in order. The
choice of weights on the atoms of OSBP ensure that; (1) probability of adding new atoms
exponentially decrease, and (2) OSBP, though
non-exchangeable, admit predictive probability
functions (PPFs). In a Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) setting, OSBP serves as a natural
prior over sequential mini-batches, facilitating
exchange of relevant statistical information by
sharing the atoms of OSBP. One of the major
contributions of this paper is SUMO, an MCMC
algorithm, for solving the inference problem
arising from applying OSBP to BNP models.
SUMO uses the PPFs of OSBP to obtain a Gibbssampling based truncation-free algorithm which
applies generally to BNP models. For large scale
inference problems existing algorithms such as
particle filtering (PF) are not practical and variational procedures such as TSVI (Wang & Blei,
2012) are the only alternative. For Dirichlet process mixture model (DPMM), SUMO outperforms TSVI on perplexity by 33% on 3 datasets
with million data points, which are beyond the
scope of PF, using only 3GB RAM.

1. Introduction
Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) models are powerful tools
for understanding probabilistic relationships (Hjort et al.,
2010). Inference in BNP models are generally intractable.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Andrieu et al., 2003)
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MRINAL @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN
TRAPIT @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN
CHIRU @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

based procedures being easy to implement and more accurate than variational inference (Blei & Jordan, 2004;
Welling et al., 2012) are often preferred. However MCMC
procedures do not scale well to large datasets.
For large datasets one could consider sequentially processing mini-batches of observations. Particle filtering (PF) is a
principled technique which sequentially approximates the
full posterior using particles (Doucet et al., 2001; Ulker
et al., 2010; Andrieu et al., 2010; Fearnhead, 2004; Jun
& Coute, 2014). However, due to the nature of recursive
dependence structure employed in PF, it needs to maintain
multiple configurations of variables, which makes it practical only in distributed setting (Canini et al., 2009; Ahmed
et al., 2011). Keeping this motivation in mind truncationfree stochastic variational inference (TSVI) was developed
(see Section 1, para 2 of Wang & Blei (2012)). Indeed, for
pure sequential inference, stochastic variational inference
(SVI) has become the state of the art in large scale inference of BNP models (Bryant & Sudderth, 2012; Lin, 2013;
Broderick et al., 2013). We aim to develop MCMC procedures which can compete with TSVI on scale and accuracy.
In particular we consider the situation where data arrives in
mini-batches and keeping in mind a true Bayesian spirit we
wish to endow the mini-batches with a suitable prior.
Stick-breaking process (SBP) (Ishwaran & James, 2001)
gives a constructive definition for designing atomic probability measures which can serve as priors for BNP models. Indeed popular priors such as Dirichlet process (DP)
(Ferguson, 1973), and Pitman-Yor process (PYP) (Pitman
& Yor, 1997) are special cases of SBP. In this paper we
study an interesting variation of SBP, where the atoms appear in order. Appearing in order has been noted by Pitman
(1995), however we did not find any literature in the area
which models it in a prior and subsequently applies it to
Bayesian nonparametrics. The goal of this paper is to explore SBP with atoms appearing in order as a prior over
mini-batches and develop sequential MCMC inference that
could compete with TSVI on scale and PF on accuracy.

