Bayesian Multiple Target Localization
Purnima Rajan
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University

PURNIMA @ CS . JHU . EDU

Weidong Han
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University
Raphael Sznitman
ARTORG Center, University of Bern

RAPHAEL . SZNITMAN @ ARTORG . UNIBE . CH

Peter I. Frazier
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University
Bruno M. Jedynak
Department of Applied Mathematics & Statistics, Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
We consider the problem of quickly localizing
multiple targets by asking questions of the form
“How many targets are within this set” while obtaining noisy answers. This setting is a generalization to multiple targets of the game of 20
questions in which only a single target is queried.
We assume that the targets are points on the real
line, or in a two dimensional plane for the experiments, drawn independently from a known distribution. We evaluate the performance of a policy
using the expected entropy of the posterior distribution after a fixed number of questions with
noisy answers. We derive a lower bound for the
value of this problem and study a specific policy, named the dyadic policy. We show that this
policy achieves a value which is no more than
twice this lower bound when answers are noisefree, and show a more general constant factor approximation guarantee for the noisy setting. We
present an empirical evaluation of this policy on
simulated data for the problem of detecting multiple instances of the same object in an image. Finally, we present experiments on localizing multiple faces simultaneously on real images.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

WHAN @ PRINCETON . EDU

PF 98@ CORNELL . EDU

BRUNO . JEDYNAK @ JHU . EDU

1. Introduction
The task of localizing structures of interest, or targets, appears in numerous applications, such as finding quasars in
astronomical data (Mortlock, 2009), localizing faces in images (Ali et al., 2012) or counting synapses in microscopy
volumes (Merchan-Perez et al., 2009). Once a competent
detection scheme is available, the localization task often reduces to evaluating each possible location in an exhaustive
fashion. Such strategies are highly effective and easy to
implement, which contributes to their widespread use.
Yet such localization strategies do not scale with data
size requirements since their computational complexity depends directly on the searchable domain’s size. This problem is critical in analysis of enormous microscopy volumes
where localizing and counting intra-cellular structures such
mitochondria or synapses is critical to understanding brain
processes (Lee et al., 2007). Similarly, efficient localization
of object instances in images remains challenging given the
growing amount of image data to evaluate.
To address this issue, theoretical works have established
strategies to reduce the computation needed to find targets.
Generally, literature considering such problems falls into
two categories: those that consider a single target (k = 1)
and those that consider multiple targets (k 1).
For single-target localization, (Jedynak et al., 2012) considered a Bayesian setting and used the entropy of the
posterior distribution to measure accuracy, as we do here.
Within this context, a number of policies have been proposed, such as the dyadic policy and the greedy probabilistic bisection (Horstein, 1963), which was further stud-

