A Provable Generalized Tensor Spectral Method
for Uniform Hypergraph Partitioning

Debarghya Ghoshdastidar
Ambedkar Dukkipati
Departiment of Computer Science & Automation,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore – 560012, India

Abstract
Matrix spectral methods play an important role
in statistics and machine learning, and most often
the word ‘matrix’ is dropped as, by default, one
assumes that similarities or affinities are measured between two points, thereby resulting in
similarity matrices. However, recent challenges
in computer vision and text mining have necessitated the use of multi-way affinities in the
learning methods, and this has led to a considerable interest in hypergraph partitioning methods
in machine learning community. A plethora of
“higher-order” algorithms have been proposed in
the past decade, but their theoretical guarantees
are not well-studied. In this paper, we develop
a unified approach for partitioning uniform hypergraphs by means of a tensor trace optimization problem involving the affinity tensor, and a
number of existing higher-order methods turn out
to be special cases of the proposed formulation.
We further propose an algorithm to solve the
proposed trace optimization problem, and prove
that it is consistent under a planted hypergraph
model. We also provide experimental results to
validate our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
The underlying problem in most clustering approaches is
to optimize a certain objective function involving pairwise
relations among all data instances, where the optimization is performed over all possible cluster assignment matrices. Various relaxations of this NP-hard problem are
common in practice. For instance, k-means (Lloyd, 1982)
uses a greedy approach for achieving a local optimum,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DEBARGHYA . G @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN
AD @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

while spectral clustering does not restrict the optimization
to binary-valued assignment matrices (Donath & Hoffman,
1973). On the other hand, non-negative matrix factorization (Lee & Seung, 2001) derives an approximation of the
assignment matrix by decomposing the similarity matrix.
Still, there are numerous applications, where pairwise similarities are either inappropriate for the purpose or provide
poor performance, for example, subspace clustering (Agarwal et al., 2005), graph matching (Duchenne et al., 2011)
etc. To tackle such problems, a wide class of algorithms,
often coined as “higher-order” methods, have been proposed in the last decade. The basic idea in these approaches
is to use a m-way similarity measure with m > 2. While
it is common to simply pose this as an optimization problem, where the objective function is justified from various
perspectives (Kim et al., 2011; Rota Bulo & Pelillo, 2013),
there are works that formulate above problem as a hypergraph partitioning problem and use hypergraph reduction
techniques (Agarwal et al., 2005; 2006; Arias-Castro et al.,
2011) or alternative solution strategies (Hein et al., 2013;
Karypis & Kumar, 2000). Since, the constructed hypergraph is m-uniform, i.e., every edge spans m vertices, it is
more natural to exploit the structure of the mth -order affinity tensor of the hypergraph. Hence, one can partition the
hypergraph using higher-order SVD of tensors (Govindu,
2005), non-negative tensor factorization (Shashua et al.,
2006) or tensor power iterations (Duchenne et al., 2011).
Despite the wide variety of solution strategies, one finds
that most of the above algorithms attempt to solve a similar
optimization problem. This is not surprising because, as in
the case of graph based clustering (Shi & Malik, 2000), the
primary objective in above methods is to obtain a grouping
with high intra-cluster similarity. Unfortunately, unlike the
case of graphs, there still remains a lack of unified treatment of above methods from a common perspective. This
paper fills the gap between graph and uniform hypergraph
partitioning by providing a general notion of associativity
maximization and its formulation as a tensor trace maximization problem involving the affinity tensor of the hyper-

