Phrase-based Image Captioning

Rémi Lebret∗
Pedro O. Pinheiro∗
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
Ronan Collobert
Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA, USA

Abstract
Generating a novel textual description of an image is an interesting problem that connects computer vision and natural language processing. In
this paper, we present a simple model that is able
to generate descriptive sentences given a sample
image. This model has a strong focus on the syntax of the descriptions. We train a purely bilinear
model that learns a metric between an image representation (generated from a previously trained
Convolutional Neural Network) and phrases that
are used to described them. The system is then
able to infer phrases from a given image sample. Based on caption syntax statistics, we propose a simple language model that can produce
relevant descriptions for a given test image using the phrases inferred. Our approach, which is
considerably simpler than state-of-the-art models, achieves comparable results in two popular
datasets for the task: Flickr30k and the recently
proposed Microsoft COCO.

1. Introduction
Being able to automatically generate a description from an
image is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence,
connecting computer vision and natural language processing. The problem is particularly challenging because it
requires to correctly recognize different objects in images
and how they interact. Another challenge is that an image
description generator needs to express these interactions in
a natural language (e.g. English). Therefore, a language
∗

These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

REMI @ LEBRET. CH
PEDRO @ OPINHEIRO . COM

RONAN @ COLLOBERT. COM

model is implicitly required in addition to visual understanding.
Recently, this problem has been studied by many different
authors. Most of the attempts are based on recurrent neural networks to generate sentences. These models leverage the power of neural networks to transform image and
sentence representations into a common space (Mao et al.,
2015; Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015; Vinyals et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2014).
In this paper, we propose a different approach to the problem that does not rely on complex recurrent neural networks. An exploratory analysis of two large datasets of
image descriptions reveals that their syntax is quite simple. The ground-truth descriptions can be represented as
a collection of noun, verb and prepositional phrases. The
different entities in a given image are described by the
noun phrases, while the interactions or events between
these entities are encoded by both the verb and the prepositional phrases. We thus train a model that predicts the
set of phrases present in the sentences used to describe
the images. By leveraging previous works on word vector representations, each phrase can be represented by the
mean of the representations of the words that compose the
phrase. Vector representations for images can also be easily
obtained from some pre-trained convolutional neural networks. The model then learns a common embedding between phrase and image representations (see Figure 3).
Given a test image, a bilinear model is trained to predict
a set of top-ranked phrases that best describe it. Several
noun phrases, verb phrases and prepositional phrases are
in this set. The objective is therefore to generate syntactically correct sentences from (possibly different) subsets
of these phrases. We introduce a trigram constrained language model based on our knowledge about how the sentence descriptions are structured in the training set. With a
very constrained decoding scheme, sentences are inferred
with a beam search. Because these sentences are not con-

