Abstraction Selection in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

Nan Jiang
Alex Kulesza
Satinder Singh
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan

Abstract
State abstractions are often used to reduce the
complexity of model-based reinforcement learning when only limited quantities of data are available. However, choosing the appropriate level
of abstraction is an important problem in practice. Existing approaches have theoretical guarantees only under strong assumptions on the domain
or asymptotically large amounts of data, but in
this paper we propose a simple algorithm based
on statistical hypothesis testing that comes with
a finite-sample guarantee under assumptions on
candidate abstractions. Our algorithm trades off
the low approximation error of finer abstractions
against the low estimation error of coarser abstractions, resulting in a loss bound that depends only
on the quality of the best available abstraction and
is polynomial in planning horizon.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we advance the theoretical understanding of
a fundamentally important setting in reinforcement learning (RL): sequential decision-making problems with large
state spaces but only limited amounts of data and no preexisting model. This is, of course, the typical setting for
many RL applications, and a number of algorithms that exploit some form of compact function approximation either
to learn a model or to directly learn value functions or policies have been applied successfully across domains from
control, robotics, resource allocation, and others. Examples
of such methods include value function approximation (Sutton & Barto, 1998), policy-gradient methods (Sutton et al.,
1999), kernel RL and related non-parametric dynamic programming algorithms (Ormoneit & Sen, 2002; Lever et al.,
2012), and pre-processing with state abstraction/aggregation
followed by standard RL algorithms (Li et al., 2006).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

NANJIANG @ UMICH . EDU
KULESZA @ UMICH . EDU
BAVEJA @ UMICH . EDU

However, state-of-the-art theoretical analysis in this area
mostly either (1) makes structural assumptions about the
domain (e.g., linear dynamics (Parr et al., 2008)) to allow
an RL algorithm using a fixed and finite-capacity function
approximator to guarantee bounded loss as the size of the
dataset grows to infinity, or (2) makes smoothness assumptions about the domain (e.g., Ormoneit & Sen, 2002) but
guarantees zero loss only when both the function approximation capacity and the dataset size go to infinity. In contrast, we are interested in analyzing the more realistic case
where no assumptions about the domain can be made—other
than that it can be described by a Markov decision process
(MDP)—and the dataset is finite.
In particular, we consider a scenario in which a domain expert offers a set of possible state abstractions for a given domain. We assume that these abstractions are finite aggregations of states; for instance, the expert may provide discretevalued state features, implicitly defining an abstraction that
aggregates states with identical feature values. Given a finite
amount of data, our task is to discover which abstraction to
use for computing a policy from the data. If the dataset is
large, we should prefer finer abstractions that are faithful
to the domain (those with low approximation error), but for
smaller datasets, coarse, lossy abstractions may be preferable because they simplify learning (low estimation error).
To simplify our analysis, we assume the dataset is fixed
in advance. To remove the choice of RL algorithm from
our analysis, we assume certainty equivalence, i.e., we assume that the agent behaves optimally with respect to the
maximum-likelihood model estimated from the data under
the chosen abstraction. When the quality of the abstraction is known, the theory of approximate homomorphisms
in MDPs bounds the loss of the certainty equivalence policy (Even-Dar & Mansour, 2003; Ravindran, 2004). However, here the quality of the abstractions is unknown, and
must itself be estimated from data. Existing theoretical
results in this setting either have exponential dependence
on the effective planning horizon (Mandel et al., 2014), or
apply to the online setting and depend on the total size of
all abstract state spaces under consideration (Ortner et al.,

