MRA-based Statistical Learning from Incomplete Rankings

Eric Sibony
ERIC . SIBONY @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
Stéphan Clémençon
STEPHAN . CLEMENCON @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
LTCI UMR No. 5141, Telecom ParisTech/CNRS, Institut Mines-Telecom, Paris, 75013, France
Jérémie Jakubowicz
JEREMIE . JAKUBOWICZ @ TELECOM - SUDPARIS . EDU
SAMOVAR UMR No. 5157, Telecom SudParis/CNRS, Institut Mines-Telecom, Evry, 91000, France

Abstract
Statistical analysis of rank data describing preferences over small and variable subsets of a potentially large ensemble of items {1, . . . , n} is
a very challenging problem. It is motivated by
a wide variety of modern applications, such as
recommender systems or search engines. However, very few inference methods have been documented in the literature to learn a ranking model
from such incomplete rank data. The goal of this
paper is twofold: it develops a rigorous mathematical framework for the problem of learning
a ranking model from incomplete rankings and
introduces a novel general statistical method to
address it. Based on an original concept of multiresolution analysis (MRA) of incomplete rankings, it finely adapts to any observation setting,
leading to a statistical accuracy and an algorithmic complexity that depend directly on the complexity of the observed data. Beyond theoretical
guarantees, we also provide experimental results
that show its statistical performance.

1. Introduction
Motivated by numerous modern applications ranging from
the design of recommender systems to customer analytics
through the optimization of search engines, the analysis
of rank data has recently been the subject of much attention in the machine-learning literature. A “full ranking”
on a set of n ≥ 1 items JnK := {1, . . . , n} is an ordering of the form a1  · · ·  an , where a1 and an are
respectively the items ranked first and last. It is usually
described as the permutation σ on JnK that maps an item
to its rank, i.e. such that σ(ai ) = i for all i ∈ JnK. The
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

variability of a statistical population of full rankings is thus
modeled by a probability distribution p on the symmetric
group Sn , the set of all permutations on JnK, called a ranking model. The statistical issue is then to learn this ranking model from the available observations, either through
parametric modeling such as those proposed in the seminal contributions of (Mallows, 1957), (Luce, 1959; Plackett, 1975) or more recently in (Fligner & Verducci, 1986;
Liqun, 2000; Lebanon & Lafferty, 2002; Meek & Meila,
2014), or through “nonparametric-like” approaches (i.e.
without assuming an explicit structure for the distribution),
such as kernel estimation (Lebanon & Mao, 2008; Sun
et al., 2012), techniques based on sparsity concepts (Jagabathula & Shah, 2011), independence modeling (Huang &
Guestrin, 2009) or inference based on harmonic analysis of
the space of distributions on Sn (Diaconis, 1988; Huang
et al., 2009; Kondor & Barbosa, 2010; Irurozki et al., 2011;
Kakarala, 2011; Kondor & Dempsey, 2012).
However, a major issue arises in practice from the fact that
rank data seldom take the form of full rankings. Much more
frequently the available rank data describe “limited” information, of the form of partial and/or incomplete rankings.
Formally, they correspond to partial orders on JnK and can
be naturally identified as subsets of permutations on JnK,
the subsets formed by their linear extensions. Let p be the
probability distribution on Sn of the random permutation
Σ that models the variability of the preferences among the
population of interest. The probability of a partial order
represented by S ⊂ Sn is then defined by
X
P[Σ ∈ S] =
p(σ).
σ∈S

For instance, the probabilityP
that item i be ranked first is
given by P[Σ(i) = 1] =
σ∈Sn , σ(i)=1 p(σ), and the
probability that itemP
i be preferred to item j is given by
P[Σ(i) < Σ(j)] =
σ∈Sn , σ(i)<σ(j) p(σ). These quantities correspond to marginal probabilities of the ranking
model p. One may either seek to estimate the full ranking model p from degraded observations under a strong

