Convex Calibrated Surrogates for Hierarchical Classification

Harish G. Ramaswamy
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, INDIA

HARISH GURUP @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

Ambuj Tewari
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA

TEWARIA @ UMICH . EDU

Shivani Agarwal
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, INDIA

SHIVANI @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

Abstract
Hierarchical classification problems are multiclass supervised learning problems with a predefined hierarchy over the set of class labels. In
this work, we study the consistency of hierarchical classification algorithms with respect to
a natural loss, namely the tree distance metric
on the hierarchy tree of class labels, via the usage of calibrated surrogates. We first show that
the Bayes optimal classifier for this loss classifies an instance according to the deepest node
in the hierarchy such that the total conditional
probability of the subtree rooted at the node is
greater than 21 . We exploit this insight to develop
new consistent algorithm for hierarchical classification, that makes use of an algorithm known
to be consistent for the “multiclass classification
with reject option (MCRO)” problem as a subroutine. Our experiments on a number of benchmark datasets show that the resulting algorithm,
which we term OvA-Cascade, gives improved
performance over other state-of-the-art hierarchical classification algorithms.

1. Introduction
In many practical applications of the multiclass classification problem the class labels live in a pre-defined hierarchy.
For example, in document classification the class labels are
topics and they form topic hierarchies; in computational biology the class labels are protein families and they are also
best organized in a hierarchy. See Figure 1 for an example hierarchy used in mood classification of speech. Such
problems are commonly known in the machine learning literature as hierarchical classification.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Speech

Active

Anger

Non-Active

Median

Gladness

Fear

Neutral

Passive

Sadness

Boredom

Figure 1. Speech based mood classification hierarchy in the
Berlin dataset (Burkhardt et al., 2005) used by Xiao et al. (2007)

Hierarchical classification has been the subject of many
studies (Wang et al., 1999; Sun & Lim, 2001; Cai & Hofmann, 2004; Dekel et al., 2004; Rousu et al., 2006; CesaBianchi et al., 2006a;b; Wang et al., 2011; Gopal et al.,
2012; Babbar et al., 2013; Gopal & Yang, 2013). For a
detailed review and more references we refer the reader to
a survey on hierarchical classification by Silla Jr. & Freitas
(2011).
The label hierarchy has been incorporated into the problem
in various ways in different approaches. The most prevalent and technically appealing approach is to involve the
hierarchy in the final evaluation metric and design an algorithm that does well on this evaluation metric. We shall
work in the setting where class labels are single nodes in a
tree, and use the very natural evaluation metric that penalizes predictions according to the tree-distance between the
prediction and truth (Sun & Lim, 2001; Cai & Hofmann,
2004; Dekel et al., 2004).
While hierarchical classification problems are actively
studied, there is a gap between theory and practice – even
basic statistical properties of hierarchical classification algorithms have not been examined in depth. This paper addresses this gap and its main contributions are summarized
below:

