A Stochastic PCA and SVD Algorithm with an Exponential Convergence Rate

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

Abstract
We describe and analyze a simple algorithm for
principal component analysis and singular value
decomposition, VR-PCA, which uses computationally cheap stochastic iterations, yet converges
exponentially fast to the optimal solution. In
contrast, existing algorithms suffer either from
slow convergence, or computationally intensive
iterations whose runtime scales with the data
size. The algorithm builds on a recent variancereduced stochastic gradient technique, which was
previously analyzed for strongly convex optimization, whereas here we apply it to an inherently non-convex problem, using a very different
analysis.

1. Introduction
We consider the following fundamental matrix optimization problem: Given a matrix X ∈ Rd×n , we wish to recover its top k left singular vectors (where k  d) by solving
1
kX > W k2F ,
(1)
max
d×k
>
W ∈R
:W W =I n
k · kF being the Frobenius norm and I being the identity matrix1 . A prominent application in machine learning and statistics is Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
which is one of the most common tools for unsupervised
data analysis and preprocessing: Given a data matrix X
whose columns consist of n instances in Rd , we are interested in finding a k-dimensional subspace (specified by a
d × k matrix W ), on which the projection of the data has
largest possible variance. Finding this subspace has numerous uses, from dimensionality reduction and data compression to data visualization, and the problem is extremely
well-studied.
1

The top k right singular values can also be extracted, by considering the matrix X > in lieu of X.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Letting x1 , . . . , xn denote the columns of X, Eq. (1) can
be equivalently written as
!
n
1X
>
>
min
−W
xi xi W,
(2)
n i=1
W ∈Rd×k :W > W =I
which reveals that the solution is
the top k eigenvecPalso
n
tors of the covariance matrix n1 i=1 xi x>
i . In this paper,
we will mostly focus on the simplest possible form of this
problem, where k = 1, in which case the above reduces to
!
n
X
1
min −w>
xi x>
w,
(3)
i
n i=1
w:kwk2 =1
and our goal is to find the top eigenvector v1 . However, as
discussed later, the algorithm to be presented can be readily
extended to solve Eq. (2) for k > 1.
When the data size n and the dimension d are modest,
this problem can be solved exactly by a full singular value
decomposition of X.
 However, the required runtime is
O min{nd2 , n2 d} , which is prohibitive in large-scale applications. A common alternative is to use iterative methods such as power iterations or more sophisticated variants (Golub & van Loan, 2013). If the covariance matrix has bounded spectral norm and an eigengap λ between
its first and second eigenvalues, then these algorithms can
be shown to produce
 a unit vector which is -far from v1
(or −v1 ) after O log(1/)
iterations (where e.g. p = 1
λp
for power iterations). However, each iteration involves
multiplying
one or more vectors by the covariance matrix
P
1
>
i xi xi . Letting ds ∈ [0, d] denote the average sparn
sity (number of non-zero entries) in each xi , this requires
O(ds n) time by passing
through

 the entire data. Thus, the
total runtime is O ds n log(1/)
. When λ is small, this is
λp
equivalent to many passes over the data, which can be prohibitive for large datasets.
An alternative to these deterministic algorithms are
stochastic and incremental algorithms (e.g. (Krasulina,
1969; Oja, 1982; Oja & Karhunen, 1985) and more recently, (Arora et al., 2012; Mitliagkas et al., 2013; Arora
et al., 2013; De Sa et al., 2014)). In contrast to the algorithms above, these algorithms perform much cheaper iter-

