Risk and Regret of Hierarchical Bayesian Learners

Jonathan H. Huggins
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Brain and Cognitive Science Department, MIT

Abstract
Common statistical practice has shown that the
full power of Bayesian methods is not realized
until hierarchical priors are used, as these allow
for greater “robustness” and the ability to “share
statistical strength.” Yet it is an ongoing challenge to provide a learning-theoretically sound
formalism of such notions that: offers practical
guidance concerning when and how best to utilize hierarchical models; provides insights into
what makes for a good hierarchical prior; and,
when the form of the prior has been chosen, can
guide the choice of hyperparameter settings. We
present a set of analytical tools for understanding
hierarchical priors in both the online and batch
learning settings. We provide regret bounds under log-loss, which show how certain hierarchical models compare, in retrospect, to the best
single model in the model class. We also show
how to convert a Bayesian log-loss regret bound
into a Bayesian risk bound for any bounded loss,
a result which may be of independent interest.
Risk and regret bounds for Student’s t and hierarchical Gaussian priors allow us to formalize
the concepts of “robustness” and “sharing statistical strength.” Priors for feature selection are investigated as well. Our results suggest that the
learning-theoretic benefits of using hierarchical
priors can often come at little cost on practical
problems.

1. Introduction
There are two standard justifications for the use of hierarchical models. The first is that they allow for the representation of greater uncertainty by placing “hyperpriors” on
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JHUGGINS @ MIT. EDU

JBT @ MIT. EDU

the hyperparameters of the prior distribution (Berger, 1985;
Bernardo & Smith, 2000; Gelman et al., 2013). By explicitly modeling the additional uncertainty, there is greater
“robustness” to misspecification and unexpected data. The
second is that hierarchical models permit the “sharing of
statistical strength” between related observations or cohorts (Gelman et al., 2013). For example, take the recent
“Big Bayes Stories” special issue of the journal Statistical Science, which was comprised of short articles describing successful applications of Bayesian models to a diverse
range of problems, including political science, astronomy,
and public health (Mengersen & Robert, 2014). Most of
the Bayesian models were hierarchical, and the need for robustness and sharing of statistical strength because of limited data were commonly cited reasons by the practitioners
for choosing a hierarchical Bayesian approach. Gelman &
Hill (2006) and Gelman et al. (2013) both contain further
examples of problems in which hierarchical modeling is
critical to obtaining high-quality inferences.
Within the machine learning and vision literature,
Salakhutdinov et al. (2011) offers an illustrative case study
in the benefits and the pitfalls of employing a hierarchical model. The motivation of Salakhutdinov et al. (2011)
was that, for image classification tasks, some categories
of objects (e.g., “car” or “dog”) have many labeled positive and negative examples while other, visually related,
categories (e.g., “bus” or “anteater”) have only a few labeled examples. Fig. 1(right, a) shows the distribution of
training examples for the 200 object categories used while
Fig. 1(right, b) shows the same distribution, but now objects are grouped with those with similar appearances. In
both cases, the distributions are fat-tailed: there are a few
categories with many training examples and many categories with a few training examples. It was hypothesized
that by using a hierarchical Bayesian model, the classes
with large amounts of labeled data could be used to construct better classifiers for the classes with small amounts
of labeled data.
The model used by Salakhutdinov et al. (2011), which

