How Can Deep Rectifier Networks Achieve Linear Separability and
Preserve Distances?
Senjian An
SENJIAN . AN @ UWA . EDU . AU
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia, Australia
Farid Boussaid
FARID . BOUSSAID @ UWA . EDU . AU
School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, The University of Western Australia, Australia
Mohammed Bennamoun
MOHAMMED . BENNAMOUN @ UWA . EDU . AU
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western Australia, Australia

Abstract
This paper investigates how hidden layers of
deep rectifier networks are capable of transforming two or more pattern sets to be linearly separable while preserving the distances with a guaranteed degree, and proves the universal classification power of such distance preserving rectifier
networks. Through the nearly isometric nonlinear transformation in the hidden layers, the margin of the linear separating plane in the output
layer and the margin of the nonlinear separating
boundary in the original data space can be closely
related so that the maximum margin classification in the input data space can be achieved approximately via the maximum margin linear classifiers in the output layer. The generalization performance of such distance preserving deep rectifier neural networks can be well justified by
the distance-preserving properties of their hidden
layers and the maximum margin property of the
linear classifiers in the output layer.

1. Introduction
With the exponential increase in computing power and
the development of efficient training techniques (Hinton
et al., 2006; Glorot & Bengio, 2010; Sutskever, 2013),
deep learning networks have achieved impressive successes
across a wide variety of domains such as speech recognition ((Seide et al., 2011; Hinton et al., 2012; Deng et al.,
2013), handwritten digit recognition (Ciresan et al., 2012),
object recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Zeiler & FerProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

gus, 2014; Lee et al., 2014; He et al., 2015) and face verification (Taigman et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2014).
Deep rectifier networks, wherein the rectifier (i.e.
max(0, x)) acts as the nonlinear activation function, are
among the most successful deep learning networks. The
training advantages and improved performance of rectifiers
over sigmodal activation functions have been shown in a
number of recent deep learning networks (Nair & Hinton,
2010; Zeiler et al., 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Bengio,
2013; Maas et al., 2013; Glorot et al., 2011), with rectifier networks providing some of the best results on several
benchmark problems for object classification (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) and speech recognition (Dahl et al., 2013).
While there is a vast body of empirical evidence for the
excellent generalization performance of deep neural networks, there is only a limited body of works that have
sought to provide a theoretical justification of such performance. Most of the theoretical works have focused on the
universal approximation power of deep neural networks for
functions (Hornik et al., 1989) or for probability distributions (Le Roux & Bengio, 2010; Montufar & Ay, 2011).
Recently, several publications have investigated the superior expressive power of deep networks against shallow networks (i.e., with a single hidden layer). (Delalleau & Bengio, 2011) showed that the deep network representation of
a certain family of polynomials can be much more compact
(i.e., with less hidden units) than that provided by a shallow
network. Similarly, with the same number of hidden units,
deep networks are able to separate their input space into
much more regions of linearity than their shallow counterparts (Pascanu et al., 2014; Montúfar et al., 2014). However, the universal approximation power and the superior
expressive power are not enough to explain the superior
generalization performance of deep neural networks. In
fact, there is currently no clear theoretical justification of

