Gradient-based Hyperparameter Optimization through Reversible Learning

Dougal Maclaurin†
David Duvenaud†
Ryan P. Adams

MACLAURIN @ PHYSICS . HARVARD . EDU
DDUVENAUD @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Abstract

ht

Wei

ght

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems abound with hyperparameters.
These can be parameters that control model complexity,
such as L1 and L2 penalties, or parameters that specify the
learning procedure itself – step sizes, momentum decay parameters and initialization conditions. Choosing the best
hyperparameters is both crucial and frustratingly difficult.
The current gold standard for hyperparameter selection
is gradient-free model-based optimization (Snoek et al.,
2012; Bergstra et al., 2011; 2013; Hutter et al., 2011). Hyperparameters are chosen to optimize the validation loss
after complete training of the model parameters. These
approaches have demonstrated that automatic tuning of
hyperparameters can yield state-of-the-art performance.
However, in general they are not able to effectively optimize more than 10 to 20 hyperparameters.
Why not use gradients? Reverse-mode differentiation allows gradients to be computed with a similar time cost to
the original objective function. This approach is taken al†

The order of these two authors is random.
github.com/hips/author-roulette

Initial weights
Meta-iteration 1
Meta-iteration 2
Meta-iteration 3

Training loss

Tuning hyperparameters of learning algorithms
is hard because gradients are usually unavailable.
We compute exact gradients of cross-validation
performance with respect to all hyperparameters
by chaining derivatives backwards through the
entire training procedure. These gradients allow us to optimize thousands of hyperparameters, including step-size and momentum schedules, weight initialization distributions, richly parameterized regularization schemes, and neural
network architectures. We compute hyperparameter gradients by exactly reversing the dynamics
of stochastic gradient descent with momentum.

See

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

W

2

g
ei

1

Figure 1. Hyperparameter optimization by gradient descent. Each
meta-iteration runs an entire training run of stochastic gradient descent to optimize elementary parameters (weights 1 and 2). Gradients of the validation loss with respect to hyperparameters are
then computed by propagating gradients back through the elementary training iterations. Hyperparameters (in this case, learning
rate and momentum schedules) are then updated in the direction
of this hypergradient.

most universally for optimization of elementary1 parameters. The problem with taking gradients with respect to hyperparameters is that computing the validation loss requires
an inner loop of elementary optimization, which makes
naı̈ve reverse-mode differentiation infeasible from a memory perspective. Section 2 describes this problem and proposes a solution, which is the main technical contribution
of this paper.
Gaining access to gradients with respect to hyperparamters
opens up a garden of delights. Instead of straining to
eliminate hyperparameters from our models, we can embrace them, and richly hyperparameterize our models. Just
as having a high-dimensional elementary parameterization
gives a flexible model, having a high-dimensional hyperparameterization gives flexibility over model classes, regularization, and training methods. Section 3 explores these
new opportunities.
1

Since this paper is about hyperparameters, we use “elementary” to unambiguously denote the other sort of parameter, the
“parameter-that-is-just-a-parameter-and-not-a-hyperparameter”.

