Privacy for Free: Posterior Sampling and Stochastic Gradient Monte Carlo
Yu-Xiang Wang†
YUXIANGW @ CS . CMU . EDU
Stephen E. Fienberg],†
FIENBERG @ STAT. CMU . EDU
Alexander J. Smola†,‡
ALEX @ SMOLA . ORG
†
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
]
Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
‡
Marianas Labs Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
We consider the problem of Bayesian learning on sensitive datasets and present two simple but somewhat surprising results that connect Bayesian learning to “differential privacy”,
a cryptographic approach to protect individuallevel privacy while permitting database-level
utility. Specifically, we show that under standard
assumptions, getting one sample from a posterior
distribution is differentially private “for free”;
and this sample as a statistical estimator is often consistent, near optimal, and computationally tractable. Similarly but separately, we show
that a recent line of work that use stochastic gradient for Hybrid Monte Carlo (HMC) sampling
also preserve differentially privacy with minor or
no modifications of the algorithmic procedure at
all, these observations lead to an “anytime” algorithm for Bayesian learning under privacy constraint. We demonstrate that it performs much
better than the state-of-the-art differential private
methods on synthetic and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Bayesian models have proven to be one of the most successful classes of tools in machine learning. It stands out
as a principled yet conceptually simple pipeline for combining expert knowledge and statistical evidence, modeling with complicated dependency structures and harnessing uncertainty by making probabilistic inferences (Geman & Geman, 1984; Gelman et al., 2014). In the past
few decades, the Bayesian approach has been intensively
used in modeling speeches (Rabiner, 1989), text documents
(Blei et al., 2003), images/videos (Fei-Fei & Perona, 2005),
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

social networks (Airoldi et al., 2009), brain activity (Penny
et al., 2011), and is often considered gold standard in many
of these application domains. Learning a Bayesisan model
typically involves sampling from a posterior distribution,
therefore the learning process is inherently randomized.
Differential privacy (DP) is a cryptography-inspired notion
of privacy (Dwork, 2006; Dwork et al., 2006). It is designed to provide a very strong form of protection of individual user’s private information and at the same time allow data analyses to be conducted with proper utility. Any
algorithm that preserves differential privacy must be appropriately randomized too. For instance, one can differentialprivately release the average salary of Californian males by
adding a Laplace noise proportional to the sensitivity of this
figure upon small perturbation of the data sample.
In this paper, we connect the two seemingly unrelated concepts by showing that under standard assumptions, the intrinsic randomization in the Bayesian learning can be exploited to obtain a degree of differential privacy. In particular, we show that:
• Any algorithm that produces a single sample from
the exact (or approximate) posterior distribution of a
Bayesian model with bounded log-likelihood is ✏ (or
(✏, ))-differentially private1 . By the classic results in
asymptotic statistics (Le Cam, 1986; Van der Vaart,
2000), we show that this posterior sample is a consistent estimator whenever the Bayesian model is consistent; and near optimal whenever standard regularity
conditions of the maximum likelihood estimate hold.
• The popular large-scale sampler Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011) and extensions, e.g. Ahn et al. (2012); Chen et al. (2014); Ding
et al. (2014) obey (✏, )-differentially private with no
algorithmic changes when the stepsize is chosen to
1

The same observation appeared earlier in Mir (2013) and
Dimitrakakis et al. (2014) under slightly different regimes and assumptions (see Appendix F for details).

