Fixed-point algorithms for learning determinantal point processes

Zelda Mariet
Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) offer an elegant tool for encoding probabilities over subsets
of a ground set. Discrete DPPs are parametrized
by a positive semidefinite matrix (called the DPP
kernel), and estimating this kernel is key to learning DPPs from observed data. We consider the
task of learning the DPP kernel, and develop for it
a surprisingly simple yet effective new algorithm.
Our algorithm offers the following benefits over
previous approaches: (a) it is much simpler; (b) it
yields equally good and sometimes even better local maxima; and (c) it runs an order of magnitude
faster on large problems. We present experimental
results on both real and simulated data to illustrate
the numerical performance of our technique.

1. Introduction
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) arose in statistical mechanics, where they were originally used to model
fermions (Macchi, 1975). Recently, they have witnessed
substantial interest in a variety of machine learning applications (Kulesza, 2013; Kulesza and Taskar, 2012).
One of the key features of DPPs is their ability to model the
notion of diversity while respecting quality, a concern that
underlies the broader task of subset selection where balancing quality with diversity is a well-known issue—see e.g.,
document summarization (Lin and Bilmes, 2012), object
retrieval (Affandi et al., 2014), recommender systems (Zhou
et al., 2010), and sensor placement (Krause et al., 2008).

ZELDA @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU
SUVRIT @ MIT. EDU

for instance (Gillenwater et al., 2014); (Kulesza and Taskar,
2011b); (Kulesza and Taskar, 2011a); (Affandi et al., 2014);
(Affandi et al., 2103); (Affandi et al., 2013); (Gillenwater
et al., 2012). For additional references and material we refer
the reader to the survey (Kulesza and Taskar, 2012).
Our paper is motivated by the recent work of Gillenwater
et al. (2014), who made notable progress on the task of
learning a DPP kernel from data. This task is conjectured
to be NP-Hard (Kulesza, 2013, Conjecture 4.1). Gillenwater et al. (2014) presented a carefully designed EM-style
procedure, which, unlike several previous approaches (e.g.,
(Kulesza and Taskar, 2011b;a; Affandi et al., 2014)) learns
a full DPP kernel nonparameterically.
One main observation of Gillenwater et al. (2014) is that
applying projected gradient ascent to the DPP log-likelihood
usually results in degenerate estimates (because it involves
projection onto the set {X : 0  X  I}). Hence one may
wonder if instead we could apply more sophisticated manifold optimization techniques (Absil et al., 2009; Boumal
et al., 2014). While this idea is attractive, and indeed applicable, e.g., via the excellent M ANOPT toolbox (Boumal
et al., 2014), empirically it turns out to be computationally
too demanding; the EM strategy of Gillenwater et al. (2014)
is more practical.
We depart from both EM and manifold optimization to develop a new learning algorithm that (a) is simple, yet powerful; and (b) yields essentially the same log-likelihood values
as the EM approach while running significantly faster. In
particular, our algorithm runs an order of magnitude faster
on larger problems.

Within machine learning DPPs have found good use—see

The key innovation of our approach is a derivation via a
fixed-point view, which by construction ensures positive
definiteness at every iteration. Its convergence analysis involves an implicit bound-optimization iteration to ensure
monotonic ascent.1 A pleasant byproduct of the fixed-point
approach is that it avoids any eigenvalue/vector computations, enabling a further savings in running time.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1
The convergence analysis in this version of the paper improves
upon our original submission, in that our proof is now constructive
and requires weaker assumptions.

DPPs are also interesting in their own right: they have
various combinatorial, probabilistic, and analytic properties,
while involving a fascinating set of open problems (Lyons,
2003; Hough et al., 2006; Kulesza, 2013).

