Convex Formulation for Learning from Positive and Unlabeled Data

Marthinus Christoffel du Plessis
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Gang Niu
Baidu Inc., Beijing, 100085, China

NIUGANG @ BAIDU . CN

Masashi Sugiyama
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
We discuss binary classification from only positive and unlabeled data (PU classification),
which is conceivable in various real-world machine learning problems. Since unlabeled data
consists of both positive and negative data, simply separating positive and unlabeled data yields
a biased solution. Recently, it was shown that
the bias can be canceled by using a particular
non-convex loss such as the ramp loss. However,
classifier training with a non-convex loss is not
straightforward in practice. In this paper, we discuss a convex formulation for PU classification
that can still cancel the bias. The key idea is to
use different loss functions for positive and unlabeled samples. However, in this setup, the hinge
loss is not permissible. As an alternative, we propose the double hinge loss. Theoretically, we
prove that the estimators converge to the optimal
solutions at the optimal parametric rate. Experimentally, we demonstrate that PU classification
with the double hinge loss performs as accurate
as the non-convex method, with a much lower
computational cost.

1. Introduction
Let us consider the problem of learning a classifier only
from positive and unlabeled data. This problem, which refer to as PU classification, arises in various practical situations under different guises. For example:
• The goal of identification is to find samples in an unlabeled dataset that are similar to the samples provided
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

CHRISTO @ MS . K . U - TOKYO . AC . JP

SUGI @ K . U - TOKYO . AC . JP

by a user. Such a situation occurs, e.g., in automatic
face tagging: a user provides a set of images of himself, and the task is to automatically tag photos in the
user’s photo album.
• Inlier-based outlier detection is aimed at identifying outliers in an unlabeled dataset based on another
dataset that consists only of inliers (Hido et al., 2008;
Smola et al., 2009). Thanks to the information brought
by the inlier dataset, this inlier-based approach is
more powerful than the conventional completely unsupervised approach. This problem is also known as
semi-supervised novelty detection (Scott & Blanchard,
2009; Blanchard et al., 2010).
• If the negative class is too diverse, it is difficult to
collect negative data in a representative way. Such a
situation is typically observable in “one-vs-rest” classification. For example, when classifying land cover
images into urban and non-urban regions (Li et al.,
2011), it is easy to obtain urban samples, but it is difficult to representatively collect diverse non-urban samples.
• The negative-class dataset shift changes the probability distributions of negative samples between the time
when the training data is collected and when the classifier is applied to the test data. Solving this problem with an ordinary classifier would require constant
generation of the negative dataset to keep up with the
changing distributions. On the other hand, PU classification only requires to update the unlabeled dataset,
which is much less costly. Negative-class dataset shift
may occur in spam detection, where adversarial spammers may change the tendency of negative samples
(‘spam’) to defeat the existing classifier, while the
positive class (‘non-spam’) is expected to remain stable over time.
Given its wide applicability as described above, PU classification is gathering a great deal of attention these days.
A naive approach to PU classification is to train a classi-

