A Nearly-Linear Time Framework for Graph-Structured Sparsity

Chinmay Hegde
Piotr Indyk
Ludwig Schmidt∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
We introduce a framework for sparsity structures
defined via graphs. Our approach is flexible
and generalizes several previously studied sparsity models. Moreover, we provide efficient projection algorithms for our sparsity model that run
in nearly-linear time. In the context of sparse recovery, we show that our framework achieves an
information-theoretically optimal sample complexity for a wide range of parameters. We
complement our theoretical analysis with experiments demonstrating that our algorithms also improve on prior work in practice.

CHINMAY @ MIT. EDU
INDYK @ MIT. EDU
LUDWIGS @ MIT. EDU

ter multi-label classification, or smaller sample complexity
in compressive sensing and statistics. Hence an important
question is the following: how can we model such sparsity
structures, and how can we make effective use of this additional information in a computationally efficient manner?
There has been a wide range of work addressing these questions, e.g., (Yuan & Lin, 2006; Jacob et al., 2009; He &
Carin, 2009; Kim & Xing, 2010; Bi & Kwok, 2011; Huang
et al., 2011; Duarte & Eldar, 2011; Bach et al., 2012b; Rao
et al., 2012; Negahban et al., 2012; Simon et al., 2013;
El Halabi & Cevher, 2015). Usually, the proposed solutions
offer a trade-off between the following conflicting goals:
Generality What range of sparsity structures does the approach apply to?

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, sparsity has emerged as an important
tool in several fields including signal processing, statistics,
and machine learning. In compressive sensing, sparsity reduces the sample complexity of measuring a signal, and
statistics utilizes sparsity for high-dimensional inference
tasks. In many settings, sparsity is a useful ingredient because it enables us to model structure in high-dimensional
data while still remaining a mathematically tractable concept. For instance, natural images are often sparse when
represented in a wavelet basis, and objects in a classification task usually belong to only a small number of classes.
Due to the success of sparsity, a natural question is how we
can refine the notion of sparsity in order to capture more
complex structures. There are many examples where such
an approach is applicable: (i) large wavelet coefficients
of natural images tend to form connected trees, (ii) active
genes can be arranged in functional groups, and (iii) approximate point sources in astronomical data often form
clusters. In such cases, exploiting this additional structure
can lead to improved compression ratio for images, betProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Statistical efficiency What statistical performance improvements does the use of structure enable?
Computational efficiency How fast are the resulting algorithms?
In this paper, we introduce a framework for sparsity models defined through graphs, and we show that it achieves a
compelling trade-off between the goals outlined above. At
a high level, our approach applies to data with an underlying graph structure in which the large coefficients form
a small number of connected components (optionally with
additional constraints on the edges). Our approach offers
three main features: (i) Generality: the framework encompasses several previously studied sparsity models, e.g.,
tree sparsity and cluster sparsity. (ii) Statistical efficiency:
our sparsity model leads to reduced sample complexity
in sparse recovery and achieves the information-theoretic
optimum for a wide range of parameters. (iii) Computational efficiency: we give a nearly-linear time algorithm for
our sparsity model, significantly improving on prior work
both in theory and in practice. Due to the growing size
of data sets encountered in science and engineering, algorithms with (nearly-)linear running time are becoming increasingly important.
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

