The Kendall and Mallows Kernels for Permutations
Yunlong Jiao
YUNLONG . JIAO @ MINES - PARISTECH . FR
Jean-Philippe Vert
JEAN - PHILIPPE . VERT @ MINES - PARISTECH . FR
MINES ParisTech – CBIO, PSL Research University, Institut Curie, INSERM U900, Paris, France

Abstract
We show that the widely used Kendall tau correlation coefficient, and the related Mallows kernel, are positive definite kernels for permutations. They offer computationally attractive
alternatives to more complex kernels on the
symmetric group to learn from rankings, or to
learn to rank. We show how to extend the
Kendall kernel to partial rankings or rankings
with uncertainty, and demonstrate promising results on high-dimensional classification problems in biomedical applications.

1. Introduction
Kernel-based algorithms have been proved successful in
numerous applications and enjoy great popularity in the
machine learning community (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995;
Vapnik, 1998; Schölkopf & Smola, 2002; Shawe-Taylor &
Cristianini, 2004). The essential idea behind these methods is to define a positive definite kernel K : X × X → R
over an input space X , which can often be thought of as a
measure of similarity, and which implicitly defines an embedding Φ : X → F of the input space X to a Hilbert
space F in which the kernel becomes an inner product:
∀x, x0 ∈ X ,

K(x, x0 ) = hΦ(x), Φ(x0 )iF .

Kernel methods operate implicitly in the Hilbert space F,
which can be high-dimensional, by only manipulating the
kernel function between data. This kernel trick is particularly interesting when K(x, x0 ) is inexpensive to evaluate,
compared to Φ(x) and Φ(x0 ). In particular, kernel methods
have found many applications where the input data are discrete or structured, such as strings or graphs, thanks to the
development of numerous kernels for these data (Haussler,
1999; Kashima et al., 2003; Gärtner et al., 2004; ShaweTaylor & Cristianini, 2004; Schölkopf et al., 2004; Vishwanathan et al., 2009).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

In this paper, we are interested in developing and studying positive definite kernels for a particular type of discrete
data, namely, permutations. A permutation is a 1-to-1 mapping from a finite set into itself. Permutations are ubiquitous in many applications involving rankings or partial
rankings, such as analyzing data describing the preferences
or votes of a population (Diaconis, 1988), learning or tracking correspondances between sets of objects (Huang et al.,
2009), or estimating a single ranking that best represents a
collection of individual rankings (Ailon et al., 2008). Another potentially rich source of ranking data comes from
real-valued vectors in which the relative order of the values
of multiple features is more important than their absolute
magnitude. For example, in the case of high-dimensional
gene expression data, Geman et al. (2004) showed that simple classifiers based on binary comparisons between the
expression of different genes in a sample show competitive prediction accuracy with much more complex classifiers built on the quantitative gene expression levels, a line
of thoughts that have been further investigated by Tan et al.
(2005); Xu et al. (2005); Lin et al. (2009). In these approaches, a n-dimensional vector is thus first transformed
into a permutation by sorting its entries, and a classifier is
trained on the resulting permutations.
Working with permutations is, however, computationally
challenging. There are n! permutations of n items, suggesting that various simplifications or approximations are
necessary in pursuit of efficient algorithms to analyze or
learn permutations. Such simplifications include for example, reducing ranks to a series of binary decisions (Ailon
et al., 2008; Balcan et al., 2008), or estimating a parametric distribution over permutations (Lebanon & Mao, 2008;
Helmbold & Warmuth, 2009; Huang et al., 2009).
In this context, it is surprising that relatively little attention has been paid to the problem of defining positive definite kernels between permutations, which could pave the
way to the use of computationally efficient kernel methods in problems involving permutations. A notable exception is the work of Kondor (2008); Kondor & Barbosa
(2010), who exploit the fact that the set of permutations
endowed with the composition operation forms a group,

