The Power of Randomization: Distributed Submodular Maximization on
Massive Datasets
Rafael Barbosa1
Department of Computer Science and DIMAP, University of Warwick

RAFAEL @ DCS . WARWICK . AC . UK

Alina Ene
Department of Computer Science and DIMAP, University of Warwick

A.E NE @ DCS . WARWICK . AC . UK

Huy Le Nguyen
Simons Institute, University of California, Berkeley

HLNGUYEN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Justin Ward
Department of Computer Science and DIMAP, University of Warwick

J.D.WARD @ DCS . WARWICK . AC . UK

Abstract
A wide variety of problems in machine learning,
including exemplar clustering, document summarization, and sensor placement, can be cast
as constrained submodular maximization problems. Unfortunately, the resulting submodular
optimization problems are often too large to be
solved on a single machine. We consider a distributed, greedy algorithm that combines previous approaches with randomization. The result
is an algorithm that is embarrassingly parallel
and achieves provable, constant factor, worstcase approximation guarantees. In our experiments, we demonstrate its efficiency in large
problems with different kinds of constraints with
objective values always close to what is achievable in the centralized setting.

1. Introduction
A set function f : 2V ! R 0 on a ground set V is submodular if f (A) + f (B) f (A \ B) + f (A [ B) for any
two sets A, B ✓ V . Several problems of interest can be
modeled as maximizing a submodular objective function
subject to certain constraints:
max f (A) subject to A 2 C,
where C ✓ 2V is the family of feasible solutions. Indeed, the general meta-problem of optimizing a constrained
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

submodular function captures a wide variety of problems
in machine learning applications, including exemplar clustering, document summarization, sensor placement, image
segmentation, maximum entropy sampling, and feature selection.
At the same time, in many of these applications, the amount
of data that is collected is quite large and it is growing at
a very fast pace. For example, the wide deployment of
sensors has led to the collection of large amounts of measurements of the physical world. Similarly, medical data
and human activity data are being captured and stored at an
ever increasing rate and level of detail. This data is often
high-dimensional and complex, and it needs to be stored
and processed in a distributed fashion.
In these settings, it is apparent that the classical algorithmic approaches are no longer suitable and new algorithmic
insights are needed in order to cope with these challenges.
The algorithmic challenges stem from the following competing demands imposed by huge datasets: the computations need to process the data that is distributed across several machines using a minimal amount of communication
and synchronization across the machines, and at the same
time deliver solutions that are competitive with the centralized solution on the entire dataset.
The main question driving the current work is whether
these competing goals can be reconciled. More precisely,
can we deliver very good approximate solutions with minimal communication overhead? Perhaps surprisingly, the
answer is yes; there is a very simple distributed greedy
algorithm that is embarrassingly parallel and it achieves
1

The authors are listed alphabetically.

