Towards a Learning Theory of Cause-Effect Inference

David Lopez-Paz1,2
Krikamol Muandet1
Bernhard Schölkopf1
Ilya Tolstikhin1
1
Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems
2
University of Cambridge

Abstract
We pose causal inference as the problem of learning to classify probability distributions. In
particular, we assume access to a collection
{(Si , li )}ni=1 , where each Si is a sample drawn
from the probability distribution of Xi ×Yi , and li
is a binary label indicating whether “Xi → Yi ” or
“Xi ← Yi ”. Given these data, we build a causal
inference rule in two steps. First, we featurize
each Si using the kernel mean embedding associated with some characteristic kernel. Second,
we train a binary classifier on such embeddings to
distinguish between causal directions. We present
generalization bounds showing the statistical consistency and learning rates of the proposed approach, and provide a simple implementation that
achieves state-of-the-art cause-effect inference.
Furthermore, we extend our ideas to infer causal
relationships between more than two variables.

1. Introduction
The vast majority of statistical learning algorithms rely on
the exploitation of associations between the variables under study. Given the argument that all associations arise
from underlying causal structures (Reichenbach, 1956), and
that different structures imply different influences between
variables, the question of how to infer and use causal knowledge in learning acquires great importance (Pearl, 2000;
Schölkopf et al., 2012). Traditionally, the most widely
used strategy to infer the causal structure of a system is
to perform interventions on some of its variables, while
studying the response of some others. However, such interventions are in many situations unethical, expensive, or
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DAVID @ LOPEZPAZ . ORG
KRIKAMOL @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
ILYA @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE

even impossible to realize. Consequently, we often face the
need of causal inference purely from observational data.
In these scenarios, one suffers, in the absence of strong
assumptions, from the indistinguishability between latent
confounding (X ← Z → Y ) and direct causation (X → Y
or X ← Y ). Nevertheless, disregarding the impossibility
of the task, humans continuously learn from experience to
accurately infer causality-revealing patterns. Inspired by
this successful learning, and in contrast to prior work, this
paper addresses causal inference by unveiling such causal
patterns directly from data. In particular, we assume access
to a set {(Si , li )}ni=1 , where each Si is a sample set drawn
from the probability distribution of Xi × Yi , and li is a
binary label indicating whether “Xi → Yi ” or “Xi ← Yi ”.
Using these data, we build a causal inference rule in two
steps. First, we construct a suitable and nonparametric representation of each sample Si . Second, we train a nonlinear
binary classifier on such features to distinguish between
causal directions. Building upon this framework, we derive
theoretical guarantees regarding consistency and learning
rates, extend inference to the multivariate case, propose
approximations to scale learning to big data, and obtain
state-of-the-art performance with a simple implementation.
Given the ubiquity of uncertainty in data, which may arise
from noisy measurements or the existence of unobserved
common causes, we adopt the probabilistic interpretation of
causation from Pearl (2000). Under this interpretation, the
causal structure underlying a set of random variables X =
(X1 , . . . , Xd ), with joint distribution P , is often described
in terms of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), denoted by
G = (V, E). In this graph, each vertex Vi ∈ V is associated
to the random variable Xi ∈ X, and an edge Eji ∈ E
from Vj to Vi denotes the causal relationship “Xi ← Xj ”.
More specifically, these causal relationships are defined by
a structural equation model: each Xi ← fi (Pa(Xi ), Ni ),
where fi is a function, Pa(Xi ) is the parental set of Vi ∈ V ,
and Ni is some independent noise variable. Then, causal
inference is the task of recovering G from S ∼ P n .

