Nested Sequential Monte Carlo Methods

Christian A. Naesseth
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden

CHRISTIAN . A . NAESSETH @ LIU . SE

Fredrik Lindsten
The University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom

FREDRIK . LINDSTEN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

Thomas B. Schön
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

THOMAS . SCHON @ IT. UU . SE

Abstract
We propose nested sequential Monte Carlo
(NSMC), a methodology to sample from sequences of probability distributions, even where
the random variables are high-dimensional.
NSMC generalises the SMC framework by requiring only approximate, properly weighted,
samples from the SMC proposal distribution,
while still resulting in a correct SMC algorithm.
Furthermore, NSMC can in itself be used to produce such properly weighted samples. Consequently, one NSMC sampler can be used to construct an efficient high-dimensional proposal distribution for another NSMC sampler, and this
nesting of the algorithm can be done to an arbitrary degree. This allows us to consider complex
and high-dimensional models using SMC. We
show results that motivate the efficacy of our approach on several filtering problems with dimensions in the order of 100 to 1 000.

1. Introduction
Inference in complex and high-dimensional statistical models is a very challenging problem that is ubiquitous in applications. Examples include, but are definitely not limited
to, climate informatics (Monteleoni et al., 2013), bioinformatics (Cohen, 2004) and machine learning (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008). In particular, we are interested in sequential
Bayesian inference, which involves computing integrals of
the form
Z
π̄k (f ) := Eπ̄k [f (X1:k )] = f (x1:k )π̄k (x1:k )dx1:k , (1)
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

···

···

···
···

···
···

···

···

···

···

···

···
k−1

k

k+1

Figure 1. Example of a spatio-temporal model where π̄k (x1:k ) is
given by a k × 2 × 3 undirected graphical model and xk ∈ R2×3 .

for some sequence of probability densities
π̄k (x1:k ) = Zπ−1
πk (x1:k ),
k

k ≥ 1,

(2)

R

with normalisation constants Zπk =
πk (x1:k )dx1:k .
Note that x1:k := (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ Xk . The typical scenario
that we consider is the well-known problem of inference
in time series or state space models (Shumway & Stoffer,
2011; Cappé et al., 2005). Here the index k corresponds to
time and we want to process some observations y1:k in a
sequential manner to compute expectations with respect to
the filtering distribution π̄k (dxk ) = P(Xk ∈ dxk | y1:k ).
To be specific, we are interested in settings where
(i) Xk is high-dimensional, i.e. Xk ∈ Rd with d  1, and
(ii) there are local dependencies among the latent variables
X1:k , both w.r.t. time k and between the individual
components of the (high-dimensional) vectors Xk .
One example of the type of models we consider are the
so-called spatio-temporal models (Wikle, 2015; Cressie &
Wikle, 2011; Rue & Held, 2005). In Figure 1 we provide
a probabilistic graphical model representation of a spatiotemporal model that we will explore further in Section 6.
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methods, reviewed in Section 2.1, comprise one of the most successful methodolo-

