Faster Cover Trees
Mike Izbicki
Christian R. Shelton
University of California Riverside, 900 University Ave, Riverside, CA 92521

Abstract
The cover tree data structure speeds up exact
nearest neighbor queries over arbitrary metric
spaces (Beygelzimer et al., 2006). This paper
makes cover trees even faster. In particular, we
provide
1. A simpler definition of the cover tree that
reduces the number of nodes from O(n) to
exactly n,
2. An additional invariant that makes queries
faster in practice,
3. Algorithms for constructing and querying
the tree in parallel on multiprocessor systems, and
4. A more cache efficient memory layout.
On standard benchmark datasets, we reduce the
number of distance computations by 10–50%.
On a large-scale bioinformatics dataset, we reduce the number of distance computations by
71%. On a large-scale image dataset, our parallel
algorithm with 16 cores reduces tree construction
time from 3.5 hours to 12 minutes.

1. Introduction
Data structures for fast nearest neighbor queries are most
often used to speed up the k-nearest neighbor classification algorithm. But many other learning tasks also require neighbor searches, and cover trees can speed up these
tasks as well: localized support vector machines (Segata
& Blanzieri, 2010), dimensionality reduction (Lisitsyn
et al., 2013), and reinforcement learning (Tziortziotis et al.,
2014). Making cover trees faster—the main contribution of
this paper—also makes these other tasks faster.
Given a space of points X , a dataset X ⊆ X , a data point
p ∈ X , and a distance function d : X × X → R, the nearProceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MIZBI 001@ UCR . EDU
CSHELTON @ CS . UCR . EDU

est neighbor of p in X is defined as
pnn = arg min d(p, q)
q∈X−{p}

The naive method for computing pnn involves a linear scan
of all the data points and takes time θ (n), but many data
structures have been created to speed up this process. The
kd-tree (Friedman et al., 1977) is probably the most famous. It is simple and effective in practice, but it can only
be used on Euclidean spaces. We must turn to other data
structures when given an arbitrary metric space. The simplest and oldest of these structures is the ball tree (Omohundro, 1989). Although attractive for its simplicity, it provides only the trivial runtime guarantee that queries will
take time O(n). Subsequent research focused on providing stronger guarantees, producing more complicated data
structures like the metric skip list (Karger & Ruhl, 2002)
and the navigating net (Krauthgamer & Lee, 2004). Because these data structures were complex and had large
constant factors, they were mostly of theoretical interest.
The cover tree (Beygelzimer et al., 2006) simplified navigating nets while maintaining good run time guarantees.
Further research has strengthened the theoretical runtime
bounds provided by the cover tree (Ram et al., 2010). Our
contributions make the cover tree faster in practice.
The cover tree as originally introduced is simpler than related data structures, but it is not simple. The original explanation required an implicit tree with an infinite number
of nodes; but a smaller, explicit tree with O(n) nodes actually gets implemented. We refer to this presentation as
the original cover tree. In the remainder of this paper we
introduce the simplified cover tree and the nearest ancestor
cover tree; parallel construction and querying algorithms;
and a cache-efficient layout suitable for all three cover
trees. We conclude with experiments showing: on standard benchmark datasets we outperform both the original
implementation (Beygelzimer et al., 2006) and MLPack’s
implementation (Curtin et al., 2013a); on a large bioinformatics dataset, our nearest ancestor tree uses 71% fewer
distance comparisons than the original cover tree; and on a
large image data set, our parallelization algorithm reduces
tree construction time from 3.5 hours to 12 minutes.

