DRAW: A Recurrent Neural Network For Image Generation

Karol Gregor
Ivo Danihelka
Alex Graves
Danilo Jimenez Rezende
Daan Wierstra
Google DeepMind

KAROLG @ GOOGLE . COM
DANIHELKA @ GOOGLE . COM
GRAVESA @ GOOGLE . COM
DANILOR @ GOOGLE . COM
WIERSTRA @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
This paper introduces the Deep Recurrent Attentive Writer (DRAW) neural network architecture
for image generation. DRAW networks combine
a novel spatial attention mechanism that mimics
the foveation of the human eye, with a sequential
variational auto-encoding framework that allows
for the iterative construction of complex images.
The system substantially improves on the state
of the art for generative models on MNIST, and,
when trained on the Street View House Numbers
dataset, it generates images that cannot be distinguished from real data with the naked eye.

1. Introduction
A person asked to draw, paint or otherwise recreate a visual
scene will naturally do so in a sequential, iterative fashion,
reassessing their handiwork after each modification. Rough
outlines are gradually replaced by precise forms, lines are
sharpened, darkened or erased, shapes are altered, and the
final picture emerges. Most approaches to automatic image generation, however, aim to generate entire scenes at
once. In the context of generative neural networks, this typically means that all the pixels are conditioned on a single
latent distribution (Dayan et al., 1995; Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Larochelle & Murray, 2011). As well as precluding the possibility of iterative self-correction, the “one
shot” approach is fundamentally difficult to scale to large
images. The Deep Recurrent Attentive Writer (DRAW) architecture represents a shift towards a more natural form of
image construction, in which parts of a scene are created
independently from others, and approximate sketches are
successively refined.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Time

Figure 1. A trained DRAW network generating MNIST digits. Each row shows successive stages in the generation of a single digit. Note how the lines composing the digits appear to be
“drawn” by the network. The red rectangle delimits the area attended to by the network at each time-step, with the focal precision indicated by the width of the rectangle border.

The core of the DRAW architecture is a pair of recurrent
neural networks: an encoder network that compresses the
real images presented during training, and a decoder that
reconstitutes images after receiving codes. The combined
system is trained end-to-end with stochastic gradient descent, where the loss function is a variational upper bound
on the log-likelihood of the data. It therefore belongs to the
family of variational auto-encoders, a recently emerged
hybrid of deep learning and variational inference that has
led to significant advances in generative modelling (Gregor et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al.,
2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Salimans et al., 2014). Where
DRAW differs from its siblings is that, rather than generat-

