Scalable Nonparametric Bayesian Inference on Point Processes with Gaussian
Processes
Yves-Laurent Kom Samo
Stephen Roberts
Deparment of Engineering Science and Oxford-Man Institute, University of Oxford

Abstract
In this paper we propose an efficient, scalable
non-parametric Gaussian process model for inference on Poisson point processes. Our model
does not resort to gridding the domain or to introducing latent thinning points. Unlike competing
models that scale as O(n3 ) over n data points,
our model has a complexity O(nk 2 ) where k 
n. We propose a MCMC sampler and show that
the model obtained is faster, more accurate and
generates less correlated samples than competing
approaches on both synthetic and real-life data.
Finally, we show that our model easily handles
data sizes not considered thus far by alternate approaches.

1. Introduction
Point processes are a standard model when the objects of
study are the number and repartition of otherwise identical
points on a domain, usually time or space. The Poisson
point process is probably the most commonly used point
process. It is fully characterised by an intensity function
that is inferred from the data. Gaussian processes have been
successfully used to form a prior over the (log-) intensity
function for applications such as astronomy (Gregory &
Loredo, 1992), forestry (Heikkinen & Arjas, 1999), finance
(Basu & Dassios, 2002), and neuroscience (Cunningham
et al., 2008b). We offer extensions to existing work as follows: we develop an exact non-parametric Bayesian model
that enables inference on Poisson processes. Our method
scales linearly with the number of data points and does not
resort to gridding the domain. We derive a MCMC sampler for core components of the model and show that our
approach offers a faster and more accurate solution, as well
as producing less correlated samples, compared to other approaches on both real-life and synthetic data.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YLKS @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
SJROB @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

2. Related Work
Non-parametric inference on point processes has been extensively studied in the literature. Rathbum & Cressie
(1994) and Moeller et al. (1998) used a finite-dimensional
piecewise constant log-Gaussian for the intensity function.
Such approximations are limited in that the choice of the
grid on which to represent the intensity function is arbitrary
and one has to trade-off precision with computational complexity and numerical accuracy, with the complexity being
cubic in the precision and exponential in the dimension of
the input space. Kottas (2006) and Kottas & Sanso (2007)
used a Dirichlet process mixture of Beta distributions as
prior for the normalised intensity function of a Poisson
process. Cunningham et al. (2008a) proposed a model
using Gaussian processes evaluated on a fixed grid for
the estimation of intensity functions of renewal processes
with log-concave renewal distributions. They turned hyperparameters inference into an iterative series of convex optimization problems, where ordinarily cubic complexity operations such as Cholesky decompositions are evaluated
in O(n log n) leveraging the uniformity of the grid and
the log-concavity of the renewal distribution. Adams et
al. (2009) proposed an exact Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) inference scheme for the posterior intensity function of a Poisson process with a sigmoid Gaussian prior
intensity, or equivalently a Cox process (Cox, 1955) with
sigmoid Gaussian stochastic intensity. The authors simplified the likelihood of a Cox process by introducing latent
thinning points. The proposed scheme has a complexity exponential in the dimension of the input space, cubic in the
number of data and thinning points, and performs particularly poorly when the data are sparse. Gunter et al. (2014)
extended this model to structured point processes. Rao &
Teh (2011) used uniformization to produce exact samples
from a non-stationary renewal process whose hazard function is modulated by a Gaussian process, and consequently
proposed a MCMC sampler to sample from the posterior
intensity of a unidimensional point process. Although the
authors have illustrated that their model is faster than that
of Adams et al. (2009) on some synthetic and real-life data,

