Cascading Bandits: Learning to Rank in the Cascade Model
Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA

KVETON @ ADOBE . COM

Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta

SZEPESVA @ CS . UALBERTA . CA

Zheng Wen
Yahoo Labs, Sunnyvale, CA

ZHENGWEN @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Azin Ashkan
Technicolor Research, Los Altos, CA

Abstract
A search engine usually outputs a list of K web
pages. The user examines this list, from the first
web page to the last, and chooses the first attractive page. This model of user behavior is known
as the cascade model. In this paper, we propose
cascading bandits, a learning variant of the cascade model where the objective is to identify K
most attractive items. We formulate our problem
as a stochastic combinatorial partial monitoring
problem. We propose two algorithms for solving
it, CascadeUCB1 and CascadeKL-UCB. We also
prove gap-dependent upper bounds on the regret
of these algorithms and derive a lower bound on
the regret in cascading bandits. The lower bound
matches the upper bound of CascadeKL-UCB up
to a logarithmic factor. We experiment with our
algorithms on several problems. The algorithms
perform surprisingly well even when our modeling assumptions are violated.

1. Introduction
The cascade model is a popular model of user behavior in
web search (Craswell et al., 2008). In this model, the user
is recommended a list of K items, such as web pages. The
user examines the recommended list from the first item to
the last, and selects the first attractive item. In web search,
this is manifested as a click. The items before the first attractive item are not attractive, because the user examines
these items but does not click on them. The items after the
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

AZIN . ASHKAN @ TECHNICOLOR . COM

first attractive item are unobserved, because the user never
examines these items. The optimal list, the list of K items
that maximizes the probability that the user finds an attractive item, are K most attractive items. The cascade model
is simple but effective in explaining the so-called position
bias in historical click data (Craswell et al., 2008). Therefore, it is a reasonable model of user behavior.
In this paper, we propose an online learning variant of the
cascade model, which we refer to as cascading bandits. In
this model, the learning agent does not know the attraction
probabilities of items. At time t, the agent recommends to
the user a list of K items out of L items and then observes
the index of the item that the user clicks. If the user clicks
on an item, the agent receives a reward of one. The goal of
the agent is to maximize its total reward, or equivalently to
minimize its cumulative regret with respect to the list of K
most attractive items. Our learning problem can be viewed
as a bandit problem where the reward of the agent is a part
of its feedback. But the feedback is richer than the reward.
Specifically, the agent knows that the items before the first
attractive item are not attractive.
We make five contributions. First, we formulate a learning
variant of the cascade model as a stochastic combinatorial
partial monitoring problem. Second, we propose two algorithms for solving it, CascadeUCB1 and CascadeKL-UCB.
CascadeUCB1 is motivated by CombUCB1, a computationally and sample efficient algorithm for stochastic combinatorial semi-bandits (Gai et al., 2012; Kveton et al., 2015).
CascadeKL-UCB is motivated by KL-UCB and we expect it
to perform better when the attraction probabilities of items
are low (Garivier & Cappe, 2011). This setting is common
in the problems of our interest, such as web search. Third,
we prove gap-dependent upper bounds on the regret of our
algorithms. Fourth, we derive a lower bound on the regret

