On Greedy Maximization of Entropy

Dravyansh Sharma
IIT Delhi, New Delhi, India

CS 1110214@ CSE . IITD . AC . IN

Amit Deshpande
Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India

AMITDESH @ MICROSOFT. COM

Ashish Kapoor
Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA

AKAPOOR @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
Submodular function maximization is one of the
key problems that arise in many machine learning tasks. Greedy selection algorithms are the
proven choice to solve such problems, where
prior theoretical work guarantees (1 − 1/e) approximation ratio. However, it has been empirically observed that greedy selection provides almost optimal solutions in practice. The main
goal of this paper is to explore and answer why
the greedy selection does significantly better than
the theoretical guarantee of (1 − 1/e). Applications include, but are not limited to, sensor selection tasks which use both entropy and mutual
information as a maximization criteria. We give
a theoretical justification for the nearly optimal
approximation ratio via detailed analysis of the
curvature of these objective functions for Gaussian RBF kernels.

1. Introduction
Consider a real-world scenario where the task is to sense
a certain physical phenomenon of interest, e.g., temperature, in an area (Krause et al., 2008) with a limited number
of sensors. Another scenario is selecting a subset of data
points to be labeled from a large corpus, for the purposes
of supervised learning (Settles, 2010). Similarly, the task
could consist of determining what tests to run on a medical
patient for diagnosing ailments (Kapoor & Horvitz, 2009).
The key underlying question in all these scenarios is how
to choose a subset of actions that would provide the most
useful information pertaining to the task at hand.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

All of the above scenarios can be considered as a subset
selection problem, where the goal is to determine which
subset maximizes a given objective function defined over
the subsets. Prior works have considered criteria such as
mutual information and entropy, which make the objective function submodular. Traditionally, these submodular maximization problems are solved via greedy selection
and often these prior works point to a result by Nemhauser
et al. (Nemhauser et al., 1978) which guarantees that the
greedy solution will be at least (1 − 1/e) times the optimum. While there exist submodular functions for which
the (1 − 1/e) bound is tight, in several practical instances it
has been observed that the greedy algorithm performs significantly better than (1 − 1/e) times the optimum. For example, we reproduce the figure (see Figure 1) from Krause
et al. (Krause et al., 2008), where the greedy method obtains an approximation ratio of over 0.95. While the greedy
selection algorithms are popular in such subset selection
problems, a better analysis explaining their empirical nearoptimal performance is an unexplored direction to the best
of our knowledge.
1.1. Our results
In this paper, we aim to answer why greedy selection results in nearly optimal solutions. We specifically focus
on the popular kernels generated by Gaussian Radial Basis Functions (RBFs), and show that the greedy selection
of points achieves an approximation ratio close to 1 that is
much superior than the traditional guarantee of (1 − 1/e).
The key insight here is that the Gaussian RBF kernel matrices for well-separated points have a very dominant diagonal, making the submodular objective function close
to linear (i.e., modular). Intuitively, it means that even
though the objective function is submodular and it satisfies the diminishing returns property, the returns diminish
only marginally even as we add more and more points.
Our main technical contribution is Theorem 5, where we

