Deep Learning with Limited Numerical Precision

Suyog Gupta
Ankur Agrawal
Kailash Gopalakrishnan
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
Pritish Narayanan
IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA 95120

Abstract
Training of large-scale deep neural networks is
often constrained by the available computational
resources. We study the effect of limited precision data representation and computation on neural network training. Within the context of lowprecision fixed-point computations, we observe
the rounding scheme to play a crucial role in determining the network’s behavior during training. Our results show that deep networks can be
trained using only 16-bit wide fixed-point number representation when using stochastic rounding, and incur little to no degradation in the
classification accuracy. We also demonstrate an
energy-efficient hardware accelerator that implements low-precision fixed-point arithmetic with
stochastic rounding.

1. Introduction
To a large extent, the success of deep learning techniques is
contingent upon the underlying hardware platform’s ability
to perform fast, supervised training of complex networks
using large quantities of labeled data. Such a capability
enables rapid evaluation of different network architectures
and a thorough search over the space of model hyperparameters. It should therefore come as no surprise that recent years have seen a resurgence of interest in deploying large-scale computing infrastructure designed specifically for training deep neural networks. Some notable
efforts in this direction include distributed computing infrastructure using thousands of CPU cores (Dean et al.,
2012; Chilimbi et al., 2014), or high-end graphics processors (GPUs) (Ciresan et al., 2010; Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SUYOG @ US . IBM . COM
ANKURAGR @ US . IBM . COM
KAILASH @ US . IBM . COM

PNARAYA @ US . IBM . COM

or a combination of CPUs and GPUs scaled-up to multiple
nodes (Coates et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2015).
At the same time, the natural error resiliency of neural network architectures and learning algorithms is welldocumented, setting them apart from more traditional
workloads that typically require precise computations and
number representations with high dynamic range. It is well
appreciated that in the presence of statistical approximation and estimation errors, high-precision computation in
the context of learning is rather unnecessary (Bottou &
Bousquet, 2007). Moreover, the addition of noise during
training has been shown to improve the neural network’s
performance (Murray & Edwards, 1994; Bishop, 1995; An,
1996; Audhkhasi et al., 2013). With the exception of employing the asynchronous version of the stochastic gradient descent algorithm (Recht et al., 2011) to reduce network traffic, the state-of-the-art large-scale deep learning
systems fail to adequately capitalize on the error-resiliency
of their workloads. These systems are built by assembling
general-purpose computing hardware designed to cater to
the needs of more traditional workloads, incurring high and
often unnecessary overhead in the required computational
resources.
This work is built upon the idea that algorithm-level noise
tolerance can be leveraged to simplify underlying hardware requirements, leading to a co-optimized system that
achieves significant improvements in computational performance and energy efficiency. Allowing the low-level hardware components to perform approximate, possibly nondeterministic computations and exposing these hardwaregenerated errors up to the algorithm level of the computing stack forms a key ingredient in developing such systems. Additionally, the low-level hardware changes need
to be introduced in a manner that preserves the programming model so that the benefits can be readily absorbed at
the application-level without incurring significant software
redevelopment costs.

