PU Learning for Matrix Completion

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Nagarajan Natarajan
Inderjit S. Dhillon
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78721, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the matrix completion
problem when the observations are one-bit measurements of some underlying matrix M , and in
particular the observed samples consist only of
ones and no zeros. This problem is motivated by
modern applications such as recommender systems and social networks where only “likes” or
“friendships” are observed. The problem is an
instance of PU (positive-unlabeled) learning, i.e.
learning from only positive and unlabeled examples that has been studied in the context of binary classification. Under the assumption that M
has bounded nuclear norm, we provide recovery
guarantees for two different observation models:
1) M parameterizes a distribution that generates
a binary matrix, 2) M is thresholded to obtain a
binary matrix. For the first case, we propose a
“shifted matrix completion” method that recovers M using only a subset of indices corresponding to ones; for the second case, we propose a
“biased matrix completion” method that recovers the (thresholded) binary matrix. Both methn×n
ods yield strong error bounds — if
,
 M ∈R
1
the error is bounded as O (1−ρ)n , where 1 − ρ
denotes the fraction of ones observed. This implies a sample complexity of O(n log n) ones to
achieve a small error, when M is dense and n
is large. We extend our analysis to the inductive matrix completion problem, where rows and
columns of M have associated features. We develop efficient and scalable optimization procedures for both the proposed methods and demonstrate their effectiveness for link prediction (on
real-world networks consisting of over 2 million
nodes and 90 million links) and semi-supervised
clustering tasks.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

CJHSIEH @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
NAGA 86@ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

1. Introduction
The problem of recovering a matrix from a given subset of
its entries arises in many practical problems of interest. The
famous Netflix problem of predicting user-movie ratings is
one example that motivates the traditional matrix completion problem, where we would want to recover the underlying (ratings) matrix given partial observations. Strong
theoretical guarantees have been developed in the recent
past for the low-rank matrix completion problem (Candès
& Recht, 2009). An important variant of the matrix completion problem is to recover an underlying matrix from
one-bit quantization of its entries. Modern applications of
the matrix completion problem reveal a conspicuous gap
between existing matrix completion theory and practice.
For example, consider the problem of link prediction in
social networks. Here, the goal is to recover the underlying friendship network from a given snapshot of the social graph consisting of observed friendships. We can pose
the problem as recovering the adjacency matrix of the network A such that Aij = 1 if users i and j are related and
Aij = 0 otherwise. In practice, we only observe positive relationships between users corresponding to 1’s in A.
Thus, there is not only one-bit quantization in the observations, but also a one-sided nature to the sampling process
here — no “negative” entries are sampled. In the context of
classification, methods for learning in the presence of positive and unlabeled examples only, called positive-unlabeled
(PU in short) learning, have been studied in the past (Elkan
& Noto, 2008; Liu et al., 2003). For matrix completion,
can one guarantee recovery when only a subset of positive
entries is observed? In this paper, we formulate the PU
matrix completion problem and answer the question in the
affirmative under different settings.
Minimizing squared loss on the observed entries corresponding to 1’s, subject to the low-rank constraints, yields
a degenerate solution — the rank-1 matrix with all its entries equal to 1 achieves zero loss. In practice, a popular
heuristic used is to try and complete the matrix by treating
some or all of the missing observations as true 0’s, which
seems to be a good strategy when the underlying matrix has
a small number of positive examples, i.e., small number of
1’s. This motivates viewing the problem of learning from

