Sparse Subspace Clustering with Missing Entries

Congyuan Yang
Daniel Robinson
René Vidal
Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N Charles St., Baltimore, MD, USA

Abstract
We consider the problem of clustering incomplete data drawn from a union of subspaces.
Classical subspace clustering methods are not applicable to this problem because the data are incomplete, while classical low-rank matrix completion methods may not be applicable because
data in multiple subspaces may not be low rank.
This paper proposes and evaluates two new approaches for subspace clustering and completion.
The first one generalizes the sparse subspace
clustering algorithm so that it can obtain a sparse
representation of the data using only the observed
entries. The second one estimates a suitable kernel matrix by assuming a random model for the
missing entries and obtains the sparse representation from this kernel. Experiments on synthetic
and real data show the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed methods, which all outperform the natural approach (low-rank matrix completion followed by sparse subspace clustering)
when the data matrix is high-rank or the percentage of missing entries is large.

1. Introduction
In many real world applications, we are faced with the
problem of clustering incomplete data drawn from a union
of low-dimensional subspaces. For example, in the motion
segmentation problem in computer vision, feature point trajectories extracted from a video sequence with multiple
moving objects lie in multiple low-dimensional subspaces,
one per moving object. However, due to occlusions or objects entering or leaving the field of view, such trajectories are often incomplete. Therefore, we are faced with the
problem of clustering these incomplete trajectories in order
to segment the video into multiple motions.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YANGCY @ JHU . EDU
DANIEL . P. ROBINSON @ JHU . EDU
RVIDAL @ CIS . JHU . EDU

Prior work. The problem of clustering complete data in a
union of subspaces has received increasing attention over
the past decade (see Vidal (2011) for a tutorial). Classical methods, such as K-subspaces (Bradley & Mangasarian, 2000; Tseng, 2000) and mixture of probabilistic PCAs
(Tipping & Bishop, 1999) suffer from local minima, while
algebraic methods such as Generalized Principal Component Analysis (Vidal et al., 2005) suffer from robustness
to data corruptions. This has motivated the development
of convex optimization methods based on sparse (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009; 2010; 2013) and low-rank (Liu et al.,
2010; 2013; Lu et al., 2012; Favaro et al., 2011; Vidal &
Favaro, 2014) representation techniques. For example, the
Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC) algorithm of (Elhamifar
& Vidal, 2009) is based on expressing each data point as
a sparse linear combination of all other data points. When
the subspaces are sufficiently separated, and the data points
are sufficiently well distributed inside the subspaces, the
nonzero coefficients of one point correspond to other points
in the same subspace. Hence the sparse representation can
be used to construct an affinity for clustering the data using
spectral clustering. The theoretical conditions guarantee
the correctness of clustering and are applicable to noiseless data (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013), data corrupted by outliers (Soltanolkotabi & Candès, 2013; Soltanolkotabi et al.,
2014) and data corrupted by noise (Wang & Xu, 2013).
In sharp contrast, the case where the data points are incomplete has received significantly less attention. Gruber &
Weiss (2004) model the data with a mixture of probabilistic
PCAs and use the EM algorithm to both segment the data
and find the missing entries. However, this approach suffers from local minima and cannot guarantee exact matrix
completion or exact clustering. Vidal & Hartley (2004) assume that, although the data lie in a union of subspaces, the
data matrix is still low-rank, hence they use low-rank matrix completion techniques followed by subspace clustering
techniques. In practice, the number of subspaces and their
dimensions may not be small enough so that the data matrix
is low rank. Eriksson et al. (2012) use a local neighborhood
of each incomplete point to complete it, and refine the estimated subspaces to recover the full matrix. Under certain

