A Hybrid Approach for Probabilistic Inference using Random Projections

Michael H. Zhu
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract
We introduce a new meta-algorithm for probabilistic inference in graphical models based on
random projections. The key idea is to use approximate inference algorithms for an (exponentially) large number of samples, obtained by randomly projecting the original statistical model
using universal hash functions. In the case
where the approximate inference algorithm is a
variational approximation, this approach can be
viewed as interpolating between sampling-based
and variational techniques. The number of samples used controls the trade-off between the accuracy of the approximate inference algorithm and
the variance of the estimator. We show empirically that by using random projections, we can
improve the accuracy of common approximate
inference algorithms.

1. Introduction
Sampling based techniques (Andrieu et al., 2003; Jerrum & Sinclair, 1997; Madras, 2002) and variational approaches (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright & Jordan, 2008)
are the two main families of probabilistic inference techniques. Sampling based techniques answer queries by
looking at a small number of representative samples from
the entire exponentially large state space. Variational techniques, on the other hand, take a more global view and attempt to globally approximate a complex probability distribution using a family of more tractable ones. These two approaches have advantages and disadvantages with respect
to each other, and neither approach dominates the other.
In this paper, we introduce a new meta-algorithm for probabilistic inference in graphical models. Our approach can
be seen as a general sampling scheme based on universal
hashing, and can be used in combination with any partition
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MHZHU @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
ERMON @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

function or marginal probability approximation scheme, including both Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling and variational approaches. The key idea is to consider a number of samples which can be extremely large,
potentially exponential in the dimensionality (number of
variables in a graphical model). This seemingly impossible task (simply enumerating the samples would take exponential space) can be achieved using powerful universal
hashing techniques (Goldreich, 2011; Vadhan, 2011; Ermon et al., 2013b; Chakraborty et al., 2013), which can
be used to represent the set of samples in an implicit and
compact way. In particular, we exploit randomness amplification ideas to generate an exponentially large number of
random variables (one for each possible state of the world),
using as input a limited amount of randomness. This process can also be interpreted as applying a random projection (perturbation) of the original graphical model (Tarlow et al., 2012; Papandreou & Yuille, 2011; Hazan &
Jaakkola, 2012; Gane et al., 2014; Maddison et al., 2014;
Chakraborty et al., 2014), where each possible state of the
world is selected with some probability (or more generally,
its likelihood is perturbed by a random amount). Since in
general we cannot enumerate such a large number of resulting samples, we use approximate inference techniques
to estimate their statistical properties (such as marginals or
partition function). The quality of the approximate inference for the samples can be substantially better than the
one obtained for the entire state space. For example, in the
extreme case where the number of samples is small enough
that enumeration is possible, exact inference can be performed.
In the case where the approximate inference algorithm is
a variational approximation, this hybrid approach can be
seen as smoothly interpolating between a pure sampling
strategy and a pure variational one. Intuitively, if we choose
a small enough number of samples, we can avoid the approximation entirely by enumerating the samples (as in traditional Monte Carlo sampling methods). At the other side
of the spectrum, we can use the entire state space as our
sample space (no sampling) obtaining the original variational approximation. Our method allows for a broad spectrum of possibilities in between these two extremes.

