Robust partially observable Markov decision process

Takayuki Osogami
IBM Research - Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
We seek to find the robust policy that maximizes
the expected cumulative reward for the worst
case when a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) has uncertain parameters
whose values are only known to be in a given
region. We prove that the robust value function,
which represents the expected cumulative reward
that can be obtained with the robust policy, is
convex with respect to the belief state. Based on
the convexity, we design a value-iteration algorithm for finding the robust policy. We prove that
our value iteration converges for an infinite horizon. We also design point-based value iteration
for fining the robust policy more efficiency possibly with approximation. Numerical experiments
show that our point-based value iteration can adequately find robust policies.

1. Introduction
The partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP) has been studied extensively as a model of
sequential decision making under stochastic and partially
observable environment (Shani et al., 2013; Young et al.,
2013). The POMDP has a wide range of applications
including the systems of spoken dialog (Young et al.,
2009), fault recovery (Shani & Meek, 2009), human-robot
interaction (Pineau et al., 2003b), and the assistance of persons (Hoey et al., 2010). In these applications, parameters
of a POMDP are often set manually by experts (Hoey et al.,
2010; Pineau et al., 2003b; Young et al., 2009). There
also exist systematic methods for learning parameters of
a POMDP (Makino & Takeuchi, 2012; Shani et al., 2005;
Shani & Meek, 2009), but precise estimation is generally
difficult. The robustness against the uncertainties in the
parameters of a POMDP is of paramount importance to
open up new but critical applications such as finance.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

OSOGAMI @ JP. IBM . COM

For a (fully observable) Markov decision process (MDP),
the prior work has investigated ways to obtain the (optimally) robust policy that maximizes the expected cumulative reward for the worst case when the values of the parameters of the MDP have uncertainties and are only known
to be in a given set called an uncertainty set (Nilim & El
Ghaoui, 2005; Osogami, 2012). Although a POMDP can
be considered as an MDP with the continuous state space
consisting of belief states (Smallwood & Sondik, 1973),
existing computational procedures for finding the robust
policy for an MDP rely on the finiteness of the state space
(Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2005).
A key property of the POMDP is that the value function
is piecewise linear and convex (PWLC) with respect to the
belief state when decisions are made over a finite horizon
(Smallwood & Sondik, 1973). Computing the value function is essentially equivalent to finding the optimal policy,
and the prior work has exploited the PWLC property for
finding the optimal policy either exactly (Monahan, 1982;
Smallwood & Sondik, 1973) or approximately (Kurniawati
et al., 2009; Pineau et al., 2003a; Smith & Simmons, 2004).
When the parameters of the POMDP are only known to
lie in an uncertainty set, we study the robust value function that gives the expected cumulative reward for the worst
case. Computing the robust value function directly leads to
finding the robust policy.
Specifically, we prove that the robust value function is convex when the uncertainty set is convex, which is the first
contribution of this paper. A lower bound on the robust
value function can then be given by a PWLC function.
Our proof is by induction and immediately suggests robust
value iteration for computing the robust value function or
its lower bound with dynamic programming.
We then prove that the robust value iteration converges for
an infinite horizon when future reward is discounted, which
is our second contribution. This means that the robust value
function for an infinite horizon can be approximated arbitrarily closely with a PWLC function, which can be found
via robust value iteration. The exact procedure of robust
value iteration is important primarily because it gives the
foundation of approximate but efficient procedures.

