On Identifying Good Options under Combinatorially Structured Feedback
in Finite Noisy Environments

Yifan Wu
YWU 12@ UALBERTA . CA
András György
GYORGY @ UALBERTA . CA
Csaba Szepesvári
SZEPESVA @ UALBERTA . CA
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8 CANADA

Abstract

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of identifying the most rewarding option(s) out of finitely many. At your disposal are a number
of probing devices, or just probes, that give you noisy measurements of the quality of a select set of options. More
precisely, each probe is associated with a known subset of
options whose quality the probe will measure. In a sequential process, the goal is to select the probes so that one can
stop early to return, with high probability, a sufficiently rewarding option (or a set of options). As a specific example,
consider the problem of identifying the segment on a road
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

0.25

SEWP
lilUCB
SE

Running time per probe (ms)

Number of probes used

We consider the problem of identifying a good
option out of finite set of options under combinatorially structured, noisy feedback about the
quality of the options in a sequential process:
In each round, a subset of the options, from an
available set of subsets, can be selected to receive noisy information about the quality of the
options in the chosen subset. The goal is to
identify the highest quality option, or a group
of options of the highest quality, with a small
error probability, while using the smallest number of measurements. The problem generalizes
best-arm identification problems. By extending previous work, we design new algorithms
that are shown to be able to exploit the combinatorial structure of the problem in a nontrivial fashion, while being unimprovable in special
cases. The algorithms call a set multi-covering
oracle, hence their performance and efficiency is
strongly tied to whether the associated set multicovering problem can be efficiently solved.

6

10

5

10

4

10

0.2

SEWP
lilUCB
SE

0.15

0.1

0.05

3

10

10

100
Number of options

1000

0

200

400
600
800
Number of options

1000

Figure 1. A specialized algorithm (SEWP) proposed in this paper
can take nontrivial advantage of the probe structure as compared
with simple adaptations of earlier algorithms, while being only
marginally more expensive. All algorithms maintain the same
error-rate. The plot on the left-hand-side uses a log-log-scale.
Due to the special structure of the problem, the expected √
stopping time of the specialized algorithm scale linearly with K,
while the others scale linearly with K, the number of options.

network that is in the worst shape after a long winter. Measurements can be obtained by sending trucks checking the
road for potholes along the paths they travel on. The trucks
must return to their garage every day. Here, the options
correspond to road segments, the probes correspond to a
closed walk in the road network that starts from the garage.
Somewhat ironically, a road segment is “rewarding” (from
the point of view of how beneficial it is to sending there the
repair team) if it has many potholes.1 Measurements are
noisy, as potholes are easy to miss.
Problems like the above one abound. Numerous quality
assurance and surveying tasks are such that measurements
give simultaneous information about multiple entities due
to physical constraints on the measurement process. Application areas include technical computing (e.g., networking), biology (ecology, microbiology, etc.), physics, etc.
Of course, even though individual measurements might be
1
In practice, one may want a whole “plan” at the end for the
repair team. As often, we took the liberty of simplifying the problem to be able to focus on how the structure of probes should be
used.

