Alpha-Beta Divergences Discover Micro and Macro Structures in Data

Karthik Narayan
University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA

KARTHIK . NARAYAN @ BERKELEY. EDU

Ali Punjani
University of Toronto, ON M5S, CANADA

ALIPUNJANI @ CS . TORONTO . EDU

Pieter Abbeel
University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA

Abstract
Although recent work in non-linear dimensionality reduction investigates multiple choices of
divergence measure during optimization (Yang
et al., 2013; Bunte et al., 2012), little work discusses the direct effects that divergence measures
have on visualization. We study this relationship,
theoretically and through an empirical analysis
over 10 datasets. Our works shows how the α and
β parameters of the generalized alpha-beta divergence can be chosen to discover hidden macrostructures (categories, e.g. birds) or microstructures (fine-grained classes, e.g. toucans).
Our method, which generalizes t-SNE (van der
Maaten, 2008), allows us to discover such structure without extensive grid searches over (α, β)
due to our theoretical analysis: such structure is
apparent with particular choices of (α, β) that
generalize across datasets. We also discuss efficient parallel CPU and GPU schemes which are
non-trivial due to the tree-structures employed in
optimization and the large datasets that do not
fully fit into GPU memory. Our method runs 20x
faster than the fastest published code (Vladymyrov & Carreira-Perpinán, 2014). We conclude
with detailed case studies on the following very
large datasets: ILSVRC 2012, a standard computer vision dataset with 1.2M images; SUSY, a
particle physics dataset with 5M instances; and
HIGGS, another particle physics dataset with
11M instances. This represents the largest published visualization attained by SNE methods.
We have open-sourced our visualization code:
http://rll.berkeley.edu/absne/.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

PABBEEL @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU

ILSVRC, Test (50K)!

Birds within ILSVRC 2012, Test

Flamingos

Chickens

Macaw parrots

α = 0.8, λ = 1.0!
Time: 10.4 s

Toucans

Birds swimming

Hummingbirds

Birds in the sky

Perched birds!
transitioning into!
swinging monkeys

Figure 1. Discovering micro-structures using the settings α <
1, λ = 1, prescribed by the intuition in (Section 4). Using
Caffe fc7 features (Jia et al., 2014), we discover structures in the
ILSVRC 2012 test set, e.g., classes of birds, and visual transitions,
e.g., perched birds transitioning smoothly to swinging monkeys.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Data visualization techniques aim to generate a lowdimensional representation of a dataset which data scientists and researchers can inspect to gain insight into the
structure and complexity of the data. Vital to data-driven
decision making, visualizations graphically represent latent structure and meaning in the dataset. Many recent
approaches produce low-dimensional embeddings of data

