The Composition Theorem for Differential Privacy

Peter Kairouz
ECE Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

KAIROUZ 2@ ILLINOIS . EDU

Sewoong Oh
IESE Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

SWOH @ ILLINOIS . EDU

Pramod Viswanath
ECE Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

PRAMODV @ ILLINOIS . EDU

Abstract
Sequential querying of differentially private
mechanisms degrades the overall privacy level.
In this paper, we answer the fundamental question of characterizing the level of overall privacy degradation as a function of the number of
queries and the privacy levels maintained by each
privatization mechanism. Our solution is complete: we prove an upper bound on the overall
privacy level and construct a sequence of privatization mechanisms that achieves this bound. The
key innovation is the introduction of an operational interpretation of differential privacy (involving hypothesis testing) and the use of new
data processing inequalities. Our result improves
over the state-of-the-art and has immediate applications to several problems studied in the literature.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy is a formal framework to quantify
to what extent individual privacy in a statistical database
is preserved while releasing useful aggregate information
about the database. It provides strong privacy guarantees
by requiring the indistinguishability of whether or not an
individual is in the database based on the released information. Denoting the database when the individual is present
as D and as D0 when the individual is not, a differentially
private mechanism provides indistinguishability guarantees
with respect to the pair (D, D0 ). The databases D and D0
are referred to as “neighboring” databases.
Definition 1.1 (Differential Privacy (Dwork et al.,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

2006b;a)). A randomized mechanism M over a set of
databases is (ε, δ)-differentially private if for all pairs of
neighboring databases D and D0 , and for all sets S in the
output space of the mechanism X ,
P(M (D) ∈ S) ≤ eε P(M (D0 ) ∈ S) + δ .
A basic problem in differential privacy is how does the
overall privacy level degrade under the composition of interactive queries where each query meets a certain differential privacy guarantee. A routine argument shows
that the composition of k queries, each of which is (ε, δ)differentially private, is at least (k, kδ)-differentially private (Dwork et al., 2006b;a; Dwork & Lei, 2009; Dwork
et al., 2010). A tighter bound of (ε̃δ̃ , kδ + δ̃)-differential
privacy under k-fold adaptive composition is provided, using more sophisticated arguments, in Dwork et al. (2010)
for the case when each of the individual queries
is (ε, δ)q


2
differentially private. Here ε̃δ̃ = O kε +ε k log(1/δ̃) .
On the other hand, it was not known if this bound could be
improved until this work.
Our main result is the exact characterization of the privacy
guarantee under k-fold composition. Any k-fold adaptive
composition of (ε, δ)-differentially private mechanisms
satisfies this privacy guarantee, stated as Theorem 3.3. Further, we construct a specific sequence of privacy mechanisms which under (in fact, nonadaptive) composition actually degrade privacy to the level guaranteed. Our result
entails a strict improvement over the state-of-the-art: this
can be seen immediately in the following approximation –
using the same notation as q
above, the value of ε̃δ̃ is now re

√
2
duced to ε̃δ̃ = O kε + ε k log(e + (ε k/δ̃) ) . Since
a typical√choice of δ̃ is δ̃ = Θ(kδ), in the regime where
ε = Θ( kδ), this improves the existing guarantee by a
logarithmic factor. The gain is especially significant when
both ε and δ are small.

