Large-scale Log-determinant Computation
through Stochastic Chebyshev Expansions

Insu Han
HAWKI 17@ KAIST. AC . KR
Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea
Dmitry Malioutov
DMALIOUTOV @ US . IBM . COM
Business Analytics and Mathematical Sciences, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
Jinwoo Shin
JINWOOS @ KAIST. AC . KR
Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea

Abstract
Logarithms of determinants of large positive definite matrices appear ubiquitously in machine
learning applications including Gaussian graphical and Gaussian process models, partition functions of discrete graphical models, minimumvolume ellipsoids, metric learning and kernel
learning. Log-determinant computation involves
the Cholesky decomposition at the cost cubic in
the number of variables, i.e., the matrix dimension, which makes it prohibitive for large-scale
applications. We propose a linear-time randomized algorithm to approximate log-determinants
for very large-scale positive definite and general
non-singular matrices using a stochastic trace approximation, called the Hutchinson method, coupled with Chebyshev polynomial expansions that
both rely on efficient matrix-vector multiplications. We establish rigorous additive and multiplicative approximation error bounds depending on the condition number of the input matrix.
In our experiments, the proposed algorithm can
provide very high accuracy solutions at orders of
magnitude faster time than the Cholesky decomposition and Schur completion, and enables us to
compute log-determinants of matrices involving
tens of millions of variables.

1. Introduction
Scalability of machine learning algorithms for extremely
large data-sets and models has been increasingly the foProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

cus of attention for the machine learning community, with
prominent examples such as first-order stochastic optimization methods and randomized linear algebraic computations. One of the important tasks from linear algebra that
appears in a variety of machine learning problems is computing the log-determinant of a large positive definite matrix. For example, serving as the normalization constant
for multivariate Gaussian models, log-determinants of covariance (and precision) matrices play an important role
in inference, model selection and learning both the structure and the parameters for Gaussian graphical models
and Gaussian processes (Rue & Held, 2005; Rasmussen
& Williams, 2005; Dempster, 1972). Log-determinants
also play an important role in a variety of Bayesian machine learning problems, including sampling and variational inference (MacKay, 2003). In addition, metric and
kernel learning problems attempt to learn quadratic forms
adapted to the data, and formulations involving Bregman
divergences of log-determinants have become very popular
(Davis et al., 2007; Van Aelst & Rousseeuw, 2009). Finally, log-determinant computation also appears in some
discrete probabilistic models, e.g., tree mixture models
(Meila & Jordan, 2001; Anandkumar et al., 2012) and
Markov random fields (Wainwright & Jordan, 2006). In
planar Markov random fields (Schraudolph & Kamenetsky,
2009; Johnson et al., 2010) inference and learning involve
log-determinants of general non-singular matrices.
For a positive semi-definite matrix B ∈ Rd×d , numerical linear algebra experts recommend to compute logdeterminant using the Cholesky decomposition. SupT
pose the Cholesky
P decomposition is B = LL , then
log det(B) = 2 i log Lii . The computational complexity of Cholesky decomposition is cubic with respect to the
number of variables, i.e., O(d3 ), in general. For large-scale
applications involving more than tens of thousands of variables, this operation is not feasible. Our aim is to com-

