Multi-Task Learning for Subspace Segmentation
Yu Wang ∗
David Wipf †
Qing Ling ♯
Wei Chen ∗
Ian Wassell ∗
∗ Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
† Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
♯ University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China

Abstract
Subspace segmentation is the process of clustering a set of data points that are assumed to lie on
the union of multiple linear or affine subspaces,
and is increasingly being recognized as a fundamental tool for data analysis in high dimensional settings. Arguably one of the most successful approaches is based on the observation
that the sparsest representation of a given point
with respect to a dictionary formed by the others involves nonzero coefficients associated with
points originating in the same subspace. Such sparse representations are computed independently for each data point via ℓ1 -norm minimization
and then combined into an affinity matrix for use
in a final spectral clustering step. The downside
of this procedure is two-fold. First, unlike canonical compressive sensing scenarios with ideallyrandomized dictionaries, the data-dependent dictionaries here are unavoidably highly structured,
disrupting many of the favorable properties of the
ℓ1 norm. Secondly, by treating each data point
independently, we ignore useful relationships between points that can be leveraged for jointly
computing such sparse representations. Consequently, we motivate a multi-task learning-based
framework for learning coupled sparse representations leading to a segmentation pipeline that is
both robust against correlation structure and tailored to generate an optimal affinity matrix. Theoretical analysis and empirical tests are provided
to support these claims.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YW 323@ CAM . AC . UK
DAVIDWIP @ MICROSOFT. COM
QINGLING @ MAIL . USTC . EDU . CN
WC 253@ CAM . AC . UK
IJW 24@ CAM . AC . UK

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis is a classical method for finding a low-dimensional linear subspace that captures the majority of variance in a particular centered data set. Estimating this subspace and projecting onto it are trivial matters using a simple eigen-decomposition. However, suppose
the data instead lie on or near the union of multiple lowdimensional subspaces. In this revised scenario the goal is
to both estimate each of these subspaces and segment every
data point into the closest one, a considerably more challenging proposition with no closed-form solution. Note
that this problem is quite different than traditional clustering, where the objective is to find groups of points that are
closest to one another, rather than closest to or members of some subspace. This so-called subspace clustering or
subspace segmentation problem (these terms are used interchangeably) is relevant to numerous machine learning
and computer vision applications, including image representation and compression (Hong et al., 2006), motion segmentation (Rao et al., 2010), and face clustering (Liu et al.,
2013).
We define the subspace segmentation problem more formally as follows. Let {Sk }K
k=1 represent a collection of
K linear subspaces in RD , where dim[Sk ] = Dk for all
k. Now consider that we have a set of N points {xj }N
j=1
that have been sampled from this union of subspaces, with
Nk samples drawn from subspace k. We then let X k denote the D × Nk matrix of points associated with the respective subspace. The entire constellation of points can
be expressed as
X , [x1 , . . . , xN ] = [X 1 , . . . , X K ]P ∈ RD×N , (1)
where P ∈ RN ×N is some unknown permutation matrix. The ultimate objective of subspace segmentation is
to learn the subspace membership of each xj , without any
prior knowledge of the cardinality or dimensionality of the
underlying union of subspaces. Extensions to affine subspaces is straightforward and will be discussed later.

