Learning Scale-Free Networks by Dynamic Node-Specific Degree Prior

Qingming Tang1
QMTANG @ TTIC . EDU
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 6045 S. Kenwood Ave., Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
Siqi Sun1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 6045 S. Kenwood Ave., Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA

SIQI @ TTIC . EDU

Jinbo Xu
JINBO . XU @ GMAIL . COM
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 6045 S. Kenwood Ave., Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA

Abstract
Learning network structure underlying data is an
important problem in machine learning. This paper presents a novel degree prior to study the inference of scale-free networks, which are widely used to model social and biological networks.
In particular, this paper formulates scale-free network inference using Gaussian Graphical model
(GGM) regularized by a node degree prior. Our
degree prior not only promotes a desirable global degree distribution, but also exploits the estimated degree of an individual node and the relative strength of all the edges of a single node. To
fulfill this, this paper proposes a ranking-based
method to dynamically estimate the degree of
a node, which makes the resultant optimization
problem challenging to solve. To deal with this,
this paper presents a novel ADMM (alternating
direction method of multipliers) procedure. Our
experimental results on both synthetic and real
data show that our prior not only yields a scalefree network, but also produces many more correctly predicted edges than existing scale-free inducing prior, hub-inducing prior and the l1 norm.

1. Introduction
Graphical models are widely used to describe the relationship between variables (or features). Estimating the
structure of an undirected graphical model from a dataset
has been extensively studied (Meinshausen & Bühlmann,
1

Equal Contribution.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

2006; Yuan & Lin, 2007; Friedman et al., 2008; Banerjee
et al., 2008; Wainwright et al., 2006). Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs) are widely used to model the data and
l1 penalty is used to yield a sparse graph structure. GGMs assume that the observed data follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution with a covariance matrix. When
GGMs are used, the network structure is encoded in the
zero pattern of the precision matrix. Accordingly, structure learning can be formulated as minimizing the negative log-likelihood (NLL) with an l1 penalty. However, the
widely-used l1 penalty assumes that any pair of variables
is equally likely to form an edge. This is not suitable for
many real-world networks such as gene networks, proteinprotein interaction networks and social networks, which are
scale-free and contain a small percentage of hub nodes.
A scale-free network (BARABÁSI & Bonabeau, 2003) has
node degree following the power-law distribution. In particular, a scale-free network may contain a few hub nodes,
whose degrees are much larger than the others. That is, a
hub node more likely forms an edge than the others. In
real-world applications, a hub node is usually functionally
important. For example, in a gene network, a gene playing
functions in many biological processes (Zhang & Horvath,
2005; Goh et al., 2007) tends to be a hub. A few methods
have been proposed to infer scale-free networks by using a
reweighed l1 norm. For example, (Peng et al., 2009) proposed a joint regression sparse method to learn scale-free
networks by setting the penalty proportional to the estimated degrees. (Candes et al., 2008) proposed a method that
iteratively reweighs the penalty in the l1 norm based on the
inverse of the previous estimation of precision matrix. This
method can suppress the large bias in the l1 norm when
the magnitude of the non-zero entries vary a lot and is also closer to the l0 norm. Some recent papers follow the
idea of node-based learning using group lasso (Friedman
et al., 2010b; Meier et al., 2008; Tan et al., 2014; Friedman
et al., 2010a; Mohan et al., 2014). Since group lasso penal-

