Reified Context Models
Jacob Steinhardt
Percy Liang
Stanford University, 353 Serra Street, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

JSTEINHARDT @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
PLIANG @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Abstract
A classic tension exists between exact inference
in a simple model and approximate inference in
a complex model. The latter offers expressivity
and thus accuracy, but the former provides coverage of the space, an important property for confidence estimation and learning with indirect supervision. In this work, we introduce a new approach, reified context models, to reconcile this
tension. Specifically, we let the choice of factors
in a graphical model (the contexts) be random
variables inside the model itself. In this sense,
the contexts are reified and can be chosen in a
data-dependent way. Empirically, we show that
our approach obtains expressivity and coverage
on three sequence modeling tasks.

1. Introduction
Many structured prediction tasks across natural language
processing, computer vision, and computational biology
can be formulated as that of learning an exponential family
distribution over outputs y1:L = (y1 , . . . , yL ) ∈ Y1:L given
input x:
!
L
X
pθ (y1:L | x) ∝ exp
θ> φi (y1:i−1 , yi , x) ,
(1)
i=1

where φi are the features and θ are the parameters. The
thirst for expressive models (e.g., where yi depends heavily on its context y1:i−1 ) often leads one down the route
of approximate inference, for example, to Markov chain
Monte Carlo (Brooks et al., 2011), sequential Monte Carlo
(Cappé et al., 2007), or beam search (Koehn et al., 2003).
While these methods can operate on models with arbitrary
amounts of context (φi can be any function of y1:i−1 ), they
use a set of concrete points to approximate the distribution
pθ , and thus they can fundamentally cover only a small part
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

r
v
y
*

ro
ra
*o
**

rol
ral
*ol
***

*olc
***c
***r
****

• • • • • • • • •

Figure 1. In handwriting recognition, we want to output a letter at
each position. Our model also chooses a context at each position
that summarizes the outputs so far (e.g., ? olc remembers only
the last three letters) and is used for predicting the next letter.
By selecting contexts at multiple levels of resolution, our model
can place probability mass over the entire output space while still
capturing complex dependencies.

of the output space Y1:L . This inadequate coverage leads
to many issues; the two that we highlight in this paper are
the following:
• precision: In user-facing applications, it is important
to only predict on inputs where the system is confident,
leaving hard decisions to the user (Zhang et al., 2014).
Lack of coverage means failing to consider all alternative outputs, which leads to overconfidence and poor estimates of uncertainty.
• indirect supervision: When only part of the output y1:L
is observed, lack of coverage is even more problematic
than in the fully-supervised setting. An approximate inference algorithm might not even consider the true y
(whereas one always has the true y in a fully-supervised
setting), leading to invalid parameter updates (Yu et al.,
2013).
Of course, lower-order models admit exact inference and
ensure coverage, but these models have unacceptably low
expressive power. Ideally, we would like a model that
varies the amount of context in a judicious way, allocating modeling power to parts of the input that demand it.
Therein lies the principal challenge: How can we adaptively choose the amount of context for each variable i in a
data-dependent way while maintaining tractability?
In this paper, we introduce a new approach, which we call
reified context models. The key idea is inspired by reification, a general idea in logic and programming languages,

