Learning to Search Better than Your Teacher

Kai-Wei Chang
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, IL

KCHANG 10@ ILLINOIS . EDU

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA

AKSHAYKR @ CS . CMU . EDU

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research, New York, NY
Hal Daumé III
University of Maryland, College Park, MD
John Langford
Microsoft Research, New York, NY

Abstract
Methods for learning to search for structured
prediction typically imitate a reference policy,
with existing theoretical guarantees demonstrating low regret compared to that reference. This
is unsatisfactory in many applications where the
reference policy is suboptimal and the goal of
learning is to improve upon it. Can learning to
search work even when the reference is poor?
We provide a new learning to search algorithm,
LOLS, which does well relative to the reference policy, but additionally guarantees low regret compared to deviations from the learned
policy: a local-optimality guarantee. Consequently, LOLS can improve upon the reference
policy, unlike previous algorithms. This enables
us to develop structured contextual bandits, a
partial information structured prediction setting
with many potential applications.

1. Introduction
In structured prediction problems, a learner makes joint
predictions over a set of interdependent output variables
and observes a joint loss. For example, in a parsing task,
the output is a parse tree over a sentence. Achieving optimal
performance commonly requires the prediction of each outProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ALEKHA @ MICROSOFT. COM

HAL @ UMIACS . UMD . EDU

JCL @ MICROSOFT. COM

put variable to depend on neighboring variables. One approach to structured prediction is learning to search (L 2 S)
(Collins & Roark, 2004; Daumé III & Marcu, 2005; Daumé
III et al., 2009; Ross et al., 2011; Doppa et al., 2014; Ross
& Bagnell, 2014), which solves the problem by:
1. converting structured prediction into a search problem
with specified search space and actions;
2. defining structured features over each state to capture
the interdependency between output variables;
3. constructing a reference policy based on training data;
4. learning a policy that imitates the reference policy.
Empirically, L 2 S approaches have been shown to be competitive with other structured prediction approaches both
in accuracy and running time (see e.g. Daumé III et al.
(2014)). Theoretically, existing L 2 S algorithms guarantee
that if the learning step performs well, then the learned policy is almost as good as the reference policy, implicitly assuming that the reference policy attains good performance.
Good reference policies are typically derived using labels
in the training data, such as assigning each word to its correct POS tag. However, when the reference policy is suboptimal, which can arise for reasons such as computational
constraints, nothing can be said for existing approaches.
This problem is most obviously manifest in a “structured
contextual bandit”1 setting. For example, one might want
to predict how the landing page of a high profile web1
The key difference from (1) contextual bandits is that the action space is exponentially large (in the length of trajectories in
the search space); and from (2) reinforcement learning is that a
baseline reference policy exists before learning starts.

