Context-based Unsupervised Data Fusion for Decision Making

Erfan Soltanmohammadi
Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA.

ERFAN @ MARVELL . COM

Mort Naraghi-Pour
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.

NARAGHI @ LSU . EDU

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Abstract
Big Data received from sources such as social
media, in-stream monitoring systems, networks,
and markets is often mined for discovering patterns, detecting anomalies, and making decisions
or predictions. In distributed learning and realtime processing of Big Data, ensemble-based
systems in which a fusion center (FC) is used
to combine the local decisions of several classifiers, have shown to be superior to single expert systems. However, optimal design of the FC
requires knowledge of the accuracy of the individual classifiers which, in many cases, is not
available. Moreover, in many applications supervised training of the FC is not feasible since
the true labels of the data set are not available.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised joint
estimation-detection scheme to estimate the accuracies of the local classifiers as functions of
data context and to fuse the local decisions of
the classifiers. Numerical results show the dramatic improvement of the proposed method as
compared with the state of the art approaches.

1. Introduction
Ensemble-based approaches have proven to be more accurate than single-classifier systems for many applications involving decision making, prediction, classification, or detection (Kuncheva & Whitaker, 2003). Furthermore, for problems with high computational complexity, ensemble-based approaches allow for distributed processing which results in load sharing among the individProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MIHAELA @ EE . UCLA . EDU

ual classifiers. Due to their high computational complexity, Big Data applications including data mining, decision making, and prediction demand parallel processing for
which ensemble learning is well-suited (Zhang et al., 2013;
Tekin & van der Schaar, 2013).
An ensemble system is comprised of a set of (possibly heterogeneous1 ) classifiers and a combining rule for fusing the
classifiers’ outputs. Individual classifiers may be trained
with different data sets and by judiciously combining their
outputs we can achieve a more accurate decision; a set of
linear (or nonlinear) classifiers may be used to span the data
space to a complicated nonlinear boundary.
The fusion center (FC) which combines the local decisions of the classifiers plays the key role in the performance of the overall system. Several different fusion rules
have been proposed in the literature. The majority rule
may be employed when no information on the performance
of the classifiers is available (Kuncheva, 2004). On the
other hand, weighted majority rule can be used when the
performances of individual classifiers are known a priori. Another approach is to construct a look-up table during the test and validation procedure including the output patterns of the classifiers and their corresponding labels. This approach, known as Behavior Knowledge Space
(BKS), actually estimates the densities of the classifier outputs and requires large training and validation data sets
(Huang & Suen, 1995). For some ensemble systems the
classifiers and the FC are trained together using a joint procedure such as stacked generalization or mixture of classifiers (Wolpert, 1992; Jacobs et al., 1991).
Optimal fusion of local decisions requires the a priori
knowledge of the accuracy of the classifiers which, in many
applications, may not be available. For example, the data
may have an extremely large dimension which makes it im1

Here heterogeneity of classifiers implies that they have different error rates in classifying the data (Webb & Copsey, 2011).

