Message Passing for Collective Graphical Models

Tao Sun1
TAOSUN @ CS . UMASS . EDU
Daniel Sheldon1,2
SHELDON @ CS . UMASS . EDU
Akshat Kumar3
AKSHATKUMAR @ SMU . EDU . SG
1
2
3
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Mount Holyoke College, Singapore Management University

Abstract
Collective graphical models (CGMs) are a formalism for inference and learning about a population of independent and identically distributed
individuals when only noisy aggregate data are
available. We highlight a close connection between approximate MAP inference in CGMs and
marginal inference in standard graphical models.
The connection leads us to derive a novel Belief
Propagation (BP) style algorithm for collective
graphical models. Mathematically, the algorithm
is a strict generalization of BP—it can be viewed
as an extension to minimize the Bethe free energy
plus additional energy terms that are non-linear
functions of the marginals. For CGMs, the algorithm is much more efficient than previous approaches to inference. We demonstrate its performance on two synthetic experiments concerning
bird migration and collective human mobility.

1. Introduction
In an influential paper, Yedidia, Freeman, and Weiss (2000)
showed that the loopy Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm
for marginal inference in graphical models can be understood as a fixed-point iteration that attempts to satisfy the
first-order optimality conditions of the Bethe free energy,
which approximates the true variational free energy. The
result shed considerable light on the convergence properties of BP and led to many new ideas for approximate variational inference.
In this paper, we highlight a connection between the Bethe
free energy and the objective function for approximate
MAP inference in Collective Graphical Models (CGMs)
(Sheldon et al., 2013), which are models for inference and
learning about populations when only noisy aggregate data
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

are available. We then follow reasoning similar to that of
Yedidia et al. to derive a novel message-passing algorithm
for CGMs. The algorithm, non-linear energy belief propagation (NLBP), has the interesting property that message
updates are identical to BP, with the exception that edge
potentials change in each step based on the gradient of the
non-linear “evidence terms” that are present in the CGM
objective but not in the Bethe free energy. NLBP is a strict
generalization of BP to deal with the presence of these additional non-linear terms.
The new algorithm has significant practical benefits. We
show experimentally that, by exploiting the graph structure,
NLBP solves the approximate MAP optimization problem
for CGMs much faster than a generic optimization solver,
and scales significantly better than previous approaches
for inference in CGMs. NLBP advances applications of
CGMs by significantly reducing the computational burden
of inference, which was previously a limiting factor. We
demonstrate this point through two synthetic applications.
First, we apply CGMs to the problem of modeling bird migration (Sheldon et al., 2007; 2013; Liu et al., 2014), where
inference is used to reconstruct bird migration routes, make
forecasts of migration, and learn parameters of migration
models. Our algorithm lets us scale from small problems
to realistic-sized problems. Second, we contribute a novel
application for modeling human mobility (Candia et al.,
2008; Isaacman et al., 2011; 2012). In this case, data
providers (e.g., cell phone companies) release aggregate
statistics about human movements for the purpose of model
fitting, but corrupt those statistics with noise to guarantee
differential privacy (Dwork & Roth, 2013; Mir et al., 2013).
CGM inference algorithms provide a way to reason about
the true sufficient statistics for the purpose of learning. We
show that a CGM-based learning algorithm that uses NLBP
is much more accurate than a baseline approach that uses
noisy statistics directly for parameter estimation.

2. Collective Graphical Models
CGMs compactly describe the distribution of the aggregate
statistics of a population sampled independently from a dis-

