A Multitask Point Process Predictive Model
Wenzhao Lian1
WL 89@ DUKE . EDU
Ricardo Henao1
R . HENAO @ DUKE . EDU
Vinayak Rao2
VARAO @ PURDUE . EDU
Joseph Lucas3
JOE @ STAT. DUKE . EDU
Lawrence Carin1
LCARIN @ DUKE . EDU
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
2
Department of Statistics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
3
Center for Predictive Medicine, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Abstract
Point process data are commonly observed in
fields like healthcare and the social sciences. Designing predictive models for such event streams
is an under-explored problem, due to often scarce
training data. In this work we propose a multitask point process model, leveraging information
from all tasks via a hierarchical Gaussian process (GP). Nonparametric learning functions implemented by a GP, which map from past events
to future rates, allow analysis of flexible arrival
patterns. To facilitate efficient inference, we propose a sparse construction for this hierarchical
model, and derive a variational Bayes method for
learning and inference. Experimental results are
shown on both synthetic data and as well as real
electronic health-records data.

1. Introduction
Point process data have seen increased attention in fields
like biomedical research (Rad & Paninski, 2011; Lian et al.,
2014), electronic commerce (Xu et al., 2014), and healthcare analysis (Lasko, 2014). One thread of work focuses on
learning arrival rates by imposing smoothness on a latent
rate function (Adams et al., 2009; Rao & Teh, 2011; Lloyd
et al., 2014). Another consists of predicting future arrivals
as a direct function of past observations (Pillow et al., 2008;
Gunawardana et al., 2011). Taking healthcare analysis as a
motivating example, we focus on the latter problem: given
a patient’s hospital visit history up to time t, (i) when will
the next visit happen? and (ii) how many visits will the patient have in [t, t + L]? Answering such questions provides
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

a quantitative evaluation of the patient’s risk, which helps
to make treatment plans and allocate hospital resources efficiently (Amarasingham et al., 2010). Similar problems
also arise in other fields, such as predicting purchasing behavior for individual customers, or predicting failures in
distributed computer systems.
A few works have explored the prediction problem in point
processes by learning a functional mapping from history
features to the current intensity rate (Pillow et al., 2008; Rajaram et al., 2005; Gunawardana et al., 2011). In Gunawardana et al. (2011), the intensity function is constrained
to be piecewise-constant, learned using decision trees and
used for prediction. In our proposed multitask point process model, we build upon this piecewise-constant intensity model. To allow for flexibility of the function mapping
from history features to future rate, and to capture the uncertainty of estimation, we use a nonparametric method,
by imposing a Gaussian process (GP) prior on the intensity
rate. However, when building such predictive models for
event arrival processes, one difficulty is that the available
training data are scarce for each subject/task. Therefore,
we treat each individual arrival process as a task and follow
a multitask learning approach to share information from all
tasks in a hierarchical manner.
Methods for learning GPs from multiple tasks have been
proposed (Yu et al., 2005), but involve a shared global mean
function, inferred at all observed inputs (history features)
across all the tasks. The posterior of this function cannot
be directly updated due to non-conjugacy of the point process likelihood to GP priors. One approximation method,
variational Bayes, is often applied, leading to the number
of unknown parameters scaling as O(N 2 ), where N is the
number of unique features from all tasks. Borrowing from
the framework of pseudo inputs in the GP literature (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias, 2009), we constrain the
rate functions to an M -dimensional latent space, where

