Bipartite Edge Prediction via Transductive Learning over Product Graphs

Hanxiao Liu
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

HANXIAOL @ CS . CMU . EDU

Yiming Yang
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

YIMING @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of predicting
the missing edges of a bipartite graph where each
side of the vertices has its own intrinsic structure. We propose a new optimization framework
to map the two sides of the intrinsic structures
onto the manifold structure of the edges via a
graph product, and to reduce the original problem to vertex label propagation over the product
graph. This framework enjoys flexible choices in
the formulation of graph products, and supports
a rich family of graph transduction schemes with
scalable inference. Experiments on benchmark
datasets for collaborative filtering, citation network analysis and prerequisite prediction of online courses show advantageous performance of
the proposed approach over other state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Machine learning applications to many important problems
involve predicting the missing edges in a bipartite graph
based on heterogeneous sources of information about both
the vertices and the edges. In recommendation systems,
for example, observed user-item interactions can be represented as the (weighted) edges in a bipartite graph where
the users are the vertices on the left and the items are vertices on the right. In order to predict the unobserved useritem interactions successfully, inference needs to be made
not only based on the observed edges, but also based on
additional information about the vertices, such as demographic data of users and textual descriptions about items.
The induced intrinsic structures within those vertices would
also be informative for inference, such as the graph of
user-user similarities and the graph of item-item similariProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ties. The challenging question in context-aware collaborative filtering (Melville et al., 2002; Basilico & Hofmann,
2004; Gu et al., 2010) therefore is how to jointly leverage
the rich and heterogeneous information about both the observed edges and the vertices in the bipartite graph.
Other examples include citation network analysis (with
publications as the vertices on both sides of the bipartite
graph), multi-label text classification (with documents on
the left sides and categories on the right side of the bipartite
graph), question-answer mapping, host-pathogen interaction modeling, prerequisite linkage within online courses,
and more. All of those problems can be viewed as Bipartite
Edge Prediction (BEP), whose success crucially depends
on how to jointly leverage the observed edges and the intrinsic structures within vertices.
A representative approach to BEP is matrix completion,
which has been intensively studied in recent machine learning (Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2007; Candès & Recht, 2009).
Using a sparse matrix to record the observed edges in a bipartite graph, the prediction of the missing entries in this
matrix (i.e., the missing edges in the graph) is accomplished via dimensionality reduction. That is, by finding
a lower-dimensional vector space for the observed data,
the missing entries can be estimated by approximation. A
major weakness of such a matrix completion approach is
that the inference is based on observed edges only, ignoring other information about vertices or the intrinsic manifolds among them. As a consequence, such methods cannot
effectively handle the cold-start problems in collaborative
filtering, for example, where new users or new items do not
have enough observed interactions for reliable inference.
Other representative works in BEP include a family of
tensor-kernel based approaches (Basilico & Hofmann,
2004; Yu et al., 2006; Brunner et al., 2012), which makes
a combined use of observed edges and additional information about vertices. E.g., the tensor kernel can be used to
combine a matrix of user-user similarities based on demographic data of users and a matrix of item-item similarities
based text descriptions of items, and to obtain the induced

