Safe Exploration for Optimization with Gaussian Processes

Yanan Sui
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

YSUI @ CALTECH . EDU

Alkis Gotovos
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

ALKISG @ INF. ETHZ . CH

Joel W. Burdick
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

JWB @ ROBOTICS . CALTECH . EDU

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We consider sequential decision problems under
uncertainty, where we seek to optimize an
unknown function from noisy samples. This
requires balancing exploration (learning about
the objective) and exploitation (localizing the
maximum), a problem well-studied in the multiarmed bandit literature. In many applications,
however, we require that the sampled function
values exceed some prespecified “safety” threshold, a requirement that existing algorithms fail
to meet. Examples include medical applications
where patient comfort must be guaranteed,
recommender systems aiming to avoid user
dissatisfaction, and robotic control, where one
seeks to avoid controls causing physical harm
to the platform. We tackle this novel, yet rich,
set of problems under the assumption that the
unknown function satisfies regularity conditions
expressed via a Gaussian process prior. We
develop an efficient algorithm called S AFE O PT,
and theoretically guarantee its convergence to
a natural notion of optimum reachable under
safety constraints. We evaluate S AFE O PT on
synthetic data, as well as two real applications:
movie recommendation, and therapeutic spinal
cord stimulation.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

1. Introduction
Many machine learning applications in areas such as recommender systems or experimental design need to make
sequential decisions to optimize an unknown function. In
particular, each decision leads to a stochastic reward with
initially unknown distribution, while new decisions are
made based on the observations of previous rewards. To
maximize the total reward, one needs to solve the tradeoff
between exploring different decisions and exploiting decisions currently estimated as optimal within a given set. In
some applications, however, it is unacceptable to ever incur low rewards; rather, the reward of any sampled strategy
must lie above some specified “safety” threshold.
Consider, for example, medical applications (e.g., rehabilitation), where physicians may choose among a large set
of therapies, some of which may be novel. The effects
of different therapies are initially unknown, and can only
be determined through experimentation. Free exploration,
however, is not possible, since some therapies might cause
severe discomfort, or even physical harm to the patient.
Oftentimes, the effects of similar therapies are correlated,
hence, a feasible way to explore the space of therapies is to
start from some therapies similar to those known to be safe.
Proceeding this way, more and more choices can be established to be safe, facilitating further exploration. In our experiments, we address an instance of such a problem, where
the goal is to choose stimulation patterns for epidurally
implanted electrode arrays to aid rehabilitation of patients
who have suffered spinal cord injuries. Challenges of this
kind arise in learning robotic controllers by experimenting
with the robot, where some parameters might lead to physical harm of the platform. Similarly, in recommender systems, we might wish to avoid recommendations that are
severely disliked by the user, an application we also consider in our experiments.

