On TD(0) with function approximation:
Concentration bounds and a centered variant with exponential convergence

Nathaniel Korda
MLRG, University of Oxford, UK.
Prashanth L.A.
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, Team SequeL, FRANCE.

Abstract
We provide non-asymptotic bounds for the
well-known temporal difference learning algorithm TD(0) with linear function approximators.
These include high-probability bounds as well
as bounds in expectation. Our analysis suggests
that a step-size inversely proportional to the number of iterations cannot guarantee optimal rate of
convergence unless we assume (partial) knowledge of the stationary distribution for the Markov
chain underlying the policy considered. We also
provide bounds for the iterate averaged TD(0)
variant, which gets rid of the step-size dependency while exhibiting the optimal rate of convergence. Furthermore, we propose a variant of
TD(0) with linear approximators that incorporates a centering sequence, and establish that it
exhibits an exponential rate of convergence in expectation. We demonstrate the usefulness of our
bounds on two synthetic experimental settings.

1. Introduction
Many stochastic control problems can be cast within the
framework of Markov decision processes (MDP). Reinforcement learning (RL) is a popular approach to solve
MDPs, when the underlying transition mechanism is unknown. An important problem in RL is to estimate the
value function V π for a given stationary policy π. We focus
on discounted reward MDPs with a high-dimensional state
space S. In this setting, one can only hope to estimate the
value function approximately and this constitutes the policy evaluation step in several approximate policy iteration
methods, e.g. actor-critic algorithms (Konda & Tsitsiklis,
2003), (Bhatnagar et al., 2009).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

NATHANIEL . KORDA @ ENG . OX . AC . UK

PRASHANTH . LA @ INRIA . FR

Temporal difference learning is a well-known policy
evaluation algorithm that is both online and works with a
single sample path obtained by simulating the underlying
MDP. However, the classic TD(0) algorithm uses full-state
representations (i.e. it stores an entry for each state s ∈ S)
and hence, suffers from the curse of dimensionality. A
standard trick to alleviate this problem is to approximate
the value function within a linearly parameterized space of
functions, i.e., V π (s) ≈ θT φ(s). Here θ is a tunable parameter and φ(s) is a column feature vector with dimension d << |S|. This approximation allows for efficient
implementation of TD(0) even on large state spaces.
The update rule for TD(0) that incorporates linear function
approximators is as follows: Starting with an arbitrary θ0 ,
θn+1 = θn + γn r(sn , π(sn )) + βθnT φ(sn+1 )
(1)

T
−θn φ(sn ) φ(sn ).
In the above, the quantities γn are step sizes, chosen in
advance ,and satisfying standard stochastic approximation
conditions (see assumption (A5)). Further, r(s, a) is the reward recieved in state s on choosing action a, β ∈ (0, 1) is
a discount factor, and sn is the state of the MDP at time n.
Asymptotic convergence of TD(0). In (Tsitsiklis &
Van Roy, 1997), the authors establish that θn governed by
(1) converges almost surely to the fixed point, θ∗ , of the
projected Bellman equation given by
Φθ∗ = ΠT π (Φθ∗ ).

(2)

In the above, T π is the Bellman operator, Π is the orthogonal projection onto the linearly parameterized space
within which we approximate the value function, and Φ is
the feature matrix with rows φ(s)T , ∀s ∈ S denoting the
features corresponding to state s ∈ S (see Section 2 for
more details). Let P denote the transition probability matrix with components p(s, π(s), s0 ) that denote the probability of transitioning from state s to s0 under the action

