From Word Embeddings To Document Distances

Matt J. Kusner
Yu Sun
Nicholas I. Kolkin
Kilian Q. Weinberger
Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130

MKUSNER @ WUSTL . EDU
YUSUN @ WUSTL . EDU
N . KOLKIN @ WUSTL . EDU
KILIAN @ WUSTL . EDU

Abstract
We present the Word Mover’s Distance (WMD),
a novel distance function between text documents. Our work is based on recent results in
word embeddings that learn semantically meaningful representations for words from local cooccurrences in sentences. The WMD distance
measures the dissimilarity between two text documents as the minimum amount of distance that
the embedded words of one document need to
“travel” to reach the embedded words of another
document. We show that this distance metric can
be cast as an instance of the Earth Mover’s Distance, a well studied transportation problem for
which several highly efficient solvers have been
developed. Our metric has no hyperparameters
and is straight-forward to implement. Further, we
demonstrate on eight real world document classification data sets, in comparison with seven stateof-the-art baselines, that the WMD metric leads
to unprecedented low k-nearest neighbor document classification error rates.

1. Introduction
Accurately representing the distance between two documents has far-reaching applications in document retrieval
(Salton & Buckley, 1988), news categorization and clustering (Ontrup & Ritter, 2001; Greene & Cunningham, 2006),
song identification (Brochu & Freitas, 2002), and multilingual document matching (Quadrianto et al., 2009).
The two most common ways documents are represented
is via a bag of words (BOW) or by their term frequencyinverse document frequency (TF-IDF). However, these features are often not suitable for document distances due to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

document 1
Obama
speaks
to
the
media
in
Illinois

‘greets’

‘Obama’
‘President’

‘speaks’

‘Chicago’
‘Illinois’

‘media’

‘press’

document 2
The
President
greets
the
press
in
Chicago

word2vec embedding

Figure 1. An illustration of the word mover’s distance. All
non-stop words (bold) of both documents are embedded into a
word2vec space. The distance between the two documents is the
minimum cumulative distance that all words in document 1 need
to travel to exactly match document 2. (Best viewed in color.)

their frequent near-orthogonality (Schölkopf et al., 2002;
Greene & Cunningham, 2006). Another significant drawback of these representations are that they do not capture
the distance between individual words. Take for example
the two sentences in different documents: Obama speaks
to the media in Illinois and: The President greets the press
in Chicago. While these sentences have no words in common, they convey nearly the same information, a fact that
cannot be represented by the BOW model. In this case, the
closeness of the word pairs: (Obama, President); (speaks,
greets); (media, press); and (Illinois, Chicago) is not factored into the BOW-based distance.
There have been numerous methods that attempt to circumvent this problem by learning a latent low-dimensional representation of documents. Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI)
(Deerwester et al., 1990) eigendecomposes the BOW feature space, and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei
et al., 2003) probabilistically groups similar words into topics and represents documents as distribution over these topics. At the same time, there are many competing variants of BOW/TF-IDF (Salton & Buckley, 1988; Robertson & Walker, 1994). While these approaches produce a
more coherent document representation than BOW, they
often do not improve the empirical performance of BOW
on distance-based tasks (e.g., nearest-neighbor classifiers)
(Petterson et al., 2010; Mikolov et al., 2013c).

