A low variance consistent test of relative dependency

Wacha Bounliphone
WACHA . BOUNLIPHONE @ CENTRALESUPELEC . FR
CentraleSupélec & Inria, Grande Voie des Vignes, 92295 Châtenay-Malabry, France
Arthur Gretton
ARTHUR . GRETTON @ GMAIL . COM
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, United Kingdom
Arthur Tenenhaus
CentraleSupélec, 3 rue Joliot-Curie, 91192 Gif-Sur-Yvette, France

ARTHUR . TENENHAUS @ CENTRALESUPELEC . FR

Matthew B. Blaschko
MATTHEW. BLASCHKO @ INRIA . FR
Inria & CentraleSupélec, Grande Voie des Vignes, 92295 Châtenay-Malabry, France

Abstract
We describe a novel non-parametric statistical
hypothesis test of relative dependence between
a source variable and two candidate target variables. Such a test enables us to determine
whether one source variable is significantly more
dependent on a first target variable or a second. Dependence is measured via the HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC), resulting in a pair of empirical dependence measures (source-target 1, source-target 2). We test
whether the first dependence measure is significantly larger than the second. Modeling the
covariance between these HSIC statistics leads
to a provably more powerful test than the construction of independent HSIC statistics by subsampling. The resulting test is consistent and
unbiased, and (being based on U-statistics) has
favorable convergence properties. The test can
be computed in quadratic time, matching the
computational complexity of standard empirical HSIC estimators. The effectiveness of the
test is demonstrated on several real-world problems: we identify language groups from a multilingual corpus, and we prove that tumor location is more dependent on gene expression
than chromosomal imbalances. Source code is
available for download at https://github.
com/wbounliphone/reldep.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Tests of dependence are important tools in statistical analysis, and are widely applied in many data analysis contexts. Classical criteria include Spearman’s ρ and Kendall’s
τ , which can detect non-linear monotonic dependencies.
More recent research on dependence measurement has focused on non-parametric measures of dependence, which
apply even when the dependence is nonlinear, or the variables are multivariate or non-euclidean (for instance images, strings, and graphs). The statistics for such tests are
diverse, and include kernel measures of covariance (Gretton et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2011) and correlation (Dauxois & Nkiet, 1998; Fukumizu et al., 2008), distance covariances (which are instances of kernel tests) (Székely
et al., 2007; Sejdinovic et al., 2013b), kernel regression
tests (Cortes et al., 2009; Gunn & Kandola, 2002), rankings (Heller et al., 2013), and space partitioning approaches
(Gretton & Gyorfi, 2010; Reshef et al., 2011; Kinney & Atwal, 2014). Specialization of such methods to univariate
linear dependence can yield similar tests to classical approaches such as Darlington (1968); Bring (1996).
For many problems in data analysis, however, the question
of whether dependence exists is secondary: there may be
multiple dependencies, and the question becomes which
dependence is the strongest. For instance, in neuroscience,
multiple stimuli may be present (e.g. visual and audio), and
it is of interest to determine which of the two has a stronger
influence on brain activity (Trommershauser et al., 2011).
In automated translation (Peters et al., 2012), it is of interest to determine whether documents in a source language
are a significantly better match to those in one target language than to another target language, either as a measure
of difficulty of the respective learning tasks, or as a basic
tool for comparative linguistics.

