Stay on path: PCA along graph paths
Megasthenis Asteris
MEGAS @ UTEXAS . EDU
Anastasios Kyrillidis
ANASTASIOS @ UTEXAS . EDU
Alexandros G. Dimakis
DIMAKIS @ AUSTIN . UTEXAS . EDU
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
Han-Gyol Yi
GYOL @ UTEXAS . EDU
Bharath Chandrasekaran
BCHANDRA @ AUSTIN . UTEXAS . EDU
Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders, The University of Texas at Austin

b = 1/n · YY> is the empirical covariance matrix.
where Σ
The principal component spans the direction of maximum
data variability. This direction usually involves all p variables of the ambient space, in other words the PC vectors
are typically non-sparse. However, it is often desirable to
obtain a principal component with specific structure, for
example limiting the support of non-zero entries. From
a statistical viewpoint, in the high dimensional regime
n = O(p), the recovery of the true (population) principal
component is only possible if additional structure information, like sparsity, is available for the former (Amini &
Wainwright, 2009; Vu & Lei, 2012).

Abstract
We introduce a variant of (sparse) PCA in which
the set of feasible support sets is determined by
a graph. In particular, we consider the following
setting: given a directed acyclic graph G on p
vertices corresponding to variables, the non-zero
entries of the extracted principal component must
coincide with vertices lying along a path in G.
From a statistical perspective, information on the
underlying network may potentially reduce the
number of observations required to recover the
population principal component. We consider
the canonical estimator which optimally exploits
the prior knowledge by solving a non-convex
quadratic maximization on the empirical covariance. We introduce a simple network and analyze
the estimator under the spiked covariance model.
We show that side information potentially improves the statistical complexity.

There are several approaches for extracting a sparse principal component. Many rely on approximating the solution to
b
max x> Σx,

x∈Rp

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is an invaluable tool
in data analysis and machine learning. Given a set of
n centered p-dimensional datapoints Y ∈ Rp×n , the first
principal component is
arg max x Σx,

(2)

The non-convex quadratic optimization is NP hard (by a
reduction from maximum clique problem), but optimally
exploits the side information on the sparsity.

We propose two algorithms to approximate the
solution of the constrained quadratic maximization, and recover a component with the desired
properties. We empirically evaluate our schemes
on synthetic and real datasets.

>b

subject to kxk2 = 1, kxk0 ≤ k.

Graph Path PCA. In this paper we enforce additional
structure on the support of principal components. Consider
a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = (V, E) on p vertices.
Let S and T be two additional special vertices and consider
all simple paths from S to T on the graph G. Ignoring the
order of vertices along a path, let P(G) denote the collection of all S-T paths in G. We seek the principal component supported on a path of G, i.e., the solution to
max x> b
Σx,

x∈X (G)

(3)

where

(1)


X (G) , x ∈ Rp : kxk2 = 1, supp(x) ∈ P(G) . (4)

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

We will argue that this formulation can be used to impose
several types of structure on the support of principal comb and the graph
ponents. Note that the covariance matrix Σ

kxk2 =1

