On Deep Multi-View Representation Learning

Weiran Wang
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

WEIRANWANG @ TTIC . EDU

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University

ARORA @ CS . JHU . EDU

Karen Livescu
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

KLIVESCU @ TTIC . EDU

Jeff Bilmes
University of Washington, Seattle

Abstract
We consider learning representations (features)
in the setting in which we have access to multiple unlabeled views of the data for representation learning while only one view is available at
test time. Previous work on this problem has proposed several techniques based on deep neural
networks, typically involving either autoencoderlike networks with a reconstruction objective or
paired feedforward networks with a correlationbased objective. We analyze several techniques
based on prior work, as well as new variants, and
compare them experimentally on visual, speech,
and language domains. To our knowledge this
is the first head-to-head comparison of a variety of such techniques on multiple tasks. We
find an advantage for correlation-based representation learning, while the best results on most
tasks are obtained with our new variant, deep
canonically correlated autoencoders (DCCAE).

1. Introduction
In many applications, we have access to multiple “views”
of data at training time while only one view is available at test time. The views can be multiple measurement modalities, such as simultaneously recorded
audio + video (Kidron et al., 2005; Chaudhuri et al.,
2009), audio + articulation (Arora & Livescu, 2013), images + text (Hardoon et al., 2004; Socher & Li, 2010;
Hodosh et al., 2013), or parallel text in two lanProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

BILMES @ EE . WASHINGTON . EDU

guages (Vinokourov et al., 2003; Haghighi et al., 2008;
Chandar et al., 2014; Faruqui & Dyer, 2014), but may also
be different information extracted from the same source,
such as words + context (Pennington et al., 2014) or document text + text of inbound hyperlinks (Bickel & Scheffer,
2004). The presence of multiple information sources
presents an opportunity to learn better representations (features) by analyzing multiple views simultaneously. Typical
approaches are based on learning a feature transformation
of the “primary” view (the one available at test time) that
captures useful information from the second view using a
paired two-view training set. Under certain assumptions,
theoretical results exist showing the advantages of multiview techniques for downstream tasks (Kakade & Foster,
2007; Foster et al., 2009; Chaudhuri et al., 2009).
Several recently proposed approaches for multi-view
representation learning are based on deep neural networks (DNNs), inspired by their success in typical unsupervised (single-view) feature learning settings (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006). Compared to kernel
methods, DNNs can more easily process large amounts of
training data and, as a parameteric method, do not require
referring to the training set at test time.
There are two main training criteria (objectives) that have
been applied for DNN-based multi-view representation
learning. One is based on autoencoders, where the objective is to learn a compact representation that best
reconstructs the inputs (Ngiam et al., 2011). The second approach is based on canonical correlation analysis
(CCA, Hotelling, 1936), which learns features in two views
that are maximally correlated. CCA and its kernel extension (Lai & Fyfe, 2000; Akaho, 2001; Bach & Jordan,
2002; Hardoon et al., 2004) have long been the workhorse
for multi-view feature learning and dimensionality re-

