Submodularity in Data Subset Selection and Active Learning

Kai Wei
Rishabh Iyer
Jeff Bilmes
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

Abstract
We study the problem of selecting a subset of big
data to train a classifier while incurring minimal
performance loss. We show the connection of
submodularity to the data likelihood functions for
Naı̈ve Bayes (NB) and Nearest Neighbor (NN)
classifiers, and formulate the data subset selection
problems for these classifiers as constrained
submodular maximization. Furthermore, we
apply this framework to active learning and
propose a novel scheme called filtered active
submodular selection (FASS), where we combine the uncertainty sampling method with a
submodular data subset selection framework. We
extensively evaluate the proposed framework on
text categorization and handwritten digit recognition tasks with four different classifiers, including
deep neural network (DNN) based classifiers.
Empirical results indicate that the proposed
framework yields significant improvement over
the state-of-the-art algorithms on all classifiers.

1

Introduction

A relatively recent turn of events is that data sets for training machine learning systems are getting extremely large —
the unprecedented amount of data at our disposal on which
we can train our systems is one of the pillars of machine
learning’s recent successes. Big data has its own problems,
however, namely that it is computationally demanding, resource hungry, and often redundant. One solution to this
latter problem is to carefully choose a subset of the data
so as to minimize any significant loss in performance. In
the context of machine learning training data subset selection, we call this problem supervised data subset selection
(when training data labels are available), or unsupervised
data subset selection (when not).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

KAIWEI @ U . WASHINGTON . EDU
RKIYER @ U . WASHINGTON . EDU
BILMES @ U . WASHINGTON . EDU

One recent class of methods treats the problem as submodular maximization, where appropriate submodular functions
are chosen as the surrogate model to measure the utility
of each subset for an underlying task (Shinohara, 2014;
Zheng et al., 2014; Hoi et al., 2006; Shamaiah et al., 2010;
Prasad et al., 2014; Krause et al., 2008; Das & Kempe,
2011; Wei et al., 2014b; Kempe et al., 2003; Gabillon et al.,
2013; Chen & Krause, 2013; Reed & Ghahramani, 2013;
Singla et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2013; Iyer et al., 2013). While
existing work typically shows very good performance,
in some cases a mathematical connection can be made
between the true objective and a submodular model, a core
goal we wish to further advance in the present paper.
Submodular functions, traditionally studied in mathematics,
economics, and operations research, are defined as follows:
f : 2V → R, returning a real value for any subset S ⊆ V ,
is submodular if it satisfies f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∩ B) +
f (A∪B), ∀A, B ⊆ V . An equivalent definition is diminishing returns: f (j|S) ≥ f (j|T ), ∀S ⊆ T, j ∈ V \ T , where
f (j|S) , f (j ∪ S) − f (S) is the marginal gain of adding an
item j to a set S. A function f is monotone non-decreasing
if f (j|S) ≥ 0, ∀S ⊆ V, j ∈ V \ S. We say that f is normalized if f (∅) = 0. Submodular functions naturally model
notions of information, diversity, and coverage in many applications. Moreover, they can be optimized efficiently by
extremely simple algorithms. For example, a greedy algorithm (Nemhauser et al., 1978) ensures that the cardinality
constrained submodular maximization problem can be approximated up to a factor of 1 − 1/e. Submodularity can be
further exploited to accelerate the greedy implementation
leading to an algorithm often called lazy greedy (Minoux,
1978) with almost linear time complexity.
Our contributions: In this paper, we study submodular
functions in connection to data subset selection. We first
propose an approach to supervised data subset selection by
connecting submodularity to likelihood functions of classifiers. Specifically, we express the utility set function for two
simple classes of classifiers, the Naı̈ve Bayes (NB) classifier
and the Nearest Neighbor (NN) classifier utilizing submodularity. We identify two classes of submodular functions,

