Entropic Graph-based Posterior Regularization

Maxwell W Libbrecht
MAXWL @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU
Genome Sciences, Box 355065, Foege Building, S220B, 3720 15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA 98195-5065
Michael M Hoffman
MICHAEL . HOFFMAN @ UTORONTO . CA
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower 11-311, 101 College St, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7
Jeffrey A Bilmes
BILMES @ EE . WASHINGTON . EDU
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Box 352500, Seattle, WA 98195-2500
William S Noble
WILLIAM - NOBLE @ U . WASHINGTON . EDU
Genome Sciences, Box 355065, Foege Building, S220B, 3720 15th Ave NE, Seattle, WA 98195-5065

Abstract
Graph smoothness objectives have achieved great
success in semi-supervised learning but have not
yet been applied extensively to unsupervised generative models. We define a new class of entropic
graph-based posterior regularizers that augment
a probabilistic model by encouraging pairs of
nearby variables in a regularization graph to
have similar posterior distributions. We present a
three-way alternating optimization algorithm with
closed-form updates for performing inference on
this joint model and learning its parameters. This
method admits updates linear in the degree of the
regularization graph, exhibits monotone convergence, and is easily parallelizable. We are motivated by applications in computational biology
in which temporal models such as hidden Markov
models are used to learn a human-interpretable
representation of genomic data. On a synthetic
problem, we show that our method outperforms
existing methods for graph-based regularization
and a comparable strategy for incorporating
long-range interactions using existing methods
for approximate inference. Using genome-scale
functional genomics data, we integrate genome
3D interaction data into existing models for
genome annotation and demonstrate significant
improvements in predicting genomic activity.1
1

Due to space constraints, this manuscript omits some proofs
and experiments, as noted below. Please refer to the extended
version (Libbrecht et al., 2015) for these sections.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Graph-based methods have recently been successful in
solving many types of semi-supervised learning problems
(Chapelle et al., 2006; Das & Smith, 2011; Joachims,
1999; Subramanya et al., 2010; ?; Subramanya & Bilmes,
2011; Zhu et al., 2004; Zhu & Ghahramani, 2002). These
methods assume that data instances lie in a low-dimensional
manifold that may be represented as a graph. They
optimize a graph smoothness criterion, which states that
data instances nearby in the graph should be more likely
to receive the same label. In a semi-supervised learning
setting, optimizing this criterion has the effect of spreading
labels from labeled to unlabeled instances.
Despite the success of graph-based methods for semisupervised learning, there has not been as much study of
the use of graph smoothness objectives in an unsupervised
setting. In unsupervised problems, we do not have labels
but instead have a generative model that is assumed to
explain the observed data given the latent labels. While
some types of relationships between instances (for example,
the relationship between neighboring words in a sentence or
neighboring bases in a genome) can easily be incorporated
into the generative model, it is often inappropriate to encode
a graph smoothness assumption into the model this way,
for two reasons. First, in some cases, it is not clear what
probabilistic process generated the labels with respect to
the graph. Some objectives and distance measures that
are successful for semi-supervised learning do not have
probabilistic analogues. Second, large models must obey
factorization properties (e.g., a tree or chain as in hidden
Markov models) to facilitate the use of efficient dynamic
programming algorithms such as belief propagation. Graphs
representing similarity between variables do not in general
satisfy these structure requirements because they tend to
be densely clustered, leading to very high-order factors.

