Threshold Influence Model for Allocating Advertising Budgets

Atsushi Miyauchi
MIYAUCHI . A . AA @ M . TITECH . AC . JP
Graduate School of Decision Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
Yuni Iwamasa
YUNI IWAMASA @ MIST. I . U - TOKYO . AC . JP
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Japan
Takuro Fukunaga
National Institute of Informatics, JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project, Japan

KAKIMURA @ GLOBAL . C . U - TOKYO . AC . JP

Naonori Kakimura
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
We propose a new influence model for allocating
budgets to advertising channels. Our model captures customer’s sensitivity to advertisements as
a threshold behavior; a customer is expected to
be influenced if the influence he receives exceeds
his threshold. Over the threshold model, we discuss two optimization problems. The first one
is the budget-constrained influence maximization. We propose two greedy algorithms based
on different strategies, and analyze the performance when the influence is submodular. We
then introduce a new characteristic to measure
the cost-effectiveness of a marketing campaign,
that is, the proportion of the resulting influence to
the cost spent. We design an almost linear-time
approximation algorithm to maximize the costeffectiveness. Furthermore, we design a betterapproximation algorithm based on linear programming for a special case. We conduct thorough experiments to confirm that our algorithms
outperform baseline algorithms.

1. Introduction
Recent development of online advertisement has opened up
a lot of opportunities for companies to conduct a marketing
campaign. They can promote their products through various online advertising channels such as search engine and
social media, in addition to traditional media such as TV,

newspapers, and radio. In marketing, one of the major decisions is how to allocate a given budget among such media
channels in order to maximize the impact on a set of potential customers.
We may model as a bipartite graph in which one side is
the set of possible marketing channels, and the other is the
population of target customers. An edge between a channel
i and a customer j indicates that i may influence j. For the
above marketing problem, we can simply consider choosing a set of advertising channels to maximize the number of
customers covered by the chosen channels. This is the classical combinatorial optimization problem called the maximum coverage problem. The problem is known to be NPhard, but we can obtain an (e/(e − 1))-approximate solution1 using a greedy-type algorithm (Hochbaum, 1997).
However, the maximum coverage problem only focuses
on the number of covered customers, and cannot handle a
probabilistic behavior of making influence in reality. Moreover, we do not consider allocating some amount of budgets to a channel.
Alon et al. (2012) proposed two fundamental marketing
models, the source-side influence model and the target-side
influence model, incorporating a probabilistic behavior of a
market model as well as allowing us to allocate a budget to
a source node. The two models focus on individual (and independent) interaction and influence between sources and
targets. In their first model, each source determines a probability of their influence to targets, while each target does
in the other model. The first model was extended to a more
general setting (Soma et al., 2014).
1

nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

TAKURO @ NII . AC . JP

A feasible solution is α-approximate if its objective value is
at least 1/α times the optimal value. An α-approximation algorithm is one that returns an α-approximate solution for any instance.

