Celeste: Variational inference for a generative model of
astronomical images

Jeffrey Regier, University of California, Berkeley
Andrew Miller, Harvard University
Jon McAuliffe, University of California, Berkeley
Ryan Adams, Harvard University
Matt Hoffman, Adobe Research
Dustin Lang, Carnegie Mellon University
David Schlegel, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Prabhat, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

JEFF @ STAT. BERKELEY. EDU
ACM @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
JON @ STAT. BERKELEY. EDU
RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
MDHOFFMA @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU
DSTN @ CMU . EDU
DJSCHLEGEL @ LBL . GOV
PRABHAT @ LBL . GOV

Abstract
We present a new, fully generative model of optical telescope image sets, along with a variational procedure for inference. Each pixel intensity is treated as a Poisson random variable, with
a rate parameter dependent on latent properties
of stars and galaxies. Key latent properties are
themselves random, with scientific prior distributions constructed from large ancillary data sets.
We check our approach on synthetic images. We
also run it on images from a major sky survey,
where it exceeds the performance of the current
state-of-the-art method for locating celestial bodies and measuring their colors.

1. Introduction
This paper presents Celeste, a new, fully generative model
of astronomical image sets—the first such model to be empirically investigated, to our knowledge. The work we
report is an encouraging example of principled statistical
inference applied successfully to a science domain underserved by the machine learning community. It is unfortunate that astronomy and cosmology receive comparatively
little of our attention: the scientific questions are fundamental, there are petabytes of data available, and we as a
data-analysis community have a lot to offer the domain scientists. One goal in reporting this work is to raise the profile
of these problems for the machine-learning audience and
show that much interesting research remains to be done.
Turn now to the science. Stars and galaxies radiate photons.
An astronomical image records photons—each originating
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Figure 1. An image from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS,
2015) of a galaxy from the constellation Serpens, 100 million
light years from Earth, along with several other galaxies and many
stars from our own galaxy.

from a particular celestial body or from background atmospheric noise—that pass through a telescope’s lens during an exposure. Multiple celestial bodies may contribute
photons to a single image (e.g. Figure 1), and even to a
single pixel of an image. Locating and characterizing the
imaged celestial bodies is an inference problem central to
astronomy. To date, the algorithms proposed for this inference problem have been primarily heuristic, based on
finding bright regions in the images (Lupton et al., 2001;
Stoughton et al., 2002).
Generative models are well-suited to this problem—for
three reasons. First, to a good approximation, photon
counts from celestial objects are independent Poisson processes: each star or galaxy has an intrinsic brightness that

