Low Rank Approximation using Error Correcting Coding Matrices

Shashanka Ubaru
Arya Mazumdar
Yousef Saad
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, MN USA

Abstract
Low-rank matrix approximation is an integral
component of tools such as principal component
analysis (PCA), as well as is an important instrument used in applications like web search, text
mining and computer vision, e.g., face recognition. Recently, randomized algorithms were proposed to effectively construct low rank approximations of large matrices. In this paper, we show
how matrices from error correcting codes can be
used to find such low rank approximations.
The benefits of using these code matrices are
the following: (i) They are easy to generate and
they reduce randomness significantly. (ii) Code
matrices have low coherence and have a better
chance of preserving the geometry of an entire
subspace of vectors; (iii) Unlike Fourier transforms or Hadamard matrices, which require sampling O(k log k) columns for a rank-k approximation, the log factor is not necessary in the case
of code matrices. (iv) Under certain conditions,
the approximation errors can be better and the
singular values obtained can be more accurate,
than those obtained using Gaussian random matrices and other structured random matrices.

1. Introduction
Many scientific computations, data analysis and machine
learning applications (Halko et al., 2011; Drineas et al.,
2006) lead to large dimensional matrices which can be well
approximated by a low dimensional basis. It is more efficient to solve such computational problems by first transforming these large matrices into a low dimensional space,
while preserving the invariant subspace that captures the
essential structure of the matrix. Several algorithms have
been proposed in the literature for finding such low rank
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

UBARU 001@ UMN . EDU
ARYA @ UMN . EDU
SAAD @ CS . UMN . EDU

approximations of a matrix (Ye, 2005; Haeffele et al., 2014;
Papailiopoulos et al., 2013). Recently, research focussed on
developing techniques which use randomization for computing low rank approximations and matrix decompositions of such matrices. It is found that randomness provides an effective way to construct low dimensional bases
with high reliability and computational efficiency.
The randomization techniques for matrix approximations
(Halko et al., 2011; Martinsson et al., 2006; Liberty et al.,
2007) aim to compute a basis that approximately spans the
input matrix A, by sampling the matrix using Gaussian random matrices. This task is accomplished by first forming
the matrix-matrix product Y = AΩ, where Ω is a random
matrix of smaller dimension, and then computing the orthonormal basis of Y = QR that identifies the range of the
reduced matrix Y . It can be shown that A ≈ QQ∗ A with
high probability. Recently, it has been observed that structured random matrices, like subsampled random Fourier
transform (SRFT) and Hadamard transform (SRHT) matrices can also be used in place of Gaussian random matrices
(Liberty, 2009; Woolfe et al., 2008; Tropp, 2011). This paper demonstrates how error correcting coding matrices can
be a good choice for computing low rank approximations.
The input matrices whose low rank approximation is to be
computed, usually have very large dimensions (e.g., in the
order of 106 − 108 ). In order to form a Gaussian random
matrix which samples the input matrix in randomized algorithms, we need to generate a large number of random numbers. This could be a serious practical issue, (in terms of
time complexity and storage). This issue can be addressed
by using the structured random matrices, like SRFT and
SRHT matrices. However, for a rank-k approximation,
these matrices require sampling O(k log k) columns. Other
practical issues arise such as: the Fourier Transform matrices require handling complex numbers and the Hadamard
matrices exist only for the sizes which are in powers of 2.
These drawbacks can be overcome if the code matrices presented in this paper are used for sampling input matrices.
In digital communication, information is encoded by
adding redundancy into (predominantly binary) vectors or

