Simple regret for infinitely many armed bandits
Alexandra Carpentier
A . CARPENTIER @ STATSLAB . CAM . AC . UK
Statistical Laboratory, CMS, Wilberforce Road, CB3 0WB, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
Michal Valko
MICHAL . VALKO @ INRIA . FR
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, SequeL team, 40 avenue Halley 59650, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

Abstract
We consider a stochastic bandit problem with infinitely many arms. In this setting, the learner
has no chance of trying all the arms even once
and has to dedicate its limited number of samples only to a certain number of arms. All previous algorithms for this setting were designed for
minimizing the cumulative regret of the learner.
In this paper, we propose an algorithm aiming at
minimizing the simple regret. As in the cumulative regret setting of infinitely many armed bandits, the rate of the simple regret will depend on a
parameter β characterizing the distribution of the
near-optimal arms. We prove that depending on
β, our algorithm is minimax optimal either up to
a multiplicative constant or up to a log(n) factor.
We also provide extensions to several important
cases: when β is unknown, in a natural setting
where the near-optimal arms have a small variance, and in the case of unknown time horizon.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making has been recently fueled by
several industrial applications, e.g., advertisement, and recommendation systems. In many of these situations, the
learner is faced with a large number of possible actions,
among which it has to make a decision. The setting we
consider is a direct extension of a classical decision-making
setting, in which we only receive feedback for the actions
we choose, the bandit setting. In this setting, at each time t,
the learner can choose among all the actions (called the
arms) and receives a sample (reward) from the chosen action, which is typically a noisy characterization of the action. The learner performs n such rounds and its performance is then evaluated with respect to some criterion, for
instance the cumulative regret or the simple regret.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

In the classical, multi-armed bandit setting, the number of
actions is assumed to be finite and small when compared
to the number of decisions. In this paper, we consider an
extension of this setting to infinitely many actions, the infinitely many armed bandits (Berry et al., 1997; Wang et al.,
2008; Bonald & Proutière, 2013). Inevitably, the sheer
amount of possible actions makes it impossible to try each
of them even once. Such a setting is practically relevant for
cases where one faces a finite, but extremely large number of actions. This setting was first formalized by Berry
et al. (1997) as follows. At each time t, the learner can
either sample an arm (a distribution) that has been already
observed in the past, or sample a new arm, whose mean µ
is sampled from the mean reservoir distribution L.
The additional challenges of the infinitely many armed bandits with respect to the multi-armed bandits come from two
sources. First, we need to find a good arm among the
sampled ones. Second, we need to sample (at least once)
enough arms in order to have (at least once) a reasonably
good one. These two difficulties ask for a while which
we call the arm selection tradeoff. It is different from the
known exploration/exploitation tradeoff and more linked
to model selection principles: On one hand, we want to
sample only from a small subsample of arms so that we
can decide, with enough accuracy, which one is the best
one among them. On the other hand, we want to sample
as many arms as possible in order to have a higher chance
to sample a good arm at least once. This tradeoff makes
the problem of infinitely many armed bandits significantly
different from the classical bandit problem.
Berry et al. (1997) provide asymptotic, minimax-optimal
(up to a log n factor) bounds for the average cumulative regret, defined as the difference between n times the highest
possible value µ̄∗ of the mean reservoir distribution and the
mean of the sum of all samples that the learner collects. A
follow-up on this result was the work of Wang et al. (2008),
providing algorithms with finite-time regret bounds and the
work of Bonald & Proutière (2013), giving an algorithm
that is optimal with exact constants in a strictly more specific setting. In all of this prior work, the authors show

