Distributed Box-Constrained Quadratic Optimization for Dual Linear SVM

Ching-pei Lee
LEECHINGPEI @ GMAIL . COM
Dan Roth
DANR @ ILLINOIS . EDU
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 201 N. Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract

where C > 0 is a specified parameter, and ξ is a loss function. Two common choices of ξ are

Training machine learning models sometimes
needs to be done on large amounts of data that
exceed the capacity of a single machine, motivating recent works on developing algorithms that
train in a distributed fashion. This paper proposes an efficient box-constrained quadratic optimization algorithm for distributedly training linear support vector machines (SVMs) with large
data. Our key technical contribution is an analytical solution to the problem of computing the
optimal step size at each iteration, using an efficient method that requires only O(1) communication cost to ensure fast convergence. With
this optimal step size, our approach is superior to
other methods by possessing global linear convergence, or, equivalently, O(log(1/)) iteration
complexity for an -accurate solution, for distributedly solving the non-strongly-convex linear
SVM dual problem. Experiments also show that
our method is significantly faster than state-ofthe-art distributed linear SVM algorithms including DSVM-AVE, DisDCA and TRON.

max(0, 1 − yi wT xi ), and max(0, 1 − yi wT xi )2 ,
which we refer to as L1-SVM and L2-SVM, respectively.
Linear SVM has been used in many applications, and its
single-machine training has been studied extensively. It is
well-known that instead of directly solving (1), optimizing
its dual problem shown below is sometimes faster (Hsieh
et al., 2008; Yuan et al., 2012), especially when l < n,
because there are fewer variables to optimize.
1 T
α Q̄α − eT α
2
subject to 0 ≤ αi ≤ U, i = 1, . . . , l,
min

α∈Rl

With the rapid growth of data volume, distributed machine
learning gains more importance as a way to address training with massive data sets that could not fit the capacity of
a single machine. Linear support vector machine (SVM)
(Boser et al., 1992; Vapnik, 1995) is a widely adopted
model for large-scale linear classification. Given training instances {(xi , yi ) ∈ Rn × {−1, 1}}li=1 , linear SVM
solves the following problem:

w∈R

f P (w) ≡

l
X
1 T
w w+C
ξ(w, xi ; yi ),
2
i=1

(2)

where e is the vector of ones, Q̄ = Q + sI, Q =
Y X(Y X)T , X = [x1 , . . . , xl ]T , Y is a diagonal matrix
such that Yi,i = yi , I is the identity matrix, and
(
(0, C)
if L1-SVM,
(s, U ) =
(1/2C, ∞) if L2-SVM.

1. Introduction

minn

f (α) ≡

(1)

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Because the main computations in batch solvers for (1)
are matrix-vector products that can be naively parallelized,
several works have successfully adapted these solvers to
distributed environments (Agarwal et al., 2014; Zhang
et al., 2012; Zhuang et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2014). However, state-of-the-art single-machine dual algorithms are all
sequential and cannot be easily parallelized. Moreover, in
a distributed setting, because each machine only has a fraction of the training data, and the cost of communication
and synchronization is relatively high, it is important to
consider algorithms with low communication cost. Consequently, algorithms with a faster convergence rate are
desirable because a smaller number of iterations implies
a smaller number of communication rounds. We observe
that without careful consideration of this issue, existing
distributed dual solvers do not achieve satisfactory training speed. However, as mentioned above, given that a dual
solver might be more suitable for high-dimensional data, it

