A Fast Variational Approach
for Learning Markov Random Field Language Models

Yacine Jernite
CIMS, New York University, 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY 10012, USA
Alexander M. Rush
Facebook AI Research, 770 Broadway, New York, NY 10003, USA
David Sontag
CIMS, New York University, 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY 10012, USA

Abstract
Language modelling is a fundamental building
block of natural language processing. However,
in practice the size of the vocabulary limits the
distributions applicable for this task: specifically, one has to either resort to local optimization methods, such as those used in neural language models, or work with heavily constrained
distributions. In this work, we take a step towards overcoming these difficulties. We present
a method for global-likelihood optimization of
a Markov random field language model exploiting long-range contexts in time independent of
the corpus size. We take a variational approach
to optimizing the likelihood and exploit underlying symmetries to greatly simplify learning. We
demonstrate the efficiency of this method both
for language modelling and for part-of-speech
tagging.

1. Introduction
The aim of language modelling is to estimate a distribution
over words that best represents the text of a corpus. Language models are central to tasks such as speech recognition, machine translation, and text generation, and the parameters of these models are commonly used as features
or as initialization for other algorithms. Examples include
the word distributions learned by topic models, or the word
embeddings learned through neural language models.
Central to the language modelling problem is the challenge
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JERNITE @ CS . NYU . EDU

SRUSH @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

DSONTAG @ CS . NYU . EDU

of scale. It is typical for languages to have vocabularies of
hundreds of thousands of word types, and language models
themselves are often estimated on corpora with billions of
tokens (Graff et al., 2003). The scale of the problem inherently limits the types of distributions that can be effectively
applied.
In practice, the most commonly used class of language
models are n-gram models. These represent the probability
of the next word as a multinomial distribution conditioned
on the previous context. The parameters of this class of
models can be very efficiently estimated by simply collecting sufficient statistics and tuning a small set of parameters.
More recently neural language models (NLMs) have
gained popularity (Bengio et al., 2006; Mnih & Hinton,
2007). These models estimate the same distribution as ngram models, but utilize a non-linear neural network parameterization. NLMs have been shown to produce competitive results with n-gram models using many fewer parameters. Additionally the parameters themselves have
proven to be useful for other language tasks (Collobert
et al., 2011). Unfortunately training NLMs can be much
slower than n-gram models, often requiring expensive gradient computations for each token; techniques have been
developed to speed up training in practice (Mnih & Hinton,
2009; Mnih & Teh, 2012).
In this work, we consider a different class of language models. Instead of estimating the local probability of the next
word given its context, we globally model the entire corpus
as a Markov random field (MRF) language model. Undirected graphical models like MRFs have been widely applied in natural language processing as a way to flexibly
model statistical dependencies; however, MRFs are rarely
used for language modelling since estimating their parameters requires computing a costly partition function.

