An Aligned Subtree Kernel for Weighted Graphs

Lu Bai
School of Information, Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing, China

BAILU 69@ HOTMAIL . COM

Luca Rossi
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

L . ROSSI @ CS . BHAM . AC . UK

Zhihong Zhang
Software School, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China

ZHIHONG @ XMU . EDU . CN

Edwin R. Hancock
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, UK

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a new entropic matching kernel for weighted graphs by aligning depthbased representations. We demonstrate that this
kernel can be seen as an aligned subtree kernel that incorporates explicit subtree correspondences, and thus addresses the drawback of neglecting the relative locations between substructures that arises in the R-convolution kernels. Experiments on standard datasets demonstrate that
our kernel can easily outperform state-of-the-art
graph kernels in terms of classification accuracy.

1. Introduction
Graph kernels are powerful tools for structural analysis in
machine learning. The main advantage of using graph kernels is that they provide an implicit embedding of graphs
in a high dimensional space where structural information
is better preserved. Most of the existing graph kernels are
instances of the R-convolution kernels proposed by Haussler (Haussler, 1999). This is a generic way of defining
graph kernels by decomposing the input graphs into smaller and simpler substructures and comparing the original
graphs in terms of these substructures. The R-convolution
kernels can be categorised into the following classes, namely graph kernels based on comparing all pairs of a) walks (Jebara et al., 2004), b) paths (Borgwardt & Kriegel,
2005), c) cycles (Aziz et al., 2013), and d) subgraph or subtree structures (Shervashidze et al., 2009; Kriege & Mutzel,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ERH @ CS . YORK . AC . UK

2012; Bai et al., 2014a;c). One drawback arising in the
R-convolution kernels is that they neglect the relative locations of substructures. This is because the R-convolution kernels cannot establish reliable structural correspondences
between substructures. Moreover, most R-convolution kernels cannot accommodate weighted graphs, i.e., a graph
where each edge is associated with a weight. This is because the distances between pairs of adjacent vertices depend on the edge weight, and it is difficult to identify the
isomorphism for weighted (sub)graphs unless the weighted
information is discarded. These drawbacks limit the precision of graph kernel measures.
To overcome the shortcomings of existing R-convolution
kernels, we propose a novel aligned subtree kernel for
weighted graphs by aligning depth-based (DB) representations. In the literature (Crutchfield & Shalizi, 1999; Escolano et al., 2012), DB representations of un-weighted
and un-directed graphs are powerful tools for characterising graphs in terms of complexity measures. One approach
to computing the DB representation of a graph is based
on measuring the entropies on a family of K-layer expansion subgraphs centred on the vertex having a maximum
topological distance K to the remaining vertices (Bai &
Hancock, 2014). Unfortunately, computing the DB representations for edge-weighted graphs tends to be an elusive
task. This is because the distances between different pairs
of adjacent vertices depend on the edges weight, making it
harder to determine the K-layer expansion subgraphs. To
overcome this problem, for each vertex of a weighted graph
GW , we compute its DB representation, i.e., its entropic
representation. More precisely, we compute the entropic representation on the vertices of the quantum-directed
graph GD that is obtained from GW through the simulation of a CTQW (Emms et al., 2009). We show that the

