Surrogate Functions for Maximizing Precision at the Top

Purushottam Kar
Microsoft Research, INDIA

T- PURKAR @ MICROSOFT. COM

Harikrishna Narasimhan∗
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, INDIA

HARIKRISHNA @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, INDIA

Abstract
The problem of maximizing precision at the
top of a ranked list, often dubbed Precision@k
(prec@k), finds relevance in myriad learning applications such as ranking, multi-label classification, and learning with severe label imbalance.
However, despite its popularity, there exist significant gaps in our understanding of this problem and its associated performance measure.
The most notable of these is the lack of a convex upper bounding surrogate for prec@k. We
also lack scalable perceptron and stochastic gradient descent algorithms for optimizing this performance measure. In this paper we make key
contributions in these directions. At the heart
of our results is a family of truly upper bounding surrogates for prec@k. These surrogates are
motivated in a principled manner and enjoy attractive properties such as consistency to prec@k
under various natural margin/noise conditions.
These surrogates are then used to design a class
of novel perceptron algorithms for optimizing
prec@k with provable mistake bounds. We also
devise scalable stochastic gradient descent style
methods for this problem with provable convergence bounds. Our proofs rely on novel uniform
convergence bounds which require an in-depth
analysis of the structural properties of prec@k
and its surrogates. We conclude with experimental results comparing our algorithms with stateof-the-art cutting plane and stochastic gradient
algorithms for maximizing prec@k.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).
∗
Part of the work was done while H.N. was an intern at MSR India.

PRAJAIN @ MICROSOFT. COM

1. Introduction
Ranking a given set of points or labels according to their
relevance forms the core of several real-life learning systems. For instance, in classification problems with a rareclass as is the case in spam/anomaly detection, the goal is
to rank the given emails/events according to their likelihood
of being from the rare-class (spam/anomaly). Similarly, in
multi-label classification problems, the goal is to rank the
labels according to their likelihood of being relevant to a
data point (Tsoumakas & Katakis, 2007).
The ranking of items at the top is of utmost importance
in these applications and several performance measures,
such as Precision@k, Average Precision and NDCG have
been designed to promote accuracy at top of ranked lists.
Of these, the Precision@k (prec@k) measure is especially
popular in a variety of domains. Informally, prec@k counts
the number of relevant items in the top-k positions of a
ranked list and is widely used in domains such as binary
classification (Joachims, 2005), multi-label classification
(Prabhu & Varma, 2014) and ranking (Le & Smola, 2007).
Given its popularity, prec@k has received attention from
algorithmic, as well as learning theoretic perspectives.
However, there remain specific deficiencies in our understanding of this performance measure. In fact, to the best of
our knowledge, there is only one known convex surrogate
function for prec@k, namely, the struct-SVM surrogate due
to (Joachims, 2005) which, as we reveal in this work, is not
an upper bound on prec@k in general, and need not recover
an optimal ranking even in strictly separable settings.
Our aim in this paper is to develop efficient algorithms for
optimizing prec@k for ranking problems with binary relevance levels. Since the intractability of binary classification
in the agnostic setting (Guruswami & Raghavendra, 2009)
extends to prec@k, our goal would be to exploit natural
notions of benign-ness usually observed in natural distributions to overcome such intractability results.

