Classification with Low Rank and Missing Data

Elad Hazan
Princeton University and Microsoft Research, Herzliya

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Roi Livni
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Microsoft Research, Herzliya
Yishay Mansour
Microsoft Research, Hertzelia and Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We consider classification and regression tasks
where we have missing data and assume that the
(clean) data resides in a low rank subspace. Finding a hidden subspace is known to be computationally hard. Nevertheless, using a non-proper
formulation we give an efficient agnostic algorithm that classifies as good as the best linear
classifier coupled with the best low-dimensional
subspace in which the data resides. A direct implication is that our algorithm can linearly (and
non-linearly through kernels) classify provably
as well as the best classifier that has access to
the full data.

1. Introduction
The importance of handling correctly missing data is a
fundamental and classical challenge in machine learning.
There are many reasons why data might be missing. For
example, consider the medical domain, some data might be
missing because certain procedures were not performed on
a given patient, other data might be missing because the
patient choose not to disclose them, and even some data
might be missing due to malfunction of certain equipment.
While it is definitely much better to have always complete
and accurate data, this utopian desire is, in many cases, unfulfilled. For this reason we need to utilize the available
data even if some of it is missing.
Another, very different motivation for missing data are recommendations. For example, a movie recommendations
dataset might have users opinions on certain movies, which
is the case, for example, in the Netflix motion picture
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ROI . LIVNI @ MAIL . HUJI . AC . IL

MANSOUR . YISHAY @ GMAIL . COM

dataset. Clearly, no user has seen or reviewed all movies,
or even close to it. In this respect recommendation data is
an extreme case: the vast majority is usually missing (i.e.,
it is sparse to the extreme).
Many times we can solve the missing data problem since
the data resides on a lower dimension manifold. In the
above examples, if there are prototypical users (or patients)
and any user is a mixture of the prototypical users, then this
implicitly suggests that the data is low rank. Another way
to formalize this assumption is to consider the data in a matrix form, say, the users are rows and movies are columns,
then our assumption is that the true complete matrix has a
low rank.
Our starting point is to consider the low rank assumption,
but to avoid any explicit matrix completion, and instead
directly dive in to the classification problem. At the end of
the introduction we show that matrix completion is neither
sufficient and/or necessary.
We consider perhaps the most fundamental data analysis
technique of the machine learning toolkit: linear (and kernel) classification, as applied to data where some (or even
most) of the attributes in an example might be missing.
Our main result is an efficient algorithm for linear and
kernel classification that performs as well as the best
classifier that has access to all data, under low rank assumption with natural non-degeneracy conditions.
We stress that our result is worst case, we do not assume
that the missing data follows any probabilistic rule other
than the underlying matrix having low rank. This is a clear
contrast to most existing matrix completion algorithms. We
also cast our results in a distributional setting, showing that
the classification error that we achieve is close to the best
classification using the subspace of the examples (and with
no missing data). Notably, many variants of the problem
of finding a hidden subspace are computationally hard (see
e.g. (Berthet & Rigollet, 2013)), yet as we show, learn-

