Online Tracking by Learning Discriminative Saliency Map
with Convolutional Neural Network
Seunghoon Hong1
Tackgeun You1
Suha Kwak2
Bohyung Han1
1
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
2
Inria–WILLOW Project, Paris, France

Abstract
We propose an online visual tracking algorithm
by learning discriminative saliency map using
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Given a
CNN pre-trained on a large-scale image repository in offline, our algorithm takes outputs from
hidden layers of the network as feature descriptors since they show excellent representation performance in various general visual recognition
problems. The features are used to learn discriminative target appearance models using an online
Support Vector Machine (SVM). In addition, we
construct target-specific saliency map by backprojecting CNN features with guidance of the
SVM, and obtain the final tracking result in each
frame based on the appearance model generatively constructed with the saliency map. Since
the saliency map reveals spatial configuration of
target effectively, it improves target localization
accuracy and enables us to achieve pixel-level
target segmentation. We verify the effectiveness
of our tracking algorithm through extensive experiment on a challenging benchmark, where our
method illustrates outstanding performance compared to the state-of-the-art tracking algorithms.

1. Introduction
Object tracking has played important roles in a wide range
of computer vision applications. Although it has been
studied extensively during past decades, object tracking
is still a difficult problem due to many challenges in real
world videos such as occlusion, pose variations, illuminaProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MAGA 33@ POSTECH . AC . KR
YOUTK @ POSTECH . AC . KR
SUHA . KWAK @ INRIA . FR
BHHAN @ POSTECH . AC . KR

tion changes, fast motion, and background clutter. Success
in object tracking relies heavily on how robust the representation of target appearance is against such challenges.
For this reason, target appearance modeling algorithms
have been studied actively, and they are classified into two
major categories depending on learning strategies: generative and discriminative methods. In generative framework, the target appearance is typically described by a statistical model estimated from tracking results in previous
frames. To maintain the target appearance model, various
approaches have been proposed including sparse representation (Bao et al., 2012; Jia et al., 2012; Mei & Ling, 2009;
Zhang et al., 2012; Zhong et al., 2012), online density estimation (Han et al., 2008), incremental subspace learning (Ross et al., 2004), etc. On the other hand, discriminative framework aims to learn a classifier that discriminates target from surrounding background. Various learning algorithms have been incorporated including online
boosting (Grabner et al., 2006; Saffari et al., 2010), multiple instance learning (Babenko et al., 2011), structured
SVM (Hare et al., 2011), and online random forest (Gall
et al., 2011; Schulter et al., 2011). These approaches are
limited to using too simple and/or hand-crafted features for
target representation, such as template, Haar-like features,
histogram features and so on, which may not be effective
to handle latent challenges imposed on video sequences.
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has recently drawn
a lot of attention in computer vision community due to its
representation power. (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) trained a
network using 1.2 million images for image classification
and demonstrated significantly improved performance in
ImageNet challenge (Berg et al., 2012). Since the huge
success of this work, CNN has been applied to representing images or objects in various computer vision tasks including object detection (Girshick et al., 2014; Sermanet
et al., 2014; He et al., 2014), object recognition (Oquab
et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014), pose

