Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows

Danilo Jimenez Rezende
Shakir Mohamed
Google DeepMind, London

Abstract
The choice of approximate posterior distribution
is one of the core problems in variational inference. Most applications of variational inference
employ simple families of posterior approximations in order to allow for efficient inference, focusing on mean-field or other simple structured
approximations. This restriction has a significant impact on the quality of inferences made
using variational methods. We introduce a new
approach for specifying flexible, arbitrarily complex and scalable approximate posterior distributions. Our approximations are distributions constructed through a normalizing flow, whereby a
simple initial density is transformed into a more
complex one by applying a sequence of invertible
transformations until a desired level of complexity is attained. We use this view of normalizing
flows to develop categories of finite and infinitesimal flows and provide a unified view of approaches for constructing rich posterior approximations. We demonstrate that the theoretical advantages of having posteriors that better match
the true posterior, combined with the scalability
of amortized variational approaches, provides a
clear improvement in performance and applicability of variational inference.

1. Introduction
There has been a great deal of renewed interest in variational inference as a means of scaling probabilistic modeling to increasingly complex problems on increasingly
larger data sets. Variational inference now lies at the core of
large-scale topic models of text (Hoffman et al., 2013), provides the state-of-the-art in semi-supervised classification
(Kingma et al., 2014), drives the models that currently produce the most realistic generative models of images (Gregor et al., 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), and are a default
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DANILOR @ GOOGLE . COM
SHAKIR @ GOOGLE . COM

tool for the understanding of many physical and chemical
systems. Despite these successes and ongoing advances,
there are a number of disadvantages of variational methods
that limit their power and hamper their wider adoption as
a default method for statistical inference. It is one of these
limitations, the choice of posterior approximation, that we
address in this paper.
Variational inference requires that intractable posterior distributions be approximated by a class of known probability
distributions, over which we search for the best approximation to the true posterior. The class of approximations used
is often limited, e.g., mean-field approximations, implying
that no solution is ever able to resemble the true posterior
distribution. This is a widely raised objection to variational
methods, in that unlike other inferential methods such as
MCMC, even in the asymptotic regime we are unable recover the true posterior distribution.
There is much evidence that richer, more faithful posterior
approximations do result in better performance. For example, when compared to sigmoid belief networks that make
use of mean-field approximations, deep auto-regressive
networks use a posterior approximation with an autoregressive dependency structure that provides a clear improvement in performance (Mnih & Gregor, 2014). There
is also a large body of evidence that describes the detrimental effect of limited posterior approximations. Turner
& Sahani (2011) provide an exposition of two commonly
experienced problems. The first is the widely-observed
problem of under-estimation of the variance of the posterior distribution, which can result in poor predictions and
unreliable decisions based on the chosen posterior approximation. The second is that the limited capacity of the posterior approximation can also result in biases in the MAP
estimates of any model parameters (and this is the case e.g.,
in time-series models).
A number of proposals for rich posterior approximations
have been explored, typically based on structured meanfield approximations that incorporate some basic form of
dependency within the approximate posterior. Another potentially powerful alternative would be to specify the approximate posterior as a mixture model, such as those developed by Jaakkola & Jordan (1998); Jordan et al. (1999);

