Optimizing Neural Networks with Kronecker-factored Approximate Curvature

James Martens
Roger Grosse
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto

Abstract
We propose an efficient method for approximating natural gradient descent in neural networks
which we call Kronecker-factored Approximate
Curvature (K-FAC). K-FAC is based on an efficiently invertible approximation of a neural network’s Fisher information matrix which is neither diagonal nor low-rank, and in some cases is
completely non-sparse. It is derived by approximating various large blocks of the Fisher (corresponding to entire layers) as being the Kronecker
product of two much smaller matrices. While
only several times more expensive to compute
than the plain stochastic gradient, the updates
produced by K-FAC make much more progress
optimizing the objective, which results in an algorithm that can be much faster than stochastic gradient descent with momentum in practice.
And unlike some previously proposed approximate natural-gradient/Newton methods which
use high-quality non-diagonal curvature matrices (such as Hessian-free optimization), K-FAC
works very well in highly stochastic optimization regimes. This is because the cost of storing
and inverting K-FAC’s approximation to the curvature matrix does not depend on the amount of
data used to estimate it, which is a feature typically associated only with diagonal or low-rank
approximations to the curvature matrix.

1. Background and notation
1.1. Neural Networks
We begin by defining the basic notation for feed-forward
neural networks which we will use throughout this paper.
A neural network transforms its input a0 = x to an output
f (x, θ) = a` through a series of ` layers, each of which
consists of a bank of units/neurons. The units each receive as input a weighted sum of the outputs of units from
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JMARTENS @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
RGROSSE @ CS . TORONTO . EDU

the previous layer and compute their output via a nonlinear “activation” function. We denote by si the vector of
these weighted sums for the i-th layer, and by ai the vector
of unit outputs (aka “activities”). The precise computation
performed at each layer i ∈ {1, . . . , `} is given as follows:
si = Wi āi−1

ai = φi (si )

where φi is an element-wise nonlinear function, Wi is a
weight matrix, and āi is defined as the vector formed by appending to ai an additional homogeneous coordinate with
value 1. Note that we do not include explicit bias parameters here as these are captured implicitly through our use
of homogeneous coordinates. In particular, the last column
of each weight matrix Wi corresponds to what is usually
thought of as the “bias vector”.
We will define θ to be the vector consisting of all
of the network’s parameters concatenated together, i.e.
[vec(W1 )> vec(W2 )> . . . vec(W` )> ]> , where vec is the
operator which vectorizes matrices by stacking their
columns together.
We let L(y, z) denote the loss function which measures the
disagreement between a prediction z made by the network,
and a target y. The training objective function h(θ) is the
average (or expectation) of losses L(y, f (x, θ)) with respect to a training distribution Q̂x,y over input-target pairs
(x, y). h(θ) is a proxy for the objective which we actually
care about but don’t have access to, which is the expectation of the loss taken with respect to the true data distribution Qx,y .
We will assume that the loss is given by the negative log
probability associated with a simple predictive distribution
Ry|z for y parameterized by z, i.e. that we have L(y, z) =
− log r(y|z) where r is Ry|z ’s density function. This is the
case for both the standard least-squares and cross-entropy
objective functions, where the predictive distributions are
multivariate normal and multinomial, respectively.
We will let Py|x (θ) = Ry|f (x,θ) denote the conditional distribution defined by the neural network, as parameterized
by θ, and p(y|x, θ) = r(y|f (x, θ)) its density function.
Note that minimizing the objective function h(θ) can be
seen as maximum likelihood learning of the model Py|x (θ).
For convenience we will define the following additional no-

