Functional Subspace Clustering with Application to Time Series

Mohammad Taha Bahadori∗
MOHAMMAB @ USC . EDU
David Kale∗†
DKALE @ USC . EDU
Yingying Fan∗
FANYINGY @ MARSHALL . USC . EDU
Yan Liu∗
YANLIU . CS @ USC . EDU
∗
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
†
Laura P. and Leland K. Whittier Virtual PICU, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027

Abstract
Functional data, where samples are random functions, are increasingly common and important in
a variety of applications, such as health care and
traffic analysis. They are naturally high dimensional and lie along complex manifolds. These
properties warrant use of the subspace assumption, but most state-of-the-art subspace learning
algorithms are limited to linear or other simple
settings. To address these challenges, we propose a new framework called Functional Subspace Clustering (FSC). FSC assumes that functional samples lie in deformed linear subspaces
and formulates the subspace learning problem as
a sparse regression over operators. The resulting problem can be efficiently solved via greedy
variable selection, given access to a fast deformation oracle. We provide theoretical guarantees for FSC and show how it can be applied to
time series with warped alignments. Experimental results on both synthetic data and real clinical time series show that FSC outperforms both
standard time series clustering and state-of-theart subspace clustering.

1. Introduction
Classical machine learning models assume that each observation is represented as a finite dimensional vector. However, many applications involve functional data, where
samples are random functions (instead of standard vectors)
representing continuous processes and exhibiting structure
(Ferraty & Romain, 2011). Functional data are increasingly
common and important in a variety of scientific and commercial domains, such as healthcare, biology, traffic analProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ysis, climatology, and video. As a result, many statistical
methods for analyzing functional data have been proposed
(Müller, 2011; Hall & Hosseini-Nasab, 2009; Hall, 2011).
Functional data present challenges and opportunities for
machine learning, especially in clustering and representation learning. The underlying process is a continuous function of infinite dimension, usually unknown and difficult
to represent directly. Even when only finite samples are
available, they can be difficult to work with. Time series,
for example, exhibit noise, different lengths, and irregular
sampling. Thus, the first step in functional data clustering
is often to transform the data into a more regular representation (Hall, 2011; Delaigle et al., 2012; Shang, 2013) to
which standard clustering can be applied (e.g., k-means).
Alternative non-parametric approaches define a measure of
similarity between samples and cluster in the similarity (or
affinity) space (Warren Liao, 2005; Cuturi, 2011). Such
approaches often utilize specialized measures of similarity
that provide invariance to transformations or deformations.
In object recognition, images of the same object should be
similar regardless of resolution, lighting, or angle. In time
series data mining, dynamic time warping (DTW) is used
to compare time series based on shape and permits distortions (e.g., shifting and stretching) along the temporal axis,
as shown in Fig. 1 (Vintsyuk, 1968). Such similarities can
often be used to perform effective clustering (Warren Liao,
2005; Petitjean et al., 2014) but are not immune to the curse
of dimensionality inherent in functional data (Ferraty &
Vieu, 2006; Geenens, 2011). What is more, they can produce complex manifolds difficult to model using classic dimensionality reduction techniques (e.g., PCA) and cluster
models (Vidal, 2011).
Subspace clustering, an increasingly popular technique in
machine learning, addresses many of the aforementioned
challenges. Subspace clustering can capture more complex
manifolds and is robust in higher dimensional settings (Vidal, 2011; Kriegel et al., 2012), both desirable properties
in practical applications. In health care, for example, hos-

