Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image Caption
Generation with Visual Attention
Kelvin Xu?
Jimmy Lei Ba†
Ryan Kiros†
Kyunghyun Cho?
Aaron Courville?
Ruslan Salakhutdinov†∗
Richard S. Zemel†∗
Yoshua Bengio?∗
? Université de Montréal, † University of Toronto, ∗ CIFAR

Abstract
Inspired by recent work in machine translation
and object detection, we introduce an attention
based model that automatically learns to describe
the content of images. We describe how we
can train this model in a deterministic manner
using standard backpropagation techniques and
stochastically by maximizing a variational lower
bound. We also show through visualization how
the model is able to automatically learn to fix its
gaze on salient objects while generating the corresponding words in the output sequence. We
validate the use of attention with state-of-theart performance on three benchmark datasets:
Flickr9k, Flickr30k and MS COCO.

1. Introduction
Automatically generating captions for an image is a task
close to the heart of scene understanding — one of the primary goals of computer vision. Not only must caption generation models be able to solve the computer vision challenges of determining what objects are in an image, but
they must also be powerful enough to capture and express
their relationships in natural language. For this reason, caption generation has long been seen as a difficult problem.
It amounts to mimicking the remarkable human ability to
compress huge amounts of salient visual information into
descriptive language and is thus an important challenge for
machine learning and AI research.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

KELVIN . XU @ UMONTREAL . CA
JIMMY @ PSI . UTORONTO . CA
RKIROS @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
KYUNGHYUN . CHO @ UMONTREAL . CA
AARON . COURVILLE @ UMONTREAL . CA
RSALAKHU @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
ZEMEL @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
YOSHUA . BENGIO @ UMONTREAL . CA

Figure 1. Our model learns a words/image alignment. The visualized attentional maps (3) are explained in Sections 3.1 & 5.4
14x14 Feature Map

LSTM

1. Input
Image

A
bird
ﬂying
over
a
body
of
water

2. Convolutional 3. RNN with attention 4. Word by
Feature Extraction over the image
word
generation

Yet despite the difficult nature of this task, there has been
a recent surge of research interest in attacking the image
caption generation problem. Aided by advances in training deep neural networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and the
availability of large classification datasets (Russakovsky
et al., 2014), recent work has significantly improved the
quality of caption generation using a combination of convolutional neural networks (convnets) to obtain vectorial representation of images and recurrent neural networks to decode those representations into natural language sentences
(see Sec. 2). One of the most curious facets of the human visual system is the presence of attention (Rensink,
2000; Corbetta & Shulman, 2002). Rather than compress
an entire image into a static representation, attention allows
for salient features to dynamically come to the forefront as
needed. This is especially important when there is a lot
of clutter in an image. Using representations (such as those
from the very top layer of a convnet) that distill information
in image down to the most salient objects is one effective
solution that has been widely adopted in previous work.
Unfortunately, this has one potential drawback of losing
information which could be useful for richer, more descrip-

