PASSCoDe: Parallel ASynchronous Stochastic dual Co-ordinate Descent

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Hsiang-Fu Yu
Inderjit S. Dhillon
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78721, USA

Abstract
Stochastic Dual Coordinate Descent (DCD) is
one of the most efficient ways to solve the family of `2 -regularized empirical risk minimization problems, including linear SVM, logistic
regression, and many others. The vanilla implementation of DCD is quite slow; however,
by maintaining primal variables while updating
dual variables, the time complexity of DCD can
be significantly reduced. Such a strategy forms
the core algorithm in the widely-used LIBLINEAR package. In this paper, we parallelize the
DCD algorithms in LIBLINEAR. In recent research, several synchronized parallel DCD algorithms have been proposed, however, they fail
to achieve good speedup in the shared memory multi-core setting. In this paper, we propose a family of parallel asynchronous stochastic dual coordinate descent algorithms (PASSCoDe). Each thread repeatedly selects a random dual variable and conducts coordinate updates using the primal variables that are stored in
the shared memory. We analyze the convergence
properties of DCD when different locking/atomic
mechanisms are applied. For implementation
with atomic operations, we show linear convergence under mild conditions. For implementation without any atomic operations or locking,
we present a novel error analysis for PASSCoDe
under the multi-core environment, showing that
the converged solution is the exact solution for
a primal problem with a perturbed regularizer.
Experimental results show that our methods are
much faster than previous parallel coordinate descent solvers.

1. Introduction
Given a set of instance-label pairs (ẋi , ẏi ), i = 1, · · · , n,
ẋi ∈ Rd , ẏi ∈ R, we focus on the following empirical risk
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

CJHSIEH @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
ROFUYU @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

minimization problem with `2 -regularization:
n
X
1
min P (w) := kwk2 +
`i (wT xi ),
(1)
2
w∈Rd
i=1
where xi = ẏi ẋi , `i (·) is the loss function and k · k is
the 2-norm. A large class of machine learning problems
can be formulated as the above optimization problem. Examples include Support Vector Machines (SVMs), logistic regression, ridge regression, and many others. Problem (1) is usually called the primal problem, and can
be solved by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Zhang,
2004; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2007), second order methods (Lin et al., 2007), or primal Coordinate Descent (CD)
algorithms (Chang et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2010).
Instead of solving the primal problem, another class of algorithms solves the following dual problem of (1):
n
1 X
minn D(α) :=
αi xi
α∈R
2 i=1

2

+

n
X

`∗i (−αi ),

(2)

i=1

where `∗i (·) is the conjugate of the loss function `i (·), defined by `∗i (u) = maxz (zu − `i (z)). If we define
Xn
w(α) =
αi xi ,
(3)
i=1

then it is known that w(α∗ ) = w∗ and P (w∗ ) = −D(α∗ )
where w∗ , α∗ are the optimal primal/dual solutions respectively. Examples include hinge-loss SVM, square hinge
SVM and `2 -regularized logistic regression.
Stochastic Dual Coordinate Descent (DCD) has become
the most widely-used algorithm for solving (2), and it is
faster than primal solvers (including SGD) in many largescale problems. The success of DCD is mainly due to the
trick of maintaining the primal variables w based on the
primal-dual relationship (3). By maintaining w in memory,
(Hsieh et al., 2008; Keerthi et al., 2008) showed that the
time complexity of each coordinate update can be reduced
from O(nnz) to O(nnz/n), where nnz is the number of
nonzeros in the training dataset. Several DCD algorithms
for different machine learning problems are currently implemented in LIBLINEAR (Fan et al., 2008) which is now
widely used in both academia and industry. The success of
DCD has also catalyzed a large body of theoretical studies (Nesterov, 2012; Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013).

