Efficient Training of LDA on a GPU by Mean-for-Mode Estimation

Jean-Baptiste Tristan
Oracle Labs, USA

JEAN . BAPTISTE . TRISTAN @ ORACLE . COM

Joseph Tassarotti
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Guy L. Steele Jr.
Oracle Labs, USA

JTASSARO @ CS . CMU . EDU

GUY. STEELE @ ORACLE . COM

Abstract
We introduce Mean-for-Mode estimation, a variant of an uncollapsed Gibbs sampler that we use
to train LDA on a GPU. The algorithm combines
benefits of both uncollapsed and collapsed Gibbs
samplers. Like a collapsed Gibbs sampler — and
unlike an uncollapsed Gibbs sampler — it has
good statistical performance, and can use sampling complexity reduction techniques such as
sparsity. Meanwhile, like an uncollapsed Gibbs
sampler — and unlike a collapsed Gibbs sampler
— it is embarrassingly parallel, and can use approximate counters.

1. Introduction
The performance of GPUs makes them an appealing choice
for machine learning. However, there are several challenges
in using them efficiently. First, there must be enough parallelism to make use of all the many thousands of GPU cores.
Second, GPUs have small amounts of memory, and with
enough parallelism, memory bandwidth becomes a bottleneck. Finally, it is often unclear how to translate techniques
that have been developed for CPUs into improvements for
GPUs.
Topic models, such as LDA (Blei et al., 2003), are a good
example of these challenges of using GPUs. Although there
are several methods that can be used to train LDA (Asuncion et al., 2009), earlier work targeting the GPU (Yan et al.,
2009; Lu et al., 2013) has primarily used collapsed Gibbs
sampling (Griffiths & Steyvers, 2004) and adapted techniques from distributed implementations of LDA (Newman
et al., 2009).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Since collapsed Gibbs sampling is inherently sequential,
this earlier work has tried to adapt collapsed sampling to
recover some parallelism. However, as the number of cores
on GPUs continues to grow, it becomes more and more
difficult to extract enough parallelism to scale effectively.
In addition, the amount of memory required for collapsed
Gibbs sampling and its memory access patterns can limit the
amount of data that can be processed at a time. Furthermore,
techniques that have been developed to reduce sampling
complexity, such as working with sparse matrices (Yao et al.,
2009), are difficult to adapt to GPUs.
In contrast, a standard uncollapsed Gibbs sampler is embarrassingly parallel. Tristan et al. (2014) show that a GPU
implementation of uncollapsed Gibbs sampling for LDA
can scale to a large number of GPU cores. However, Newman et al. (2009) have shown that the statistical performance of an uncollapsed Gibbs sampler is not as good as
that of the collapsed Gibbs sampler: it requires more iterations to converge, and it generates estimates that are not
as good. Moreover, as pointed out by Smola & Narayanamurthy (2010), the standard uncollapsed sampler cannot
use the sparse representations that have been developed for
collapsed samplers.
In this paper, we present Mean-for-Mode estimation, a modification of the uncollapsed Gibbs sampler that is related to
stochastic expectation maximization as presented by Celeux
et al. (1995). In §2 we describe the algorithm and empirically demonstrate that its convergence rate is similar to
that of the collapsed Gibbs sampler. Next, we describe a
simple GPU implementation in §3 and show that there is
more than enough parallelism to scale effectively. One important difference between our work and previous work here
is that instead of adapting popular inference methods for
LDA that were implicitly designed for a CPU architecture,
we rethink the inference method in light of the needs of the
GPU architecture.

