Swept Approximate Message Passing for Sparse Estimation

Andre Manoel
AMANOEL @ IF. USP. BR
Institute of Physics, University of São Paulo, R. do Matão 187, São Paulo, SP 05508-090, Brazil
Florent Krzakala
KRZAKALA @ ENS . FR
Université Pierre et Marie Curie and École Normale Supérieure, 24 rue Lhomond, 75005 Paris, France
Eric W. Tramel
École Normale Supérieure, 24 rue Lhomond, 75005 Paris, France

ERIC . TRAMEL @ LPS . ENS . FR

Lenka Zdeborová
LENKA . ZDEBOROVA @ GMAIL . COM
Institut de Physique Théorique, CEA Saclay, and CNRS URA 2306, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Abstract
Approximate Message Passing (AMP) has been
shown to be a superior method for inference
problems, such as the recovery of signals from
sets of noisy, lower-dimensionality measurements, both in terms of reconstruction accuracy
and in computational efficiency. However, AMP
suffers from serious convergence issues in contexts that do not exactly match its assumptions.
We propose a new approach to stabilizing AMP
in these contexts by applying AMP updates to individual coefficients rather than in parallel. Our
results show that this change to the AMP iteration can provide expected, but hitherto unobtainable, performance for problems on which the
standard AMP iteration diverges. Additionally,
we find that the computational costs of this swept
coefficient update scheme is not unduly burdensome, allowing it to be applied efficiently to signals of large dimensionality.

1. Introduction
Belief Propagation (BP) is a powerful iterative message passing algorithm for graphical models (Pearl, 1988;
Mézard & Montanari, 2009; Opper & Saad, 2001). However, it presents two main drawbacks when applied to
highly connected continuous variable problems: first, the
need to work with continuous probability distributions; and
second, the necessity to iterate over one such probability
distribution for each pair of variables.
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

The first problem can be addressed by projecting the distributions onto a finite number of moments (Sudderth et al.,
2010) and the second by utilizing the Thouless-AndresonPalmer (TAP) approach (Mézard & Montanari, 2009; Opper & Saad, 2001) where only single variable marginals are
required. Approximate message passing (AMP), first introduced in (Donoho et al., 2009), is one such relaxation of
BP that utilizes both of the aforementioned approximations
in order to solve sparse estimation problems. In AMP’s
more general setting, as is considered in Generalized AMP
(GAMP) (Rangan, 2011a), the goal of the algorithm is the
reconstruction of an N -dimensional sparse vector x given
the knowledge of an M -dimensional vector y obtained via
a possibly non-linear and/or probabilistic output function
h(z) performed on a set of linear projections. Specifically,
yµ = h(zµ ),

where zµ =

N
X

Φµi xi .

1

(1)

i=1

For example, if h(z) = z + ξ where ξ is a zero-mean
i.i.d. Gaussian random variable, then h(z) represents an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. With this
output function, in the setting M  N , (1) is simply
the application of Compressed Sensing (CS) (Candès &
Romberg, 2005) under noise. AMP is currently acknowledged as one of the foremost algorithms for such problems in terms of both its computational efficiency and in
the number of measurements required for exact reconstruction of x. In fact, with properly chosen measurement matrices (Krzakala et al., 2012b;a; Donoho et al., 2012), one
1

In the present work, we use subscript notation to denote the
individual coefficients of vectors, i.e. yµ refers to the µth coefficient of y where µ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }, and the double-subscript
notation to refer to individual matrix elements in row-column order.

