Vector-Space Markov Random Fields via Exponential Families

Wesley Tansey
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA

TANSEY @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

Oscar Hernan Madrid Padilla
OSCAR . MADRID @ UTEXAS . EDU
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA
Arun Sai Suggala
Pradeep Ravikumar
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA

Abstract
We present Vector-Space Markov Random Fields
(VS-MRFs), a novel class of undirected graphical models where each variable can belong to an
arbitrary vector space. VS-MRFs generalize a recent line of work on scalar-valued, uni-parameter
exponential family and mixed graphical models,
thereby greatly broadening the class of exponential families available (e.g., allowing multinomial
and Dirichlet distributions). Specifically, VSMRFs are the joint graphical model distributions
where the node-conditional distributions belong
to generic exponential families with general vector space domains. We also present a sparsistent M -estimator for learning our class of MRFs
that recovers the correct set of edges with high
probability. We validate our approach via a set
of synthetic data experiments as well as a realworld case study of over four million foods from
the popular diet tracking app MyFitnessPal. Our
results demonstrate that our algorithm performs
well empirically and that VS-MRFs are capable
of capturing and highlighting interesting structure in complex, real-world data. All code for our
algorithm is open source and publicly available.

1. Introduction
Undirected graphical models, also known as Markov Random Fields (MRFs), are a popular class of models for probability distributions over random vectors. Popular parametric instances include Gaussian MRFs, Ising, and Potts
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ARUNSAI @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

models, but these are all suited to specific data-types: Ising
models for binary data, Gaussian MRFs for thin-tailed continuous data, and so on. Conversely, when there is prior
knowledge of the graph structure but limited information
otherwise, nonparametric approaches are available (Sudderth et al., 2010). A recent line of work has considered
the challenge of specifying classes of MRFs targeted to
the data-types in the given application, when the structure is unknown. For the specific case of homogeneous
data, where each variable in the random vector has the
same data-type, (Yang et al., 2012) proposed a general subclass of homogeneous MRFs. In their construction, they
imposed the restriction that each variable conditioned on
other variables belong to a shared exponential family distribution, and then performed a Hammersley-Clifford-like
analysis to derive the corresponding joint graphical model
distribution, consistent with these node-conditional distributions. As they showed, even classical instances belong to
this sub-class of MRFs; for instance, with Gaussian MRFs
and Ising models, the node-conditional distributions follow univariate Gaussian and Bernoulli distributions respectively.
Yang et al. (2014) then proposed a class of mixed MRFs that
extended this construction to allow for random vectors with
variables belonging to different data types, and allowing
each node-conditional distribution to be drawn from a different univariate, uni-parameter exponential family member (such as a Gaussian with known variance or a Bernoulli
distribution). This flexibility in allowing for different univariate exponential family distributions yielded a class of
mixed MRFs over heterogeneous random vectors that were
capable of modeling a much wider class of distributions
than was previously feasible, opening up an entirely new
suite of possible applications.
To summarize, the state of the art can specify MRFs over
heterogeneous data-typed random vectors, under the re-

