Deep Unsupervised Learning using
Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein
Stanford University

JASCHA @ STANFORD . EDU

Eric A. Weiss
University of California, Berkeley

EWEISS @ BERKELEY. EDU

Niru Maheswaranathan
Stanford University

NIRUM @ STANFORD . EDU

Surya Ganguli
Stanford University

SGANGULI @ STANFORD . EDU

Abstract
A central problem in machine learning involves
modeling complex data-sets using highly flexible families of probability distributions in which
learning, sampling, inference, and evaluation
are still analytically or computationally tractable.
Here, we develop an approach that simultaneously achieves both flexibility and tractability.
The essential idea, inspired by non-equilibrium
statistical physics, is to systematically and slowly
destroy structure in a data distribution through
an iterative forward diffusion process. We then
learn a reverse diffusion process that restores
structure in data, yielding a highly flexible and
tractable generative model of the data. This approach allows us to rapidly learn, sample from,
and evaluate probabilities in deep generative
models with thousands of layers or time steps,
as well as to compute conditional and posterior
probabilities under the learned model. We additionally release an open source reference implementation of the algorithm.

these models are unable to aptly describe structure in rich
datasets. On the other hand, models that are flexible can be
molded to fit structure in arbitrary data. For example, we
can define models in terms of any (non-negative) function
(x) yielding the flexible distribution p (x) = (x)
Z , where
Z is a normalization constant. However, computing this
normalization constant is generally intractable. Evaluating,
training, or drawing samples from such flexible models typically requires a very expensive Monte Carlo process.
A variety of analytic approximations exist which ameliorate, but do not remove, this tradeoff–for instance mean
field theory and its expansions (T, 1982; Tanaka, 1998),
variational Bayes (Jordan et al., 1999), contrastive divergence (Welling & Hinton, 2002; Hinton, 2002), minimum
probability flow (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2011b;a), minimum
KL contraction (Lyu, 2011), proper scoring rules (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007; Parry et al., 2012), score matching
(Hyvärinen, 2005), pseudolikelihood (Besag, 1975), loopy
belief propagation (Murphy et al., 1999), and many, many
more. Non-parametric methods (Gershman & Blei, 2012)
can also be very effective1 .
1.1. Diffusion probabilistic models

1. Introduction
Historically, probabilistic models suffer from a tradeoff between two conflicting objectives: tractability and flexibility. Models that are tractable can be analytically evaluated
and easily fit to data (e.g. a Gaussian or Laplace). However,
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

We present a novel way to define probabilistic models that
allows:
1. extreme flexibility in model structure,
2. exact sampling,
1

Non-parametric methods can be seen as transitioning
smoothly between tractable and flexible models. For instance,
a non-parametric Gaussian mixture model will represent a small
amount of data using a single Gaussian, but may represent infinite
data as a mixture of an infinite number of Gaussians.

