Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees

Zhiting Hu
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

ZHITINGH @ CS . CMU . EDU

Qirong Ho
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

HOQIRONG @ GMAIL . COM

Avinava Dubey
Eric P. Xing
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University

AKDUBEY @ CS . CMU . EDU
EPXING @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
Practical applications of Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) models have been limited, due to their
high computational complexity and poor scaling on large data. In this paper, we consider
dependent nonparametric trees (DNTs), a powerful infinite model that captures time-evolving
hierarchies, and develop a large-scale distributed training system. Our major contributions include: (1) an effective memoized variational inference for DNTs, with a novel birth-merge strategy for exploring the unbounded tree space;
(2) a model-parallel scheme for concurrent tree
growing/pruning and efficient model alignment, through conflict-free model partitioning and
lightweight synchronization; (3) a data-parallel
scheme for variational parameter updates that allows distributed processing of massive data. Using 64 cores in 36 hours, our system learns a
10K-node DNT topic model on 8M documents
that captures both high-frequency and long-tail
topics. Our data and model scales are orders-ofmagnitude larger than recent results on the hierarchical Dirichlet process, and the near-linear scalability indicates great potential for even bigger
problem sizes.

1. Introduction
Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) methods provide a powerful framework for learning the internal structure of data. For example, Dirichlet processes can be used to cluster with an unbounded number of centers; its derivatives
are used in applications such as storyline tracking (Ahmed
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

et al., 2011), taxonomy induction (Ho et al., 2012), and
image segmentation (Sudderth & Jordan, 2009), to name a
few. Recently, a flexible dependent nonparametric trees (DNTs) model (Dubey et al., 2014) was developed to induce
hierarchical structures with unbounded width and depth,
which in turn supports cluster creation, evolution, and extinction over time.
Despite their flexibility and expressiveness, practical applications of BNP models have unfortunately been limited
due to their high computational complexity and poor scaling on large data. While there has been recent work on
efficient parallel inference algorithms for BNPs, the problem scales were limited to 100s to 1000s of samples, and
at most 100s of components with a few million parameters
(Table 1). This stands in stark contrast to recent industrialscale algorithms for parametric models (e.g. the LDA topic model (Blei et al., 2003)), which typically handle billions of samples, millions of components, and trillions of
parameters (Yuan et al., 2015). Such big parametric models have been shown to capture long-tail semantics (Wang
et al., 2014) that improve the performance of industrial applications, yet this long-tail capability is, arguably, better
realized using BNP models, with their unlimited and selfadjusting model capacity. Hence, we believe there is an
urgent need to develop highly-scalable solutions for BNPs,
in order to boost their utility on real-world problems.
A second issue is that most existing parallel BNP research
is focused on the (hierarchical) Dirichlet process, and it
is unclear how those techniques might be applied to other BNP models, including the tree-structured models considered in this paper (which are desirable for organizing
information into easily-navigated hierarchies (Ghahramani
et al., 2010; Blei et al., 2010)). The main issue is that tree
models contain additional complex dependencies which
render the inference hard to parallelize, while the changing tree structures can impose costly alignment overheads
between parallel workers (Pan et al., 2013).

