Spectral Clustering via the Power Method - Provably

Christos Boutsidis
Yahoo, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, NY, USA.

BOUTSIDIS @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Alex Gittens
International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA.

GITTENS @ ICSI . BERKELEY. EDU

Prabhanjan Kambadur
Bloomberg L.P., 731 Lexington Avenue, New York, 10022, USA.

PKAMBADUR @ BLOOMBERG . NET

Abstract
Spectral clustering is one of the most important algorithms in data mining and machine intelligence; however, its computational complexity limits its application to truly large scale data
analysis. The computational bottleneck in spectral clustering is computing a few of the top
eigenvectors of the (normalized) Laplacian matrix corresponding to the graph representing the
data to be clustered. One way to speed up the
computation of these eigenvectors is to use the
“power method” from the numerical linear algebra literature. Although the power method has
been empirically used to speed up spectral clustering, the theory behind this approach, to the
best of our knowledge, remains unexplored. This
paper provides the first such rigorous theoretical justification, arguing that a small number of
power iterations suffices to obtain near-optimal
partitionings using the approximate eigenvectors.
Specifically, we prove that solving the k-means
clustering problem on the approximate eigenvectors obtained via the power method gives an
additive-error approximation to solving the kmeans problem on the optimal eigenvectors.

1. Introduction
Consider clustering the points in Figure 1. The data in this
space are non-separable and there is no apparent clustering
metric which can be used to recover this clustering structure. In particular, the two clusters have the same centers
(centroids); hence, distance-based clustering methods such
as k-means (Ostrovsky et al., 2006) will fail. Motivated by
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Figure 1. 2-D data amenable to spectral clustering.

such shortcomings of traditional clustering approaches, researchers have produced a body of more flexible and dataadaptive clustering approaches, now known under the umbrella of spectral clustering. The crux of these approaches
is to model the points to be clustered as vertices of a graph,
where weights on edges connecting the vertices are assigned according to some similarity measure between the
points. Next, a new, hopefully separable, representation of
the points is formed by using the eigenvectors of the (normalized) Laplacian matrix associated with this similarity
graph. This new, typically low-dimensional, representation
is often called “spectral embedding” of the points. We refer the reader to (Fiedler, 1973; Von Luxburg, 2007; Shi
& Malik, 2000b) for the foundations of spectral clustering and to (Belkin & Niyogi, 2001; Ng et al., 2002; Liu
& Zhang, 2004; Zelnik-Manor & Perona, 2004; Smyth &
White, 2005) for applications in data mining and machine
learning. We explain spectral clustering and the baseline
algorithm in detail in Section 2.1.

