Scaling Up Natural Gradient by
Sparsely Factorizing the Inverse Fisher Matrix

Roger B. Grosse
Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto

Abstract
Second-order optimization methods, such as natural gradient, are difficult to apply to highdimensional problems, because they require approximately solving large linear systems. We
present FActorized Natural Gradient (FANG), an
approximation to natural gradient descent where
the Fisher matrix is approximated with a Gaussian graphical model whose precision matrix can
be computed efficiently. We analyze the Fisher
matrix for a small RBM and derive an extremely
sparse graphical model which is a good match
to the covariance of the sufficient statistics. Our
experiments indicate that FANG allows RBMs
to be trained more efficiently compared with
stochastic gradient descent. Additionally, our
analysis yields insight into the surprisingly good
performance of the “centering trick” for training
RBMs.

1. Introduction
In the field of deep learning, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) has been the optimization workhorse in the largedata setting (Bottou & Bousquet, 2007). While it often
works well in practice, it has been observed that deep networks suffer from severe curvature problems, and this observation has motivated work on second-order optimization methods (Martens, 2010; Martens & Sutskever, 2012).
Second-order methods such as Newton-Rhapson and natural gradient (Amari, 1998) attenuate these problems by
solving a linear system related to the curvature of the loss
function. Unfortunately, the requirement of constructing
and solving a large linear system makes the exact versions
of these algorithms impractical for large models.
Various approximations have been proposed which avoid
the cost of matrix inversion. The AdaGrad method (Duchi
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

RGROSSE @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
RSALAKHU @ CS . TORONTO . EDU

et al., 2011) typically assumes a diagonal approximation
to the matrix, as diagonal matrices can be easily inverted.
TONGA (Le Roux et al., 2008) is an approximation to
natural gradient which assumes block diagonal structure,
and low rank structure within each block. While these
methods have the virtue that the curvature statistics can
be estimated online, the approximation may be inaccurate.
Hessian-free (H-F) optimization (Martens, 2010) uses an
iterative method to approximately solve the linear system
with a series of implicit matrix-vector products (Schraudolph, 2002). H-F accounts for the curvature more accurately than diagonal methods, but requires an expensive iterative procedure for each update and only uses curvature
information associated with a single mini-batch.
Ideally, we would like an approximation to the curvature
which can be estimated online, is cheap to invert, and captures the important interactions between different model
parameters. In Section 4, we propose FActorized Natural Gradient (FANG), an approximation to natural gradient
descent where the Fisher matrix G is approximated with a
Gaussian graphical model over the sufficient statistics. By
empirically analyzing the structure of G for a binary restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM; Smolensky, 1986), we
derive an extremely sparse graphical model structure which
is nonetheless a good fit to G. We show how the approximate covariance can be efficiently inverted to compute the
approximate natural gradient, as well as how the graphical
model parameters can be efficiently estimated from data.
In Section 5, we provide an alternative interpretation of
FANG as an approximate whitening transformation, and
use this interpretation to explain the surprising effectiveness of the recently discovered “centering trick” for training RBMs (Cho et al., 2011; Montavon & Muller, 2012),
which has not previously been connected to natural gradient. In Section 6, we show that FANG outperforms SGD,
both with and without the centering trick, for training binary RBMs. While we focus on RBMs, FANG should give
a recipe more generally for designing second-order optimization methods which account for model structure.

