Optimizing Non-decomposable Performance Measures: A Tale of Two Classes

Harikrishna Narasimhan∗
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, INDIA

HARIKRISHNA @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

Purushottam Kar
Microsoft Research, INDIA

T- PURKAR @ MICROSOFT. COM

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, INDIA

PRAJAIN @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
Modern classification problems frequently
present mild to severe label imbalance as well
as specific requirements on classification characteristics, and require optimizing performance
measures that are non-decomposable over the
dataset, such as F-measure. Such measures
have spurred much interest and pose specific
challenges to learning algorithms since their
non-additive nature precludes a direct application of well-studied large scale optimization
methods such as stochastic gradient descent.
In this paper we reveal that for two large families
of performance measures that can be expressed
as functions of true positive/negative rates, it is
indeed possible to implement point stochastic updates. The families we consider are concave
and pseudo-linear functions of TPR, TNR which
cover several popularly used performance measures such as F-measure, G-mean and H-mean.
Our core contribution is an adaptive linearization
scheme for these families, using which we develop optimization techniques that enable truly
point-based stochastic updates. For concave
performance measures we propose SPADE, a
stochastic primal dual solver; for pseudo-linear
measures we propose STAMP, a stochastic alternate maximization procedure. Both methods
have crisp convergence guarantees, demonstrate
significant speedups over existing methods - often by an order of magnitude or more, and give
similar or more accurate predictions on test data.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).
∗
Part of the work was done while H.N. was an intern at MSR India.

1. Introduction
Learning applications with binary classification problems
involving severe label imbalance abound, often accompanied with specific requirements in terms of false positive,
or negative rates. Examples included spam classification,
anomaly detection, and medical applications. Class imbalance is also often introduced as a result of the reduction
of a problem to binary classification, such as in multi-class
problems (Bishop, 2006) and multi-label problems due to
extreme label sparsity (Hsu et al., 2009).
Traditional performance measures such as misclassification
rate are ill-suited in such situations as it is usually trivial to
optimize them by constantly predicting the majority class.
Instead, the performance measures of choice in such cases
are those that perform a more holistic evaluation over the
entire data. Naturally, these performance measures are nondecomposable over the dataset and cannot be cannot be expressed as a sum of errors on individual data points. Popular examples include F-measure, G-mean, H-mean etc.
A consistent effort directed at optimizing these performance measures has, over the years, resulted in the development of two broad approaches - 1) surrogate based
approaches (e.g. SVMPerf (Joachims et al., 2009)) that
design convex surrogates for these performance measures,
and 2) indirect approaches which include cost-sensitive
classification-based approaches (Parambath et al., 2014)
which solve weighted classification problems, and plug-in
approaches (Koyejo et al., 2014; Narasimhan et al., 2014)
which rely on consistent estimates of class probabilities.
Both these approaches are known to work fairly well on
small datasets but do not scale very well to large ones,
especially those large enough to not even fit in memory.
SVMPerf-style approaches, which employ cutting plane
methods do not scale well. On the other hand, plug-in approaches first need to solve a class probability estimation
problem optimally and then tune a threshold. This two-

