A Linear Dynamical System Model for Text
David Belanger
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst

BELANGER @ CS . UMASS . EDU

Sham Kakade
Microsoft Research

SKAKADE @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
Low dimensional representations of words allow
accurate NLP models to be trained on limited
annotated data. While most representations ignore words’ local context, a natural way to induce context-dependent representations is to perform inference in a probabilistic latent-variable
sequence model. Given the recent success of
continuous vector space word representations,
we provide such an inference procedure for continuous states, where words’ representations are
given by the posterior mean of a linear dynamical system. Here, efficient inference can be
performed using Kalman filtering. Our learning algorithm is extremely scalable, operating
on simple cooccurrence counts for both parameter initialization using the method of moments
and subsequent iterations of EM. In our experiments, we employ our inferred word embeddings as features in standard tagging tasks, obtaining significant accuracy improvements. Finally, the Kalman filter updates can be seen as a
linear recurrent neural network. We demonstrate
that using the parameters of our model to initialize a non-linear recurrent neural network language model reduces its training time by a day
and yields lower perplexity.

1. Introduction
In many NLP applications, there is limited available labeled training data, but tremendous quantities of unlabeled, in-domain text. An effective semi-supervised learning technique is to learn word embeddings on the unlabeled
data, which map every word to a low dimensional dense
vector (Bengio et al., 2006; Mikolov et al., 2013; PenningProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ton et al., 2014), and then use these as features for supervised training on the labeled data (Turian et al., 2010; Passos et al., 2014; Bansal et al., 2014). Furthermore in many
deep architectures for NLP, the first layer maps words to
low-dimensional vectors, and these parameters are initialized with unsupervised embeddings (Collobert et al., 2011;
Socher et al., 2013; Vinyals et al., 2014).
Most of these methods embed word types, i.e., words independent of local context, as opposed to work tokens, i.e.,
instances of words within their context. Ideally we would
have a different representation per token. For example, depending on the context, “bank” is the side of a river or a
financial institution. Furthemore, we would like such embeddings to come from a probablistic sequence model that
allows us to study the transition dynamics of text generation in low dimensional space.
We present a method for obtaining such context-dependent
token embeddings, using a generative model with a vectorvalued latent variable per token and performing posterior
inference for each sentence. Specifically, we employ a
Gaussian linear dynamical system (LDS), with efficient inference from a Kalman filter. To learn the LDS parameters,
we use a two-stage procedure, initializing with the method
of moments, and then performing EM with the approximate second order statistics (ASOS) technique of Martens
(2010). Overall, after taking a single pass over the training corpus, the runtime of our approximate maximumlikelihood estimation (MLE) procedure is independent of
the amount of training data since it operates on aggregate
co-occurrence counts. Furthermore, performing inference
to obtain token embeddings has the same time complexity
as widely-used discrete first-order sequence models.
We fit the LDS to a one-hot encoding of each token in the
input text sequence. Therefore, the LDS is a mis-specified
generative model, since draws from it are not proper indicator vectors. However, we embrace this multivariate Gaussian model instead of a continuous-state dynamical system
with a multinomial link function because the Gaussian LDS
offers several desirable scalability properties: (1) Kalman

