Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent with Adaptive Probabilities

Dominik Csiba
University of Edinburgh

CDOMINIK @ GMAIL . COM

Zheng Qu
University of Edinburgh

ZHENG . QU @ ED . AC . UK

Peter Richtárik
University of Edinburgh

PETER . RICHTARIK @ ED . AC . UK

Abstract
This paper introduces AdaSDCA: an adaptive
variant of stochastic dual coordinate ascent
(SDCA) for solving the regularized empirical
risk minimization problems. Our modification
consists in allowing the method to adaptively
change the probability distribution over the dual
variables throughout the iterative process. AdaSDCA achieves provably better complexity bound
than SDCA with the best fixed probability distribution, known as importance sampling. However, it is of a theoretical character as it is expensive to implement. We also propose AdaSDCA+:
a practical variant which in our experiments outperforms existing non-adaptive methods.

1. Introduction
Empirical Loss Minimization. In this paper we consider
the regularized empirical risk minimization problem:
"
#
n
X
def 1
>
min P (w) =
φi (Ai w) + λg(w) .
(1)
n i=1
w∈Rd
In the context of supervised learning, w is a linear predictor,
A1 , . . . , An ∈ Rd are samples, φ1 , . . . , φn : R → R are
loss functions, g : Rd → R is a regularizer and λ > 0 a
regularization parameter. Hence, we are seeking to identify
the predictor which minimizes the average (empirical) loss
P (w).
We assume throughout that the loss functions are 1/γsmooth for some γ > 0. That is, we assume they are
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

differentiable and have Lipschitz derivative with Lipschitz
constant 1/γ:
|φ0 (a) − φ0 (b)| ≤

1
|a − b|
γ

for all a, b ∈ R. Moreover, we assume that g is 1-strongly
convex with respect to the L2 norm:
g(w) ≤ αg(w1 ) + (1 − α)g(w2 ) −

α(1 − α)
kw1 − w2 k2
2

for all w1 , w2 ∈ dom g, 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 and w = αw1 + (1 −
α)w2 .
The ERM problem (1) has received considerable attention
in recent years due to its widespread usage in supervised
statistical learning (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013b). Often, the number of samples n is very large and it is important to design algorithms that would be efficient in this
regime.
Modern stochastic algorithms for ERM. Several highly
efficient methods for solving the ERM problem were proposed and analyzed recently. These include primal methods such as SAG (Schmidt et al., 2013), SVRG (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013), S2GD (Konečný & Richtárik, 2014), SAGA
(Defazio et al., 2014), mS2GD (Konečný et al., 2014a)
and MISO (Mairal, 2015). Importance sampling was considered in ProxSVRG (Xiao & Zhang, 2014) and S2CD
(Konečný et al., 2014b).
Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent. One of the most successful methods in this category is stochastic dual coordinate ascent (SDCA), which operates on the dual of the
ERM problem (1):
max
α=(α1 ,...,αn )∈R

h
i
def
D(α)
=
−f
(α)
−
ψ(α)
,
n

(2)

