Telling Cause from Effect in Deterministic Linear Dynamical Systems

Naji Shajarisales1
Dominik Janzing1
Bernhard Schölkopf1
Michel Besserve1,2
1
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tuebingen, Germany
2
MPI for Biological Cybernetics , Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
Telling a cause from its effect using observed
time series data is a major challenge in natural
and social sciences. Assuming the effect is generated by the cause through a linear system, we
propose a new approach based on the hypothesis
that nature chooses the “cause” and the “mechanism generating the effect from the cause” independently of each other. Specifically we postulate that the power spectrum of the “cause” time
series is uncorrelated with the square of the frequency response of the linear filter (system) generating the effect. While most causal discovery methods for time series mainly rely on the
noise, our method relies on asymmetries of the
power spectral density properties that exist even
in deterministic systems. We describe mathematical assumptions in a deterministic model under
which the causal direction is identifiable. In particular, we show a scenario where the method
works but Granger causality fails. Experiments
show encouraging results on synthetic as well as
real-world data. Overall, this suggests that the
postulate of Independence of Cause and Mechanism is a promising principle for causal inference
on observed time series.

1. Introduction
A major challenge in the study of complex natural systems is to infer the causal relationships between elementary characteristics of these systems. This provides key
information to understand the underlying mechanisms at
play and possibly allows to intervene on them to influence
the overall behavior of the system. While causal knowlProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

NAJI @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
DOMINIK . JANZING @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
MICHEL . BESSERVE @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE

edge is traditionally built by performing experiments, boiling down to modifying a carefully selected parameter of the
system and analyzing the resulting changes, many natural
systems do not allow such interventions without tremendous cost or complexity. For example, it is very difficult to
influence the activity of a specific brain region without influencing other properties of the neural system (Logothetis
et al., 2010). Causal inference methods have been developed to avoid such interventions and infer the causal relationships from observational data only (Spirtes et al., 1993;
Pearl, 2000). To be able to build such knowledge without
interventions, these approaches have to rely on key assumptions pertaining to the mechanisms generating the observed
data.
The framework of causality described in Spirtes et al.
(1993) and Pearl (2000) has originally addressed this question by modelling observations as i.i.d. random variables.
However, observed data from complex natural systems are
often not i.i.d. and time dependent information reflects key
aspects of those systems. Many causal inference methods for time series, including the widely used Granger
causality (Granger, 1969), assume the data is generated
from a stochastic model through a structural equation linking past values to future ones through an i.i.d. additive
noise term, the “innovation of the process” (Granger, 1969;
Peters et al., 2013). While these methods can successfully
estimate the causal relationships when empirical data is
generated according to the model assumptions, the results
can be misleading when the model is misspecified. In particular, this is the case when the data generating model has
unknown measurement delays.
In this paper, we introduce a new approach for inferring
causal directions in time series, the Spectral Independence
Criterion (SIC). The idea behind SIC, as well as several
new approaches to causal inference (Daniusis et al., 2010;
Janzing et al., 2010; Mooij et al., 2010; Zscheischler et al.,
2011; Janzing et al., 2012; Sgouritsa et al., 2015), is to
rely on the “philosophical” principle that the cause and

