Differentially Private Bayesian Optimization

Matt J. Kusner
Jacob R. Gardner
Roman Garnett
Kilian Q. Weinberger
Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a powerful tool for finetuning the hyper-parameters of a wide variety of
machine learning models. The success of machine learning has led practitioners in diverse
real-world settings to learn classifiers for practical problems. As machine learning becomes
commonplace, Bayesian optimization becomes
an attractive method for practitioners to automate
the process of classifier hyper-parameter tuning.
A key observation is that the data used for tuning models in these settings is often sensitive.
Certain data such as genetic predisposition, personal email statistics, and car accident history, if
not properly private, may be at risk of being inferred from Bayesian optimization outputs. To
address this, we introduce methods for releasing the best hyper-parameters and classifier accuracy privately. Leveraging the strong theoretical guarantees of differential privacy and known
Bayesian optimization convergence bounds, we
prove that under a GP assumption these private
quantities are often near-optimal. Finally, even if
this assumption is not satisfied, we can use different smoothness guarantees to protect privacy.

1. Introduction

MKUSNER @ WUSTL . EDU
GARDNER . JAKE @ WUSTL . EDU
GARNETT @ WUSTL . EDU
KILIAN @ WUSTL . EDU

In these scenarios data cannot be shared legally, but companies and hospitals may want to share hyper-parameters and
validation accuracies through publications or other means.
However, data-holders must be careful, as even a small
amount of information can compromise privacy.
Which hyper-parameter setting yields the highest accuracy
can reveal sensitive information about individuals in the
validation or training data set, reminiscent of reconstruction attacks described by Dwork & Roth (2013) and Dinur
& Nissim (2003). For example, imagine updated hyperparameters are released right after a prominent public figure is admitted to a hospital. If a hyper-parameter is known
to correlate strongly with a particular disease the patient is
suspected to have, an attacker could make a direct correlation between the hyper-parameter value and the individual.
To prevent these sorts of attacks, we develop a set of algorithms that automatically fine-tune the hyper-parameters
of a machine learning algorithm while provably preserving
differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006b). Our approach
leverages recent results on Bayesian optimization (Snoek
et al., 2012; Hutter et al., 2011; Bergstra & Bengio,
2012; Gardner et al., 2014), training a Gaussian process
(GP) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) to accurately predict
and maximize the validation gain of hyper-parameter settings. We show that the GP model in Bayesian optimization
allows us to release noisy final hyper-parameter settings to
protect against aforementioned privacy attacks, while only
sacrificing a tiny, bounded amount of validation gain.

Machine learning is increasingly used in application areas
with sensitive data. For example, hospitals use machine
learning to predict if a patient is likely to be readmitted
soon (Yu et al., 2013), webmail providers classify spam
emails from non-spam (Weinberger et al., 2009), and insurance providers forecast the extent of bodily injury in car
crashes (Chong et al., 2005).

Our privacy guarantees hold for releasing the best hyperparameters and best validation gain. Specifically our contributions are as follows: 1. We derive, to the best of our
knowledge, the first framework for Bayesian optimization
with differential privacy guarantees, with/without oberservation noise, 2. We show that even if our validation gain is
not drawn from a Gaussian process, we can guarantee differential privacy under different smoothness assumptions.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

We begin with background on Bayesian optimization and
differential privacy we will use to prove our guarantees.

