Random Coordinate Descent Methods for
Minimizing Decomposable Submodular Functions
Alina Ene
Department of Computer Science and DIMAP, University of Warwick
Huy L. Nguyen
Simons Institute, University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Submodular function minimization is a fundamental optimization problem that arises in several applications in machine learning and computer vision. The problem is known to be solvable in polynomial time, but general purpose algorithms have high running times and are unsuitable for large-scale problems. Recent work have
used convex optimization techniques to obtain
very practical algorithms for minimizing functions that are sums of “simple” functions. In this
paper, we use random coordinate descent methods to obtain algorithms with faster linear convergence rates and cheaper iteration costs. Compared to alternating projection methods, our algorithms do not rely on full-dimensional vector operations and they converge in significantly
fewer iterations.

1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, there has been a significant
progress on minimizing submodular functions, leading
to several polynomial time algorithms for the problem
(Grötschel et al., 1981; Schrijver, 2000; Iwata, 2003; Fleischer & Iwata, 2003; Orlin, 2009). Despite this intense focus, the running times of these algorithms are high-order
polynomials in the size of the data and designing faster
algorithms remains a central and challenging direction in
submodular optimization.
At the same time, technological advances have made it possible to capture and store data at an ever increasing rate and
level of detail. A natural consequence of this “big data”
phenomenon is that machine learning applications need to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

A.E NE @ DCS . WARWICK . AC . UK
HLNGUYEN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

cope with data that is quite large and is growing at a fast
pace. Thus there is an increasing need for algorithms that
are fast and scalable.
The general purpose algorithms for submodular minimization are designed to provide worst-case guarantees even in
settings where the only structure that one can exploit is submodularity. At the other extreme, graph cut algorithms are
very efficient but they cannot handle more general submodular functions. In many applications, the functions strike a
middle ground between these two extremes and it is becoming increasingly more important to use their special structure to obtain significantly faster algorithms.
Following (Kolmogorov, 2012; Stobbe & Krause, 2010;
Jegelka et al., 2013; Nishihara et al., 2014a), we consider the problem of minimizing decomposable submodular functions that can be expressed as a sum of simple functions. We use the term simple to refer to functions F for
which there is an efficient algorithm for minimizing F + w,
where w is a linear function. We assume that we are given
black-box access to these minimization procedures for simple functions.
Decomposable functions are a fairly rich class of functions
and they arise in several applications in machine learning
and computer vision. For example, they model higherorder potential functions for MAP inference in Markov random fields, the cost functions in SVM models for which
the examples have only a small number of features, and the
graph and hypergraph cut functions in image segmentation.
The recent work of (Jegelka et al., 2013; Kolmogorov,
2012; Stobbe & Krause, 2010) has developed several algorithms with very good empirical performance that exploit
the special structure of decomposable functions. In particular, (Jegelka et al., 2013) have shown that the problem
of minimizing decomposable submodular functions can be
formulated as a distance minimization problem between
two polytopes. This formulation, when coupled with powerful convex optimization techniques such as gradient de-

