On Symmetric and Asymmetric LSHs for Inner Product Search

Behnam Neyshabur
Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

Abstract

is also widely used in other settings (Gionis et al., 1999;
Datar et al., 2004; Charikar, 2002). An LSH is a random
mapping h(·) from objects to a small, possibly binary, alphabet, where collision probabilities P[h(x) = h(y)] relate
to the desired notion of similarity sim(x, y). An LSH can
in turn be used to generate short hash words such that hamming distances between hash words correspond to similarity between objects. Recent studies have also explored the
power of asymmetry in LSH and binary hashing, where two
different mappings f (·), g(·) are used to approximate similarity, sim(x, y) ≈ P[h(x) = g(y)] (Neyshabur et al., 2013;
2014). Neyshabur et al. showed that even when the similarity sim(x, y) is entirely symmetric, asymmetry in the hash
may enable obtaining an LSH when a symmetric LSH is
not possible, or enable obtaining a much better LSH yielding shorter and more accurate hashes.

We consider the problem of designing locality
sensitive hashes (LSH) for inner product similarity, and of the power of asymmetric hashes in
this context. Shrivastava and Li (2014a) argue
that there is no symmetric LSH for the problem
and propose an asymmetric LSH based on different mappings for query and database points.
However, we show there does exist a simple symmetric LSH that enjoys stronger guarantees and
better empirical performance than the asymmetric LSH they suggest. We also show a variant of
the settings where asymmetry is in-fact needed,
but there a different asymmetric LSH is required.

1. Introduction
Following Shrivastava and Li (2014a), we consider the
problem of Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS): given
a collection of “database” vectors S ⊂ Rd and a query
q ∈ Rd , find a data vector maximizing the inner product
with the query:
p = arg max q > x
x∈S

BNEYSHABUR @ TTIC . EDU
NATI @ TTIC . EDU

(1)

MIPS problems of the form (1) arise, e.g. when using
matrix-factorization based recommendation systems (Koren et al., 2009; Srebro et al., 2005; Cremonesi et al., 2010),
in multi-class prediction (Dean et al., 2013; Jain et al.,
2009) and structural SVM (Joachims, 2006; Joachims
et al., 2009) problems and in vision problems when scoring filters based on their activations (Dean et al., 2013) (see
Shrivastava and Li, 2014a, for more about MIPS). In order
to efficiently find approximate MIPS solutions, Shrivastava
and Li (2014a) suggest constructing a Locality Sensitive
Hash (LSH) for inner product “similarity”.
Locality Sensitive Hashing (Indyk and Motwani, 1998) is
a popular tool for approximate nearest neighbor search and
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Several tree-based methods have also been proposed for
inner product search (Ram and Gray, 2012; Koenigstein
et al., 2012; Curtin et al., 2013). Shrivastava and Li (2014a)
argue that tree-based methods, such as cone trees, are
impractical in high dimensions while the performance of
LSH-based methods is in a way independent of dimension
of the data. Although the exact regimes under which LSHbased methods are superior to tree-based methods and vice
versa are not fully established yet, the goal of this paper is
to analyze different LSH methods and compare them with
each other, rather than comparing to tree-based methods,
so as to understand which LSH to use and why, in those
regimes where tree-based methods are not practical.
Considering MIPS, Shrivastava and Li (2014a) argue that
there is no symmetric LSH for inner product similarity, and
propose two distinct mappings, one of database objects and
the other for queries, which yields an asymmetric LSH for
MIPS. But the caveat is that they consider different spaces
in their positive and negative results: they show nonexistence of a symmetric LSH over the entire space Rd , but
their asymmetric LSH is only valid when queries are normalized and data vectors are bounded. Thus, they do not
actually show a situation where an asymmetric hash succeeds where a symmetric hash is not possible. In fact, in
Section 4 we show a simple symmetric LSH that is also

