Long Short-Term Memory Over Recursive Structures

Xiaodan Zhu
X IAODAN .Z HU @ NRC - CNRC . GC . CA
National Research Council Canada, 1200 Montreal Road M-50, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6 CANADA
Parinaz Sobhani
PSOBH 090@ UOTTAWA . CA
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, 800 King Edward Avenue, Ottawa, ON
K1N 6N5 CANADA
Hongyu Guo
H ONGYU .G UO @ NRC - CNRC . GC . CA
National Research Council Canada, 1200 Montreal Road M-50, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6 CANADA

Abstract
The chain-structured long short-term memory
(LSTM) has showed to be effective in a wide
range of problems such as speech recognition
and machine translation. In this paper, we propose to extend it to tree structures, in which a
memory cell can reflect the history memories
of multiple child cells or multiple descendant
cells in a recursive process. We call the model
S-LSTM, which provides a principled way of
considering long-distance interaction over hierarchies, e.g., language or image parse structures.
We leverage the models for semantic composition to understand the meaning of text, a fundamental problem in natural language understanding, and show that it outperforms a state-of-theart recursive model by replacing its composition
layers with the S-LSTM memory blocks. We also
show that utilizing the given structures is helpful
in achieving a performance better than that without considering the structures.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a revival of the long short-term
memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), with
its effectiveness being demonstrated on a wide range of
problems such as speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013),
machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al.,
2014), and image-to-text conversion (Vinyals et al., 2014),
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

among many others, in which history is summarized and
coded in the memory blocks in a full-order fashion.
Recursion is a fundamental process associated with many
problems—a recursive process and the structure it forms
are common in different modalities. For example, semantics of sentences in human languages is arguably to be carried not merely by a linear concatenation of words; instead, sentences often have structures (Manning & Schütze,
1999). Image understanding, as another example, may benefit from recursive modeling over structures, which yielded
the state-of-the-art performance on tasks like scene segmentation (Socher et al., 2011).
In this paper, we extend LSTM to tree structures, in which
we attempt to learn memory blocks that can reflect the history memories of multiple child cells and hence multiple
descendant cells. We call the model S-LSTM. Compared
with previous recursive neural networks (Socher et al.,
2013; 2012), S-LSTM has the potentials of avoiding gradient vanishing and hence may model long-distance interactions over trees. This is a desirable characteristic as many
of such structures are deep. S-LSTM can be viewed as considering together a recursive neural network and a recurrent
neural network1 . In brief, S-LSTM wires memory blocks
in a partial-order tree structures instead of in a full-order
sequence as in a chain-structured LSTM.
We leverage the S-LSTM model to solve a semantic composition problem that learns the meaning for a piece of
texts—learning a good representation for the meaning of a
span of text is core to automatically understanding human
languages. More specifically, we experiment with the mod1

As both of them can be shortened to be RNN, in the rest of
this paper we refer to a Recurrent Neural Network as RNN and a
Recursive Neural Network as RvNN.

