Off-policy Model-based Learning under Unknown Factored Dynamics

Assaf Hallak
François Schnitzler
Timothy Mann
Shie Mannor
Technion, Haifa, Israel

IFOGPH @ GMAIL . COM
FRANCOIS @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL
MANN @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL
SHIE @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL

Abstract
Off-policy learning in dynamic decision problems is essential for providing strong evidence
that a new policy is better than the one in use.
But how can we prove superiority without testing the new policy? To answer this question,
we introduce the G-SCOPE algorithm that evaluates a new policy based on data generated by the
existing policy. Our algorithm is both computationally and sample efficient because it greedily
learns to exploit factored structure in the dynamics of the environment. We present a finite sample analysis of our approach and show through
experiments that the algorithm scales well on
high-dimensional problems with few samples.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms learn to maximize rewards by analyzing past experience with an unknown environment. Most RL algorithms assume that they
can choose which actions to explore to learn quickly. However, this assumption leaves RL algorithms incompatible
with many real-world business applications.
To understand why, consider the problem of on-line advertising: Each customer is successively presented with
one of several advertisements. The advertiser’s goal is to
maximize the probability that a user will click on an ad.
This probability is called the Click Through Rate (CTR,
Richardson et al. 2007). A marketing strategy, called a policy, chooses which ads to display to each customer. However, testing new policies could lose money for the company. Therefore, management would not allow a new policy to be tested unless there is strong evidence that the policy is not worse than the company’s existing policy. In
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

other words, we would like to estimate the CTR of other
strategies using only data obtained from the company’s existing policy. In general, the problem of determining a policy’s value from data generated by another policy is called
off-policy evaluation, where the policy that generates the
data is called the behavior policy, and the policy we are
trying to evaluate is called the target policy. This problem
may be the primary reason batch RL algorithms are hardly
used in applications, despite the maturity of the field.
A simple approach to off-policy evaluation is given by the
MFMC algorithm Fonteneau et al. (2010), which constructs
complete trajectories for the target policy by concatenating
partial trajectories generated by the behavior policy. However, this approach may require a large number of samples to construct complete trajectories. One may think that
the number of samples is of little importance, since Internet technology companies have access to billions of transactions. Unfortunately, the dimensionality of real-world
problems is generally large (up to millions of dimensions)
and the events they want to predict can have extremely
small probability of occurring. Thus, sample efficient offpolicy evaluation is paramount.
An alternative way of looking at the problem is through
counterfactual (CF) analysis Bottou et al. (2013). Given the
outcome of an experiment, CF analysis is a framework for
reasoning about what would have happened if some aspect
of the experiment was different. In this paper, we focus on
the question: what would have been the expected reward
received for executing the target policy rather than the behavior policy? One approach that falls naturally into the
CF framework is Importance Sampling (IS) Bottou et al.
(2013); Li et al. (2014). IS methods evaluate the target policy by weighting rewards received by the behavior policy.
The weights are determined by the probability that the target policy would perform the same action as the one prescribed by the behavior policy. Unfortunately, IS methods
suffer from high variance and typically assume that the behavior policy visits every state that the target policy visits
with nonzero probability.

