Probabilistic Backpropagation for Scalable
Learning of Bayesian Neural Networks

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
JMH @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
Ryan P. Adams
RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Abstract
Large multilayer neural networks trained with
backpropagation have recently achieved state-ofthe-art results in a wide range of problems. However, using backprop for neural net learning still
has some disadvantages, e.g., having to tune a
large number of hyperparameters to the data,
lack of calibrated probabilistic predictions, and
a tendency to overfit the training data. In principle, the Bayesian approach to learning neural
networks does not have these problems. However, existing Bayesian techniques lack scalability to large dataset and network sizes. In this
work we present a novel scalable method for
learning Bayesian neural networks, called probabilistic backpropagation (PBP). Similar to classical backpropagation, PBP works by computing
a forward propagation of probabilities through
the network and then doing a backward computation of gradients. A series of experiments on ten
real-world datasets show that PBP is significantly
faster than other techniques, while offering competitive predictive abilities. Our experiments also
show that PBP provides accurate estimates of the
posterior variance on the network weights.

algorithm (Rumelhart et al., 1986). This, along with faster
machines, larger datasets, and innovations such as dropout
(Srivastava et al., 2014) and rectified linear units (Nair &
Hinton, 2010), have resulted in successes for NNs on tasks
such as speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012; Hannun
et al., 2014), computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Wu
et al., 2015) and natural language processing (Collobert &
Weston, 2008; Sutskever et al., 2014).
Despite all these successes, there are still some challenges
in learning NNs with backpropagation (BP). First, there are
many hyperparameters in BP-based stochastic optimization
that require specific tuning, e.g., learning rate, momentum,
weight decay, etc., each of which may be layer-specific.
With large data sets, finding the optimal values can take a
large amount of time, even with an efficient procedure such
as Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2012). Second, in
NNs trained with BP, we can only obtain point estimates
of the weights in the network. As a result, these networks
make predictions that do not account for uncertainty in the
parameters. However, in many cases these weights may
be poorly specified and it is desirable to produce uncertainty estimates along with predictions. Finally, it is common practice to use a very large NN to flexibly fit data, and
then reign in overfitting using regularization terms, even if
a smaller network would be cheaper and easier to train.

Neural networks (NNs) have seen a recent resurgence of
interest due to empirical achievements on a wide range of
supervised learning problems. In their typical usage, neural
networks are highly expressive models that can learn complex function approximations from input/output examples
(Hornik et al., 1989). Part of the success of NNs is due to
the ability to train them on massive data sets with stochastic
optimization (Bottou, 2010) and the backpropagation (BP)

A Bayesian approach to neural networks can potentially
avoid some of the pitfalls of stochastic optimization
(MacKay, 1992c). Bayesian techniques, in principle, can
automatically infer hyperparameter values by marginalizing them out of the posterior distribution or by determining
them via type II maximum likelihood (empirical Bayes).
Furthermore, Bayesian methods naturally account for uncertainty in parameter estimates and can propagate this uncertainty into predictions. Finally, Bayesian approaches are
often more robust to overfitting, since they average over parameter values instead of choosing a single point estimate.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Several approaches have been proposed for Bayesian learning of neural networks, based on, e.g., the Laplace approximation (MacKay, 1992c), Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Neal,

1. Introduction

