Discovering Temporal Causal Relations from Subsampled Data

Mingming Gong∗1
MINGMING . GONG @ STUDENT. UTS . EDU . AU
Kun Zhang∗2,3
KZHANG @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Bernhard Schölkopf2
BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Dacheng Tao1
DACHENG . TAO @ UTS . EDU . AU
Philipp Geiger2
PGEIGER @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
1
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, FEIT, University of Technology, Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
Max Plank Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 72076, Germany
3
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California

Abstract
Granger causal analysis has been an important
tool for causal analysis for time series in various
fields, including neuroscience and economics,
and recently it has been extended to include instantaneous effects between the time series to
explain the contemporaneous dependence in the
residuals. In this paper, we assume that the time
series at the true causal frequency follow the vector autoregressive model. We show that when the
data resolution becomes lower due to subsampling, neither the original Granger causal analysis nor the extended one is able to discover the
underlying causal relations. We then aim to answer the following question: can we estimate
the temporal causal relations at the right causal
frequency from the subsampled data? Traditionally this suffers from the identifiability problems: under the Gaussianity assumption of the
data, the solutions are generally not unique. We
prove that, however, if the noise terms are nonGaussian, the underlying model for the highfrequency data is identifiable from subsampled
data under mild conditions. We then propose an
Expectation-Maximization (EM) approach and a
variational inference approach to recover temporal causal relations from such subsampled data.
Experimental results on both simulated and real
data are reported to illustrate the performance of
the proposed approaches.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s). * Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Granger causal analysis (Granger, 1980) has been widely
used to find the temporal causal relations from time series. Time series x1 is said to cause times series x2 in the
Granger’s sense, if and only if the past and current values of
x1 contain useful information to predict the future values of
x2 that are not contained elsewhere.1 In practice, although
its nonlinear or nonparametric extensions exist, Granger
causal analysis usually assumes a linear model, and consequently, the Granger causal relations can be seen by fitting
the vector autoregressive (VAR) regression model (Sims,
1980). When using VAR to estimate temporal causal relations, one assumes that the data are obtained at the right
causal frequency, i.e., the VAR model serves as an approximator to the true data-generating process. However, in
practice the causal frequency is usually unknown, and the
data are available at some fixed frequency such as daily,
weekly, or monthly. As a consequence, the sampling frequency of the data is usually different from the true causal
frequency.
There are two typical aggregation schemes to generate lowresolution or low-frequency data from high frequency ones.
One is by subsampling or systematic sampling: for every k consecutive observations, one is kept, the rest being
skipped. We call k the subsampling factor. The other is to
take the local averages of k consecutive, non-overlapping
observations as the new observations. See Silvestrini &
Veredas (2008) for a survey on aggregation of univariate
and multivariate time series models. Subsampling is a common phenomenon in time series, and is our main focus in
1
In physics, it might be more mathematically tractable to construct theoretical models in continuous time, and often an exact
description requires the use of continuous time. However, we
would like to note that some time series are inherently discrete;
an example is the dividend paid by a company to shareholders
in successive years. Furthermore, even for continuous processes,
their causal interactions may take place at discrete points.

