CUR Algorithm for Partially Observed Matrices

Miao Xu
XUM @ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, China
Rong Jin
Institute of Data Science and Technologies at Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA

RONGJIN @ CSE . MSU . EDU

Zhi-Hua Zhou
ZHOUZH @ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, China

Abstract
CUR matrix decomposition computes the low
rank approximation of a given matrix by using
the actual rows and columns of the matrix. It
has been a very useful tool for handling large
matrices. One limitation with the existing algorithms for CUR matrix decomposition is that they
cannot deal with entries in a partially observed
matrix, while incomplete matrices are found in
many real world applications. In this work, we
alleviate this limitation by developing a CUR decomposition algorithm for partially observed matrices. In particular, the proposed algorithm computes the low rank approximation of the target
matrix based on (i) the randomly sampled rows
and columns, and (ii) a subset of observed entries that are randomly sampled from the matrix.
Our analysis shows the error bound, measured by
spectral norm, for the proposed algorithm when
the target matrix is of full rank. We also show
that only O(nr ln r) observed entries are needed by the proposed algorithm to perfectly recover a rank r matrix of size n × n, which improves
the sample complexity of the existing algorithms
for matrix completion. Empirical studies on both
synthetic and real-world datasets verify our theoretical claims and demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed algorithm.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In many machine learning applications, it is convenient to represent the data by matrix.
Examples
include user-item rating matrix in recommender system (Srebro et al., 2004), gene expression matrix in bioinformatics (Mahoney & Drineas, 2008), kernel matrix in
kernel learning (Williams & Seeger, 2000), documentterm matrix in document retrieval (Mahoney & Drineas,
2008), and instance-label matrix in multi-label learning
(Goldberg et al., 2010). An effective approach for handling big matrices is to approximate them by their low
rank counterparts which can be computed and stored efficiently. Various methods have been developed for low
rank matrix approximation, including truncated singular
value decomposition, matrix factorization (Srebro et al.,
2004), matrix regression (Koltchinskii, 2011), column subset selection (Boutsidis et al., 2011), the Nyström
method (Williams & Seeger, 2000), and random SVD techniques (Halko et al., 2011; Woodruff, 2014).
In this work, we will focus on the CUR algorithm for low
rank matrix approximation (Mahoney & Drineas, 2009;
Boutsidis & Woodruff, 2014). It is a randomized algorithm that computes the low rank approximation for a given
rectangle matrix by randomly sampled columns and rows
of the matrix. Compared to other low rank approximation algorithms, CUR is advantageous in that it has (i) an
easy interpretation of the approximation result because the
subspace is constructed by the actual columns and rows
of the target matrix (Mahoney & Drineas, 2009), and (ii)
a strong (near-optimal) theoretical guarantee (Bien et al.,
2010; Drineas et al., 2006; Mahoney & Drineas, 2008;
2009; Wang & Zhang, 2012; 2013; Boutsidis & Woodruff,
2014). The CUR matrix decomposition algorithm has
been successfully applied to many domains, including
bioinformatics (Mahoney & Drineas, 2009), collaborative

