Following the Perturbed Leader for Online Structured Learning

Alon Cohen
ALONCOH @ CSWEB . HAIFA . AC . IL
University of Haifa, University of Haifa, Dept. of Computer Science, 31905 Haifa, Israel
Tamir Hazan
University of Haifa, University of Haifa, Dept. of Computer Science, 31905 Haifa, Israel

Abstract
We investigate a new Follow the Perturbed
Leader (FTPL) algorithm for online structured
prediction problems. We show a regret bound
which is comparable to the state of the art of
FTPL algorithms and is comparable with the best
possible regret in some cases. To better understand FTPL algorithms for online structured
learning, we present a lower bound on the regret for a large and natural class of FTPL algorithms that use logconcave perturbations. We
complete our investigation with an online shortest path experiment and empirically show that
our algorithm is both statistically and computationally efficient.

1. Introduction
Learning from a constant flow of data is one of the central
challenges of machine learning. Online learning require
to sequentially decide on actions in ever-changing environments. Such environments include the stock market and
ranking newly published movies. In past years, a variety of online learning algorithms have been devised, each
such algorithm for a different setting. Among well-known
settings are prediction with expert advice (Littlestone &
Warmuth, 1994) and online convex optimization (Zinkevich, 2003). Despite their applicability, many sequential
decision-making problems still remain open — one such
problem is that of online structured learning.
Structured problems drive many of the recent applications
in machine learning, such as road navigation, network routing, adaptive resource allocation, personalized content recommendation, online ad display and many more. Unfortunately, known algorithms for this setting are suboptimal in
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

TAMIR @ CS . HAIFA . AC . IL

the following sense — they are either statistically efficient
or computationally efficient, but not both.
In our work we investigate Follow the Perturbed Leader
algorithms, whose advantage is their simplicity and computational efficiency. We present a new FTPL algorithm
whose regret bound is comparable to the best known bound
of FTPL algorithms for structured problems. We further
show a lower bound that implies that most FTPL algorithms found in the literature are, in fact, suboptimal in
terms of regret. Finally, we run an experiment evaluating
our algorithm against the state of the art. We empirically
show that our algorithm has similar regret and yet has a
much faster runtime.
1.1. Related work
The problem of online learning has been studied in the last
few decades across many different fields. Since the 1990s,
however, it has become a prominent field of research alongside the Machine Learning community. This is attributed
to, for example, works of Cover (1991); Blum (1998); Foster & Vohra (1999).
Perhaps the most well known setting of online learning is
that of prediction with expert advice. Originally, this was
the problem of predicting a binary sequence, being given
the predictions of a number of experts at each round. This
problem has been studied extensively in, for example, Littlestone & Warmuth (1994); Cesa-Bianchi et al. (1997) that
have given an algorithm for the problem based on the multiplicative updates rule. This algorithm is known as Hedge,
Exponential Weights (EXP) or Randomized Weighted Majority.
Hannan (1957); Kalai and Vempala (2002; 2005) have introduced another algorithmic scheme for online learning,
now known as Follow the Perturbed Leader (FTPL). Since
then, FTPL algorithms were the subject of many papers,
including Rakhlin et al. (2012); Neu & Bartók (2013); Devroye et al. (2013); Abernethy et al. (2014); Van Erven et al.
(2014). It is a known folklore result, that the Hedge al-

