Dealing with Small Data: On the Generalization of Context Trees

Ralf Eggeling
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany

EGGELING @ INFORMATIK . UNI - HALLE . DE

Mikko Koivisto
MIKKO . KOIVISTO @ CS . HELSINKI . FI
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology, Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
Ivo Grosse
GROSSE @ INFORMATIK . UNI - HALLE . DE
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
German Center for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany

Abstract
Context trees (CT) are a widely used tool in machine learning for representing context-specific
independences in conditional probability distributions. Parsimonious context trees (PCTs) are
a recently proposed generalization of CTs that
can enable statistically more efficient learning
due to a higher structural flexibility, which is
particularly useful for small-data settings. However, this comes at the cost of computationally
expensive structure learning, which is feasible
only for domains with small alphabets and tree
depths. In this work, we investigate to which
degree CTs can be generalized to increase statistical efficiency while still keeping the learning computationally feasible. Approaching this
goal from two different angles, we (i) propose
algorithmic improvements to the PCT learning
algorithm, and (ii) study further generalizations
of CTs, which are inspired by PCTs, but trade
structural flexibility for computational efficiency.
By empirical studies both on simulated and realworld data, we demonstrate that the synergy of
combining of both orthogonal approaches yields
a substantial breakthrough in obtaining statistically efficient and computationally feasible generalizations of CTs.

1. Introduction
Univariate conditional distributions play a central role in
various multivariate probabilistic models such as Markov
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

models, hidden Markov models, Bayesian networks, and
general hierarchical graphical models. Ideally, each conditional distribution either involves only a few conditioning
variables or we can assume the conditional distribution to
take some simple form, e.g., a linear model. In practice,
neither case may apply, and we encounter the curse of dimensionality: the representation size, i.e., the number of
parameters, of the conditional distribution grows exponentially in the number of variables. Depending on the chosen
statistical paradigm, such explosion easily leads to overfitting or otherwise poor use of the available data, which
become scarce in relation to a multitude of parameters.
The concept of context-specific independence (Boutilier
et al., 1996) provides an appealing approach to deal with
the curse of dimensionality. Context-specific independence
takes place when fixing some of the conditioning variables
to certain states, called a context, the remaining variables
provide no additional information about the response variable, that is, the response variable is independent of the rest
given the context. Various structured models that enable
learning a sufficient set of contexts from data have been investigated (Rissanen, 1983; Bryant, 1986; Quinlan, 1986).
Context trees (CTs) in particular enable computationally
efficient learning of a sufficient set of contexts for categorical, linearly ordered random variables (Rissanen, 1983;
Volf & Willems, 1994; Bühlmann & Wyner, 1999). CTs
arise from organizing the full conditional probability distribution as a rooted tree, where each node at level ` of the tree
is labeled by one of the possible states of the `th variable. If
a node at level ` is a leaf of the tree, then the path from the
root to the leaf corresponds to a context x1 x2 · · · x` in the
sense defined above: the conditional probability will be the
same no matter what states are selected for the remaining
variables. CTs can thus be learned efficiently by pruning
subtrees that are not justified by observed data.

