Compressing Neural Networks with the Hashing Trick

Wenlin Chen∗
WENLINCHEN @ WUSTL . EDU
James T. Wilson∗
J . WILSON @ WUSTL . EDU
Stephen Tyree∗†
STYREE @ NVIDIA . COM
Kilian Q. Weinberger∗
KILIAN @ WUSTL . EDU
Yixin Chen∗
CHEN @ CSE . WUSTL . EDU
∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
†
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, CA, USA

Abstract
As deep nets are increasingly used in applications suited for mobile devices, a fundamental dilemma becomes apparent: the trend in
deep learning is to grow models to absorb everincreasing data set sizes; however mobile devices
are designed with very little memory and cannot
store such large models. We present a novel network architecture, HashedNets, that exploits inherent redundancy in neural networks to achieve
drastic reductions in model sizes. HashedNets
uses a low-cost hash function to randomly group
connection weights into hash buckets, and all
connections within the same hash bucket share
a single parameter value. These parameters are
tuned to adjust to the HashedNets weight sharing
architecture with standard backprop during training. Our hashing procedure introduces no additional memory overhead, and we demonstrate
on several benchmark data sets that HashedNets
shrink the storage requirements of neural networks substantially while mostly preserving generalization performance.

1. Introduction
In the past decade deep neural networks have set new
performance standards in many high-impact applications.
These include object classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Sermanet et al., 2013), speech recognition (Hinton et al.,
2012), image caption generation (Vinyals et al., 2014;
Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2014) and domain adaptation (Glorot et al., 2011b). As data sets increase in size, so do
the number of parameters in these neural networks in orProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

der to absorb the enormous amount of supervision (Coates
et al., 2013). Increasingly, these networks are trained on
industrial-sized clusters (Le, 2013) or high-performance
graphics processing units (GPUs) (Coates et al., 2013).
Simultaneously, there has been a second trend as applications of machine learning have shifted toward mobile and
embedded devices. As examples, modern smart phones are
increasingly operated through speech recognition (Schuster, 2010), robots and self-driving cars perform object
recognition in real time (Montemerlo et al., 2008), and
medical devices collect and analyze patient data (Lee &
Verma, 2013). In contrast to GPUs or computing clusters, these devices are designed for low power consumption
and long battery life. Most importantly, they typically have
small working memory. For example, even the top-of-theline iPhone 6 only features a mere 1GB of RAM.1
The disjunction between these two trends creates a
dilemma when state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms are
designed for deployment on mobile devices. While it is
possible to train deep nets offline on industrial-sized clusters (server-side), the sheer size of the most effective models would exceed the available memory, making it prohibitive to perform testing on-device. In speech recognition, one common cure is to transmit processed voice
recordings to a computation center, where the voice recognition is performed server-side (Chun & Maniatis, 2009).
This approach is problematic, as it only works when sufficient bandwidth is available and incurs artificial delays
through network traffic (Kosner, 2012). One solution is to
train small models for the on-device classification; however, these tend to significantly impact accuracy (Chun &
Maniatis, 2009), leading to customer frustration.
This dilemma motivates neural network compression. Recent work by Denil et al. (2013) demonstrates that there
is a surprisingly large amount of redundancy among the
1

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPhone_6

