Exponential Integration for Hamiltonian Monte Carlo

Wei-Lun Chao1
WEILUNC @ USC . EDU
Justin Solomon2
JUSTIN . SOLOMON @ STANFORD . EDU
Dominik L. Michels2
MICHELS @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
Fei Sha1
FEISHA @ USC . EDU
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
2
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford, California 94305 USA

Abstract
We investigate numerical integration of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) for Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC). High-quality integration is
crucial for designing efficient and effective proposals for HMC. While the standard method is
leapfrog (Störmer-Verlet) integration, we propose
the use of an exponential integrator, which is
robust to stiff ODEs with highly-oscillatory components. This oscillation is difficult to reproduce
using leapfrog integration, even with carefully
selected integration parameters and preconditioning. Concretely, we use a Gaussian distribution
approximation to segregate stiff components of
the ODE. We integrate this term analytically for
stability and account for deviation from the approximation using variation of constants. We consider various ways to derive Gaussian approximations and conduct extensive empirical studies
applying the proposed “exponential HMC” to several benchmarked learning problems. We compare to state-of-the-art methods for improving
leapfrog HMC and demonstrate the advantages of
our method in generating many effective samples
with high acceptance rates in short running times.

1. Introduction
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is at the core of many
methods in computational statistics (Gelman et al., 2004;
Robert & Casella, 2004) to sample from complex probability
distributions for inference and learning.
Metropolis-Hastings MCMC obtains such samples by constructing a Markov chain with help from proposal distriProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

butions that generate random walks in sample space. A
fraction of these walks aligned with the target distribution is
kept, while the remainder is discarded. Sampling efficiency
and quality depends critically on the proposal distribution.
For this reason, designing good proposals has long been a
subject of intensive research.
For distributions over continuous variables, Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) is a state-of-the-art sampler using classical mechanics to generate proposal distributions (Neal,
2011). The method starts by introducing auxiliary sampling variables. It then treats the negative log density of
the variables’ joint distribution as the Hamiltonian of particles moving in sample space. Final positions on the motion
trajectories are used as proposals.
The equations of motion are ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) requiring numerical integration. Several factors
affect the choice of integrators. Time reversibility is needed
for the Markov chain to converge to the target distribution,
and volume preservation ensures that the sample acceptance
test is tractable. The acceptance rate of HMC is determined
by how well the integrator preserves the energy of the physical system, and hence high-fidelity numerical solutions are
preferable. In the rare case that the ODE can be integrated
exactly, no samples would be rejected. More realistically,
however, when the ODE is integrated approximately, especially over a long time period to encourage exploration
of the sample space, integration error can impede energy
conservation, slowing convergence. Thus, the time period
for integration usually is subdivided into many shorter steps.
Despite its relevance to sampling efficiency, investigation
of sophisticated numerical integrators for HMC has been
scarce in the current machine learning literature. The
standard HMC integrator is the leapfrog (Störmer-Verlet)
method. Leapfrog integration, however, is sensitive to
stiff ODEs with highly-oscillatory dynamical components
(Hairer et al., 2006). When the target density yields a stiff
ODE, e.g. a multivariate Gaussian distribution with small
variances in certain dimensions, the time step for leapfrog

