arXiv:submit/1277131 [cs.CL] 11 Jun 2015

Modeling Order in Neural Word Embeddings at Scale
Andrew Trask
Digital Reasoning Systems, Inc., Nashville, TN USA

ANDREW. TRASK @ DIGITALREASONING . COM

David Gilmore
Digital Reasoning Systems, Inc., Nashville, TN USA

DAVID . GILMORE @ DIGITALREASONING . COM

Matthew Russell
Digital Reasoning Systems, Inc., Nashville, TN USA

MATTHEW. RUSSELL @ DIGITALREASONING . COM

Abstract
Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems
commonly leverage bag-of-words co-occurrence
techniques to capture semantic and syntactic
word relationships. The resulting word-level
distributed representations often ignore morphological information, though character-level embeddings have proven valuable to NLP tasks.
We propose a new neural language model incorporating both word order and character order in its embedding. The model produces several vector spaces with meaningful substructure,
as evidenced by its performance of 85.8% on a
recent word-analogy task, exceeding best published syntactic word-analogy scores by a 58%
error margin (Pennington et al., 2014). Furthermore, the model includes several parallel training
methods, most notably allowing a skip-gram network with 160 billion parameters to be trained
overnight on 3 multi-core CPUs, 14x larger than
the previous largest neural network (Coates
et al., 2013).

1. Introduction
NLP systems seek to automate the extraction of useful information from sequences of symbols in human language.
These systems encounter difficulty due to the complexity
and sparsity in natural language. Traditional systems have
represented words as atomic units with success in a variety
of tasks (Katz, 1987). This approach is limited by the curse
of dimensionality and has been outperformed by neural network language models (NNLM) in a variety of tasks (BenProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

gio et al., 2003; Morin & Bengio, 2005; Mnih & Hinton,
2009). NNLMs overcome the curse of dimensionality by
learning distributed representations for words (G.E. Hinton, 1986; Bengio et al., 2003). Specifically, neural language models embed a vocabulary into a smaller dimensional linear space that models “the probability function
for word sequences, expressed in terms of these representations” (Bengio et al., 2003). The result is a vector space
model (Maas & Ng, 2010) that encodes semantic and syntactic relationships and has defined a new standard for feature generation in NLP (Manning et al., 2008; Sebastiani,
2002; Turian et al., 2010).
NNLMs generate word embeddings by training a symbol
prediction task over a moving local-context window such as
predicting a word given its surrounding context (Mikolov
et al., 2013a;b). This work follows from the distributional
hypothesis: words that appear in similar contexts have similar meaning (Harris). Words that appear in similar contexts will experience similar training examples, training
outcomes, and converge to similar weights. The ordered set
of weights associated with each word becomes that word’s
dense vector embedding. These distributed representations
encode shades of meaning across their dimensions, allowing for two words to have multiple, real-valued relationships encoded in a single representation (Liang & Potts,
2015).
(Mikolov et al., 2013c) introduced a new property of word
embeddings based on word analogies such that vector operations between words mirror their semantic and syntactic
relationships. The analogy ”king is to queen as man is to
woman” can be encoded in vector space by the equation
king - queen = man - woman. A dataset of these analogies,
the Google Analogy Dataset 1 , is divided into two broad
categories, semantic queries and syntactic queries. Semantic queries idenfity relationships such as “France is to Paris
1

http://word2vec.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/

