Markov Mixed Membership Models

Aonan Zhang
John Paisley
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
We present a Markov mixed membership model
(Markov M3) for grouped data that learns a fully
connected graph structure among mixing components. A key feature of Markov M3 is that
it interprets the mixed membership assignment
as a Markov random walk over this graph of
nodes. This is in contrast to tree-structured models in which the assignment is done according to
a tree structure on the mixing components. The
Markov structure results in a simple parametric model that can learn a complex dependency
structure between nodes, while still maintaining
full conjugacy for closed-form stochastic variational inference. Empirical results demonstrate
that Markov M3 performs well compared with
tree structured topic models, and can learn meaningful dependency structure between topics.

1. Introduction
Mixed membership modeling is a statistical framework
for modeling grouped data where each group is represented as a unique mixture over a shared structure (Airoldi
et al., 2014). A wide range of data fall within the scope
of mixed membership models, including documents (Blei
et al., 2003), images (Li & Perona, 2005), and the genome
(Pritchard et al., 2000). Exchangeability assumptions can
be relaxed to extend mixed membership models to link
data (Airoldi et al., 2008), heterogeneous data (Chang &
Blei, 2009; Wang & Blei, 2011) and matrix factorization (Mackey et al., 2010). In this paper, we focus on
the case where each group’s data is assumed i.i.d. given
its mixed membership mixing measure.
For discrete grouped data, the most basic mixed membership model is latent Dirichlet allocaiton (LDA) (Blei et al.,
2003), which assumes a finite set of discrete distributions,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

AZ 2385@ COLUMBIA . EDU
JPAISLEY @ COLUMBIA . EDU

and models each group as a mixture over these distributions
using a Dirichlet prior. The simple “flat” Dirichlet prior assumes no structure among the atoms, and so the model can
overfit as the number of components increases beyond a
certain number. To capture finer resolution without overfitting, structure has been introduced to the atom relationships, for example by modeling pairwise correlations (Blei
& Lafferty, 2007) or tree structures (Blei et al., 2010).
Among these models, the tree-structured model is especially interesting for the structure it can learn (Blei et al.,
2010; Li et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2012; Ahmed et al., 2013;
Paisley et al., 2015). Because the components are given
a strict parent/child relationship, tree models can discover
components of different granularities having top-down dependencies. In topic modeling, this is natural since topics
can be more or less specific and the children of one topic
can further specify the more general content of the parent
topic that unites them.
To consider two Bayesian nonparametric instances, the
nested Chinese restaurant process (nCRP) (Blei et al.,
2010) and nested hierarchical Dirichlet process (nHDP)
(Paisley et al., 2015) are two tree-structured models that
select distributions on paths from a root node (see Figure
1). For example, the nCRP selects the atoms for a group by
following a path from root to leaf node; the nHDP generalizes this by selecting a subtree of atoms for each group.
Still, in both models it is assumed that there is a clear treestructured relationship among nodes. In this paper, we explore a related modeling framework that allows for a more
flexible range of node connections by assuming a Markov
structure among the nodes.
To this end, we present the Markov mixed membership model (Markov M3) for grouped data that learns
a fully connected graph structure among mixing components. With respect to tree-structured models, our proposed
Markov model is straightforward in that, rather than imposing a tree-structured transition rule between nodes, we
model the nodes as a fully connected graph with a firstorder Markov rule for transitioning between nodes (see
Figure 1). We therefore refer to this as a graph-based
mixed membership model. In the context of topic models,

