Learning from Corrupted Binary Labels via Class-Probability Estimation

Aditya Krishna Menon∗
ADITYA . MENON @ NICTA . COM . AU
Brendan van Rooyen†
BRENDAN . VANROOYEN @ NICTA . COM . AU
Cheng Soon Ong∗
CHENGSOON . ONG @ NICTA . COM . AU
Robert C. Williamson∗
BOB . WILLIAMSON @ NICTA . COM . AU
∗
National ICT Australia and The Australian National University, Canberra
†
The Australian National University and National ICT Australia, Canberra

Abstract
Many supervised learning problems involve
learning from samples whose labels are corrupted in some way. For example, each label
may be flipped with some constant probability
(learning with label noise), or one may have a
pool of unlabelled samples in lieu of negative
samples (learning from positive and unlabelled
data). This paper uses class-probability estimation to study these and other corruption processes
belonging to the mutually contaminated distributions framework (Scott et al., 2013), with three
conclusions. First, one can optimise balanced error and AUC without knowledge of the corruption parameters. Second, given estimates of the
corruption parameters, one can minimise a range
of classification risks. Third, one can estimate
corruption parameters via a class-probability estimator (e.g. kernel logistic regression) trained
solely on corrupted data. Experiments on label
noise tasks corroborate our analysis.

1. Learning from corrupted binary labels
In many practical scenarios involving learning from binary
labels, one observes samples whose labels are corrupted
versions of the actual ground truth. For example, in learning from class-conditional label noise (CCN learning), the
labels are flipped with some constant probability (Angluin
& Laird, 1988). In positive and unlabelled learning (PU
learning), we have access to some positive samples, but in
lieu of negative samples only have a pool of samples whose
label is unknown (Denis, 1998). More generally, suppose
there is a notional clean distribution D over instances and
labels. We say a problem involves learning from corrupted
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

binary labels if we observe training samples drawn from
some corrupted distribution Dcorr such that the observed
labels do not represent those we would observe under D.
A fundamental question is whether one can minimise a
given performance measure with respect to D, given access only to samples from Dcorr . Intuitively, in general
this requires knowledge of the parameters of the corruption process that determines Dcorr . This yields two further questions: are there measures for which knowledge of
these corruption parameters is unnecessary, and for other
measures, can we estimate these parameters?
In this paper, we consider corruption problems belonging to
the mutually contaminated distributions framework (Scott
et al., 2013). We then study the above questions through
the lens of class-probability estimation, with three conclusions. First, optimising balanced error (BER) as-is on corrupted data equivalently optimises BER on clean data, and
similarly for the area under the ROC curve (AUC). That
is, these measures can be optimised without knowledge of
the corruption process parameters; further, we present evidence that these are essentially the only measures with this
property. Second, given estimates of the corruption parameters, a range of classification measures can be minimised
by thresholding corrupted class-probabilities. Third, under
some assumptions, these corruption parameters may be estimated from the range of the corrupted class-probabilities.
For all points above, observe that learning requires only
corrupted data. Further, corrupted class-probability estimation can be seen as treating the observed samples as if
they were uncorrupted. Thus, our analysis gives justification (under some assumptions) for this apparent heuristic
in problems such as CCN and PU learning.
While some of our results are known for the special cases
of CCN and PU learning, our interest is in determining to
what extent they generalise to other label corruption problems. This is a step towards a unified treatment of these
problems. We now fix notation and formalise the problem.

