A Deterministic Analysis of Noisy Sparse Subspace Clustering for
Dimensionality-reduced Data
Yining Wang
Yu-Xiang Wang
Aarti Singh
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
Subspace clustering groups data into several lowrank subspaces. In this paper, we propose
a theoretical framework to analyze a popular
optimization-based algorithm, Sparse Subspace
Clustering (SSC), when the data dimension is
compressed via some random projection algorithms. We show SSC provably succeeds if
the random projection is a subspace embedding,
which includes random Gaussian projection, uniform row sampling, FJLT, sketching, etc. Our
analysis applies to the most general deterministic
setting and is able to handle both adversarial and
stochastic noise. It also results in the first algorithm for privacy-preserved subspace clustering.

1. Introduction
Subspace clustering groups a collection of data points into
k clusters so that data points within a single cluster lie
near some low rank subspace. It has found a wide range
of applications as many high dimensional data can be approximated by a union of low rank subspaces. Some examples include motion trajectories (Costeira & Kanade,
1998), face images (Basri & Jacobs, 2003), network hop
counts (Eriksson et al., 2012), movie ratings (Zhang et al.,
2012) and social graphs (Jalali et al., 2011).
A large body of research has been devoted to subspace clustering in the last decade. Recently a class of convex optimization based algorithms, in particular Low Rank Representation (LRR, (Liu et al., 2013)) and Sparse Subspace
Clustering (SSC, (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013)), have drawn
much interest from the literature. It is known that SSC enjoys superb performance in practice (Elhamifar & Vidal,
2009) and have theoretical guarantee under fairly general
conditions (Soltanolkotabi et al., 2012; Wang & Xu, 2013;
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YININGWA @ CS . CMU . EDU
YUXIANGW @ CS . CMU . EDU
AARTI @ CS . CMU . EDU

Soltanolkotabi et al., 2014).
Let X ∈ Rd×N denote the data matrix, where d is the ambient dimension and N is the number of data points. For
noiseless data (i.e., data points lie exactly on low-rank subspaces), the exact SSC algorithm solves the optimization
problem in Eq. (1.1) for each data point xi to obtain self
regression solutions ci ∈ RN .
min kci k1 ,

ci ∈RN

s.t. xi = Xci , cii = 0.

(1.1)

For noisy data, the following Lasso version of SSC is often
used in practice:
min kxi − Xci k22 + 2λkci k1 ,

ci ∈RN

s.t. cii = 0.

(1.2)

Although success conditions for both exact SSC and Lasso
SSC have been extensively analyzed in previous literature,
in practice it is inefficient or even infeasible to operate on
data with high dimension. Some types of dimension reduction is usually required. In this paper, we propose a theoretical framework that analyzes SSC under many popular
dimension reduction settings, including
• Compressive measurement: For compressive measurement dimensionality-reduced data are obtained by
multiplying the original data typically with a random
Gaussian matrix. We show that SSC provably succeeds when the projected dimension is at the order of
the maximum intrinsic rank of each subspace.
• Efficient computation: By using fast JohnsonLindenstrauss transform (Ailon & Chazelle, 2009)
or sketching (Charikar et al., 2004; Clarkson &
Woodruff, 2013) one can computationally efficiently
reduce the data dimension while still preserving important structures in the underlying data. We prove
similar results for both FJLT and sketching.
• Handling missing data: In many applications the
data matrix may be incomplete due to measurement
and sensing limits. It is shown in this paper that when
data meet some incoherent criteria uniform feature
sampling suffices for SSC.

