Scalable Deep Poisson Factor Analysis for Topic Modeling
Zhe Gan
ZHE . GAN @ DUKE . EDU
Changyou Chen
CHANGYOU . CHEN @ DUKE . EDU
Ricardo Henao
RICARDO . HENAO @ DUKE . EDU
David Carlson
DAVID . CARLSON @ DUKE . EDU
Lawrence Carin
LCARIN @ DUKE . EDU
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA

Abstract
A new framework for topic modeling is developed, based on deep graphical models, where
interactions between topics are inferred through
deep latent binary hierarchies. The proposed
multi-layer model employs a deep sigmoid belief network or restricted Boltzmann machine,
the bottom binary layer of which selects topics
for use in a Poisson factor analysis model. Under
this setting, topics live on the bottom layer of the
model, while the deep specification serves as a
flexible prior for revealing topic structure. Scalable inference algorithms are derived by applying
Bayesian conditional density filtering algorithm,
in addition to extending recently proposed work
on stochastic gradient thermostats. Experimental
results on several corpora show that the proposed
approach readily handles very large collections
of text documents, infers structured topic representations, and obtains superior test perplexities
when compared with related models.

1. Introduction
Considerable research effort has been devoted to developing probabilistic models for documents. In the context of
topic modeling, a popular approach is latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003), a directed graphical model
that aims to discover latent topics (word distributions) in
collections of documents that are represented in bag-ofwords form. Recent work focuses on linking observed
word counts in a document to latent nonnegative matrix
factorization, via a Poisson distribution, termed Poisson
factor analysis (PFA) (Zhou et al., 2012). Different choices
of priors on the latent nonnegative matrix factorization can
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

lead to equivalent marginal distributions to LDA, as well
as to the Focused Topic Model (FTM) of Williamson et al.
(2010).
Additionally, hierarchical (“deep”) tree-structured topic
models have been developed by using structured Bayesian
nonparametric priors, including the nested Chinese restaurant process (nCRP) (Blei et al., 2004), and the recently
proposed nested hierarchical Dirichlet process (nHDP)
(Paisley et al., 2015). The nCRP is limited because it requires that each document select topics from a single path
in a tree, while the nHDP allows each document to access
the entire tree by defining priors over a base tree. However,
the relationship between two paths in these models is only
explicitly given on shared parent nodes.
Another alternative for topic modeling is to develop undirected graphical models, such as the Replicated Softmax Model (RSM) (Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009a),
based on a generalization of the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) (Hinton, 2002). Also closely related to the
RBM is the neural autoregressive density estimator (DocNADE) (Larochelle & Lauly, 2012), a neural-networkbased method, that has been shown to outperform the RSM.
Deep models, such as the Deep Belief Network (DBN)
(Hinton et al., 2006), the Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM)
(Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009b), and layered Bayesian
networks (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014;
Danilo et al., 2014; Gan et al., 2015) are becoming popular,
as they consistently obtain state-of-the-art performances on
a variety of machine learning tasks. A popular theme in
this direction of work is to extend shallow topic models to
deep counterparts. In such a setting, documents arise from
a cascade of layers of latent variables. For instance, DBNs
and DBMs have been generalized to model documents by
utilizing the RBM as a building block (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2011; Srivastava et al., 2013).
Combining ideas from traditional Bayesian topic modeling
and deep models, we propose a new deep generative model

