Structural Maxent Models
Corinna Cortes
Google Research, 111 8th Avenue, New York, NY 10011

CORINNA @ GOOGLE . COM

Vitaly Kuznetsov
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY 10012

VITALY @ CIMS . NYU . EDU

Mehryar Mohri
Courant Institute and Google Research, 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY 10012

MOHRI @ CIMS . NYU . EDU

Umar Syed
Google Research, 111 8th Avenue, New York, NY 10011

Abstract
We present a new class of density estimation
models, Structural Maxent models, with feature functions selected from a union of possibly very complex sub-families and yet benefiting from strong learning guarantees. The design of our models is based on a new principle
supported by uniform convergence bounds and
taking into consideration the complexity of the
different sub-families composing the full set of
features. We prove new data-dependent learning
bounds for our models, expressed in terms of the
Rademacher complexities of these sub-families.
We also prove a duality theorem, which we use
to derive our Structural Maxent algorithm. We
give a full description of our algorithm, including
the details of its derivation, and report the results
of several experiments demonstrating that its performance improves on that of existing L1 -norm
regularized Maxent algorithms. We further similarly define conditional Structural Maxent models for multi-class classification problems. These
are conditional probability models also making
use of a union of possibly complex feature subfamilies. We prove a duality theorem for these
models as well, which reveals their connection
with existing binary and multi-class deep boosting algorithms.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

USYED @ GOOGLE . COM

1. Introduction
Maximum entropy models, commonly referred to as Maxent models, are density estimation methods used in a
variety of tasks in natural language processing (Berger
et al., 1996; Rosenfeld, 1996; Pietra et al., 1997; Malouf,
2002; Manning & Klein, 2003; Ratnaparkhi, 2010) and in
many other applications, including species habitat modeling (Phillips et al., 2004; 2006; Dudı́k et al., 2007; Elith
et al., 2011).
Maxent models are based on the density estimation principle advocated by Jaynes (1957), which consists of selecting
the distribution that is the closest to the uniform distribution
or to some other prior, while ensuring that the average value
of each feature matches its empirical value. When closeness is measured in terms of the relative entropy, Maxent
models are known to coincide with Gibbs distributions, as
in the original Boltzmann models in statistical mechanics.
One key benefit of Maxent models is that they allow the
use of diverse features that can be selected and augmented
by the user, while in some other popular density estimation techniques such as n-gram modeling in language processing, the features are inherently limited. The richness
of the features used in many tasks as well as small sample
sizes have motivated the use of regularized Maxent models where the L1 -norm (Kazama & Tsujii, 2003) or the
L2 -norm (Chen & Rosenfeld, 2000; Lebanon & Lafferty,
2001) of the parameter vector defining the Gibbs distribution is controlled. This can be shown to be equivalent to
the introduction of a Laplacian or Gaussian prior over the
parameter vector in a Bayesian interpretation (Williams,
1994; Goodman, 2004). Group sparsity regularizations can
also be used with for example L1 - and L2 -norms: the parameter vector is partitioned into blocks with L2 -norm used

