An Online Learning Algorithm for Bilinear Models

Yuanbin Wu
Shiliang Sun
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
Department of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University

Abstract
We investigate the bilinear model, which is a matrix form linear model with the rank 1 constraint.
A new online learning algorithm is proposed to
train the model parameters. Our algorithm runs
in the manner of online mirror descent, and gradients are computed by the power iteration. To
analyze it, we give a new second order approximation of the squared spectral norm, which helps
us to get a regret bound. Experiments on two sequential labelling tasks give positive results.

1. Introduction
In supervised classification, linear models are important
and fundamental. Features are packed into a vector, and
a weight in the same vector space is used to vote the importance of different features. However, in some applications of computer vision (Pirsiavash et al., 2009), natural
language processing (Lei et al., 2014) and recommender
systems (Rendle, 2010), matrices are more natural and informative than vectors to express features They can help to
explore latent structures of the input space (e.g., semantic
relations among features), which can potentially improve
the classification performance. In this work, as a specific
case, we will study the bilinear model, which is a matrix
form linear model with the rank 1 constraint.
The rank constraint brings difficulties both on designing
and analyzing learning algorithms. We introduce a simple and fast online algorithm for the bilinear model which
tries to overcome those difficulties. First, models with
low rank constraints usually need singular value decomposition (SVD). The full SVD is computationally unaffordable for large scale matrices. In the case of our bilinear
model, we will rely on the power iteration to compute the
leading singular vectors. By the carefully selected initial
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YBWU @ CS . ECNU . EDU . CN
SLSUN @ CS . ECNU . EDU . CN

value and normalization factor, we get an efficient update
of singular vectors. Second, since the rank constraint is
non-convex, the framework of online convex optimization
(Shalev-Shwartz, 2012) is not directly applicable for analyzing the learning problem. We give a second order approximation of the squared spectral norm (Proposition 3).
It serves as a complement of the strong smoothness result on the squared Schatten norm (Ball et al., 1994; Duchi
et al., 2010; Kakade et al., 2012). Equipped with this result,
we derive a regret bound of the algorithm.
We conduct experiments on two sequential labelling tasks:
word segmentation and text chunking. The results show
that the prior knowledge expressed by the matrix form feature and the new online learning algorithm can help to build
efficient and competitive models.

2. Related Work
Bilinear models have been applied in computer vision
(Tenenbaum & Freeman, 2000; Pirsiavash et al., 2009).
Major motivations of these works are that it is more natural
to represent images by matrices, and the bilinear formulation can help to reduce the number of parameters and the
risk of overfitting. In natural language processing, although
the matrix feature representation is not as obvious as the intensity matrix of an image, the bilinear models could also
have clear physical interpretations. For example, a tensor
model has been recently proposed by Lei et al. (2014) for
dependency parsing. Different from their work, we give a
solid formulation and analysis of the learning problem.
There are many works on low rank approximations in collaborative filtering (Srebro et al., 2005; Rennie & Srebro, 2005; Wang et al., 2013). It is popular to use the
trace norm as a convex surrogate of rank constraints. In
this work, we deal with a special case of hard rank constraints (rank = 1). The analysis of our learning algorithm will show the relation to the trace norm regularization. Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2011) considered the general
low rank constrained optimization problem with convex
objectives. Compared with that work, we investigate the

