Pushing the Limits of Affine Rank Minimization
by Adapting Probabilistic PCA

Bo Xin
BOXIN @ PKU . EDU . CN
Nat’l Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology; Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University, Beijing
David Wipf
Microsoft Research, Beijing

Abstract
Many applications require recovering a matrix of
minimal rank within an affine constraint set, with
matrix completion a notable special case. Because the problem is NP-hard in general, it is
common to replace the matrix rank with the nuclear norm, which acts as a convenient convex
surrogate. While elegant theoretical conditions
elucidate when this replacement is likely to be
successful, they are highly restrictive and convex algorithms fail when the ambient rank is too
high or when the constraint set is poorly structured. Non-convex alternatives fare somewhat
better when carefully tuned; however, convergence to locally optimal solutions remains a continuing source of failure. Against this backdrop
we derive a deceptively simple and parameterfree probabilistic PCA-like algorithm that is capable, over a wide battery of empirical tests, of
successful recovery even at the theoretical limit
where the number of measurements equals the
degrees of freedom in the unknown low-rank
matrix. Somewhat surprisingly, this is possible even when the affine constraint set is highly
ill-conditioned. While proving general recovery guarantees remains evasive for non-convex
algorithms, Bayesian-inspired or otherwise, we
nonetheless show conditions whereby the underlying cost function has a unique stationary point
located at the global optimum; no existing cost
function we are aware of satisfies this property.
The algorithm has also been successfully deployed on a computer vision application involving image rectification and a standard collaborative filtering benchmark.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DAVIDWIP @ MICROSOFT. COM

1. Introduction
Recently there has been a surge of interest in finding minimum rank matrices subject to some problem-specific constraints often characterized as an affine set (Candès et al.,
2011; Candès & Recht, 2009; Hu et al., 2013; Liu et al.,
2013; Lu et al., 2014; Mohan & Fazel, 2012; Zhang et al.,
2012). Mathematically this involves solving
min rank[X]
X

s.t. b = A(X),

(1)

where X ∈ Rn×m is the unknown matrix, b ∈ Rp represents a vector of observations and A : Rn×m → Rp
denotes a linear mapping. An important special case of (1)
commonly applied to collaborative filtering is the matrix
completion problem
min rank[X]
X

s.t. X ij = (X 0 )ij , (i, j) ∈ Ω,

(2)

where X 0 is a low-rank matrix we would like to recover,
but we are only able to observe elements from the set Ω
(Candès & Recht, 2009; Hu et al., 2013). Unfortunately
however, both this special case and the general problem (1)
are well-known to be NP-hard, and the rank penalty itself
is non-smooth. Consequently, a popular alternative is to
instead compute
X
min
f (σi [X]) s.t. b = A(X),
(3)
X
i
where σi [X] denotes the i-th singular value of X and f is
usually a concave, non-decreasing function (or nearly so).
In the special case where f (z) = I[z 6= 0] (i.e., an indicator
function) we retrieve the matrix rank; however, smoother
surrogates such as f (z) = log z or f (z) = z q with q ≤ 1
are generally preferred for optimization purposes. When
f (z) = z, (3) reduces to convex nuclear norm minimization. A variety of celebrated theoretical results have quantified specific conditions, heavily dependent on the singular
values of matrices in the nullspace of A, where the minimum nuclear norm solution is guaranteed to coincide with

