Inferring Graphs from Cascades: A Sparse Recovery Framework

JEANPOUGETABADIE @ G . HARVARD . EDU

Jean Pouget-Abadie
Harvard University

THOREL @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Thibaut Horel
Harvard University

Abstract
In the Network Inference problem, one seeks to
recover the edges of an unknown graph from the
observations of cascades propagating over this
graph. In this paper, we approach this problem from the sparse recovery perspective. We
introduce a general model of cascades, including the voter model and the independent cascade
model, for which we provide the first algorithm
which recovers the graph’s edges with high probability and O(s log m) measurements where s is
the maximum degree of the graph and m is the
number of nodes. Furthermore, we show that
our algorithm also recovers the edge weights (the
parameters of the diffusion process) and is robust in the context of approximate sparsity. Finally we prove an almost matching lower bound
of Ω(s log m
s ) and validate our approach empirically on synthetic graphs.

1. Introduction
Graphs have been extensively studied for their propagative abilities: connectivity, routing, gossip algorithms, etc.
A diffusion process taking place over a graph provides
valuable information about the presence and weights of its
edges. Influence cascades are a specific type of diffusion
processes in which a particular infectious behavior spreads
over the nodes of the graph. By only observing the “infection times” of the nodes in the graph, one might hope
to recover the underlying graph and the parameters of the
cascade model. This problem is known in the literature as
the Network Inference problem.
More precisely, solving the Network Inference problem
involves designing an algorithm taking as input a set of
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

observed cascades (realisations of the diffusion process)
and recovers with high probability a large fraction of the
graph’s edges. The goal is then to understand the relationship between the number of observations, the probability
of success, and the accuracy of the reconstruction.
The Network Inference problem can be decomposed and
analyzed “node-by-node”. Thus, we will focus on a single node of degree s and discuss how to identify its parents among the m nodes of the graph. Prior work has
shown that the required number of observed cascades is
O(poly(s) log m) (Netrapalli & Sanghavi, 2012; Abrahao
et al., 2013).
A more recent line of research (Daneshmand et al., 2014)
has focused on applying advances in sparse recovery to the
network inference problem. Indeed, the graph can be interpreted as a “sparse signal” measured through influence
cascades and then recovered. The challenge is that influence cascade models typically lead to non-linear inverse
problems and the measurements (the state of the nodes at
different time steps) are usually correlated. The sparse recovery literature suggests that Ω(s log m
s ) cascade observations should be sufficient to recover the graph (Donoho,
2006; Candes & Tao, 2006). However, the best known upper bound to this day is O(s2 log m) (Netrapalli & Sanghavi, 2012; Daneshmand et al., 2014)
The contributions of this paper are the following:
• we formulate the Graph Inference problem in the context of discrete-time influence cascades as a sparse recovery problem for a specific type of Generalized Linear Model. This formulation notably encompasses the
well-studied Independent Cascade Model and Voter
Model.
• we give an algorithm which recovers the graph’s edges
using O(s log m) cascades. Furthermore, we show
that our algorithm is also able to efficiently recover the
edge weights (the parameters of the influence model)
up to an additive error term,
• we show that our algorithm is robust in cases where
the signal to recover is approximately s-sparse by

