An Asynchronous Distributed Proximal Gradient Method
for Composite Convex Optimization

N. S. Aybat
Z. Wang
Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802 USA

NSA 10@ PSU . EDU
ZXW 121@ PSU . EDU

G. Iyengar
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA

Abstract
We propose a distributed first-order augmented
Lagrangian (DFAL) algorithm to minimize the
sum of composite convex functions, where each
term in the sum is a private cost function belonging to a node, and only nodes connected
by an edge can directly communicate with each
other. This optimization model abstracts a number of applications in distributed sensing and machine learning. We show that any limit point
of DFAL iterates is optimal; and for any ǫ >
0, an ǫ-optimal and ǫ-feasible solution can be
computed within O(log(ǫ−1 )) DFAL iterations,
ψ 1.5
which require O( dmax
ǫ−1 ) proximal gradient
min
computations and communications per node in
total, where ψmax denotes the largest eigenvalue
of the graph Laplacian, and dmin is the minimum degree of the graph. We also propose an
asynchronous version of DFAL by incorporating
randomized block coordinate descent methods;
and demonstrate the efficiency of DFAL on large
scale sparse-group LASSO problems.

1. Introduction
Let G = (N , E) denote a connected undirected graph of
N computing nodes where nodes i and j can communicate information only if (i, j) ∈ E. Each node i ∈ N :=
{1, . . . , N } has a private (local) cost function
Fi (x) := ρi (x) + γi (x),
(1)
where ρi : Rn → R is a possibly non-smooth convex function, and γi : Rn → R is a smooth convex function. We
assume that the proximal map

(2)
proxρi (x) := argmin ρi (y) + 12 ky − xk22
y∈Rn

is efficiently computable for i ∈ N .

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

GARUD @ IEOR . COLUMBIA . EDU

We propose a distributed augmented Lagrangian algorithm
for efficiently computing a solution for the convex problem:
N
X
Fi (x).
(3)
F ∗ := minn F (x) :=
x∈R

i=1

Clearly, (3) can be solved in a “centralized” fashion by
communicating all the private functions Fi to a central
node, and solving the overall problem at this node. However, such an approach can be very expensive both from
communication and computation perspectives. Suppose
(Ai , bi ) ∈ Rm×(n+1) and Fi (x) = kAi x−bi k22 +λkxk1 for
i ∈ N such that m ≪ n and N ≫ 1. Hence, (3) is a very
large scale LASSO problem distributed data. To solve (3)
in a centralized fashion the data {(Ai , bi ) : i ∈ N } needs
to be communicated to the central node. This can be prohibitively expensive, and may also violate privacy constraints. Furthermore, it requires that the central node have
large enough memory to be able to accommodate all the
data. On the other hand, at the expense of slower convergence, one can completely do away with a central node,
and seek for consensus among all the nodes on an optimal decision using “local” decisions communicated by the
neighboring nodes. In addition, for certain cases, computing partial gradients locally in an asynchronous manner
can be even more computationally efficient when compared
to computing the entire gradient at a central node. With
these considerations in mind, we propose decentralized algorithms that can compute solutions to (3) using only local
computations; thereby, circumventing all privacy, communication and memory issues. To facilitate the design of decentralized algorithms, we take advantage of the fact that
graph G is connected, and reformulate (3) as
N
o
nX
F
(x
)
:
x
=
x
,
∀
(i,
j)
∈
E
. (4)
min
i
i
i
j
n
xi ∈R , i∈N

i=1

Optimization problems of form (4) model a variety of very important applications, e.g., distributed
linear regression (Mateos et al., 2010), distributed
control (Necoara & Suykens, 2008), machine learning (McDonald et al., 2010), and estimation using sensor
networks (Lesser et al., 2003).

