A Divide and Conquer Framework for Distributed Graph Clustering

Wenzhuo Yang
A 0096049@ NUS . EDU . SG
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576
Huan Xu
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576

Abstract
Graph clustering is about identifying clusters of
closely connected nodes, and is a fundamental
technique of data analysis with many applications including community detection, VLSI network partitioning, collaborative filtering, etc. In
order to improve the scalability of existing graph
clustering algorithms, we propose a novel divide
and conquer framework for graph clustering, and
establish theoretical guarantees of exact recovery
of the clusters. One additional advantage of the
proposed framework is that it can identify small
clusters – √
the size of the smallest cluster
can be
√
of size o( n), in contrast to Ω( n) required
by standard methods. Extensive experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the
efficiency and effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Graph clustering is a widely-used tool for exploiting the
relationships between nodes connected in a graph. Such
graph usually consists of a large number of nodes, e.g., the
friendship graph on Facebook, the co-author graph in bibliographic records. The pairwise connection between two
nodes indicates their similarity or affinity, whereas the disconnection represents their dissimilarity or difference. The
goal of graph clustering is to partition the nodes into clusters so that the nodes within the same cluster have more
connections than those in different clusters, in other words,
the closely connected nodes are grouped together.
Various kinds of graph models have been proposed and
studied in literature (e.g., Holland et al., 1983; Watts &
Strogatz, 1998; Goldenberg et al., 2010), among which the
stochastic block model (Holland et al., 1983), also known
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MPEXUH @ NUS . EDU . SG

as the planted partition model (Condon & Karp, 2001), is
arguably the most natural one for clustering. The stochastic block model assumes that the nodes are partitioned into
several clusters and the probability of the connection between each pair of nodes depends on their cluster membership, i.e., an edge is generated with probability p if they
are in the same cluster or with probability q if they are in
different clusters with p > q, and the goal is to recover
the ground truth clusters from the observed graph. Many
graph clustering algorithms have been analyzed under this
model. One of the most popular approaches is spectral
clustering (Luxburg, 2007). Rohe et al. (2011) analyzed
the performance of spectral clustering under the stochastic
block model and provided an upper bound of the misclassified nodes. Another approach developed recently and has
attracted great attention is based on convex optimization
using trace-norm and l1 norm as a surrogate of the rank
and sparsity functions respectively (e.g., Oymak & Hassibi, 2011; Jalali et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2014b; Ames &
Vavasis, 2011; Chen et al., 2014a). The main advantages of
the trace-norm based clustering are their theoretically guarantees for the exact recovery of the ground-truth clustering
and their outstanding empirical performance. Indeed, one
of them, proposed by Chen et al. (2014b), can provably recover the ground-truth clustering even in the face of outlier
nodes (nodes that are not in any cluster) and can be used to
solve planted clique and planted coloring problems.
However, both spectral clustering and trace-norm based
clustering algorithms have difficulties tackling very large
graphs. Indeed, for a graph with n nodes, both approaches
need to compute the spectral decomposition of a n × n matrix which requires O(n3 ) operations and O(n2 ) storage.
Hence it is impractical to apply them even on mediumsized graphs with 10,000 nodes on a desktop PC. How
to reduce the memory and computational cost of these
methods to improve their scalability is undoubtedly a significant problem, as real-world applications often involve
graphs with tens of thousands to even millions of nodes
(Günnemann et al., 2010; Macropol & Singh, 2010; Whang
et al., 2012). To address this, one approach is to perform

