Rademacher Observations, Private Data, and Boosting

Richard Nock†
RICHARD . NOCK @ NICTA . COM . AU
Giorgio Patrini†
GIORGIO . PATRINI @ NICTA . COM . AU
Arik Friedman‡
ARIK . FRIEDMAN @ NICTA . COM . AU
†
‡
NICTA & { The Australian National University, The University of New South Wales}, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
The minimization of the logistic loss is a popular
approach to batch supervised learning. Our paper
starts from the surprising observation that, when
fitting linear classifiers, the minimization of the
logistic loss is equivalent to the minimization of
an exponential rado-loss computed (i) over transformed data that we call Rademacher observations (rados), and (ii) over the same classifier as
the one of the logistic loss. Thus, a classifier
learnt from rados can be directly used to classify
observations. We provide a learning algorithm
over rados with boosting-compliant convergence
rates on the logistic loss (computed over examples). Experiments on domains with up to millions of examples, backed up by theoretical arguments, display that learning over a small set
of random rados can challenge the state of the art
that learns over the complete set of examples. We
show that rados comply with various privacy requirements that make them good candidates for
machine learning in a privacy framework. We
give several algebraic, geometric and computational hardness results on reconstructing examples from rados. We also show how it is possible to craft, and efficiently learn from, rados in a
differential privacy framework. Tests reveal that
learning from differentially private rados brings
non-trivial privacy vs accuracy tradeoffs.

1. Introduction
This paper deals with the following fundamental question:
What information is sufficient for learning, and what
guarantees can it bring that regular data cannot ?
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

By “regular”, we mean the usual inputs provided to a
learner. In our context of batch supervised learning, this is
a training set of examples, each of which is an observation
with a class, and learning means inducing in reduced time
an accurate function from observations to classes, a classifier. It turns out that we do not need the detail of classes to
learn a linear classifier: an aggregate, whose size is the dimension of the observation space, is minimally sufficient,
the mean operator (Patrini et al., 2014).
But do we need examples ?
This perhaps surprising and non-trivial question is becoming crucial now that the nature of stored and processed
signals intelligence data is heavily debated in the public
sphere (Landau, 2015; Sproull et al., 2015). In the context
of machine learning (ML), the objective of being accurate
is more and more frequently subsumed by more complex
goals, sometimes involving challenging tradeoffs in which
accuracy does not ultimately appear in the topmost requirements. Privacy is one such crucial goal (Duchi et al., 2014;
Enserink & Chin, 2015; Goroff, 2015). There are various models to capture the privacy requirement, such as secure multi-party computation and differential privacy (DP,
(Dwork & Roth, 2014)). The former usually relies on cryptographic protocols, which can be heavy even for bare classification and simple algorithms (Bost et al., 2014). The
latter usually relies on the power of randomization to ensure that any “local” change cannot be spotted from the output delivered (Dwork et al., 2010; Dwork & Roth, 2014).
In a ML setting, randomization can be performed at various stages, from the examples to the output of a classifier.
We focus on the upstream stage of the process, i.e. the input
to the learner, which grants the benefits that all subsequent
stages also comply with differential privacy. Randomization has its power: it also has its limits in this case, as it
may significantly degrade the performance of learners.
The way we address this problem starts from a surprising
observation, whose relevance to supervised ML goes beyond learning with private data: learning a linear classifier
over examples throughout the minimization of the expected
logistic loss is equivalent to learning the same classifier

