Subsampling Methods for Persistent Homology
Frédéric Chazal
INRIA Saclay, Palaiseau, 91120, France

FREDERIC . CHAZAL @ INRIA . FR

Brittany Terese Fasy
Computer Science Department, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118

BRITTANY @ FASY. US

Fabrizio Lecci
Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

LECCI @ CMU . EDU

Bertrand Michel
LSTA, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, 75005, France

BERTRAND . MICHEL @ UPMC . FR

Alessandro Rinaldo
Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

ARINALDO @ CMU . EDU

Larry Wasserman
Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

LARRY @ CMU . EDU

Abstract
Persistent homology is a multiscale method for
analyzing the shape of sets and functions from
point cloud data arising from an unknown distribution supported on those sets. When the size of
the sample is large, direct computation of the persistent homology is prohibitive due to the combinatorial nature of the existing algorithms. We
propose to compute the persistent homology of
several subsamples of the data and then combine the resulting estimates. We study the risk
of two estimators and we prove that the subsampling approach carries stable topological information while achieving a great reduction in computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) refers to a collection of
methods for finding topological structure in data (Carlsson,
2009). The input is a dataset drawn from a probability measure supported on an unknown set X. The output is a collection of data summaries that are used to describe the topological features of X. Comparisons between the datasets
can then be done on these data summaries.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Homology, or more precisely persistent homology, appears
as a fundamental tool for TDA. Homology associates to
any topological space X, a family of vector spaces (the
so-called homology groups) Hk (X), k = 0, 1, . . ., each of
them encoding topological features of X. The k th Betti
number of X, denoted k , is the rank of Hk (X) and represents the number of k-dimensional features of X: for example, 0 is the number of connected components of M,
1 the number of independent cycles or “tunnels”, 2 the
number of “voids”, etc. (see Hatcher, 2001). Persistent homology (Edelsbrunner et al., 2002; Zomorodian & Carlsson, 2005) provides a framework and efficient algorithms
to encode the evolution of the homology of families of
nested topological spaces indexed by a set of real numbers
that may often be seen as scales, such as the the union of
growing balls, or a nested family of simplicial complexes
built on top of the data. The obtained multiscale topological information is then represented in a simple way as a
barcode or persistence diagram, providing relevant information about the data (Cohen-Steiner et al., 2007; Chazal
et al., 2009; 2012a;b). The persistence diagram can be converted into a summary function called a persistence landscape (Bubenik, 2012); see Section 2. These landscapes
are the data summaries that we focus on in this paper.
Contribution and Related Work. The time and space
complexity of persistent homology algorithms is one of
the main obstacles in applying TDA techniques to highdimensional problems. To overcome the problem of computational costs, we propose the following strategy: given

