Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing
Internal Covariate Shift
Sergey Ioffe
Christian Szegedy
Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043

Abstract
Training Deep Neural Networks is complicated
by the fact that the distribution of each layer’s
inputs changes during training, as the parameters of the previous layers change. This slows
down the training by requiring lower learning
rates and careful parameter initialization, and
makes it notoriously hard to train models with
saturating nonlinearities. We refer to this phenomenon as internal covariate shift, and address the problem by normalizing layer inputs.
Our method draws its strength from making normalization a part of the model architecture and
performing the normalization for each training
mini-batch. Batch Normalization allows us to
use much higher learning rates and be less careful about initialization, and in some cases eliminates the need for Dropout. Applied to a stateof-the-art image classification model, Batch Normalization achieves the same accuracy with 14
times fewer training steps, and beats the original
model by a significant margin. Using an ensemble of batch-normalized networks, we improve
upon the best published result on ImageNet classification: reaching 4.82% top-5 test error, exceeding the accuracy of human raters.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has dramatically advanced the state of the art
in vision, speech, and many other areas. Stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) has proved to be an effective way of training deep networks, and SGD variants such as momentum
(Sutskever et al., 2013) and Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011)
have been used to achieve state of the art performance.
SGD optimizes the parameters Θ of the network, so as to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SIOFFE @ GOOGLE . COM
SZEGEDY @ GOOGLE . COM

minimize the loss
N

Θ = arg min
Θ

1 X
`(xi , Θ)
N i=1

where x1...N is the training data set. With SGD, the training proceeds in steps, at each step considering a minibatch x1...m of size m. Using mini-batches of examples,
as opposed to one example at a time, is helpful in several ways. First, the gradient of the loss over a mini-batch
Pm ∂`(xi ,Θ)
1
is an estimate of the gradient over the
i=1
m
∂Θ
training set, whose quality improves as the batch size increases. Second, computation over a mini-batch can be
more efficient than m computations for individual examples on modern computing platforms.
While stochastic gradient is simple and effective, it requires
careful tuning of the model hyper-parameters, specifically
the learning rate and the initial parameter values. The training is complicated by the fact that the inputs to each layer
are affected by the parameters of all preceding layers – so
that small changes to the network parameters amplify as
the network becomes deeper.
The change in the distributions of layers’ inputs presents
a problem because the layers need to continuously adapt
to the new distribution. When the input distribution to a
learning system changes, it is said to experience covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000). This is typically handled via
domain adaptation (Jiang, 2008). However, the notion of
covariate shift can be extended beyond the learning system
as a whole, to apply to its parts, such as a sub-network or a
layer. Consider a network computing
` = F2 (F1 (u, Θ1 ), Θ2 )
where F1 and F2 are arbitrary transformations, and the
parameters Θ1 , Θ2 are to be learned so as to minimize
the loss `. Learning Θ2 can be viewed as if the inputs
x = F1 (u, Θ1 ) are fed into the sub-network
` = F2 (x, Θ2 ).

