A Lower Bound for the Optimization of Finite Sums

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research NYC, New York, NY.
Léon Bottou
Facebook AI Research, New York, NY.

Abstract
This paper presents a lower bound for optimizing a finite sum of n functions, where each function is L-smooth and the sum is µ-strongly convex. We show that no algorithm can reach an error ε in minimizing all
p functions from this class
in fewer than Ω(n + n(κ − 1) log(1/ε)) iterations, where κ = L/µ is a surrogate condition
number. We then compare this lower bound to
upper bounds for recently developed methods
specializing to this setting. When the functions
involved in this sum are not arbitrary, but based
on i.i.d. random data, then we further contrast
these complexity results with those for optimal
first-order methods to directly optimize the sum.
The conclusion we draw is that a lot of caution is
necessary for an accurate comparison, and identify machine learning scenarios where the new
methods help computationally.

1. Introduction
Many machine learning setups lead to the minimization a
convex function of the form
x∗f = arg min f (x), with f (x) =
x∈X

µ
1 n
kxk2 + ∑ gi (x), (1)
2
n i=1

where X is a convex, compact set. When the functions
gi are also convex, then the overall optimization problem
is convex, and can in principle be solved using any offthe-shelf convex minimization procedure. In the machine
learning literature, two primary techniques have typically
been used to address such convex optimization problems.
The first approach (called the batch approach) uses the ability to evaluate the function f along with its gradients, Hessian etc. and applies first- and second-order methods to
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ALEKHA @ MICROSOFT. COM

LEON @ BOTTOU . ORG

minimize the objective. The second approach (called the
stochastic approach) interprets the average in Equation (1)
as an expectation and uses stochastic gradient methods,
randomly sampling a gi and using its gradient and Hessian
information as unbiased estimates for those of the function f .1 Both these classes of algorithms have extensive
literature on upper bounds for the complexities of specific
methods. More fundamentally, there are also lower bound
results on the minimum black-box complexity of the bestpossible algorithm to solve convex minimization problems.
In several broad problem classes, these lower bounds further coincide with the known upper bounds for specific
methods, yielding a rather comprehensive general theory.
However, a recent line of work in the machine learning literature, recognizes that the specific problem (1) of interest has additional structure beyond a general convex minimization problem. For instance, the average in defining the
function f is over a fixed number n of functions, whereas
typical complexity results on stochastic optimization allow
for the expectation to be with respect to a continuous random variable. Recent works (Le Roux et al., 2012; ShalevShwartz & Zhang, 2013; Johnson & Zhang, 2013) make
further assumptions that the functions gi involved in this
sum are smooth, and the function f is of course strongly
convex by construction. Under these conditions, the algorithms studied in these works have the following properties: (i) the cost of each iteration is identical to stochastic optimization methods, and (ii) the convergence rate of
the method is linear.2 The results are surprising since the
existing lower bounds on stochastic optimization dictate
that the error can decrease no faster than Ω(1/k) after k
iterations under such assumptions (Nemirovsky & Yudin,
1983), leaving an exponential gap compared to these new
results. It is of course not a contradiction due to the finite
1 There is a body of literature that recognizes the ability of

stochastic optimization to minimize testing error rather than training error in machine learning contexts (see e.g. Bottou & Bousquet, 2008), but we will focus on training error for this paper.
2 An optimization algorithm is linearly convergent if it reduces
the sub-optimality by a constant factor at each iteration.

