PeakSeg: constrained optimal segmentation and supervised penalty learning
for peak detection in count data

Toby Dylan Hocking
TOBY. HOCKING @ MAIL . MCGILL . CA
Guillem Rigaill
RIGAILL @ EVRY. INRA . FR
Guillaume Bourque
GUIL . BOURQUE @ MCGILL . CA
Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
Institute of Plant Sciences Paris-Saclay, UMR 9213/UMR1403, CNRS, INRA, Université Paris-Sud, Université d’Evry,
Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, Orsay, France.

Abstract
Peak detection is a central problem in genomic
data analysis, and current algorithms for this task
are unsupervised and mostly effective for a single
data type and pattern (e.g. H3K4me3 data with a
sharp peak pattern). We propose PeakSeg, a new
constrained maximum likelihood segmentation
model for peak detection with an efficient inference algorithm: constrained dynamic programming. We investigate unsupervised and supervised learning of penalties for the critical model
selection problem. We show that the supervised
method has state-of-the-art peak detection across
all data sets in a benchmark that includes both
sharp H3K4me3 and broad H3K36me3 patterns.

1. Introduction
1.1. Peak detection in ChIP-seq data
Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) is
a biological experiment for genome-wide profiling of histone modifications and transcription factor binding sites,
with many experimental and computational steps (Bailey
et al., 2013). Briefly, each experiment yields a set of sequence reads which are aligned to a reference genome, and
then the number of aligned reads are counted at each genomic position (Figure 1). Although these read counts can
be interpreted as quantitative data, they are most often interpreted using one of the many available peak detection algorithms (Wilibanks and Facciotti, 2010; Rye et al., 2010;
Szalkowski and Schmid, 2011). A peak detection algorithm is a binary classifier for each genomic position. The
positive class is enriched (peaks) and the negative class is
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

background noise. Importantly, peaks and background occur in long contiguous segments across the genome.
More concretely, a single ChIP-seq profile on a genomic
region with d base pairs
 can dbe represented as a vector
y1 · · · yd
y =
∈ Z+ of counts of aligned sequence reads. A peak detection algorithm is a function
c : Zd+ → {0, 1}d which returns 0 for background noise
and 1 for a peak.
1.2. Unsupervised versus supervised peak detection
There are several different kinds of peak patterns that have
been observed in different ChIP-seq data sets. For example, Figure 1 shows H3K4me3 data with a sharp peak pattern, and H3K36me3 data with a broad peak pattern. Current state-of-the-art peak detectors from the bioinformatics literature are unsupervised learning algorithms that are
designed for specific patterns. For example, the MACS
algorithm was initially designed for the sharp pattern in
H3K4me3 data (Zhang et al., 2008). Another example is
HMCan (Ashoor et al., 2013), whose authors suggest fixed
pattern-specific mergeDistance parameters: H3K4me3 ⇒
200, H3K36me3 ⇒ 1000. In fact, each unsupervised peak
detection algorithm has several numeric parameters, each
with defaults that may or may not be optimal for a particular data set. Rather than taking an unsupervised model and
default parameters for granted, we propose a new supervised peak detection model that can be efficiently trained
to recognize different peak patterns.
In supervised peak detection, there are n labeled samples,
and each sample i ∈ {1, . . . , n} has a profile yi ∈ Zd+ and a
set of annotated region labels Ri (“noPeaks,” “peaks,” etc.
as in Figures 1 and 2). These labels define a non-convex
annotation error function
E[c(yi ), Ri ] = FP[c(yi ), Ri ] + FN[c(yi ), Ri ]

(1)

which counts the number of false positive (FP) and false

