Adding vs. Averaging in Distributed Primal-Dual Optimization

Chenxin Ma∗
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, USA

CHM 514@ LEHIGH . EDU

Virginia Smith∗
University of California, Berkeley, USA

VSMITH @ BERKELEY. EDU

Martin Jaggi
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

JAGGI @ INF. ETHZ . CH

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley, USA

JORDAN @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU

Peter Richtárik
School of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh, UK

PETER . RICHTARIK @ ED . AC . UK

Martin Takáč
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh University, USA
∗

TAKAC .MT@ GMAIL . COM

Authors contributed equally.

Abstract
Distributed optimization methods for large-scale
machine learning suffer from a communication
bottleneck. It is difficult to reduce this bottleneck
while still efficiently and accurately aggregating
partial work from different machines. In this paper, we present a novel generalization of the recent communication-efficient primal-dual framework (C O C OA) for distributed optimization. Our
framework, C O C OA+ , allows for additive combination of local updates to the global parameters at each iteration, whereas previous schemes
with convergence guarantees only allow conservative averaging. We give stronger (primal-dual)
convergence rate guarantees for both C O C OA as
well as our new variants, and generalize the theory for both methods to cover non-smooth convex loss functions. We provide an extensive experimental comparison that shows the markedly
improved performance of C O C OA+ on several
real-world distributed datasets, especially when
scaling up the number of machines.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
With the wide availability of large datasets that exceed
the storage capacity of single machines, distributed optimization methods for machine learning have become increasingly important. Existing methods require significant
communication between workers, frequently equaling the
amount of local computation (or reading of local data). As
a result, distributed machine learning suffers significantly
from a communication bottleneck on real world systems,
where communication is typically several orders of magnitudes slower than reading data from main memory.
In this work we focus on optimization problems with empirical loss minimization structure, i.e., objectives that are
a sum of the loss functions of each datapoint. This includes the most commonly used regularized variants of
linear regression and classification methods. For this
class of problems, the recently proposed C O C OA approach
(Yang, 2013; Jaggi et al., 2014) develops a communicationefficient primal-dual scheme that targets the communication bottleneck, allowing more computation on data-local
subproblems native to each machine before communication. By appropriately choosing the amount of local computation per round, this framework allows one to control
the trade-off between communication and local computation based on the systems hardware at hand.
However, the performance of C O C OA (as well as related
primal SGD-based methods) is significantly reduced by the

