Stochastic Optimization with Importance Sampling for Regularized Loss
Minimization
Peilin Zhao†,‡
ZHAOP @ I 2 R . A - STAR . EDU . SG
Tong Zhang‡
TZHANG @ STAT. RUTGERS . EDU
†
Data Analytics Department, Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
‡
Department of Statistics & Biostatistics, Rutgers University, USA; and Big Data Lab, Baidu Research, China

Abstract
Uniform sampling of training data has been commonly used in traditional stochastic optimization
algorithms such as Proximal Stochastic Mirror
Descent (prox-SMD) and Proximal Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent (prox-SDCA). Although
uniform sampling can guarantee that the sampled
stochastic quantity is an unbiased estimate of the
corresponding true quantity, the resulting estimator may have a rather high variance, which negatively affects the convergence of the underlying
optimization procedure. In this paper we study stochastic optimization, including prox-SMD and
prox-SDCA, with importance sampling, which
improves the convergence rate by reducing the
stochastic variance. We theoretically analyze the
algorithms and empirically validate their effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Stochastic optimization has been extensively studied in the
machine learning community (Zhang, 2004; Rakhlin et al.,
2011;
Shamir & Zhang,
2013;
Duchi & Singer,
2009; Luo & Tseng, 1992; Mangasarian & Musicant,
1999; Hsieh et al., 2008; Shalev-Shwartz & Tewari,
2011; Lacoste-Julien et al., 2012; Nesterov, 2012b;
Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2012a; 2013; 2012b). At every
step, a traditional stochastic optimization method will
sample one training example or one dual coordinate uniformly at random from the training data, and then update
the model parameter using the sampled example or dual
coordinate. In this paper we focus on Proximal Stochastic
Mirror Descent (prox-SMD) (Duchi & Singer, 2009;
Duchi et al., 2010) and Proximal Stochastic Dual CoorProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

dinate Ascent (prox-SDCA) (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang,
2012b) methods.
For prox-SMD, the traditional algorithms such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) sample training examples uniformly at random during the entire learning process,
so that the stochastic gradient is an unbiased estimation
of the true gradient (Zhang, 2004; Rakhlin et al., 2011;
Shamir & Zhang, 2013; Duchi & Singer, 2009). However,
the variance of the resulting stochastic gradient estimator
may be large since the stochastic gradient can vary significantly over different examples. In order to improve convergence, this paper proposes a sampling distribution and
the corresponding unbiased importance weighted gradient estimator that minimizes the variance. To this end, we
analyze the relationship between the variance of stochastic gradient and the sampling distribution. We show that
to minimize the variance, the optimal sampling distribution
should be roughly proportional to the norm of the stochastic gradient. To simplify computation, we also consider the
use of upper bounds for the norms. Our theoretical analysis
shows that under certain conditions, the proposed sampling
method can significantly improve the convergence rate, and
our results include the existing theoretical results for uniformly sampled prox-SGD and SGD as special cases.
Similarly for prox-SDCA, the traditional approach
such as Stochastic Dual Coordinate Ascent (SDCA) (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013) picks a coordinate
to update by sampling the training data uniformly at
random (Luo & Tseng, 1992; Mangasarian & Musicant,
1999; Hsieh et al., 2008; Shalev-Shwartz & Tewari,
2011; Lacoste-Julien et al., 2012; Nesterov, 2012b;
Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2012a; 2013; 2012b). It was
shown recently that the SDCA and prox-SDCA algorithms
with uniform random sampling converge much faster than
a fixed cyclic ordering (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013;
2012b). However, this paper shows that if we employ
an appropriately defined importance sampling strategy,
the convergence can be further improved. To optimize
sampling distribution, we analyze the connection between

