Entropy-Based Concentration Inequalities for Dependent Variables

Liva Ralaivola
LIVA . RALAIVOLA @ LIF. UNIV- MRS . FR
QARMA, LIF, CNRS, Aix-Marseille University, F–13288 Marseille cedex 9, France
Massih-Reza Amini
MASSIH - REZA . AMINI @ IMAG . FR
AMA, LIG, CNRS, University Grenoble Alpes, Centre Equation 4, BP 53, F–38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France

Abstract
We provide new concentration inequalities for
functions of dependent variables. The work extends that of Janson (2004), which proposes concentration inequalities using a combination of
the Laplace transform and the idea of fractional
graph coloring, as well as many works that derive concentration inequalities using the entropy
method (see, e.g., (Boucheron et al., 2003)). We
give inequalities for fractionally sub-additive and
fractionally self-bounding functions. In the way,
we prove a new Talagrand concentration inequality for fractionally sub-additive functions of dependent variables. The results allow us to envision the derivation of generalization bounds for
various applications where dependent variables
naturally appear, such as in bipartite ranking.

1. Introduction
We present new concentration inequalities for specific
functions of possibly dependent random variables. The approach that we advocate is based on the entropy method
and the idea of breaking up the dependencies between random variables thanks to a graph coloring approach. Having
these results at hand allows us to envision the study of the
generalization properties of predictors trained over interdependent data for which a suitable dependency structure
exist. As discussed by Amini & Usunier (2015), this structure could be naturally related to the dependency graph of
the data, or it could be obtained a posteriori from a transformation that reduces a general learning problem to a more
simple case, e.g. some reductions of multiclass classification problems to binary classification problems.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Related Works. Learning with interdependent data is a
topic that has received quite interest over the past few years;
from a theoretical point of view, it ultimately pertains to
the availability of concentration inequalities designed to account for the dependencies at hand. Among the prominent
works that address this problem are a series of contributions on learning from mixing processes, where the dependencies within a sequence of random variables decreases
over time (Yu, 1994; Karandikar & Vidyasagar, 2002; Kontorovich & Ramanan, 2008; Mohri & Rostamizadeh, 2008;
2009; Samson, 2000; Steinwart & Christmann, 2010). Another line of research within this field, is based on the
idea of graph coloring, designed to divide a graph into
sets of independent sets, and considers subsets of independent random variables deduced from the graph, linking these variables. By mixing the idea of graph coloring with the Laplace transform, Hoeffding-like concentration inequalities for the sum of dependent random variables
were proposed by Janson (2004). Usunier et al. (2006)
later extended this result to provide a generalization of the
bounded differences inequality of McDiarmid (1989) to
the case of interdependent random variables. This extension then paved the way for the definition of the fractional
Rademacher complexity that generalizes the idea of Rademancher complexity and allows one to derive generalization bounds for scenarios where the training data are made
of dependent data. The Chromatic PAC-Bayes bound proposed by Ralaivola et al. (2009; 2010) is another instance of
a generalization bound that builds upon the coloring principle; London et al. (2014) later provided another PACBayesian result for dependent inputs. However, one important issue that has not been explored in these studies, is
the use of second-order (i.e. variance) information: such
information is pivotal to get generalization bounds with
fast learning rates as outlined for instance in (Boucheron
et al., 2005). To this aim, we here consider the entropy
method (Boucheron et al., 2003) that is a central technique to obtain concentration inequalities for certain types
of functions (namely, sub-additive and self-bounding) and
it is at the core of a proof of the well-known Talagrand

