Landmarking Manifolds with Gaussian Processes

Dawen Liang
John Paisley
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
We present an algorithm for finding landmarks
along a manifold. These landmarks provide a
small set of locations spaced out along the manifold such that they capture the low-dimensional
nonlinear structure of the data embedded in the
high-dimensional space. The approach does not
select points directly from the dataset, but instead
we optimize each landmark by moving along the
continuous manifold space (as approximated by
the data) according to the gradient of an objective function. We borrow ideas from active learning with Gaussian processes to define the objective, which has the property that a new landmark is “repelled” by those currently selected,
allowing for exploration of the manifold. We derive a stochastic algorithm for learning with large
datasets and show results on several datasets, including the Million Song Dataset and articles
from the New York Times.

1. Introduction
In data analysis problems, a typical goal is to learn the
underlying structure of a dataset, whether it be its statistical properties, latent patterns or the shape of the data itself. For example, Bayesian methods hypothesize a generative model for the data in which latent variables capture
information about certain structural properties assumed to
exist a priori. One common property is that the data
lies on or near a manifold, which is a nonlinear, lowdimensional space embedded in a high-dimensional ambient space. For example, images of faces or normalized
word histograms of documents may have several thousand
dimensions, but be restricted in the way they vary within
that high-dimensional space based on the intrinsic properties of the data-generating processes.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DLIANG @ EE . COLUMBIA . EDU
JPAISLEY @ COLUMBIA . EDU

In this paper we consider the problem of landmarking manifolds; that is, finding a subset of locations evenly spaced
along a manifold that captures its low-dimensional, nonlinear characteristics. Learning the overall structure of a
manifold by focusing on local information has many uses,
whether it is learning a low-dimensional embedding of
the data (Roweis & Saul, 2000; Tenenbaum et al., 2000;
Ng et al., 2001), finding relevant observations from the
dataset for supervised learning (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995;
Tipping, 2001) or unsupervised learning (Silva et al., 2005;
Li & Hao, 2009; Cai & He, 2012; Vladymyrov & CarreiraPerpinán, 2013), or for active learning problems (Kapoor
et al., 2007; Paisley et al., 2010; Li et al., 2014).
Previous manifold landmarking approaches focus on selecting a subset of points from within the dataset that characterizes the manifold (Silva et al., 2005; Li & Hao, 2009;
Vladymyrov & Carreira-Perpinán, 2013). Related supervised approaches such as sparse regression models (Tipping, 2001) implicitly do so as well. Such approaches assume that the dataset provides a densely sampled representation of the manifold, which may not always be the case.
Furthermore, these methods typically require either a full
kernel constructed from pairwise distances, or the evaluation of a function using all data points, both of which can be
computationally prohibitive as the size of the dataset grows.
We present an unsupervised method for finding points
along the space of a manifold that does not encounter these
issues. Our approach learns landmarks that can fall anywhere in the continuous ambient space, but will lie along
the manifold as approximated by the noisy data. The approach greedily learns these locations by optimizing a sequence of objective functions that naturally “repels” each
new location from the previously selected ones. The objective function is motivated by a simple active learning method using Gaussian processes (Cohn et al., 1996;
Rasmussen, 2006; Kapoor et al., 2007). This supervised
method selects the next location to measure according to
the level of uncertainty in the predicted response. Interestingly, previous measurements are not used to determine
this and so the selection process itself is unsupervised. We
modify this algorithm to efficiently explore manifolds.

