Variational Inference for Gaussian Process Modulated Poisson Processes
Chris Lloyd*
Tom Gunter*
Michael A. Osborne
Stephen J. Roberts
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
We present the first fully variational Bayesian
inference scheme for continuous Gaussianprocess-modulated Poisson processes. Such
point processes are used in a variety of domains,
including neuroscience, geo-statistics and astronomy, but their use is hindered by the computational cost of existing inference schemes. Our
scheme: requires no discretisation of the domain;
scales linearly in the number of observed events;
and is many orders of magnitude faster than previous sampling based approaches. The resulting
algorithm is shown to outperform standard methods on synthetic examples, coal mining disaster
data and in the prediction of Malaria incidences
in Kenya.

1. Introduction
Sparse events defined over a continuous domain arise in a
variety of real-world applications. The geospatial spread
of disease through time, for example, may be viewed as a
set of infections which occur in three dimensional spacetime. In this work, we will consider data where the intensity (or average incidence rate) of the event generating
process is assumed to vary smoothly over the domain. A
popular model for such data is the inhomogenous Poisson
process with a Gaussian process model for the smoothlyvarying intensity function. This flexible approach has
been adopted for applications in neuroscience (Cunningham et al., 2008b), finance (Basu & Dassios, 2002) and
forestry (Heikkinen & Arjas, 1999).
However, existing inference schemes for such models scale
poorly with the number of data, preventing them from finding greater use. The use of a full Gaussian process in modelling the intensity (Adams et al., 2009) incurs prohibitive
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

CLLOYD @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
TGUNTER @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
MOSB @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK
SJROB @ ROBOTS . OX . AC . UK

O(N 3 ) computational scaling in the number of data points,
N . To tackle this problem in practice, many approaches
(Rathbun & Cressie, 1994; Mller et al., 1998) discretise
the domain, binning counts within each segment. This
approach enabled Cunningham et al. (2008a) to achieve
O(N log N ) performance. However, the discretisation approach suffers from poor scaling with the dimension of the
domain and sensitivity to the choice of discretisation.
We introduce a new model for Gaussian-processmodulated Poisson processes that eliminates the requirement for discretisation, while simultaneously delivering
O(N ) scaling. We further introduce the first fully variational Bayesian inference scheme for such models, allowing computation many orders of magnitude faster than existing schemes. This approach, which we term Variational
Bayes for Point Processes (VBPP), is shown to provide
more accurate prediction than benchmarks on held-out data
from datasets including synthetic examples, coal mining
disaster data and Malaria incidences in Kenya. The power
of our approach suggests many future applications: in particular, our fully generative model will permit the joint inference of real-valued covariates (such as log-rainfall) and
a point process (such as disease outbreaks).

2. Cox Processes
Formally a Cox process—a particular type of inhomogenous Poisson process—is defined via a stochastic intensity
function λ(x) : X → R+ . For a domain X = RR of arbitrary dimension R, the number of points, N (T ), found in
a subregion
R T ⊂ X is Poisson distributed with parameter
λT = T λ(x) dx—where dx indicates integration with
respect to the Lebesgue measure over the domain—and for
disjoint subsets Ti of X , the counts N (Ti ) are independent.
This independence is due to the completely independent
nature of points in a Poisson process (Kingman, 1993).
If we restrict our consideration to some bounded region,
T , the probability density of a set of N observed points,
* Corresponding authors.

