Sparse Variational Inference for Generalized Gaussian Process Models

Rishit Shetha
Yuyang Wangb
Roni Khardona
a
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA
b
Amazon, 500 9th Ave N, Seattle, WA, USA

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GP) provide an attractive machine learning model due to their nonparametric form, their flexibility to capture many
types of observation data, and their generic inference procedures. Sparse GP inference algorithms
address the cubic complexity of GPs by focusing
on a small set of pseudo-samples. To date, such
approaches have focused on the simple case of
Gaussian observation likelihoods. This paper develops a variational sparse solution for GPs under
general likelihoods by providing a new characterization of the gradients required for inference in
terms of individual observation likelihood terms.
In addition, we propose a simple new approach
for optimizing the sparse variational approximation using a fixed point computation. We demonstrate experimentally that the fixed point operator
acts as a contraction in many cases and therefore
leads to fast convergence. An experimental evaluation for count regression, classification, and ordinal regression illustrates the generality and advantages of the new approach.

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) models are a flexible class of nonparametric Bayesian methods that have been used in a variety of supervised machine learning tasks. A GP induces
a normally distributed set of latent values which in turn
generate observation data. GPs have been successfully applied to many observation types including regression with
Gaussian likelihood, binary classification (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006), robust regression (Vanhatalo et al., 2009),
ordinal regression (Chu & Ghahramani, 2005), quantile regression (Boukouvalas et al., 2012), and relational learning
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

R ISHIT.S HETH @ TUFTS . EDU
WANGYUYANG 1028@ GMAIL . COM
RONI @ CS . TUFTS . EDU

(Chu et al., 2007). In addition, a generalized GPs formulation (Shang & Chan, 2013), using observation data from
a generic exponential family distribution, enables a nonparametric extension of generalized linear models. The
main difficulty in applying GP models is the complexity
which is cubic in the number of observations N . In addition, non-Gaussian likelihoods require some approximation
of the posterior as the GP prior is non-conjugate.
In recent years, a number of approaches have been developed to address this issue. The variational Gaussian approximation has received renewed attention (Opper & Archambeau, 2009; Lázaro-gredilla & Titsias, 2011; Khan
et al., 2012; Challis & Barber, 2013; Khan et al., 2013)
with reformulations and algorithms that reduce the number of estimated parameters, and improve convergence of
the estimates. This provides
 significant improvements but
retains the overall O N 3 complexity of inference. Several recent papers develop novel algorithmic frameworks,
including online stochastic solutions for variational inference via data sub-sampling (Hoffman et al., 2013) and distribution sampling (Titsias & Lázaro-gredilla, 2014), and
parallelization (Gal et al., 2014).
An alternative known as sparse solutions (see e.g. (Seeger
et al., 2003; Keerthi & Chu, 2006; Quiñonero Candela
et al., 2005; Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006; Titsias, 2009))
uses an additional approximation to reduce complexity. In
particular, Titsias (2009) formulated this approximation as
an optimization of a variational bound on the marginal
likelihood. In these methods, an active set of M real or
“pseudo” samples, where M  N , is used as an approximate sufficient statistic for inference and prediction, reducing training complexity to O M 2 N . Despite significant
interest, and some work on specific models (Naish-Guzman
& Holden, 2008; Vanhatalo & Vehtari, 2007), there is no
general formulation of sparse GPs for general likelihoods.
In this paper, we extend the formulation of Titsias (2009)
to handle arbitrary likelihoods. Our formulation and solution are generic in that they depend directly on properties of
the likelihood function of individual observations. In par-

