Unsupervised Domain Adaptation by Backpropagation

Yaroslav Ganin
Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow Region, Russia

Abstract
Top-performing deep architectures are trained on
massive amounts of labeled data. In the absence
of labeled data for a certain task, domain adaptation often provides an attractive option given
that labeled data of similar nature but from a different domain (e.g. synthetic images) are available. Here, we propose a new approach to domain adaptation in deep architectures that can
be trained on large amount of labeled data from
the source domain and large amount of unlabeled
data from the target domain (no labeled targetdomain data is necessary).
As the training progresses, the approach promotes the emergence of “deep” features that are
(i) discriminative for the main learning task on
the source domain and (ii) invariant with respect
to the shift between the domains. We show that
this adaptation behaviour can be achieved in almost any feed-forward model by augmenting it
with few standard layers and a simple new gradient reversal layer. The resulting augmented
architecture can be trained using standard backpropagation.
Overall, the approach can be implemented with
little effort using any of the deep-learning packages. The method performs very well in a series of image classification experiments, achieving adaptation effect in the presence of big domain shifts and outperforming previous state-ofthe-art on Office datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep feed-forward architectures have brought impressive
advances to the state-of-the-art across a wide variety of
machine-learning tasks and applications. At the moment,
however, these leaps in performance come only when a
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

GANIN @ SKOLTECH . RU
LEMPITSKY @ SKOLTECH . RU

large amount of labeled training data is available. At the
same time, for problems lacking labeled data, it may be
still possible to obtain training sets that are big enough for
training large-scale deep models, but that suffer from the
shift in data distribution from the actual data encountered
at “test time”. One particularly important example is synthetic or semi-synthetic training data, which may come in
abundance and be fully labeled, but which inevitably have
a distribution that is different from real data (Liebelt &
Schmid, 2010; Stark et al., 2010; Vázquez et al., 2014; Sun
& Saenko, 2014).
Learning a discriminative classifier or other predictor in
the presence of a shift between training and test distributions is known as domain adaptation (DA). A number of
approaches to domain adaptation has been suggested in the
context of shallow learning, e.g. in the situation when data
representation/features are given and fixed. The proposed
approaches then build the mappings between the source
(training-time) and the target (test-time) domains, so that
the classifier learned for the source domain can also be applied to the target domain, when composed with the learned
mapping between domains. The appeal of the domain
adaptation approaches is the ability to learn a mapping between domains in the situation when the target domain data
are either fully unlabeled (unsupervised domain annotation) or have few labeled samples (semi-supervised domain
adaptation). Below, we focus on the harder unsupervised
case, although the proposed approach can be generalized to
the semi-supervised case rather straightforwardly.
Unlike most previous papers on domain adaptation that
worked with fixed feature representations, we focus on
combining domain adaptation and deep feature learning
within one training process (deep domain adaptation). Our
goal is to embed domain adaptation into the process of
learning representation, so that the final classification decisions are made based on features that are both discriminative and invariant to the change of domains, i.e. have
the same or very similar distributions in the source and the
target domains. In this way, the obtained feed-forward network can be applicable to the target domain without being
hindered by the shift between the two domains.
We thus focus on learning features that combine (i)

