Budget Allocation Problem with Multiple Advertisers: A Game Theoretic View

Takanori Maehara1,4
MAEHARA . TAKANORI @ SHIZUOKA . AC . JP
Akihiro Yabe2,4
A - YABE @ CQ . JP. NEC . COM
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi3,4
K KENITI @ NII . AC . JP
1
2
3
Shizuoka University, NEC Corporation, National Institute of Informatics
4
JST, ERATO, Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project

Abstract
In marketing planning, advertisers seek to maximize the number of customers by allocating
given budgets to each media channel effectively.
The budget allocation problem with a bipartite
influence model captures this scenario; however,
the model is problematic because it assumes
there is only one advertiser in the market. In reality, there are many advertisers which are in conflict of advertisement; thus we must extend the
model for such a case.
By extending the budget allocation problem with
a bipartite influence model, we propose a gametheoretic model problem that considers many advertisers. By simulating our model, we can analyze the behavior of a media channel market, e.g.,
we can estimate which media channels are allocated by an advertiser, and which customers are
influenced by an advertiser.
Our model has many attractive features. First,
our model is a potential game; therefore, it has a
pure Nash equilibrium. Second, any Nash equilibrium of our game has 2-optimal social utility,
i.e., the price of anarchy is 2. Finally, the proposed model can be simulated very efficiently;
thus it can be used to analyze large markets.

This problem can be formulated as follows: Suppose we
have estimates for the extent to which marketing channels
can influence customer decisions and convert potential customers into loyal buyers. We would like to market a new
product that may possibly be adopted by a large fraction
of the customers. How should we choose the appropriate
marketing channels?
Alon et al. (2012) were the first to model this channel market. Consider a bipartite graph in which one side is the set
of media channels and the other is the customers. Each
edge between a channel and a customer indicates that the
customer is influenced via the channel with some probability that depends on the budget allocated to that channel. The maximization of the expected number of influenced customers under some budget constraint can be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem. This optimization problem can be developed in the general submodularity framework. More precisely, it can be formulated as knapsack-constrained monotone submodular function maximization problem on the integer lattice. Thus a
polynomial time (1 − 1/e)-approximation algorithm can
be obtained by a greedy algorithm with partial enumeration (Alon et al., 2012; Soma et al., 2014); see Section 3.
This model and its extensions are studied in the area of
computational advertising (Ieong et al., 2014; Geyik et al.,
2014; Hatano et al., 2015).
1.2. Motivation

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Marketing is used by advertisers to create loyal customers.
A major decision problem in marketing planning is the allocation of budgets to media channels (e.g., TV, newspaper, billboards, and websites) efficiently to maximize the
number of influenced customers under some constraints.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

In reality, there are many advertisers with comparable
products in a channel market, and they compete to convert
potential customers into as many loyal buyers as possible.
Market analysts (often controlled by publishers or advertisers) analyze such a complicated market. Major tasks
of analysts are to simulate/predict the market to acquire
an insight, and to propose a strategy for a market planning (Broder & Josifovski, 2011). In particular, they wish
to estimate the media channels that are allocated by advertisers and the number of customers that are influenced by

