Adaptive Stochastic Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers

Peilin Zhao∗,‡
ZHAOP @ I 2 R . A - STAR . EDU . SG
Jinwei Yang†
JYANG 7@ ND . EDU
Tong Zhang‡
TZHANG @ STAT. RUTGERS . EDU
Ping Li§
PINGLI @ STAT. RUTGERS . EDU
∗
Data Analytics Department, Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
†
Department of Mathematics, Rutgers University; and Department of Mathematics, University of Notre Dame, USA
‡
Department of Statistics & Biostatistics, Rutgers University, USA; and Big Data Lab, Baidu Research, China
§
Department of Statistics & Biostatistics, Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University; and Baidu Research, USA

Abstract
The Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
(ADMM) has been studied for years. Traditional ADMM algorithms need to compute, at each
iteration, an (empirical) expected loss function
on all training examples, resulting in a computational complexity proportional to the number
of training examples. To reduce the complexity, stochastic ADMM algorithms were proposed
to replace the expected loss function with a random loss function associated with one uniformly
drawn example plus a Bregman divergence term. The Bregman divergence, however, is derived
from a simple 2nd-order proximal function, i.e.,
the half squared norm, which could be a suboptimal choice.
In this paper, we present a new family of stochastic ADMM algorithms with optimal 2nd-order
proximal functions, which produce a new family of adaptive stochastic ADMM methods. We
theoretically prove that the regret bounds are as
good as the bounds which could be achieved by
the best proximal function that can be chosen in
hindsight. Encouraging empirical results on a variety of real-world datasets confirm the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Originally introduced in (Glowinski & Marroco, 1975;
Gabay & Mercier, 1976), the offline/batch Alternating
Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) stemmed
from the augmented Lagrangian method, with its
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

global convergence property established in (Gabay,
1983; Glowinski & Le Tallec, 1989; Eckstein & Bertsekas,
1992). Recent studies have shown that ADMM achieves
a convergence rate of O(1/T ) (Monteiro & Svaiter, 2013;
He & Yuan, 2012) (where T is number of iterations of
ADMM), when the objective function is generally convex. Furthermore, ADMM enjoys a convergence rate
of O(αT ), for some α ∈ (0, 1), when the objective function is strongly convex and smooth (Luo, 2012;
Deng & Yin, 2012). ADMM has shown attractive performance in a wide range of real-world problems such as
compressed sensing (Yang & Zhang, 2011), image restoration (Goldstein & Osher, 2009), video processing, and matrix completion (Goldfarb et al., 2013), etc.
From the computational perspective, one drawback of ADMM is that, at every iteration, the method needs to compute
an (empirical) expected loss function on all the training examples. The computational complexity is propositional to
the number of training examples, which makes the original
ADMM unsuitable for solving large-scale learning and big
data mining problems. The online ADMM (OADMM) algorithm (Wang & Banerjee, 2012) was proposed to tackle
the computational challenge. For OADMM, the objective
function is replaced with an online function at every step,
which only depends on a single training example.√ OADMM can achieve an average regret bound of O(1/ T ) for
convex objective functions and O(log(T )/T ) for strongly convex objective functions. Interestingly, although the
optimization of the loss function is assumed to be easy in
the analysis of (Wang & Banerjee, 2012), this step is actually not necessarily easy in practice. To address this issue,
the stochastic ADMM algorithm was proposed, by linearizing the online loss function (Ouyang et al., 2013; Suzuki,
2013). In stochastic ADMM algorithms, the online loss
function is firstly uniformly drawn from all the loss functions associated with all the training examples. Then the

