Strongly Adaptive Online Learning

Amit Daniely
Alon Gonen
Shai Shalev-Shwartz
The Hebrew University

AMIT. DANIELY @ MAIL . HUJI . AC . IL
ALONGNN @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL
SHAIS @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

Abstract
Strongly adaptive algorithms are algorithms
whose performance on every time interval is
close to optimal. We present a reduction that
can transform standard low-regret algorithms to
strongly adaptive. As a consequence, we derive simple, yet efficient, strongly adaptive algorithms for a handful of problems.

1. Introduction
Coping with changing environments and rapidly adapting
to changes is a key component in many tasks. A broker is
highly rewarded from rapidly adjusting to new trends. A
reliable routing algorithm must respond quickly to congestion. A web advertiser should adjust himself to new ads
and to changes in the taste of its users. A politician can
also benefit from quickly adjusting to changes in the public
opinion. And the list goes on.
Most current algorithms and theoretical analysis focus on
relatively stationary environments. In statistical learning,
an algorithm should perform well on the training distribution. Even in online learning, an algorithm should usually
compete with the best strategy (from a pool), that is fixed
and does not change over time.
Our main focus is to investigate to which extent such algorithms can be modified to cope with changing environments.
We consider a general online learning framework that encompasses various online learning problems including prediction with expert advice, online classification, online
convex optimization and more. In this framework, a learning scenario is defined by a decision set D, a context space
C and a set L of real-valued loss functions defined over D.
The learner sequentially observes a context ct ∈ C and
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

then picks a decision xt ∈ D. Next, a loss function `t ∈ L
is revealed and the learner suffers a loss `t (xt ).
Often, algorithms in such scenarios are evaluated by comparing their performance to the performance of the best
strategy from a pool of strategies (usually, this pool is simply all strategies that play the same action all the time).
Concretely, the regret, RA (T ), of an algorithm A is defined
as its cumulative loss minus the cumulative loss of the best
strategy in the pool. The rationale behind this evaluation
metric is that one of the strategies in the pool is reasonably good during the entire course of the game. However,
when the environment is changing, different strategies will
be good in different periods. As we do not want to make
any assumption on the duration of each of these periods, we
would like to guarantee that our algorithm performs well on
every interval I = [q, s] ⊂ [T ]. Clearly, we cannot hope to
have a regret bound which is better than what we have for
algorithms that are tested only on I. If this barrier is met,
we say that the corresponding algorithm is strongly adaptive1 .
Surprisingly maybe, our main result shows that for many
learning problems strongly adaptive algorithms exist. Concretely, we show a simple “meta-algorithm” that can use
any online algorithm (that was possibly designed to have
just small standard regret) as a black box, and produces a
new algorithm that is designed to have a small regret on every interval. We show that if the original algorithm have a
regret bound of R(T ), then the produced algorithm has, on
every interval [q, s] of size τ := |I|, regret that is very close
to R(τ ) (see a precise statement in Section 1.2). Moreover,
the running time of the new algorithm at round t is just
O (log(t)) times larger than that of the original algorithm.
As an immediate corollary we obtain strongly adaptive algorithms for a handful of online problems including prediction with expert advice, online convex optimization, and
more.
1

See a precise definition in Section 1.1. Also, see Section 1.3
for a weaker notion of adaptive algorithms that was studied in
(Hazan & Seshadhri, 2007).

