A Deeper Look at Planning as Learning from Replay

Harm van Seijen
HARM . VANSEIJEN @ UALBERTA . CA
Richard S. Sutton
SUTTON @ CS . UALBERTA . CA
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2E8, Canada

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, the notions of experience replay, and of planning as learning from replayed experience, have long been used to find
good policies with minimal training data. Replay can be seen either as model-based reinforcement learning, where the store of past experiences serves as the model, or as a way to avoid
a conventional model of the environment altogether. In this paper, we look more deeply at
how replay blurs the line between model-based
and model-free methods. First, we show for the
first time an exact equivalence between the sequence of value functions found by a modelbased policy-evaluation method and by a modelfree method with replay. Second, we present a
general replay method that can mimic a spectrum
of methods ranging from the explicitly modelfree (TD(0)) to the explicitly model-based (linear
Dyna). Finally, we use insights gained from these
relationships to design a new model-based reinforcement learning algorithm for linear function
approximation. This method, which we call forgetful LSTD(λ), improves upon regular LSTD(λ)
because it extends more naturally to online control, and improves upon linear Dyna because it is
a multi-step method, enabling it to perform well
even in non-Markov problems or, equivalently,
in problems with significant function approximation.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 1998;
Kaelbling et al., 1996; Szepesvári, 2009), value-function
based methods are traditionally divided into two categories:
model-free and model-based. Model-free, or direct, methods learn a value function directly from samples, from
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

which a policy can be easily derived. By contrast, modelbased, or indirect, methods learn a model of the environment dynamics and derive a value function or policy from
the model using planning.
The distinction between model-free and model-based (and
similarly, learning and planning) is not always clear. For
example, with linear Dyna (Sutton et al., 2008) samples are
used to simultaneously update a value function and learn a
model. The model is then used to generate simulated samples to further improve the value function. Another example are model-free methods that store observed samples for
reuse at a later time, like LSTD (Bradtke & Barto, 1996;
Boyan, 2002) or experience replay (Lin, 1992; Adam et al.,
2012). While such methods do not store an explicit transition model, they share many characteristics with modelbased methods, such as increased computational requirements and improved sample efficiency, which has led some
people to argue that a stored set of samples should also be
considered a model.
The distinction between model-free and model-based
methods is further blurred by the theoretical result that the
fixed point of a linear, least-squares model on a set of samples is the same as the LSTD solution of those samples
(Sutton et al., 2008; Parr et al., 2008). In practise, however,
the value function computed by a model-based method (at
any particular time) is different. This is partly because it
learns only an estimate of the least-squares model, and because, due to bounded computation per time step, its iterative planning process terminates before convergence is
reached.
In this paper, we show that the relation between model-free
and model-based methods runs even deeper. Specifically,
we show for the first time an exact equivalence between
the sequence of value functions found by a model-based
method and by a model-free method with replay.
The replay technique we use is different from the traditional way of doing replay as introduced by Lin (1992).
Rather than presenting old samples as new to the learning agent, we recompute the update targets of old samples
based on current information and redo the updates start-

