Hashing for Distributed Data

Cong Leng
CONG . LENG @ NLPR . IA . AC . CN
Jiaxiang Wu
JIAXIANG . WU @ NLPR . IA . AC . CN
Jian Cheng∗
JCHENG @ NLPR . IA . AC . CN
Xi Zhang
XI . ZHANG @ NLPR . IA . AC . CN
Hanqing Lu
LUHQ @ NLPR . IA . AC . CN
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing

Abstract
Recently, hashing based approximate nearest
neighbors search has attracted much attention.
Extensive centralized hashing algorithms have
been proposed and achieved promising performance. However, due to the large scale of many
applications, the data is often stored or even collected in a distributed manner. Learning hash
functions by aggregating all the data into a fusion
center is infeasible because of the prohibitively
expensive communication and computation overhead. In this paper, we develop a novel hashing
model to learn hash functions in a distributed setting. We cast a centralized hashing model as a
set of subproblems with consensus constraints.
We find these subproblems can be analytically
solved in parallel on the distributed compute nodes. Since no training data is transmitted across
the nodes in the learning process, the communication cost of our model is independent to the data size. Extensive experiments on several large
scale datasets containing up to 100 million samples demonstrate the efficacy of our method.

1. Introduction
Large scale similarity search is a fundamental building
block in many machine learning applications such as clustering, classification and matching (Strecha et al., 2012;
Cheng et al., 2014). Traditional nearest neighbor search
methods, such as exhaustive search and Kd-tree, become
infeasible when the data is huge in size and high in dimensionality. Recently, hashing based approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search has attracted much attention.
Hashing methods encode high dimensional data as comProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

pact binary codes so that the distance between two points
can be approximated by Hamming distance between their
codes. This enables large efficiency gains in both storage
and computation speed for similarity search.
Existing hashing approaches can be roughly categorized into data-independent and data-dependent schemes.
Early works, such as locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
(Indyk & Motwani, 1998; Charikar, 2002) and its variants (Kulis & Grauman, 2009; Datar et al., 2004), construct hash functions based on random projections without
considering the input data. More recent works focus on developing data-dependent techniques to learn hash functions
by considering the structure of data or side information.
Representative approaches include anchor graph hashing (AGH) (Liu et al., 2011), iterative quantization (ITQ)
(Gong et al., 2013), spherical hashing (SpH) (Heo et al.,
2012), k-means Hashing (KMH) (He et al., 2013) and
(Liu et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2013; 2014; Leng et al., 2015).
Most existing hashing algorithms are designed for the centralized setting, or in other words, are single machine approaches. However, because more and more large scale
datasets have emerged in real-world applications, the data is often distributed across different locations, such as
distributed databases (Corbett et al., 2013), images/videos
over the networks, etc. Furthermore, in some applications,
the data is inherently distributed. For example, in mobile
surveillance (Greenhill & Venkatesh, 2007) and sensor networks (Howard et al., 2002; Liang et al., 2014), the data is
collected at distributed sites. In such contexts, in order to
get unbiased binary codes for the data, the hash functions
should be learned based on the total data. One intuitive way
is gathering all data together at a fusion center before training. But it is not a feasible option because of the impractical communication overhead. Besides, directly training on
large scale data is often prohibitively expensive in computation, both time and space, which makes it further infeasible for practical applications. As a consequence it has become of central importance to develop hashing algorithms

