Optimal Regret Analysis of Thompson Sampling in Stochastic Multi-armed
Bandit Problem with Multiple Plays

Junpei Komiyama
Junya Honda
Hiroshi Nakagawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
We discuss a multiple-play multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem in which several arms are
selected at each round. Recently, Thompson
sampling (TS), a randomized algorithm with a
Bayesian spirit, has attracted much attention for
its empirically excellent performance, and it is
revealed to have an optimal regret bound in the
standard single-play MAB problem. In this paper, we propose the multiple-play Thompson
sampling (MP-TS) algorithm, an extension of TS
to the multiple-play MAB problem, and discuss
its regret analysis. We prove that MP-TS for binary rewards has the optimal regret upper bound
that matches the regret lower bound provided
by Anantharam et al. (1987). Therefore, MPTS is the first computationally efficient algorithm
with optimal regret. A set of computer simulations was also conducted, which compared MPTS with state-of-the-art algorithms. We also propose a modification of MP-TS, which is shown
to have better empirical performance.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the most
well-known instances of sequential decision-making problems in uncertain environments, which can model many
real-world scenarios. The problem involves conceptual entities called arms. At each round, the forecaster draws one
of K arms and receives a corresponding reward. The aim
of the forecaster is to maximize the cumulative reward over
rounds, and the forecaster’s performance is usually measured by a regret, which is the gap between his or her
cumulative reward and that of an optimal drawing policy.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JUNPEI @ KOMIYAMA . INFO
HONDA @ STAT. T. U - TOKYO . AC . JP
NAKAGAWA @ DL . ITC . U - TOKYO . AC . JP

Throughout the rounds, the forecaster faces an “exploration
vs. exploitation” dilemma. On one hand, the forecaster
wants to exploit the information that he or she has gathered up to the previous round by selecting seemingly good
arms. On the other hand, there is always a possibility that
the other arms have been underestimated, which motivates
him or her to explore seemingly bad arms in order to gather
their information. To resolve this dilemma, the forecaster
uses an algorithm to control the number of draws for each
arm.
In the stochastic MAB problem, which is the most widely
studied version of the MAB problem, it is assumed that
each arm is associated with a distinct probability distribution. While there have been many theoretical studies on the
infinite setting in which future rewards are geometrically
discounted (e.g., the Gittins index (Gittins & Jones, 1974)),
recent availability of massive data has led to a finite horizon
setting in which every reward has the same importance. In
this work, we focus on the latter setting.
There has been significant progress in this setting of the
MAB problem. In particular, the upper confidence bound
(UCB) algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) has been widely used
and studied for its computational simplicity and customizability. Whereas the coefficient of the leading logarithmic
term in UCB is larger than the theoretical lower bound
given by Lai & Robbins (1985), algorithms have been proposed that achieve this bound, such as DMED (Honda &
Takemura, 2010), Kinf , and KL-UCB (Cappé et al., 2013).
Moreover, Thompson sampling (TS) (Thompson, 1933)
has recently attracted attention for its excellent performance (Scott, 2010; Chapelle & Li, 2011) and it has been
revealed to be applicable to even a wider class of problems
(Agrawal & Goyal, 2013a; Russo & Roy, 2013; Osband
et al., 2013; Kocák et al., 2014; Guha & Munagala, 2014).
Thompson sampling is an old heuristic that has a spirit of
Bayesian inference and selects an arm based on posterior
samples of the expectation of each arm. It has been shown
that TS has an optimal regret bound (Agrawal & Goyal,

