Safe Policy Search for Lifelong Reinforcement Learning with Sublinear Regret
Haitham Bou Ammar
HAITHAMB @ SEAS . UPENN . EDU
Rasul Tutunov
TUTUNOV @ SEAS . UPENN . EDU
Eric Eaton
EEATON @ CIS . UPENN . EDU
University of Pennsylvania, Computer and Information Science Department, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Abstract
Lifelong reinforcement learning provides a
promising framework for developing versatile
agents that can accumulate knowledge over a
lifetime of experience and rapidly learn new
tasks by building upon prior knowledge. However, current lifelong learning methods exhibit
non-vanishing regret as the amount of experience
increases, and include limitations that can lead to
suboptimal or unsafe control policies. To address
these issues, we develop a lifelong policy gradient learner that operates in an adversarial setting to learn multiple tasks online while enforcing safety constraints on the learned policies. We
demonstrate, for the first time, sublinear regret
for lifelong policy search, and validate our algorithm on several benchmark dynamical systems
and an application to quadrotor control.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) (Busoniu et al., 2010; Sutton
& Barto, 1998) often requires substantial experience before achieving acceptable performance on individual control problems. One major contributor to this issue is the
tabula-rasa assumption of typical RL methods, which learn
from scratch on each new task. In these settings, learning
performance is directly correlated with the quality of the
acquired samples. Unfortunately, the amount of experience
necessary for high-quality performance increases exponentially with the tasks’ degrees of freedom, inhibiting the application of RL to high-dimensional control problems.
When data is in limited supply, transfer learning can significantly improve model performance on new tasks by reusing
previous learned knowledge during training (Taylor &
Stone, 2009; Gheshlaghi Azar et al., 2013; Lazaric, 2011;
Ferrante et al., 2008; Bou Ammar et al., 2012). Multitask learning (MTL) explores another notion of knowledge transfer, in which task models are trained simultaneProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ously and share knowledge during the joint learning process (Wilson et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2008).
In the lifelong learning setting (Thrun & O’Sullivan,
1996a;b), which can be framed as an online MTL problem, agents acquire knowledge incrementally by learning
multiple tasks consecutively over their lifetime. Recently,
based on the work of Ruvolo & Eaton (2013) on supervised lifelong learning, Bou Ammar et al. (2014) developed a lifelong learner for policy gradient RL. To ensure
efficient learning over consecutive tasks, these works employ a second-order Taylor expansion around the parameters that are (locally) optimal for each task without transfer. This assumption simplifies the MTL objective into a
weighted quadratic form for online learning, but since it is
based on single-task learning, this technique can lead to parameters far from globally optimal. Consequently, the success of these methods for RL highly depends on the policy initializations, which must lead to near-optimal trajectories for meaningful updates. Also, since their objective
functions average loss over all tasks, these methods exhibit
non-vanishing regrets of the form O(R), where R is the
total number of rounds in a non-adversarial setting.
In addition, these methods may produce control policies
with unsafe behavior (i.e., capable of causing damage to
the agent or environment, catastrophic failure, etc.). This is
a critical issue in robotic control, where unsafe control policies can lead to physical damage or user injury. This problem is caused by using constraint-free optimization over the
shared knowledge during the transfer process, which may
lead to uninformative or unbounded policies.
In this paper, we address these issues by proposing the first
safe lifelong learner for policy gradient RL operating in an
adversarial framework. Our approach rapidly learns highperformance safe control policies based on the agent’s previously learned knowledge and safety constraints on each
task, accumulating knowledge over multiple consecutive
tasks to optimize overall performance. We theoretically analyze the regret exhibited by our algorithm,
showing subp
linear dependency of the form O( R) for R rounds, thus
outperforming current methods. We then evaluate our approach empirically on a set of dynamical systems.

