Weight Uncertainty in Neural Networks

Charles Blundell
Julien Cornebise
Koray Kavukcuoglu
Daan Wierstra
Google DeepMind

CBLUNDELL @ GOOGLE . COM
JUCOR @ GOOGLE . COM
KORAYK @ GOOGLE . COM
WIERSTRA @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
We introduce a new, efficient, principled and
backpropagation-compatible algorithm for learning a probability distribution on the weights of
a neural network, called Bayes by Backprop. It
regularises the weights by minimising a compression cost, known as the variational free energy or the expected lower bound on the marginal
likelihood. We show that this principled kind
of regularisation yields comparable performance
to dropout on MNIST classification. We then
demonstrate how the learnt uncertainty in the
weights can be used to improve generalisation
in non-linear regression problems, and how this
weight uncertainty can be used to drive the
exploration-exploitation trade-off in reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Plain feedforward neural networks are prone to overfitting. When applied to supervised or reinforcement learning problems these networks are also often incapable of
correctly assessing the uncertainty in the training data and
so make overly confident decisions about the correct class,
prediction or action. We shall address both of these concerns by using variational Bayesian learning to introduce
uncertainty in the weights of the network. We call our algorithm Bayes by Backprop. We suggest at least three motivations for introducing uncertainty on the weights: 1) regularisation via a compression cost on the weights, 2) richer
representations and predictions from cheap model averaging, and 3) exploration in simple reinforcement learning
problems such as contextual bandits.
Various regularisation schemes have been developed to preProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

vent overfitting in neural networks such as early stopping,
weight decay, and dropout (Hinton et al., 2012). In this
work, we introduce an efficient, principled algorithm for
regularisation built upon Bayesian inference on the weights
of the network (MacKay, 1992; Buntine and Weigend,
1991; MacKay, 1995). This leads to a simple approximate learning algorithm similar to backpropagation (LeCun, 1985; Rumelhart et al., 1988). We shall demonstrate
how this uncertainty can improve predictive performance
in regression problems by expressing uncertainty in regions
with little or no data, how this uncertainty can lead to more
systematic exploration than -greedy in contextual bandit
tasks.
All weights in our neural networks are represented by probability distributions over possible values, rather than having
a single fixed value as is the norm (see Figure 1). Learnt
representations and computations must therefore be robust
under perturbation of the weights, but the amount of perturbation each weight exhibits is also learnt in a way that
coherently explains variability in the training data. Thus
instead of training a single network, the proposed method
trains an ensemble of networks, where each network has its
weights drawn from a shared, learnt probability distribution. Unlike other ensemble methods, our method typically
only doubles the number of parameters yet trains an infinite ensemble using unbiased Monte Carlo estimates of the
gradients.
In general, exact Bayesian inference on the weights of a
neural network is intractable as the number of parameters
is very large and the functional form of a neural network
does not lend itself to exact integration. Instead we take a
variational approximation to exact Bayesian updates. We
build upon the work of Graves (2011), who in turn built
upon the work of Hinton and Van Camp (1993). In contrast to this previous work, we show how the gradients
of Graves (2011) can be made unbiased and further how
this method can be used with non-Gaussian priors. Consequently, Bayes by Backprop attains performance comparable to that of dropout (Hinton et al., 2012). Our method

