JUMP-Means: Small-Variance Asymptotics for
Markov Jump Processes

Jonathan H. Huggins*
Karthik Narasimhan*
Ardavan Saeedi*
Vikash K. Mansinghka
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
*These authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

Abstract
Markov jump processes (MJPs) are used to
model a wide range of phenomena from disease progression to RNA path folding. However, maximum likelihood estimation of parametric models leads to degenerate trajectories
and inferential performance is poor in nonparametric models. We take a small-variance asymptotics (SVA) approach to overcome these limitations. We derive the small-variance asymptotics
for parametric and nonparametric MJPs for both
directly observed and hidden state models. In
the parametric case we obtain a novel objective
function which leads to non-degenerate trajectories. To derive the nonparametric version we introduce the gamma-gamma process, a novel extension to the gamma-exponential process. We
propose algorithms for each of these formulations, which we call JUMP-means. Our experiments demonstrate that JUMP-means is competitive with or outperforms widely used MJP inference approaches in terms of both speed and
reconstruction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Markov jump processes (MJPs) are continuous-time,
discrete-state Markov processes in which state durations
are exponentially distributed according to state-specific
rate parameters. A stochastic matrix controls the probability of transitioning between pairs of states. MJPs have been
used to construct probabilistic models either when the state
of a system is observed directly, such as with disease proProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JHUGGINS @ MIT. EDU
KARTHIKN @ MIT. EDU
ARDAVANS @ MIT. EDU
VKM @ MIT. EDU

gression (Mandel, 2010) and RNA path folding (Hajiaghayi
et al., 2014), or when the state is only observed indirectly,
as in corporate bond rating (Bladt & Sørensen, 2009). For
example, consider the important clinical task of analyzing
physiological signals of a patient in order to detect abnormalities. Such signals include heart rate, blood pressure,
respiration, and blood oxygen level. For an ICU patient,
an abnormal state might be the precursor to a cardiac arrest event while for an epileptic, the state might presage a
seizure (Goldberger et al., 2000). How can the latent state
of the patient be inferred by a Bayesian modeler, so that,
for example, an attending nurse can be notified when a patient enters an abnormal state? MJPs offer one attractive
approach to analyzing such physiological signals.
Applying an MJP model to physiological signals presents
a challenge: the number of states is unknown and must
be inferred using, for example, Bayesian nonparametric
methods. However, efficient inference in nonparametric MJP models is a challenging problem, where existing methods based on particle MCMC scale poorly and
mix slowly (Saeedi & Bouchard-Côté, 2011). Current
optimization-based methods such as expectation maximization (EM) are inapplicable if the state size is countably
infinite; hence, they cannot be applied to Bayesian nonparametric MJP models, as we would like to do for physiological signals.
Furthermore, although MJPs are viewed as more realistic
than their discrete-time counterparts in many fields (Rao &
Teh, 2013), degenerate solutions for the maximum likelihood (ML) trajectories for both directly and indirectly observed cases (Perkins, 2009), and non-existence of the ML
transition matrix (obtained from EM) for some indirectly
observed cases (Bladt & Sørensen, 2009) present inferential challenges. Degenerate ML trajectories occur when
some of the jump times are infinitesimal, which severely
undermines the practicality of such approaches. For instance, a trajectory which predicts a patient’s seizure for an

