Mind the duality gap: safer rules for the Lasso

Olivier Fercoq
Alexandre Gramfort
Joseph Salmon
Institut Mines-Télécom, Télécom ParisTech, CNRS LTCI
46 rue Barrault, 75013, Paris, France

OLIVIER . FERCOQ @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
ALEXANDRE . GRAMFORT @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR
JOSEPH . SALMON @ TELECOM - PARISTECH . FR

Abstract

one can mention dictionary learning (Mairal, 2010), biostatistics (Haury et al., 2012) and medical imaging (Lustig
et al., 2007; Gramfort et al., 2012) to name a few.

Screening rules allow to early discard irrelevant
variables from the optimization in Lasso problems, or its derivatives, making solvers faster. In
this paper, we propose new versions of the socalled safe rules for the Lasso. Based on duality
gap considerations, our new rules create safe test
regions whose diameters converge to zero, provided that one relies on a converging solver. This
property helps screening out more variables, for
a wider range of regularization parameter values.
In addition to faster convergence, we prove that
we correctly identify the active sets (supports)
of the solutions in finite time. While our proposed strategy can cope with any solver, its performance is demonstrated using a coordinate descent algorithm particularly adapted to machine
learning use cases. Significant computing time
reductions are obtained with respect to previous
safe rules.

1. Introduction
Since the mid 1990’s, high dimensional statistics has attracted considerable attention, especially in the context of
linear regression with more explanatory variables than observations: the so-called p ą n case. In such a context, the
least squares with `1 regularization, referred to as the Lasso
(Tibshirani, 1996) in statistics, or Basis Pursuit (Chen et al.,
1998) in signal processing, has been one of the most popular tools. It enjoys theoretical guarantees (Bickel et al.,
2009), as well as practical benefits: it provides sparse solutions and fast convex solvers are available. This has made
the Lasso a popular method in modern data-science toolkits. Among successful fields where it has been applied,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Many algorithms exist to approximate Lasso solutions, but
it is still a burning issue to accelerate solvers in high dimensions. Indeed, although some other variable selection
and prediction methods exist (Fan & Lv, 2008), the best
performing methods usually rely on the Lasso. For stability selection methods (Meinshausen & Bühlmann, 2010;
Bach, 2008; Varoquaux et al., 2012), hundreds of Lasso
problems need to be solved. For non-convex approaches
such as SCAD (Fan & Li, 2001) or MCP (Zhang, 2010),
solving the Lasso is often a required preliminary step (Zou,
2006; Zhang & Zhang, 2012; Candès et al., 2008).
Among possible algorithmic candidates for solving the
Lasso, one can mention homotopy methods (Osborne et al.,
2000), LARS (Efron et al., 2004), and approximate homotopy (Mairal & Yu, 2012), that provide solutions for the full
Lasso path, i.e., for all possible choices of tuning parameter λ. More recently, particularly for p ą n, coordinate
descent approaches (Friedman et al., 2007) have proved to
be among the best methods to tackle large scale problems.
Following the seminal work by El Ghaoui et al. (2012),
screening techniques have emerged as a way to exploit the
known sparsity of the solution by discarding features prior
to starting a Lasso solver. Such techniques are coined safe
rules when they screen out coefficients guaranteed to be
zero in the targeted optimal solution. Zeroing those coefficients allows to focus more precisely on the non-zero ones
(likely to represent signal) and helps reducing the computational burden. We refer to (Xiang et al., 2014) for a concise
introduction on safe rules. Other alternatives have tried to
screen the Lasso relaxing the “safety”. Potentially, some
variables are wrongly disregarded and post-processing is
needed to recover them. This is for instance the strategy
adopted for the strong rules (Tibshirani et al., 2012).
The original basic safe rules operate as follows: one

