Convergence rate of Bayesian tensor estimator and its minimax optimality

Taiji Suzuki†,‡
†
Tokyo Institute of Technology, O-okayama 2-12-1, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8552, JAPAN
‡
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, JAPAN

Abstract
We investigate the statistical convergence rate of
a Bayesian low-rank tensor estimator, and derive the minimax optimal rate for learning a lowrank tensor. Our problem setting is the regression
problem where the regression coefficient forms
a tensor structure. This problem setting occurs
in many practical applications, such as collaborative filtering, multi-task learning, and spatiotemporal data analysis. The convergence rate of
the Bayes tensor estimator is analyzed in terms
of both in-sample and out-of-sample predictive
accuracies. It is shown that a fast learning rate
is achieved without any strong convexity of the
observation. Moreover, we show that the method
has adaptivity to the unknown rank of the true
tensor, that is, the near optimal rate depending on
the true rank is achieved even if it is not known
a priori. Finally, we show the minimax optimal learning rate for the tensor estimation problem, and thus show that the derived bound of the
Bayes estimator is tight and actually near minimax optimal.

1. Introduction
Tensor modeling is a powerful tool for representing higher
order relations between several data sources. The second
order correlation has been a main tool in data analysis for
a long time. However, because of an increase in the variety of data types, we frequently encounter a situation where
higher order correlations are important for transferring information between more than two data sources. In this situation, a tensor structure is required. For example, a recommendation system with a three-mode table, such as user
× movie × context, is regarded as comprising the tensor
data analysis (Karatzoglou et al., 2010). The noteworthy
success of tensor data analysis is based on the notion of the
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

S - TAIJI @ IS . TITECH . AC . JP

low rank property of a tensor, which is analogous to that
of a matrix. The rank of a tensor is defined by a generalized version of the singular value decomposition for matrices. This enables us to decompose a tensor into a few
factors and find higher order relations between several data
sources.
A naive approach to computing tensor decomposition requires non-convex optimization (Kolda & Bader, 2009).
Several authors have proposed convex relaxation methods
to overcome the computational difficulty caused by nonconvexity (Liu et al., 2009; Signoretto et al., 2010; Gandy
et al., 2011; Tomioka et al., 2011; Tomioka & Suzuki,
2013). The main idea of convex relaxations is to unfold
a tensor into a matrix, and apply trace norm regularization to the matrix thus obtained. This technique connects
low rank tensor estimation to the well-investigated convex
low rank matrix estimation. Thus, we can apply the techniques developed in low rank matrix estimation in terms
of optimization and statistical theories. To address the theoretical aspects, Tomioka et al. (2011) gave the statistical
convergence rate of a convex tensor estimator that utilizes
the so-called overlapped Schatten 1-norm defined by the
sum of the trace norms of all unfolded matricizations. Mu
et al. (2014) showed that the bound given by Tomioka et al.
(2011) is tight, but can be improved by a modified technique called square deal. Tomioka & Suzuki (2013) proposed another approach called latent Schatten 1-norm regularization that is defined by the infimum convolution of
trace norms of all unfolded matricizations, and analyzed
its convergence rate. These theoretical studies revealed the
qualitative dependence of learning rates on the rank and
size of the underlying tensor. However, one problem of
convex methods is that, reducing the problem to a matrix
estimation, one may lose statistical efficiency in exchange
for computational efficiency.
The main question addressed in this paper is whether we
can obtain a tractable method that possesses a (near) optimal learning rate. To answer this question, we consider a
Bayesian learning method. Bayesian tensor learning methods have been studied extensively (Chu & Ghahramani,
2009; Xu et al., 2013; Xiong et al., 2010; Rai et al., 2014).

