Latent Topic Networks:
A Versatile Probabilistic Programming Framework for Topic Models

James Foulds
JFOULDS @ UCSC . EDU
Shachi H. Kumar
SHACHIHKUMAR @ SOE . UCSC . EDU
Lise Getoor
GETOOR @ SOE . UCSC . EDU
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Abstract
Topic models have become increasingly prominent text-analytic machine learning tools for research in the social sciences and the humanities. In particular, custom topic models can
be developed to answer specific research questions. The design of these models requires a nontrivial amount of effort and expertise, motivating general-purpose topic modeling frameworks.
In this paper we introduce latent topic networks,
a flexible class of richly structured topic models designed to facilitate applied research. Custom models can straightforwardly be developed
in our framework with an intuitive first-order logical probabilistic programming language. Latent topic networks admit scalable training via
a parallelizable EM algorithm which leverages
ADMM in the M-step. We demonstrate the broad
applicability of the models with case studies
on modeling influence in citation networks, and
U.S. Presidential State of the Union addresses.

1. Introduction
In the last decade topic models have become a core tool for
the analysis of text corpora. Their usage has spread beyond
machine learning to answer substantive questions in disciplines such as cognitive science (Griffiths et al., 2007),
political science (Grimmer & Stewart, 2013; Lucas et al.,
2015), and sociology (McFarland et al., 2013). The success
of these models is due in part to their extensibility. The latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic model of Blei et al.
(2003) is frequently used as a foundational building block
for constructing more sophisticated latent variable models (Grimmer, 2010; Gerrish & Blei, 2011; Nguyen et al.,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

2014). Topic models can also be extended to model additional structure such as correlations (Blei & Lafferty, 2007)
or covariates (Mimno & McCallum, 2008), which are key
for social science applications (Roberts et al., 2014).
However, the development of new topics models is a timeconsuming and challenging process. As well as designing
the model, a corresponding inference algorithm must be derived and implemented in order to fit the model to data,
with the model/algorithm pair being carefully selected to
make inference tractable and efficient. The model and algorithm then need to be evaluated, either relative to some
extrinsic task, or with respect to an intrinsic measure of
quality such as semantic coherence (Newman et al., 2010;
Mimno et al., 2011) or predictive performance (Wallach
et al., 2009; Foulds & Smyth, 2014), or by human judgment (Chang et al., 2009). Depending on the outcome of
the evaluation, the entire process may need to be repeated
iteratively until the desired level of performance is reached.
The effort required for the development process motivates
general purpose modeling frameworks for building and inferring custom topic models. From a practical perspective, the challenge is to design a topic modeling framework which (1) is general enough to be widely applicable
to many latent variable modeling applications, while (2) remaining scalable. We would also like the framework to be
(3) easy to use by non-specialist domain scientists, which
suggests a probabilistic programming approach.
Regarding (1), Roberts et al. (2013; 2014) argue that a
general-purpose topic modeling framework for applied social science needs to model covariates as well as dependencies/correlations between documents and topics, for which
they propose the structural topic model (STM). The STM
combines several previous models into a unified framework, and its application-focused design represents a substantial and useful step towards a general social science
topic modeling toolkit. This model does not however provide the capability for including additional latent variables
to build more sophisticated latent variable models. Another

