A Unifying Framework of Anytime Sparse Gaussian Process Regression
Models with Stochastic Variational Inference for Big Data
Trong Nghia Hoang†
NGHIAHT @ COMP. NUS . EDU . SG
Quang Minh Hoang†
HQMINH @ COMP. NUS . EDU . SG
Kian Hsiang Low†
LOWKH @ COMP. NUS . EDU . SG
†
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore

Abstract

This paper presents a novel unifying framework
of anytime sparse Gaussian process regression
(SGPR) models that can produce good predictive performance fast and improve their predictive performance over time. Our proposed unifying framework reverses the variational inference
procedure to theoretically construct a non-trivial,
concave functional that is maximized at the predictive distribution of any SGPR model of our
choice. As a result, a stochastic natural gradient
ascent method can be derived that involves iteratively following the stochastic natural gradient of
the functional to improve its estimate of the predictive distribution of the chosen SGPR model
and is guaranteed to achieve asymptotic convergence to it. Interestingly, we show that if the predictive distribution of the chosen SGPR model
satisfies certain decomposability conditions, then
the stochastic natural gradient is an unbiased estimator of the exact natural gradient and can be
computed in constant time (i.e., independent of
data size) at each iteration. We empirically evaluate the trade-off between the predictive performance vs. time efficiency of the anytime SGPR
models on two real-world million-sized datasets.

1. Introduction
A Gaussian process regression (GPR) model is a Bayesian
nonparametric model for performing nonlinear regression
that provides a Gaussian predictive distribution with formal measures of predictive uncertainty. The expressivity of
a full-rank GPR (FGPR) model, however, comes at a cost
of cubic time in the size of the data, thus rendering it computationally impractical for training with massive datasets.
To improve its scalability, a number of sparse GPR (SGPR)
models (Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010; Quiñonero-Candela
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

& Rasmussen, 2005; Snelson & Ghahramani, 2007; Titsias, 2009) exploiting low-rank approximate representations have been proposed, many of which share a similar
structural assumption of conditional independence (albeit
of varying degrees) based on the notion of inducing variables (Section 2) and consequently incur only linear time
in the data size. The work of Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen (2005) has in fact presented a unifying view of
such SGPR models, which include the subset of regressors (SoR) (Smola & Bartlett, 2001), deterministic training conditional (DTC) (Seeger et al., 2003), fully independent training conditional (FITC) (Snelson & Gharahmani, 2005), fully independent conditional (FIC), partially
independent training conditional (PITC) (Schwaighofer &
Tresp, 2003), and partially independent conditional (PIC)
(Snelson & Ghahramani, 2007) approximations. To scale
up these SGPR models further for performing real-time
predictions necessary in many time-critical applications
and decision support systems (e.g., ocean sensing (Cao
et al., 2013; Dolan et al., 2009; Low et al., 2008; 2009;
2011; 2012; Podnar et al., 2010), traffic monitoring (Chen
et al., 2012; 2013b; 2015; Hoang et al., 2014a;b; Low et al.,
2014a;b; Ouyang et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2014; Yu et al.,
2012)), the work of Gal et al. (2014) has parallelized DTC
while that of Chen et al. (2013a) has parallelized FITC,
FIC, PITC, and PIC to be run on multiple machines. The
recent work of Low et al. (2015) has produced a spectrum
of SGPR models with PIC and FGPR at the two extremes
that are also amenable to parallelization on multiple machines. Ideally, these parallel SGPR models can reduce the
incurred time of their centralized counterparts by a factor
close to the number of machines. In practice, since the
number of machines is limited due to budget constraints,
their incurred time will still grow with an increasing size
of data. Like their centralized counterparts, they can be
trained using all the data.
A more affordable alternative is to instead train a SGPR
model in an anytime fashion with a small, randomly sampled subset of the data at each iteration, which requires
only a single machine. To the best of our knowledge, the

