Controversy in mechanistic modelling with Gaussian processes

Benn Macdonald
School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Glasgow

B . MACDONALD .1@ RESEARCH . GLA . AC . UK

Catherine Higham
School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Glasgow

CATHERINE . HIGHAM @ GLASGOW. AC . UK

Dirk Husmeier
School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Glasgow

DIRK . HUSMEIER @ GLASGOW. AC . UK

Abstract
Parameter inference in mechanistic models based
on non-affine differential equations is computationally onerous, and various faster alternatives
based on gradient matching have been proposed.
A particularly promising approach is based on
nonparametric Bayesian modelling with Gaussian processes, which exploits the fact that a
Gaussian process is closed under differentiation.
However, two alternative paradigms have been
proposed. The first paradigm, proposed at NIPS
2008 and AISTATS 2013, is based on a product
of experts approach and a marginalization over
the derivatives of the state variables. The second
paradigm, proposed at ICML 2014, is based on
a probabilistic generative model and a marginalization over the state variables. The claim has
been made that this leads to better inference results. In the present article, we offer a new interpretation of the second paradigm, which highlights the underlying assumptions, approximations and limitations. In particular, we show
that the second paradigm suffers from an intrinsic
identifiability problem, which the first paradigm
is not affected by.

1. Introduction
Many processes in science and engineering can be described by dynamical systems models based on ordinary
differential equations (ODEs). Examples range from simple models of predator-prey interactions in ecosystems
(Lotka, 1932) or activation/deactivation dynamics of spikProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ing neurons (Nagumo et al., 1962) to increasingly complex mathematical descriptions of biopathways that aim to
predict the time-varying concentrations of different molecular species, like mRNAs and proteins, inside the living cell (Pokhilko et al., 2012). ODEs are typically constructed from well understood scientific principles and include clearly interpretable parameters that define the kinetics of the processes and the interactions between the
species. However, these parameters are often unknown and
not directly measurable. In principle, the task of statistically inferring them from data is not different from statistical inference in more conventional models. For given initial
concentrations and under fairly mild regularity conditions,
the solution of the ODEs is uniquely defined; hence, the
kinetic parameters could be inferred e.g. by minimizing
the mismatch between the data and the ODE solutions in
a maximum likelihood sense. In practice, a closed-form
solution for non-linear ODEs usually does not exist. Any
variation of the kinetic parameters thus requires a numerical integration of the ODEs, which is computationally expensive and imposes severe limitations on the number of
parameter adaptation steps that are practically feasible.
To circumvent the high computational complexity of numerically integrating the ODEs, several authors have explored approximate inference based on gradient matching.
The details vary from method to method, but they all have
in common the combination of a data interpolation (DI)
and a parameter adaptation (PA) step. In the DI step, an
established statistical model or procedure is applied to obtain a set of smooth interpolants from noisy (measured or
observed) concentration time series (for each species). In
the PA step, the time derivatives obtained from the timevarying slopes of the tangents to the interpolants are compared with the time derivatives predicted by the ODEs, and
the kinetic parameters are adjusted so as to minimize some
measure of mismatch. More advanced methods (see overleaf) allow the ODEs to regularize the interpolation, and

