Coresets for Nonparametric Estimation — the Case of DP-Means

Olivier Bachem
Mario Lucic
Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Scalable training of Bayesian nonparametric
models is a notoriously difficult challenge. We
explore the use of coresets – a data summarization technique originating from computational
geometry – for this task. Coresets are weighted
subsets of the data such that models trained on
these coresets are provably competitive with
models trained on the full dataset. Coresets
sublinear in the dataset size allow for fast
approximate inference with provable guarantees.
Existing constructions, however, are limited to
parametric problems. Using novel techniques
in coreset construction we show the existence
of coresets for DP-Means – a prototypical
nonparametric clustering problem – and provide
a practical construction algorithm. We empirically demonstrate that our algorithm allows us
to efficiently trade off computation time and
approximation error and thus scale DP-Means
to large datasets. For instance, with coresets we
can obtain a computational speedup of 45× at
an approximation error of only 2.4% compared
to solving on the full data set. In contrast, for
the same subsample size, the “naive” approach
of uniformly subsampling the data incurs an
approximation error of 22.5%.

1. Introduction
Traditional models in machine learning often require an
explicit choice of the model capacity via hyperparameters.
For example, in K-Means clustering, the number of
clusters must be selected a priori even though this quantity
is not known for many practical applications. The standard
remedy to this problem is to consider models of varying
capacities and to perform model selection using criteria
such as AIC or BIC.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

OLIVIER . BACHEM @ INF. ETHZ . CH
LUCIC @ INF. ETHZ . CH
KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

Instead of comparing models of different complexity,
Bayesian nonparametric models infer the complexity from
the data. The fact that the model complexity can scale
with the amount of observed data enables one to fit a
single model to datasets of varying sizes, making nonparametric models especially appealing in the age of Big
Data. This flexibility is a consequence of Bayesian nonparametric models having an infinite-dimensional parameter space (Orbanz & Teh, 2010). At the same time a finite
number of observations can be fully explained by only a finite subset of parameters ensuring tractability of the problem. Of course, this flexibility comes at a cost: Training
nonparametric models on massive data sets is notoriously
difficult.
As a concrete example, consider the Dirichlet process (DP)
mixture model (Antoniak, 1974) which is a widely used
Bayesian nonparametric model for clustering. It assumes
that the i-th observation depends on a parameter θi which
is sampled from a Dirichlet process. Since Dirichlet processes are almost surely discrete, the model can be viewed
as a mixture model with an unbounded number of cluster centers. If the base distribution of the Dirichlet process and the distribution of an observation i given θi are
both Gaussian, we obtain the Gaussian Dirichlet process
mixture which can be viewed as an unbounded extension
of the Gaussian mixture model. Recently, Kulis & Jordan (2012) apply the technique of small variance asymptotics to the Gibbs sampler of a Gaussian Dirichlet process mixture model. This leads to a hard clustering algorithm that monotonically decreases an object function similar to the K-Means objective. In contrast to K-Means, DPMeans clustering allows solutions with an arbitrary number of clusters, but introduces a penalty term proportional
to the number of clusters used in the solution. One motivation for DP-Means instead of DP mixtures is that inference
becomes more efficient. Nevertheless, scaling it to massive
datasets remains a difficult challenge.
Related Work. In case of DP mixtures, the traditional
approaches are based on MCMC sampling (MacEachern,
1994; Escobar & West, 1995; Neal, 2000). Yet, they can

