DP-space: Bayesian Nonparametric Subspace Clustering with
Small-variance Asymptotics
Yining Wang
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

YININGWA @ CS . CMU . EDU

Jun Zhu
DCSZJ @ TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intell. Tech. & Sys., TNList, CBICR Center, Tsinghua University, China

Abstract
Subspace clustering separates data points approximately lying on union of affine subspaces
into several clusters. This paper presents a
novel nonparametric Bayesian subspace clustering model that infers both the number of subspaces and the dimension of each subspace from
the observed data. Though the posterior inference is hard, our model leads to a very efficient deterministic algorithm, DP-space, which
retains the nonparametric ability under a smallvariance asymptotic analysis. DP-space monotonically minimizes an intuitive objective with an
explicit tradeoff between data fitness and model
complexity. Experimental results demonstrate
that DP-space outperforms various competitors
in terms of clustering accuracy and at the same
time it is highly efficient.

1. Introduction
Given a collection of data points x1 , · · · , xn ∈ RD , subspace clustering is the task that groups the data points into
K components by finding K affine subspaces of dimensions d1 , · · · , dK < D such that each data point lies in (or
near) a particular subspace. Subspace clustering has found
many applications in computer vision, including motion
segmentation (Vidal et al., 2008) and face clustering (Ho
et al., 2003). See (Vidal, 2010) for an excellent review.
Many subspace clustering methods have been developed.
One particularly interesting example is the mixture of probabilistic PCAs (MPPCA) (Tipping & Bishop, 1999), which
represents each affine subspace by a probabilistic PCA
(pPCA) model and posits that each data point comes from
a mixture of pPCA models. Compared to alternative algeProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

braic and geometry solutions (Ma et al., 2007; Fischler &
Bolles, 1981; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013), the MPPCA formulation enjoys the advantage of being more tolerate to
noisy and outlier values. Model parameters of MPPCA
could be learned via Expectation-Maximization (EM) (Tipping & Bishop, 1999). However, a major drawback of MPPCA is that both the number of clusters K and the dimension of each subspace dk must be specified a priori (Vidal,
2010). This causes difficult model selection problems, because unlike PCA, we need to select both K and dk at the
same time. When K or D is large, model selection soon
becomes intractable due to an exponential number of subspace dimension configurations.
In this paper, we present Dirichlet process mixture of PCAs
(DP-PCA), a novel nonparametric Bayesian model for subspace clustering that automatically resolves model complexity from data. One challenge of DP-PCA is on defining proper priors that take the nonparametric requirements
of clustering as well as unknown subspace dimensions into
consideration. For clustering, we adopt the commonly used
Chinese restaurant process (CRP (Aldous, 1985; Pitman,
1995), a marginalization of Dirichlet process) prior on cluster assignment variables. In addition, we propose a novel
hierarchical prior to facilitate a nonparametric treatment on
subspace dimensions, which is significantly different from
the mixture of factor analysis (MFA) (Chen et al., 2010)
model. More importantly, though the posterior inference is
hard, our carefully designed model leads to an efficient deterministic algorithm, named DP-space, which resembles
the EM algorithm for MPPCA but still possesses the nonparametric nature of DP-PCA to resolve model complexity.
DP-space is provable to converge by monotonically minimizing an intuitive objective during iterations, and empirically it achieves increased efficiency and clustering accuracy on synthetic and real-world datasets.
Technically, we first derive a partially collapsed Gibbs
(PCG) sampler (van Dyk & Park, 2008) for the DP-PCA
model. The PCG sampler is elegant in theory but unfortunately impractical in computation. By carefully perform-

