On the Optimality of Multi-Label Classification under Subset Zero-One Loss
for Distributions Satisfying the Composition Property

Maxime Gasse
Alex Aussem
Haytham Elghazel
LIRIS, UMR 5205, University of Lyon 1, 69622 Lyon, France

Abstract
The benefit of exploiting label dependence in
multi-label classification is known to be closely
dependent on the type of loss to be minimized.
In this paper, we show that the subsets of labels
that appear as irreducible factors in the factorization of the conditional distribution of the label set given the input features play a pivotal role
for multi-label classification in the context of 0/1
loss minimization, as they divide the learning
task into simpler independent multi-class problems. We establish theoretical results to characterize and identify these irreducible label factors
for any given probability distribution satisfying
the Composition property. The analysis lays the
foundation for generic multi-label classification
and optimal feature subset selection procedures
under this subclass of distributions. Our conclusions are supported by carefully designed experiments on synthetic and benchmark data.

1. Introduction
Multi-label Classification (MLC) is a challenging problem in many real-world application domains, where each
instance can be assigned simultaneously to multiple binary labels (Dembczynski et al., 2012; Read et al., 2009;
Madjarov et al., 2012; Kocev et al., 2007; Tsoumakas
et al., 2011). Formally, learning from multi-label examples amounts to finding a mapping from a space of features
to a space of labels. Given a multilabel training set D, the
goal of MLC is to find a function which is able to map any
unseen example to its proper set of labels. From a Bayesian
point of view, this problem amounts to modeling the conditional joint distribution p(Y|X), where X is a random
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MAXIME . GASSE @ LIRIS . CNRS . FR
ALEXANDRE . AUSSEM @ LIRIS . CNRS . FR
HAYTHAM . ELGHAZEL @ LIRIS . CNRS . FR

vector in Rd associated with the input space, Y a random
vector in {0, 1}n associated with the labels, and p the probability distribution defined over (X, Y).
The problem of modeling p(Y|X) may be tackled in various ways (Luaces et al., 2012; Cherman et al., 2012; Read
et al., 2009; Blockeel et al., 1998; Kocev et al., 2007; Gasse
et al., 2014). Each of these approaches is supposed to capture - to some extent - the relationships between labels. An
important question remains: what shall we capture from
the statistical relationships between labels exactly to solve
the multi-label classification problem? The question received increasing attention in the last years. So far, there
was a consensus among researchers that, to improve the
performance of MLC algorithms, label dependencies have
to be incorporated into the learning process (Tsoumakas &
Vlahavas, 2007; Guo & Gu, 2011; Zhang & Zhang, 2010;
Bielza et al., 2011). In a recent paper, however, Dembczynski et al. (2012) showed that the expected benefit of exploiting label dependence is tightly dependent on the type
of loss to be minimized and, most importantly, one cannot
expect the same MLC method to be optimal for different
types of losses at the same time (the reader is directed to
Dembczynski et al. (2012) and references therein for further details about closed-form solution for risk-minimizing
prediction).
In this study we are mainly concerned with risk-minimizing
prediction for the subset 0/1 loss which is commonly applied as performance metric in MLC experimental studies. More specifically, we establish several theorems to
characterize: 1) the irreducible label factors (denoted as
ILFs) in the factorization of the conditional distribution of
the label set given the input features (i.e., minimal subsets YLF ⊆ Y such that YLF ⊥
⊥ Y \ YLF | X) under
the assumption that the probability distribution satisfies the
Composition property; and 2) the ILFs’ Markov boundaries (that are not necessarily unique under this subclass
of distributions). The latter problem is closely related to
the feature subset selection problem in the MLC context
(Gharroudi et al., 2014; Lee & Kim, 2013; Spolaôr et al.,

