Bimodal Modelling of Source Code and Natural Language

Miltiadis Allamanis†
School of Informatics University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, United Kingdom
Daniel Tarlow
Andrew D. Gordon
Yi Wei
Microsoft Research, 21 Station Road, Cambridge, CB1 2FB, United Kingdom

Abstract
We consider the problem of building probabilistic
models that jointly model short natural language
utterances and source code snippets. The aim is to
bring together recent work on statistical modelling
of source code and work on bimodal models of
images and natural language. The resulting models are useful for a variety of tasks that involve
natural language and source code. We demonstrate their performance on two retrieval tasks:
retrieving source code snippets given a natural language query, and retrieving natural language descriptions given a source code query (i.e., source
code captioning). Experiments show there to be
promise in this direction, and that modelling the
structure of source code improves performance.

1. Introduction
Software plays a central role in society, touching billions
of lives on a daily basis. Writing and maintaining software
— in the form of source code — is a core activity of software engineers, who aim to provide reliable and functional
software. However, writing and maintaining source code
is a costly business; software developers need to constantly
look at documentation and online resources, and they need
to make sense of large existing code bases. Both of these
can be challenging and slow down the development process.
This need motivates our work here, where we seek to build
joint models of natural language and snippets of source code.
Advances in joint models of these two modalities could
lead to tools that make writing and understanding software
significantly faster and easier. Our approach combines two
†
Work done primarily while author was an intern at Microsoft
Research.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

M . ALLAMANIS @ ED . AC . UK

DTARLOW @ MICROSOFT. COM
ADG @ MICROSOFT. COM
YIWE @ MICROSOFT. COM

lines of work. First, Hindle et al. (2012); Maddison &
Tarlow (2014); Raychev et al. (2015); Tu et al. (2014) have
built increasingly sophisticated statistical models of source
code. Second, in machine learning and computer vision
there have been rapid recent advances in bimodal models
that map between images and natural language (Srivastava
& Salakhutdinov, 2012; Kiros et al., 2013; Socher et al.,
2014; Fang et al., 2014; Vinyals et al., 2014; Karpathy &
Fei-Fei, 2014). Can we take inspiration from these recent
works and build models that map from natural language to
source code, and from source code to natural language?
We explore the problem in this work, building a model that
allows mapping in both directions. We leverage data that
has short natural language utterances paired with source
code snippets, like titles of questions along with source
code found in answers from StackOverflow.com. We make
three main contributions: (1) combining ideas from the two
lines of work mentioned above, showing that this direction
has promise going forward; (2) describing modelling and
learning challenges that arose in the process of building
these models and giving solutions that allowed us to overcome the challenges; and (3) showing how the performance
of the models are affected by increasingly difficult instances
of the problem. Results on the retrieval task show that we
can often discern the proper natural language description for
previously unseen source code snippets from a reasonably
sized set of candidate descriptions.

2. Preliminaries
Let L be a sequence of words in natural language and C be a
source code snippet. The first high level choice is whether to
formulate a model where code is conditional upon language
(i.e., P (C | L)), language is conditional upon code (i.e.,
P (L | C)), or perhaps use an undirected model. While any
of these would be possible, we decided to define the model
in terms of P (C | L) because it leads to the more natural
way of encoding known structure of source code.

