A Modified Orthant-Wise Limited Memory Quasi-Newton Method with
Convergence Analysis

Pinghua Gong
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

GONGP @ UMICH . EDU

Jieping Ye
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

JPYE @ UMICH . EDU

Abstract
The Orthant-Wise Limited memory QuasiNewton (OWL-QN) method has been demonstrated to be very effective in solving the ℓ1 regularized sparse learning problem. OWL-QN
extends the L-BFGS from solving unconstrained
smooth optimization problems to ℓ1 -regularized
(non-smooth) sparse learning problems. At each
iteration, OWL-QN does not involve any ℓ1 regularized quadratic optimization subproblem
and only requires matrix-vector multiplications without an explicit use of the (inverse) Hessian matrix, which enables OWL-QN to tackle large-scale problems efficiently. Although
many empirical studies have demonstrated that
OWL-QN works quite well in practice, several
recent papers point out that the existing convergence proof of OWL-QN is flawed and a rigorous convergence analysis for OWL-QN still remains to be established. In this paper, we propose a modified Orthant-Wise Limited memory Quasi-Newton (mOWL-QN) algorithm by slightly modifying the OWL-QN algorithm. As
the main technical contribution of this paper,
we establish a rigorous convergence proof for
the mOWL-QN algorithm. To the best of our
knowledge, our work fills the theoretical gap by
providing the first rigorous convergence proof
for the OWL-QN-type algorithm on solving ℓ1 regularized sparse learning problems. We also
provide empirical studies to show that mOWLQN works well and is as efficient as OWL-QN.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Sparse learning with ℓ1 -regularized optimization
problems have been extensively studied (Tibshirani,
1996; Efron et al., 2004) and have been successfully applied to many applications including
face recognition (Wright et al., 2008), gene selecsignal recovery
tion (Shevade & Keerthi, 2003),
(Figueiredo et al., 2007; Wright et al., 2009) and
image deburring (Bioucas-Dias & Figueiredo, 2007;
Beck & Teboulle, 2009). Due to the wide use of the ℓ1 regularized sparse learning problem, many algorithms have
been developed to speedup the optimization. The existing
optimization algorithms can be roughly classified into two
categories. The first family of algorithms, called first-order
algorithms (Beck & Teboulle, 2009; Wright et al., 2009),
mainly utilize the gradient or sub-gradient to solve the
problem. The first-order algorithms have low computational cost per iteration but usually achieve sub-linear
convergence rates. The second family of algorithms,
called (quasi-) Newton algorithms (Tseng & Yun, 2009;
Friedman et al., 2010), rely on the (approximated) Hessian
matrix to achieve linear or super-linear convergence rates
but commonly have high computational cost per iteration.
In general, (quasi-) Newton algorithms need to estimate
the exact or approximated (inverse) Hessian and solve
an ℓ1 -regularized quadratic optimization subproblem at
each iteration (Schmidt et al., 2009; Friedman et al., 2010;
Yuan et al., 2012). Moreover, the subproblem usually does
not admit a closed-form solution. Thus, a specific iterative
algorithm needs to be designed to solve the subproblem.
Different from the (quasi-) Newton framework presented
in Tseng & Yun (2009), the Orthant-Wise Limited memory Quasi-Newton (OWL-QN) method (Andrew & Gao,
2007) does not involve an ℓ1 -regularized quadratic optimization subproblem at each iteration. It generalizes the
limited memory quasi-Newton method (Jorge & Stephen,
1999) from solving the unconstrained smooth optimization problem to the ℓ1 -regularized (non-smooth) optimiza-

