Approval Voting and Incentives in Crowdsourcing
Nihar B. Shah
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720

NIHAR @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Dengyong Zhou
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052

DENZHO @ MICROSOFT. COM

Yuval Peres
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052

PERES @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract
The growing need for labeled training data has
made crowdsourcing an important part of machine learning. The quality of crowdsourced labels is, however, adversely affected by three factors: (1) the workers are not experts; (2) the incentives of the workers are not aligned with those
of the requesters; and (3) the interface does not
allow workers to convey their knowledge accurately, by forcing them to make a single choice
among a set of options. In this paper, we address these issues by introducing approval voting
to utilize the expertise of workers who have partial knowledge of the true answer, and coupling
it with a (“strictly proper”) incentive-compatible
compensation mechanism. We show rigorous
theoretical guarantees of optimality of our mechanism together with a simple axiomatic characterization. We also conduct preliminary empirical studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk which
validate our approach.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, with the ever increasing complexity of
machine learning models such as deep learning, the demand for large amounts of labeled data is growing at an
unprecedented scale. A primary means of label collection
is crowdsourcing, through commercial web services like
Amazon Mechanical Turk where crowdsourcing workers
or annotators perform tasks in exchange for monetary payments. Unfortunately, the data obtained via crowdsourcing is typically highly erroneous (Kazai et al., 2011; VuProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Select ALL options that could
be the language in this image
Latin
Thai
Tamil
Japanese
Hebrew
Chinese
Russian
Hindi
Figure 1. An illustration of a task with an approval-voting interface, asking the worker to select all the options that she believes
may be correct.

urens et al., 2011; Wais et al., 2010) due to the lack of
expertise of workers, lack of appropriate incentives, and
often the lack of an appropriate interface for the workers
to express their knowledge. Several statistical aggregation
methods (Dawid & Skene, 1979; Whitehill et al., 2009;
Raykar et al., 2010; Karger et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2012;
Zhou et al., 2012; Shah et al., 2015) have been proposed in
the literature for improving the quality of the data. Our approach complements these techniques in that we endeavor
to obtain higher-quality labels directly via novel interface
and incentive mechanisms while not increasing the labeling
cost.
The typical crowdsourcing labeling task consists of a set of
questions such as images to be labeled, and each question
is associated with a set of options. Each option is the name
of a category and the true label for any question is one of
these options. In principle, for each question, the worker
is required to select the option that she believes is most
likely to be correct. More formally, it involves eliciting
the mode of the worker’s belief. Such a “single-selection”
crowdsourcing setting has been studied extensively, both

