Support Matrix Machines

Luo Luo
RICKY @ SJTU . EDU . CN
Yubo Xie
YUBOTSE @ SJTU . EDU . CN
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Zhihua Zhang
ZHIHUA @ SJTU . EDU . CN
Institute of Data Science, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Wu-Jun Li
LIWUJUN @ NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology
and Industrialization, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
In many classification problems such as electroencephalogram (EEG) classification and image classification, the input features are naturally
represented as matrices rather than vectors or scalars. In general, the structure information of
the original feature matrix is useful and informative for data analysis tasks such as classification.
One typical structure information is the correlation between columns or rows in the feature matrix. To leverage this kind of structure information, we propose a new classification method that
we call support matrix machine (SMM). Specifically, SMM is defined as a hinge loss plus a
so-called spectral elastic net penalty which is a
spectral extension of the conventional elastic net
over a matrix. The spectral elastic net enjoys a
property of grouping effect, i.e., strongly correlated columns or rows tend to be selected altogether or not. Since the optimization problem
for SMM is convex, this encourages us to devise an alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) algorithm for solving the problem.
Experimental results on EEG and image classification data show that our model is more robust
and efficient than the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Classical classification methods such as support vector machines (SVMs) (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) and logistic regression (Hastie et al., 2001) have been originally built on
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

the case that input samples are represented as vectors or scalars. However, it is also often met that input samples are
naturally represented as two-dimensional matrices or tensors. When using classical classification methods to data of
matrix representation, we have to reshape the input matrices into vectors. However, this would destroy the structure
information of the data matrix, e.g., the correlation of different channels of electroencephalogram (EEG) data (Zhou
& Li, 2014) and the spatial relationship of the nearby pixels
of image data (Wolf et al., 2007). Moreover, if the data matrix is stacked (reshaped) into a vector, the dimensionality
of the resulting vector typically becomes very high, which
in turn leads to the curse of dimensionality.
There has been some work on classification methods which
attempt to exploit the correlation between the columns or
rows of the data matrix. Usually, such a classification
method introduces a matrix of regression coefficients to
leverage the correlation within the data matrix. For example, Wolf et al. (2007) proposed a rank-k SVM, which
models the regression matrix as the sum of k rank-one orthogonal matrices. Pirsiavash et al. (2009) devised a bilinear SVM by factorizing the regression matrix into two lowrank matrices. Cai et al. (2006) proposed a similar bilinear
framework called support tensor machines for text categorization. These methods essentially take advantage of the
low-rank assumption, which can be used for describing the
correlation within a matrix. However, their treatments result in non-convex optimization problems.
In this paper we are also concerned with the classification
problems on a set of data matrices. Our work is motivated by the use of the nuclear norm (a.k.a., the trace norm) in low-rank matrix approximation (Srebro & Shraibman, 2005), matrix completion (Candès & Recht, 2009; Liu et al., 2013; Salakhutdinov & Srebro, 2010; Huang et al.,
2013), and multi-task learning problems (Pong et al., 2010;

