Metadata Dependent Mondrian Processes

Yi Wang‡†
YI . WANG @ NICTA . COM . AU
Bin Li†
BIN . LI @ NICTA . COM . AU
Yang Wang†
YANG . WANG @ NICTA . COM . AU
Fang Chen†‡
FANG . CHEN @ NICTA . COM . AU
†
Machine Learning Research Group, National ICT Australia, Eveleigh, NSW 2015, Australia
‡
School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2033, Australia

Abstract
Stochastic partition processes in a product space
play an important role in modeling relational data. Recent studies on the Mondrian process have
introduced more flexibility into the block structure in relational models. A side-effect of such
high flexibility is that, in data sparsity scenarios,
the model is prone to overfit. In reality, relational entities are always associated with meta information, such as user profiles in a social network.
In this paper, we propose a metadata dependent
Mondrian process (MDMP) to incorporate meta
information into the stochastic partition process
in the product space and the entity allocation process on the resulting block structure. MDMP
can not only encourage homogeneous relational interactions within blocks but also discourage
meta-label diversity within blocks. Regularized
by meta information, MDMP becomes more robust in data sparsity scenarios and easier to converge in posterior inference. We apply MDMP to
link prediction and rating prediction and demonstrate that MDMP is more effective than the baseline models in prediction accuracy with a more
parsimonious model structure.

sent the relational data as an adjacency matrix and cluster rows and columns simultaneously to uncover the block
structure. Such “co-clustering” operation can be understood as permuting row/column entities on each dimension
of the data matrix, with the objective to make the intensity
of relational interactions consistent within blocks.
Block models (White et al., 1976) have been widely used
in modeling, analyzing and predicting relational data. Stochastic block models were first proposed in (Holland
et al., 1983) to establish a stochastic generalization of block
models. By imposing a Chinese restaurant process on each
dimension of the adjacency matrix, the infinite relational
model (IRM) (Kemp et al., 2006) discards the restriction on
the number of blocks. While IRM and its variants (Airoldi
et al., 2009) have obtained the flexibility of the number of
blocks, their block structures are restricted to regular grids (Muthukrishnan et al., 1999). The Mondrian process (MP) (Roy & Teh, 2009) was proposed to relax this restriction
with a more flexible structure of blocks, which are generated recursively as a kd-tree.

Relational data exist widely and many real-world applications boil down to relational data modeling, such as community detection, link prediction, and collaborative filtering. Although in different applications relational data may
appear in different forms (e.g., binary links in a social network and discrete ratings in a recommender system), the
essence of relational data modeling is similar – To repre-

While the Mondrian process is a powerful prior for complex relational modeling, its flexibility may lead to some
side-effects compared to other regular block models: 1) It
is prone to overfit in data sparsity scenarios; and 2) it is
hard to converge based on a uniform prior assumption. In
this paper, we aim to incorporate meta information of entities into MP to relieve these problems. The rationale behind
is that the entities with similar meta information are more
likely to have similar behaviors than those entities with different meta information. For example, people graduating
from the same university are more likely to become friends
on an online social network. Based on this observation, we
propose a metadata dependent Mondrian process (MDMP), which seamlessly integrates the meta information into
an MP-like hierarchical partition process.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MDMP can be viewed as a generalization of MP by integrating meta information into both the stochastic partition
process in the product space and the entity allocation pro-

1. Introduction

