An Empirical Study of Stochastic Variational
Algorithms for the Beta Bernoulli Process

Amar Shah ?
David A. Knowles †
Zoubin Ghahramani ?
?
University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering, Cambridge, UK
†
Stanford University, Department of Computer Science, Stanford, CA, USA

Abstract
Stochastic variational inference (SVI) is emerging as the most promising candidate for scaling inference in Bayesian probabilistic models
to large datasets. However, the performance of
these methods has been assessed primarily in the
context of Bayesian topic models, particularly
latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA). Deriving several new algorithms, and using synthetic, image
and genomic datasets, we investigate whether the
understanding gleaned from LDA applies in the
setting of sparse latent factor models, specifically beta process factor analysis (BPFA). We
demonstrate that the big picture is consistent: using Gibbs sampling within SVI to maintain certain posterior dependencies is extremely effective. However, we find that different posterior
dependencies are important in BPFA relative to
LDA. Particularly, approximations able to model
intra-local variable dependence perform best.

1. Introduction
The last two decades have seen an explosion in the development of flexible statistical methods able to model diverse data sources. Bayesian nonparametric priors in particular provide a powerful framework to enable models to
adapt their complexity to the data at hand (Orbanz & Teh,
2010). In the regression setting this might mean learning the smoothness of the output function (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006), for clustering adapting the number of
components (MacEachern & Müller, 1998), and in the case
of our interest, latent factor models, finding an appropriate number of latent features (Knowles et al., 2011). While
such models are appealing for a range of applied data analProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

AS 793@ CAM . AC . UK
DAVIDKNOWLES @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
ZOUBIN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

ysis applications, their scalability is often limited. The
posterior distribution over parameters and latent variables
is typically analytically intractable and highly multimodal,
making MCMC, particularly Gibbs sampling, the norm.
Along with concerns over performance and convergence,
MCMC methods are often impractical for the applied practitioner: how should the multiple samples be summarized?
Variational methods work on the basis that simply finding
a good posterior mode, and giving some measure of the
associated uncertainty, is typically sufficient. In addition,
the predictive performance of variational methods is often
comparable to more computationally expensive sampling
based approaches (Ghahramani & Beal, 1999).
Recently stochastic variational inference has begun to
emerge as the most promising avenue for scaling inference
in large latent variable models (Hoffman et al., 2013). Marrying variational inference with stochastic gradient descent
allows principled updates using only minibatches of observations, greatly improving data scalability. While some
MCMC methods have been proposed to work with minibatches (Welling & Teh, 2011; Ahn et al., 2012) they lack
theoretical guarantees and apply only to continuous, unbounded latent variables. While SVI has been influential
for Bayesian topic modeling, particularly latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA, Mimno et al., 2012; Hoffman & Blei,
2014; Wang & Blei, 2012), the same cannot be said for
sparse factor analysis models for continuous data. While
the former has been driven by the ready availability of huge
text corpora, the scale of continuous data being generated
by new genomic technologies is still growing. For example,
CyTOF, single cell time of flight mass spectrometry is able
to measure the abundance of dozens of proteins in hundreds
of thousands of cells in a single run (Bendall et al., 2011).
Such complex, large scale, high dimensional datasets require sophisticated statistical models, but are typically analyzed using simple heuristic clustering methods or PCA,
which do not capture important structure, such as sparsity. As a result, scaling more advanced factor analysis type
models is of great interest.

