The Ladder: A Reliable Leaderboard for Machine Learning Competitions

Moritz Hardt

M @ MRTZ . ORG

Avrim Blum
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The organizer of a machine learning competition faces the problem of maintaining an accurate
leaderboard that faithfully represents the quality
of the best submission of each competing team.
What makes this estimation problem particularly
challenging is its sequential and adaptive nature.
As participants are allowed to repeatedly evaluate
their submissions on the leaderboard, they may
begin to overfit to the holdout data that supports
the leaderboard. Few theoretical results give actionable advice on how to design a reliable leaderboard. Existing approaches therefore often resort
to poorly understood heuristics such as limiting
the bit precision of answers and the rate of resubmission.
In this work, we introduce a notion of leaderboard accuracy tailored to the format of a competition. We introduce a natural algorithm called
the Ladder and demonstrate that it simultaneously
supports strong theoretical guarantees in a fully
adaptive model of estimation, withstands practical
adversarial attacks, and achieves high utility on
real submission files from an actual competition
hosted by Kaggle.
Notably, we are able to sidestep a powerful recent
hardness result for adaptive risk estimation that
rules out algorithms such as ours under a seemingly very similar notion of accuracy. On a practical note, we provide a completely parameter-free
variant of our algorithm that can be deployed in a
real competition with no tuning required whatsoever.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

AVRIM @ CS . CMU . EDU

1. Introduction
Machine learning competitions have become an extremely
popular format for solving prediction and classification problems of all kinds. A number of companies such as Netflix
have organized major competitions in the past and some
start-ups like Kaggle specialize in hosting machine learning
competitions. In a typical competition hundreds of participants will compete for prize money by repeatedly submitting
classifiers to the host in an attempt to improve on their previously best score. The score reflects the performance of
the classifier on some subset of the data, which are typically
partitioned into two sets: a training set and a test set. The
training set is publicly available with both the individual
instances and their corresponding class labels. The test set is
publicly available as well, but the class labels are withheld.
Predicting these missing class labels is the goal of the participant and a valid submission is simply a list of labels—one
for each point in the test set.
The central component of any competition is the leaderboard
which ranks all teams in the competition by the score of their
best submission. This leads to the fundamental problem
of maintaining a leaderboard that accurately reflects the
true strength of a classifier. What makes this problem so
challenging is that participants may begin to incorporate
the feedback from the leaderboard into the design of their
classifier thus creating a dependence between the classifier
and the data on which it is evaluated. In such cases, it is
well known that the holdout set no longer gives an unbiased
estimate of the classifier’s true performance. To counteract
this problem, existing solutions such as the one used by
Kaggle further partition the test set into two parts. One part
of the test set is used for computing scores on the public
leaderboard. The other is used to rank all submissions after
the competition ended. This final ranking is often referred
to as the private leaderboard. While this solution increases
the quality of the private leaderboard, it does not address the
problem of maintaining accuracy on the public leaderboard.
Indeed, numerous posts on the forums of Kaggle report
on the problem of “overfitting to the holdout” meaning that

