Feature-Budgeted Random Forest

Feng Nan
Joseph Wang
Venkatesh Saligrama
Boston University, 8 Saint Mary’s Street, Boston, MA

Abstract
We seek decision rules for prediction-time cost
reduction, where complete data is available for
training, but during prediction-time, each feature
can only be acquired for an additional cost. We
propose a novel random forest algorithm to minimize prediction error for a user-specified average feature acquisition budget. While random
forests yield strong generalization performance,
they do not explicitly account for feature costs
and furthermore require low correlation among
trees, which amplifies costs. Our random forest grows trees with low acquisition cost and
high strength based on greedy minimax costweighted-impurity splits. Theoretically, we establish near-optimal acquisition cost guarantees
for our algorithm. Empirically, on a number
of benchmark datasets we demonstrate competitive accuracy-cost curves against state-of-the-art
prediction-time algorithms.

1. Introduction
In many applications such as surveillance and retrieval, we
acquire measurements for an entity, and features for a query
in order to make a prediction. Features can be expensive
and complementary, namely, knowledge of previously acquired feature values often renders acquisition of another
feature redundant. In these cases, the goal is to maximize
prediction performance given a constraint on the average
feature acquisition cost. Our proposed approach is to learn
decision rules for prediction-time cost reduction (Kanani &
Melville, 2008) from training data in which the full set of
features and ground truth labels are available for training.
We propose a novel random forest learning algorithm to
minimize prediction error for a user-specified average feaProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

FNAN @ BU . EDU
JOEWANG @ BU . EDU
SRV @ BU . EDU

ture acquisition budget. Random forests (Breiman, 2001)
construct a collection of trees, wherein each tree is grown
by random independent data sampling & feature splitting, producing a collection of independent identically distributed trees. The resulting classifiers are robust, are easy
to train, and yield strong generalization performance.
Although well suited to unconstrained supervised learning problems, applying random forests in the case of
prediction-time budget constraints presents a major challenge. First, random forests do not account for feature acquisition costs. If two features have similar utility in terms
of power to classify examples but have vastly different
costs, random forest is just as likely to select the high cost
feature as the low cost alternative. This is obviously undesirable. Second, a key element of random forest performance is the diversity amongst trees (Breiman, 2001). Empirical evidence suggest a strong connection between diversity and performance, and generalization error is bounded
not only with respect to the strength of individual trees but
also the correlation between trees (Breiman, 2001). High
diversity amongst trees constructed without regard for acquisition cost results in trees using a wide range of features,
and therefore a high acquisition cost (See Section 3).
Thus, ensuring a low acquisition cost on the forest hinges
on growing each tree with high discriminative power and
low acquisition cost. To this end, we propose to learn decision trees that incorporates feature acquisition cost. Our
random forest grows trees based on greedy minimax costweighted-impurity splits. Although the problem of learning decision trees with optimally low-cost is computationally intractable, we show that our greedy approach outputs
trees whose cost is closely bounded with respect to the optimal cost. Using these low cost trees, we construct random forests with high classification performance and low
prediction-time feature acquisition cost.
Abstractly, our algorithm attempts to solve an empirical
risk minimization problem subject to a budget constraint.
At each step in the algorithm, we add low-cost trees to the
random forest to reduce the empirical risk until the budget
constraint is met. The resulting random forest adaptively

