Consistent estimation of dynamic and multi-layer block models

Qiuyi Han
Department of Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
Kevin S. Xu
Technicolor Research, Los Altos, CA, USA

KEVINXU @ OUTLOOK . COM

Edoardo M. Airoldi
Department of Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract
Significant progress has been made recently on
theoretical analysis of estimators for the stochastic block model (SBM). In this paper, we consider the multi-graph SBM, which serves as a
foundation for many application settings including dynamic and multi-layer networks. We explore the asymptotic properties of two estimators for the multi-graph SBM, namely spectral
clustering and the maximum-likelihood estimate
(MLE), as the number of layers of the multigraph increases. We derive sufficient conditions
for consistency of both estimators and propose
a variational approximation to the MLE that is
computationally feasible for large networks. We
verify the sufficient conditions via simulation
and demonstrate that they are practical. In addition, we apply the model to two real data sets: a
dynamic social network and a multi-layer social
network with several types of relations.

1. Introduction
Modeling relational data arising from networks including social, biological, and information networks has received much attention recently. Various probabilistic models for networks have been proposed, including stochastic block models and their mixed-membership variants
(Airoldi et al., 2008; Goldenberg et al., 2010). However,
in many settings, we not only have a single network, but a
collection of networks over a common set of nodes, which
is often referred to as a multi-graph. Multi-graphs arise in
several types of settings including dynamic networks with
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

QIUYIHAN @ FAS . HARVARD . EDU

AIROLDI @ FAS . HARVARD . EDU

time-evolving edges, such as time-stamped social networks
of interactions between people, and multi-layer networks,
where edges are measured in multiple ways such as phone
calls, text messages, e-mails, face-to-face contacts, etc.
A significant challenge with multi-graphs is to extract common information across the layers of the multi-graph in a
concise representation, yet be flexible enough to allow differences across layers. Motivated by the above examples,
we consider the multi-graph stochastic block model first
proposed by Holland et al. (1983), which divides nodes into
classes that define blocks in the multi-graph. The key assumption is that nodes share the same block structure over
the multiple layers, but the class connection probabilities
may vary across layers. We believe this model is a flexible
and principled way of analyzing multi-graphs and provides
a strong foundation for many applications. The special case
of a single layer, often referred to simply as the stochastic
block model (SBM), has been studied extensively in recent
years (Bickel and Chen, 2009; Rohe et al., 2011; Choi et al.,
2012; Celisse et al., 2012; Jin, 2012; Bickel et al., 2013;
Amini et al., 2013). However, the more general multi-graph
case has not been studied as much.
In this paper, we explore the asymptotic properties of several estimators for the multi-graph SBM by letting the number of network layers grow while keeping the number of
nodes fixed. We prove that a spectral clustering estimate of
the class memberships is consistent for a special case of the
model (Section 4.1). Next we derive sufficient conditions
under which the maximum-likelihood estimate (MLE) of
the class memberships is consistent in the general case
(Section 4.2). Finally we propose a variational approximation to the MLE that is computationally tractable and
is applicable to many multi-graph settings including dynamic and multi-layer networks (Section 4.2.1). We apply
the spectral and variational approximation methods to several simulated and real data sets, including both a dynamic
and a multi-relational social network (Section 5).

