Boosted Categorical Restricted Boltzmann Machine
for Computational Prediction of Splice Junctions

Taehoon Lee
TAEHOONLEE @ SNU . AC . KR
Sungroh Yoon
SRYOON @ SNU . AC . KR
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea

Gene

Abstract
Splicing refers to the elimination of non-coding
regions in transcribed pre-messenger ribonucleic
acid (RNA). Discovering splice sites is an important machine learning task that helps us not only
to identify the basic units of genetic heredity but
also to understand how different proteins are produced. Existing methods for splicing prediction
have produced promising results, but often show
limited robustness and accuracy. In this paper,
we propose a deep belief network-based methodology for computational splice junction prediction. Our proposal includes a novel method for
training restricted Boltzmann machines for classimbalanced prediction. The proposed method
addresses the limitations of conventional contrastive divergence and provides regularization
for datasets that have categorical features. We
tested our approach using public human genome
datasets and obtained significantly improved accuracy and reduced runtime compared to stateof-the-art alternatives. The proposed approach
was less sensitive to the length of input sequences and more robust for handling false splicing signals. Furthermore, we could discover noncanonical splicing patterns that were otherwise
difficult to recognize using conventional methods. Given the efficiency and robustness of our
methodology, we anticipate that it can be extended to the discovery of primary structural patterns of other subtle genomic elements.

1. Introduction
In living organisms, biological information flows from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) to ribonucleic acid (RNA) to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Intron Exon 1

DNA

Exon 3

Exon 2

Exon 4

5’

3’
GT

AG

GG

Donor site

AG

GT AG

Acceptor site

Transcription
1

Pre-mRNA

2
GU

AG

3
GG

AG

4
GU AG

Canonical splicing
Non-canonical splicing

Splicing
1

3

4

1

2

3

1

2

3

4

mRNA
Translation
Protein

Protein 1

Protein 2

Protein 3

Figure 1. Gene expression process. Dimers GU(GT) and AG represent canonical donor and acceptor splice sites, respectively.
Dimer GG shows an example of non-canonical (donor) sites.

protein. DNA is a sequence of four types of nucleotides:
adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and thymine (T). A
gene is a segment of DNA that constitutes the basic unit of
heredity. As shown in Fig. 1, genetic information is delivered from DNA to protein through a procedure called gene
expression (Lockhart & Winzeler, 2000). There are three
major steps in gene expression: transcription, splicing, and
translation.
Eukaryotic genes have an internal structure that includes
two types of subunits: exons (protein-coding regions) and
introns (non-coding regions). Introns intervene between
exons, and the boundary between an exon and an intron
is referred to as the splice junction (site). The majority
of splice sites contain consensus strings called canonical
splicing patterns. The most frequent patterns are dimer
GT (called donor) and dimer AG (called acceptor) at intron/exon boundaries (Burset et al., 2000).
During transcription, DNA is copied into precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA), and then the introns in the transcribed pre-mRNA are removed by splicing (Keren et al.,
2010). For a single gene, various combinations of al-

