Generalization error bounds for learning to rank:
Does the length of document lists matter?
Ambuj Tewari
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

TEWARIA @ UMICH . EDU

Sougata Chaudhuri
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

SOUGATA @ UMICH . EDU

Abstract
We consider the generalization ability of algorithms for learning to rank at a query level, a
problem also called subset ranking. Existing
generalization error bounds necessarily degrade
as the size of the document list associated with a
query increases. We show that such a degradation is not intrinsic to the problem. For several
loss functions, including the cross-entropy loss
used in the well known ListNet method, there is
no degradation in generalization ability as document lists become longer. We also provide novel
generalization error bounds under `1 regularization and faster convergence rates if the loss function is smooth.

1. Introduction
Learning to rank at the query level has emerged as an exciting research area at the intersection of information retrieval
and machine learning. Training data in learning to rank
consists of queries along with associated documents, where
documents are represented as feature vectors. For each
query, the documents are labeled with human relevance
judgements. The goal at training time is to learn a ranking
function that can, for a future query, rank its associated documents in order of their relevance to the query. The performance of ranking functions on test sets is evaluated using a
variety of performance measures such as NDCG (Järvelin
& Kekäläinen, 2002), ERR (Chapelle et al., 2009) or Average Precision (Yue et al., 2007).
The performance measures used for testing ranking methods cannot be directly optimized during training time as
they lead to discontinuous optimization problems. As a result, researchers often minimize surrogate loss functions
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

that are easier to optimize. For example, one might consider smoothed versions of, or convex upper bounds on,
the target performance measure. However, as soon as one
optimizes a surrogate loss, one has to deal with two questions (Chapelle et al., 2011). First, does minimizing the
surrogate on finite training data imply small expected surrogate loss on infinite unseen data? Second, does small
expected surrogate loss on infinite unseen data imply small
target loss on infinite unseen data? The first issue is one of
generalization error bounds for empirical risk minimization (ERM) algorithms that minimize surrogate loss on
training data. The second issue is one of calibration: does
consistency in the surrogate loss imply consistency in the
target loss?
This paper deals with the former issue, viz. that of generalization error bounds for surrogate loss minimization. In
pioneering works, Lan et al. (2008; 2009) gave generalization error bounds for learning to rank algorithms. However,
while the former paper was restricted to analysis of pairwise approach to learning to rank, the later paper was limited to results on just three surrogates: ListMLE, ListNet
and RankCosine. To the best of our knowledge, the most
generally applicable bound on the generalization error of
query-level learning to rank algorithms has been obtained
by Chapelle & Wu (2010).
The bound of Chapelle & Wu (2010), while generally applicable, does have an explicit dependence on the length of
the document list associated with a query. Our investigations begin with this simple question: is an explicit dependence on the length of document lists unavoidable in generalization error bounds for query-level learning to rank algorithms? We focus on the prevalent technique in literature
where learning to rank algorithms learn linear scoring functions and obtain ranking by sorting scores in descending
order. Our first contribution (Theorem 3) is to show that dimension of linear scoring functions that are permutation invariant (a necessary condition for being valid scoring functions for learning to rank) has no dependence on the length
of document lists. Our second contribution (Theorems 5,

