Is Feature Selection Secure against Training Data Poisoning?

Huang Xiao
XIAOHU @ IN . TUM . DE
Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstr.3, 85748 Garching, Germany
Battista Biggio
BATTISTA . BIGGIO @ DIEE . UNICA . IT
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Cagliari, Piazza d’Armi, 09123 Cagliari, Italy
Gavin Brown
GAVIN . BROWN @ MANCHESTER . AC . UK
School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, UK
Giorgio Fumera
FUMERA @ DIEE . UNICA . IT
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Cagliari, Piazza d’Armi, 09123 Cagliari, Italy
Claudia Eckert
CLAUDIA . ECKERT @ IN . TUM . DE
Department of Computer Science, Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstr.3, 85748 Garching, Germany
Fabio Roli
ROLI @ DIEE . UNICA . IT
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Cagliari, Piazza d’Armi, 09123 Cagliari, Italy

Abstract
Learning in adversarial settings is becoming an
important task for application domains where attackers may inject malicious data into the training set to subvert normal operation of data-driven
technologies. Feature selection has been widely
used in machine learning for security applications to improve generalization and computational efficiency, although it is not clear whether
its use may be beneficial or even counterproductive when training data are poisoned by intelligent attackers. In this work, we shed light on
this issue by providing a framework to investigate the robustness of popular feature selection
methods, including LASSO, ridge regression and
the elastic net. Our results on malware detection show that feature selection methods can be
significantly compromised under attack (we can
reduce LASSO to almost random choices of feature sets by careful insertion of less than 5% poisoned training samples), highlighting the need
for specific countermeasures.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
With the advent of the modern Internet, the number of interconnected users and devices, along with the available number of services, has tremendously increased. This has not
only simplified our lives, through accessibility and ease-ofuse of novel services (e.g., think to the use of maps and
geolocation on smartphones), but it has also provided great
opportunities for attackers to perform novel and profitable
malicious activities. To cope with this phenomenon, machine learning has been adopted in security-sensitive settings like spam and malware detection, web-page ranking
and network protocol verification (Sahami et al., 1998; McCallum & Nigam, 1998; Rubinstein et al., 2009; Barreno
et al., 2010; Smutz & Stavrou, 2012; Brückner et al., 2012;
Biggio et al., 2012; 2013b; 2014). In these applications, the
challenge is that of inferring actionable knowledge from
a large, usually high-dimensional data collection, to correctly prevent malware (i.e., malicious software) infections
or other threats. For instance, detection of malware in PDF
files relies on the analysis of the PDF logical structure,
which consists of a large set of different kinds of objects
and metadata, yielding a high-dimensional data representation (Smutz & Stavrou, 2012; Maiorca et al., 2012; 2013;
Šrndić & Laskov, 2013). Similarly, text classifiers for spam
filtering rely on the construction of a large dictionary to
identify words that are mostly discriminant of spam and legitimate emails (Sahami et al., 1998; McCallum & Nigam,
1998; Graham, 2002; Robinson, 2003).

