Counterfactual Risk Minimization: Learning from Logged Bandit Feedback

Adith Swaminathan
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

ADITH @ CS . CORNELL . EDU

Thorsten Joachims
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

TJ @ CS . CORNELL . EDU

Abstract
We develop a learning principle and an efficient
algorithm for batch learning from logged bandit
feedback. This learning setting is ubiquitous in
online systems (e.g., ad placement, web search,
recommendation), where an algorithm makes a
prediction (e.g., ad ranking) for a given input
(e.g., query) and observes bandit feedback (e.g.,
user clicks on presented ads). We first address
the counterfactual nature of the learning problem
through propensity scoring. Next, we prove generalization error bounds that account for the variance of the propensity-weighted empirical risk
estimator. These constructive bounds give rise
to the Counterfactual Risk Minimization (CRM)
principle. We show how CRM can be used
to derive a new learning method – called Policy Optimizer for Exponential Models (POEM)
– for learning stochastic linear rules for structured output prediction. We present a decomposition of the POEM objective that enables efficient
stochastic gradient optimization. POEM is evaluated on several multi-label classification problems showing substantially improved robustness
and generalization performance compared to the
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Log data is one of the most ubiquitous forms of data available, as it can be recorded from a variety of systems (e.g.,
search engines, recommender systems, ad placement) at little cost. The interaction logs of such systems typically contain a record of the input to the system (e.g., features describing the user), the prediction made by the system (e.g.,
a recommended list of news articles) and the feedback (e.g.,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

number of ranked articles the user read) (Li et al., 2010).
The feedback, however, provides only partial information
– “bandit feedback”– limited to the particular prediction
shown by the system. The feedback for all the other predictions the system could have made is typically not known.
This makes learning from log data fundamentally different
from supervised learning, where “correct” predictions (e.g.,
the best ranking of news articles for that user) together with
a loss function provide full-information feedback.
We study the problem of batch learning from logged bandit feedback. Unlike online learning with bandit feedback,
batch learning does not require interactive experimental
control over the system. Furthermore, it enables the reuse
of existing data and offline cross-validation techniques for
model selection (e.g., “should we perform feature selection?”, “which learning algorithm to use?”, etc.).
To solve this batch-learning problem, we first need a counterfactual estimator (Bottou et al., 2013) of a system’s performance, so that we can estimate how other systems would
have performed if they had been in control of choosing predictions. Such estimators have been developed recently for
the off-policy evaluation problem (Langford et al., 2011),
(Li et al., 2011), (Li et al., 2014), where data collected from
the interaction logs of one bandit algorithm is used to evaluate another system.
Our approach to counterfactual learning centers around the
insight that, to perform robust learning, it is not sufficient to
have just an unbiased estimator of the off-policy system’s
performance. We must also reason about how the variances of these estimators differ across the hypothesis space,
and pick the hypothesis that has the best possible guarantee
(tightest conservative bound) for its performance. We first
prove generalization error bounds analogous to structural
risk minimization (Vapnik, 1998) for a stochastic hypothesis family using an empirical Bernstein argument (Maurer
& Pontil, 2009). The constructive nature of these bounds
suggests a general principle – Counterfactual Risk Minimization (CRM) – for designing methods for batch learning from bandit feedback.

