An Explicit Sampling Dependent Spectral Error Bound
for Column Subset Selection
Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science, the University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA

TIANBAO - YANG @ UIOWA . EDU

Lijun Zhang
ZHANGLJ @ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Rong Jin
RONGJIN @ CSE . MSU . EDU
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA
Institute of Data Science and Technologies at Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA
Shenghuo Zhu
Institute of Data Science and Technologies at Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of column
subset selection. We present a novel analysis of
the spectral norm reconstruction for a simple randomized algorithm and establish a new bound
that depends explicitly on the sampling probabilities. The sampling dependent error bound (i) allows us to better understand the tradeoff in the
reconstruction error due to sampling probabilities, (ii) exhibits more insights than existing error bounds that exploit specific probability distributions, and (iii) implies better sampling distributions. In particular, we show that a sampling distribution with probabilities proportional
to the square root of the statistical leverage scores
is better than uniform sampling, and is better
than leverage-based sampling when the statistical leverage scores are very nonuniform. And by
solving a constrained optimization problem related to the error bound with an efficient bisection search we are able to achieve better performance than using either the leverage-based distribution or that proportional to the square root
of the statistical leverage scores. Numerical simulations demonstrate the benefits of the new sampling distributions for low-rank matrix approximation and least square approximation compared
to state-of-the art algorithms.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SHENGHUO @ GMAIL . COM

1. Introduction
Give a data matrix A ∈ Rm×n , column subset selection
(CSS) is an important technique for constructing a compressed representation and a low rank approximation of A
by selecting a small number of columns. Compared with
conventional singular value decomposition (SVD), CSS
could yield more interpretable output while maintaining
performance close to SVD (Mahoney, 2011). Recently,
CSS has been applied successfully to problems of interest
to geneticists such as genotype reconstruction, identifying
substructure in heterogeneous populations, etc. (Mahoney,
2011).
Let C ∈ Rm×` be the matrix formed by ` selected columns
of A. The key question to CSS is how to select the columns
to minimize the reconstruction error:
kA − PC Akξ ,
where PC = CC † denotes the projection onto the column
space of C with C † being the pseudo-inverse of C and
ξ = 2 or F corresponds to the spectral norm or the Frobenius norm (Meyer, 2000). In this paper, we are particularly
interested in the spectral norm reconstruction with respect
to a target rank k.
Our analysis is developed for a randomized algorithm that
selects ` > k columns from A according to sampling probabilities s = (s1 , . . . , sn ). Building on advanced matrix
concentration inequalities (e.g., matrix Chernoff bound and
Bernstein inequality), we develop a novel analysis of the
spectral norm reconstruction and establish a sampling dependent relative spectral error bound with a high probabil-

