Bayesian and Empirical Bayesian Forests
Matt Taddy
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
Chun-Sheng Chen
eBay

TADDY @ CHICAGOBOOTH . EDU

CHUNSCHEN @ EBAY. COM

Jun Yu
eBay

JUNYU @ EBAY. COM

Mitch Wyle
eBay

MWYLE @ EBAY. COM

Abstract
We derive ensembles of decision trees through
a nonparametric Bayesian model, allowing us to
view random forests as samples from a posterior
distribution. This insight provides large gains in
interpretability, and motivates a class of Bayesian
forest (BF) algorithms that yield small but reliable performance gains. Based on the BF framework, we are able to show that high-level tree hierarchy is stable in large samples. This leads to
an empirical Bayesian forest (EBF) algorithm for
building approximate BFs on massive distributed
datasets and we show that EBFs outperform subsampling based alternatives by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Decision trees are a fundamental machine learning tool.
They partition the feature (input) space into regions of response homogeneity, such that the response (output) value
associated with any point in a given partition can be predicted from the average for that of its neighbors. The classification and regression tree (CART) algorithm of (Breiman
et al., 1984) is a common recipe for building trees; it grows
greedily through a series of partitions on features, each of
which maximizes reduction in some measure of impurity at
the current tree leaves (terminal nodes; i.e., the implied input space partitioning). The development of random forests
(RF) by (Breiman, 2001), which predict through the average of many CART trees fit to bootstrap data resamples,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

is an archetype for the successful strategy of tree ensemble
learning. For prediction problems with training sets that are
large relative to the number of inputs, properly trained ensembles of trees can predict out-of-the-box as well as any
carefully tuned, application-specific alternative.
This article makes three contributions to understanding and
application of decision tree ensembles (or, forests).
Bayesian forest: A nonparametric Bayesian (npB) pointof-view allows interpretation of forests as a sample from a
posterior over trees. Imagine CART applied to a data generating process (DGP) with finite support: the tree greedily splits support to minimize impurity of the partitioned
response distributions (terminating at some minimumleaf-probability threshold). We present a nonparametric
Bayesian model for DGPs based on multinomial draws
from (large) finite support, and derive the Bayesian forest
(BF) algorithm for sampling from the distribution of CART
trees implied by the posterior over DGPs. Random forests
are an approximation to this BF exact posterior sampler,
and we show in examples that BFs provide a small but reliable gain in predictive performance over RFs.
Posterior tree variability: Based upon this npB framework,
we derive results on the stability of CART over different
DGP realizations. We find that, conditional on the data allocated to a given node on the sample CART tree, the probability that the next split for a posterior DGP realization
matches the observed full-sample CART split is
p (split matches sample CART) & 1

p
p e n,
n

(1)

where p is the number of possible split locations and n the
number of observations on the node. Even if p grows with
n, the result indicates that partitioning can be stable conditional on the data being split. This conditioning is key:

