Binary Embedding: Fundamental Limits and Fast Algorithm

Xinyang Yi
YIXY @ UTEXAS . EDU
Constantine Caramanis
CONSTANTINE @ UTEXAS . EDU
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712
Eric Price
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712

Abstract
Binary embedding is a nonlinear dimension reduction methodology where high dimensional
data are embedded into the Hamming cube while
preserving the structure of the original space.
Specifically, for an arbitrary N distinct points
in Sp−1 , our goal is to encode each point using m-dimensional binary strings such that we
can reconstruct their geodesic distance up to
δ uniform distortion. Existing binary embedding algorithms either lack theoretical guaran
tees or suffer from running time O mp . We
make three contributions: (1) we establish a
lower bound that shows any binary embedding
oblivious to the set of points requires m =
Ω( δ12 log N ) bits and a similar lower bound for
non-oblivious embeddings into Hamming distance; (2) we propose a novel fast binary embedding algorithm with provably
optimal bit com
plexity m = O δ12 log N and near linear run√
ning time O(p log p) whenever log N  δ p,
with a slightly worse running time for larger
log N ; (3) we also provide an analytic result
about embedding a general set of points K ⊆
Sp−1 with even infinite size. Our theoretical findings are supported through experiments on both
synthetic and real data sets.

1. Introduction
Low distortion embeddings that transform highdimensional points to low-dimensional space have played
an important role in dealing with storage, information retrieval and machine learning problems for modern datasets.
Perhaps one of the most famous results along these lines
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ECPRICE @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

is the Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma Johnson &
Lindenstrauss (1984), which shows
that N points can be

embedded into a O δ −2 log N -dimensional space while
preserving pairwise Euclidean distance up to δ-Lipschitz
distortion. This δ −2 dependence has been shown to be
information-theoretically optimal Alon (2003). Significant
work has focused on fast algorithms for computing the
embeddings, e.g., (Ailon & Chazelle, 2006; Krahmer &
Ward, 2011; Ailon & Liberty, 2013; Cheraghchi et al.,
2013; Nelson et al., 2014).
More recently, there has been a growing interest in designing binary codes for high dimensional points with low distortion, i.e., embeddings into the binary cube (Weiss et al.,
2009; Raginsky & Lazebnik, 2009; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009; Gong & Lazebnik, 2011; Yu et al., 2014). Compared to JL embedding, embedding into the binary cube
(also called binary embedding) has two advantages in practice: (i) As each data point is represented by a binary code,
the disk size for storing the entire dataset is reduced considerably. (ii) Distance in binary cube is some function of the
Hamming distance, which can be computed quickly using
computationally efficient bit-wise operators. As a consequence, binary embedding can be applied to a large number
of domains such as biology, finance and computer vision
where the data are usually high dimensional.
While most JL embeddings are linear maps, any binary embedding is fundamentally a nonlinear transformation. As
we detail below, this nonlinearity poses significant new
technical challenges for both upper and lower bounds. In
particular, our understanding of the landscape is significantly less complete. To the best of our knowledge, lower
bounds are not known; embedding algorithms for infinite
sets have distortion-dependence δ significantly exceeding
their finite-set counterparts; and perhaps most significantly,
there are no fast (near linear-time) embedding algorithms
with strong performance guarantees. As we explain below,
this paper contributes to each of these three areas. First, we
detail some recent work and state of the art results.

