B LITZ: A Principled Meta-Algorithm for Scaling Sparse Optimization

Tyler B. Johnson
Carlos Guestrin
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

Abstract
By reducing optimization to a sequence of small
subproblems, working set methods achieve fast
convergence times for many challenging problems. Despite excellent performance, theoretical understanding of working sets is limited,
and implementations often resort to heuristics to
determine subproblem size, makeup, and stopping criteria. We propose B LITZ, a fast working set algorithm accompanied by useful guarantees. Making no assumptions on data, our theory
relates subproblem size to progress toward convergence. This result motivates methods for optimizing algorithmic parameters and discarding
irrelevant variables as iterations progress. Applied to `1 -regularized learning, B LITZ convincingly outperforms existing solvers in sequential,
limited-memory, and distributed settings. B LITZ
is not specific to `1 -regularized learning, making
the algorithm relevant to many applications involving sparsity or constraints.

1. Introduction
With user-specific features for recommendation, n-gram
phrases in text, or high-order transformations for feature
engineering, many learning problems involve large numbers of features. In these cases, `1 regularization is a popular tool, as it biases learning toward sparse solutions. Sparsity offers many advantages, including reduced resources
needed at test time, more interpretable models, and statistical efficiency, as the feature space may increase exponentially with sample size (Ng, 2004; Wainwright, 2009).
Unfortunately, convergence times for `1 -regularized loss
minimization tend to grow linearly with the number of features. For faster solutions, recent works have considered
parallel algorithms (Boyd et al., 2011; Bradley et al., 2011;
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

TBJOHNS @ WASHINGTON . EDU
GUESTRIN @ CS . WASHINGTON . EDU

Fercoq & Richtárik, 2013). Despite parallel speedups,
these algorithms in their basic form share a significant inefficiency: equal priority is assigned to all features. Due to
sparsity, most features are instead irrelevant to the solution!
We propose B LITZ, a general optimization algorithm that
prioritizes resources on important parts of the problem. For
`1 -regularized learning, B LITZ solves a sequence of subproblems restricted to small subsets of features using an existing solver, converging quickly to the original problem’s
solution. Known as a working set method, this concept is
not new. GLMNET (Friedman et al., 2010) and LIBLINEAR (Yuan et al., 2012), two libraries for `1 -regularized
learning, prioritize computation with working set heuristics. More broadly, working sets have been applied successfully to a diverse set of optimization problems involving sparsity or constraints; see Fan et al. (2005), Tsochantaridis et al. (2005), and Kim & Park (2008) as examples.
Given the practical success of working set methods, theoretical understanding of these algorithms is surprisingly
limited. How to choose a subproblem, how large it should
be, and when it should terminate are questions inadequately
answered by existing theory. We present novel analysis to
offer such perspective. Without assumptions on data, our
theory explains how to choose working sets to guarantee a
desired amount of progress toward convergence. This motivates methods for eliminating irrelevant variables and optimizing algorithmic parameters, making B LITZ’s choices
of subproblem size, variables, and stopping criteria more
principled and robust than previous approaches allow.
In practice, our theoretical insights lead to very fast convergence times for `1 -regularized learning. In the sequential
setting, B LITZ outperforms solvers such as GLMNET and
LIBLINEAR, making B LITZ one of the fastest algorithms
for high dimensional lasso and sparse logistic regression on
a single machine. We then show additional gains for B LITZ
in limited-memory and distributed regimes. By considering
data in subsets, B LITZ prioritizes not only computation but
also memory and bandwidth usage, directly targeting I/O
and communication bottlenecks for problems at scale.
Importantly, B LITZ directly extends to objectives other

