Ranking from Stochastic Pairwise Preferences:
Recovering Condorcet Winners and Tournament Solution Sets at the Top
Arun Rajkumar
Suprovat Ghoshal
Indian Institute of Science
Lek-Heng Lim
University of Chicago

ARUN R @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN
SUPROVAT. GHOSHAL @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

LEKHENG @ GALTON . UCHICAGO . EDU

Shivani Agarwal
Indian Institute of Science

Abstract
We consider the problem of ranking n items from
stochastically sampled pairwise preferences. It
was shown recently that when the underlying
pairwise preferences are acyclic, several algorithms including the Rank Centrality algorithm,
the Matrix Borda algorithm, and the SVMRankAggregation algorithm succeed in recovering a ranking that minimizes a global pairwise disagreement error (Rajkumar and Agarwal,
2014). In this paper, we consider settings where
pairwise preferences can contain cycles. In such
settings, one may still like to be able to recover
‘good’ items at the top of the ranking. For example, if a Condorcet winner exists that beats every other item, it is natural to ask that this be
ranked at the top. More generally, several tournament solution concepts such as the top cycle,
Copeland set, Markov set and others have been
proposed in the social choice literature for choosing a set of winners in the presence of cycles.
We show that existing algorithms can fail to perform well in terms of ranking Condorcet winners
and various natural tournament solution sets at
the top. We then give alternative ranking algorithms that provably rank Condorcet winners, top
cycles, and other tournament solution sets of interest at the top. In all cases, we give finite sample complexity bounds for our algorithms to recover such winners. As a by-product of our analysis, we also obtain an improved sample complexity bound for the Rank Centrality algorithm
to recover an optimal ranking under a BradleyTerry-Luce (BTL) condition, which answers an
open question of Rajkumar and Agarwal (2014).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SHIVANI @ CSA . IISC . ERNET. IN

1. Introduction
There has been much interest in recent years in designing algorithms for aggregating pairwise preferences to rank
a set of items (Fürnkranz & Hüllermeier, 2010; Ailon,
2011; Lu & Boutilier, 2011; Jiang et al., 2011; Jamieson &
Nowak, 2011; Negahban et al., 2012; Osting et al., 2013;
Wauthier et al., 2013; Busa-Fekete et al., 2014a;b; Rajkumar & Agarwal, 2014). Indeed, the need for aggregating
pairwise preferences arises in many domains where fully
ordered preferences may be hard to obtain, e.g. in customer
surveys, recommender systems, sports team rankings etc.
In many such settings, particularly those related to applications such as customer surveys and recommender systems,
it is common to assume that the pairwise comparisons follow some (unknown) underlying statistical model. An important question that arises then is, as we observe more and
more data from the underlying statistical model, do the algorithms used converge to a ‘good’ ranking solution?
Recently, Rajkumar & Agarwal (2014) showed that when
the underlying pairwise preferences are acyclic, several algorithms including the Rank Centrality (RC), Matrix Borda
(MB) and SVM-RankAggregation (SVM-RA) algorithms
can converge to an optimal ranking solution in terms of
minimizing a pairwise disagreement error. However, in
practice, pairwise preferences often contain cycles. In such
settings, minimizing the pairwise disagreement error is typically NP-hard, but one may still want to converge to a
ranking that places ‘good’ items at the top.
In this paper, we take ‘good’ items to refer to Condorcet
winners (which beat all other items) when they exist, and
more generally, to tournament solution sets such as top cycles and Copeland and Markov sets, which have been used
to define ‘winners’ in the computational social choice literature (Moulin, 1986; De Donder et al., 2000; Laslier, 1997;
Brandt et al., 2015). We show that when preferences contain cycles, the RC, MB and SVM-RA algorithms can fail
to rank such ‘good’ items at the top; we then propose three

