Fast Kronecker Inference in Gaussian Processes with non-Gaussian Likelihoods
Seth Flaxman1
Andrew Gordon Wilson1
Daniel B. Neill1
Hannes Nickisch2
Alexander J. Smola1,3
1

SFLAXMAN @ CS . CMU . EDU
ANDREWGW @ CS . CMU . EDU
NEILL @ CS . CMU . EDU
HANNES @ NICKISCH . ORG
ALEX @ SMOLA . ORG

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Philips Research Hamburg, 3 Marianas Labs

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are a flexible class of
methods with state of the art performance on
spatial statistics applications. However, GPs require O(n3 ) computations and O(n2 ) storage,
and popular GP kernels are typically limited to
smoothing and interpolation. To address these
difficulties, Kronecker methods have been used
to exploit structure in the GP covariance matrix for scalability, while allowing for expressive kernel learning (Wilson et al., 2014). However, fast Kronecker methods have been confined
to Gaussian likelihoods. We propose new scalable Kronecker methods for Gaussian processes
with non-Gaussian likelihoods, using a Laplace
approximation which involves linear conjugate
gradients for inference, and a lower bound on
the GP marginal likelihood for kernel learning.
Our approach has near linear scaling, requirD+1
2
ing O(Dn D ) operations and O(Dn D ) storage, for n training data-points on a dense D >
1 dimensional grid. Moreover, we introduce a
log Gaussian Cox process, with highly expressive kernels, for modelling spatiotemporal count
processes, and apply it to a point pattern (n =
233,088) of a decade of crime events in Chicago.
Using our model, we discover spatially varying
multiscale seasonal trends and produce highly
accurate long-range local area forecasts.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes were pioneered in geostatistics (Matheron, 1963) where they are commonly known as kriging
models (Ripley, 1981). O’Hagan (1978) instigated their
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

general use, pursuing applications to optimal design, curve
fitting, and time series. GPs remain a mainstay of spatial and spatiotemporal statistics (Diggle & Ribeiro, 2007;
Cressie & Wikle, 2011) and have gained widespread popularity in machine learning (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006).
Unfortunately, the O(n3 ) computations and O(n2 ) storage
requirements for GPs has greatly limited their applicability.
Kronecker methods have recently been introduced (Saatçi,
2011) to scale up Gaussian processes, with no losses in
predictive accuracy. While these methods require that the
input space (predictors) are on a multidimensional lattice,
this structure is present in many spatiotemporal statistics
applications, where predictors are often indexed by a grid
of spatial coordinates and time.
A variety of approximate approaches have been proposed
for scalable GP inference, including inducing point methods (Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005), and finite
basis representations through random projections (LázaroGredilla et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2015). Groot et al. (2014)
use Kronecker based inference and low-rank approximations for GP classification, scaling to moderately sized
datasets (n < 7000).
Our contributions include:
• We extend Kronecker methods for non-Gaussian likelihoods, enabling applications outside of standard regression settings. We use a Laplace approximation on the likelihood, proposing linear conjugate
gradients for inference, and a lower bound on the
GP marginal likelihood, for kernel learning. Moreover, our methodology extends to incomplete grids
– caused by, for example, water or political boundaries. The Laplace approximation naturally harmonizes with Kronecker methods, providing a scalable
general purpose approach for GPs with non-Gaussian
likelihoods. Alternatives such as EP or VB would require another layer of approximation as the required
marginal variance approximations are not tractable for
large n: EP has sequential local updates, one per dat-

