An Empirical Exploration of Recurrent Network Architectures

Rafal Jozefowicz
Google Inc.

RAFALJ @ GOOGLE . COM

Wojciech Zaremba
New York University, Facebook1
Ilya Sutskever
Google Inc.

ILYASU @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is an extremely powerful sequence model that is often
difficult to train. The Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) is a specific RNN architecture whose
design makes it much easier to train. While
wildly successful in practice, the LSTM’s architecture appears to be ad-hoc so it is not clear if it
is optimal, and the significance of its individual
components is unclear.
In this work, we aim to determine whether the
LSTM architecture is optimal or whether much
better architectures exist. We conducted a thorough architecture search where we evaluated
over ten thousand different RNN architectures,
and identified an architecture that outperforms
both the LSTM and the recently-introduced
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) on some but not all
tasks. We found that adding a bias of 1 to the
LSTM’s forget gate closes the gap between the
LSTM and the GRU.

1. Introduction
The Deep Neural Network (DNN) is an extremely expressive model that can learn highly complex vector-to-vector
mappings. The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is a
DNN that is adapted to sequence data, and as a result the
RNN is also extremely expressive. RNNs maintain a vector
of activations for each timestep, which makes the RNN extremely deep. Their depth, in turn, makes them difficult to
1

WOJ . ZAREMBA @ GMAIL . COM

Work done while the author was at Google.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

train due to the exploding and the vanishing gradient problems (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al., 1994).
There have been a number of attempts to address the difficulty of training RNNs. Vanishing gradients were successfully addressed by Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997), who
developed the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture, which is resistant to the vanishing gradient problem. The LSTM turned out to be easy to use, causing it
to become the standard way of dealing with the vanishing
gradient problem. Other attempts to overcome the vanishing gradient problem include the use of powerful secondorder optimization algorithms (Martens, 2010; Martens &
Sutskever, 2011), regularization of the RNN’s weights that
ensures that the gradient does not vanish (Pascanu et al.,
2012), giving up on learning the recurrent weights altogether (Jaeger & Haas, 2004; Jaeger, 2001), and a very
careful initialization of RNN’s parameters (Sutskever et al.,
2013). Unlike the vanishing gradient problem, the exploding gradient problem turned out to be relatively easy to address by simply enforcing a hard constraint over the norm
of the gradient (Mikolov, 2012; Pascanu et al., 2012).
A criticism of the LSTM architecture is that it is ad-hoc
and that it has a substantial number of components whose
purpose is not immediately apparent. As a result, it is also
not clear that the LSTM is an optimal architecture, and it is
possible that better architectures exist.
Motivated by this criticism, we attempted to determine
whether the LSTM architecture is optimal by means of
an extensive evolutionary architecture search. We found
specific architectures similar to the Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) (Cho et al., 2014) that outperformed the LSTM
and the GRU by on most tasks, although an LSTM variant achieved the best results whenever dropout was used.
In addition, by adding a bias of 1 to the LSTM’s forget gate
(a practice that has been advocated by Gers et al. (2000)
but that has not been mentioned in recent LSTM papers),

