Paired-Dual Learning for Fast Training of Latent Variable Hinge-Loss MRFs

Stephen H. Bach∗
Bert Huang∗
Jordan Boyd-Graber
Lise Getoor
∗
Equal contributors.

University of Maryland, College Park, MD
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA

Abstract
Latent variables allow probabilistic graphical
models to capture nuance and structure in important domains such as network science, natural
language processing, and computer vision. Naive
approaches to learning such complex models can
be prohibitively expensive—because they require
repeated inferences to update beliefs about latent variables—so lifting this restriction for useful classes of models is an important problem.
Hinge-loss Markov random fields (HL-MRFs)
are graphical models that allow highly scalable
inference and learning in structured domains, in
part by representing structured problems with
continuous variables. However, this representation leads to challenges when learning with latent variables. We introduce paired-dual learning, a framework that greatly speeds up training
by using tractable entropy surrogates and avoiding repeated inferences. Paired-dual learning optimizes an objective with a pair of dual inference
problems. This allows fast, joint optimization of
parameters and dual variables. We evaluate on
social-group detection, trust prediction in social
networks, and image reconstruction, finding that
paired-dual learning trains models as accurate as
those trained by traditional methods in much less
time, often before traditional methods make even
a single parameter update.

1. Introduction
Latent variables can capture structure in complicated domains and have been used extensively in social and biological network analysis, Web analytics, computer vision,
and many other domains that study large-scale, structured
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

data. However, including latent variables sacrifices scalability for expressiveness because the values of latent variables are—by definition—unknown. Algorithms for learning with latent variables often require repeated inference
to iteratively update parameters, and each inference alone
can be expensive for a large model. For example, inference methods like Gibbs sampling and belief propagation
require many iterations to converge, and learning methods
like EM alternate between fully inferring latent variable
values and updating parameters.
Latent variables are particularly valuable in rich, structured
models, but the computational costs become even more
challenging. Our contribution is a new learning framework for rich, structured, continuous latent-variable models that addresses this computational bottleneck. Our focus
is on hinge-loss Markov random fields (HL-MRFs) (Bach
et al., 2013b), a class of probabilistic graphical models that
makes large-scale maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference
highly efficient by representing structured domains with
continuous variables. These models have been successfully
applied to user attribute (Li et al., 2014) and trust (Huang
et al., 2013; West et al., 2014) prediction in social networks, natural language semantics (Beltagy et al., 2014),
and drug discovery (Fakhraei et al., 2014). Researchers
have also begun to train HL-MRFs with latent variables for
tasks such as group detection in social media (Bach et al.,
2013a), online-education analytics (Ramesh et al., 2014),
and automobile-traffic modeling (Chen et al., 2014). Like
other approaches to learning with latent variables, these applications repeatedly solve inference problems to convergence for each update of the parameters. Removing this
bottleneck is critical for retaining the existing scalability
benefits of HL-MRFs when training with latent variables.
Overcoming the need for repeated inference requires
contending with challenges that arise from a continuous representation, including the need for efficient alternatives to representing distributions over uncountable
state spaces and evaluating irreducible integrals. For
fully-supervised learning, large-margin methods can use

