A Relative Exponential Weighing Algorithm for Adversarial Utility-based
Dueling Bandits

Pratik Gajane
Tanguy Urvoy
Fabrice Clérot
Orange-labs, Lannion, France

Abstract
We study the K-armed dueling bandit problem
which is a variation of the classical Multi-Armed
Bandit (MAB) problem in which the learner receives only relative feedback about the selected
pairs of arms. We propose an efficient algorithm
called Relative Exponential-weight algorithm for
Exploration and Exploitation (REX 3) to handle
the adversarial utility-based formulation of this
problem. We prove a finite p
time expected regret upper bound of order O( K ln(K)T ) for
this√algorithm and a general lower bound of order
Ω( KT ). At the end, we provide experimental
results using real data from information retrieval
applications.

1. Introduction
The K-armed dueling bandit problem is a variation of
the classical Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem introduced by Yue and Joachims (2009) to formalize the exploration/exploitation dilemma in learning from preference
feedback. In its utility-based formulation, at each time period, the environment sets a bounded value for each of K
arms. Simultaneously the learner selects two arms and wagers that one of the arms will be better than the other. The
learner only sees the outcome of the duel between the selected arms (i.e. the feedback indicates which of the selected arms has better value) and receives the average of
the rewards of the selected arms. The goal of the learner is
to maximize her cumulative reward. The difficulty of this
problem stems from the fact that the learning algorithm has
no way of directly observing the reward of its actions. This
is a perfect example of partial monitoring problem as defined in Piccolboni and Schindelhauer (2001).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

PRATIK . GAJANE @ ORANGE . COM
TANGUY. URVOY @ ORANGE . COM
FABRICE . CLEROT @ ORANGE . COM

Relative feedback is naturally suited to many practical applications like user-perceived product preferences, where a
relative perception: “A is better than B” is easier to obtain than its absolute counterpart: “A value is 42, B is
worth 33”. Another important application of dueling bandits comes from information retrieval systems where users
provide implicit feedback about the provided results. This
implicit feedback is collected in various ways e.g. a click
on a link, a tap, or any monitored action of the user. In all
these ways however, this kind of feedback is often strongly
biased by the model itself (the user cannot click on a link
which was not proposed).
To remove this bias in search engines, Radlinski and
Joachims (2007) propose to interleave the outputs of different ranking models: the model which scores a click wins
the duel. The accuracy of this interleave filtering method
was highlighted in several experimental studies (Radlinski
and Joachims, 2007; Joachims et al., 2007; Chapelle et al.,
2012).
Main contribution
The main contribution of this article is an algorithm designed for the adversarial utility-based dueling bandit problem in contrast to most of the existing algorithms which
assume a stochastic environment.
Our algorithm, called Relative Exponential-weight algorithm for Exploration and Exploitation (REX 3), is
a non-trivial extension of the Exponential-weight algorithm for Exploration and Exploitation (EXP 3) algorithm
(Auer et al., 2002b) to the dueling bandit problem. We
prove
p a finite time expected regret upper bound of order
O( K ln(K)T ) and develop an argument initially proposed by Ailon et√al. (2014) to exhibit a general lower
bound of order Ω( KT ) for this problem.
These two bounds correspond to the original bounds of
the classical EXP 3 algorithm
√ and the upper bound strictly
improves from the Õ(K T ) obtained by existing generic

