Preference Completion: Large-scale Collaborative Ranking
from Pairwise Comparisons

Dohyung Park
Joe Neeman
Jin Zhang
Sujay Sanghavi
Inderjit S. Dhillon
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
In this paper we consider the collaborative ranking setting: a pool of users each provides a small
number of pairwise preferences between d possible items; from these we need to predict each
users preferences for items they have not yet
seen. We do so by fitting a rank r score matrix
to the pairwise data, and provide two main contributions:
(a) we show that an algorithm based on convex optimization provides good generalization
guarantees once each user provides as few as
O(r log2 d) pairwise comparisons – essentially
matching the sample complexity required in the
related matrix completion setting (which uses actual numerical as opposed to pairwise information), and
(b) we develop a large-scale non-convex implementation, which we call AltSVM, that trains a
factored form of the matrix via alternating minimization (which we show reduces to alternating SVM problems), and scales and parallelizes
very well to large problem settings. It also outperforms common baselines on many moderately
large popular collaborative filtering datasets in
both NDCG and in other measures of ranking
performance.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the following recommendation system problem: given a set of items, a set of users, and nonnumerical pairwise comparison data, find the underlying
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DHPARK @ UTEXAS . EDU
JOENEEMAN @ GMAIL . COM
ZJ @ UTEXAS . EDU
SANGHAVI @ MAIL . UTEXAS . EDU
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

preference ordering of the users. In particular, we are interested in the setting where data is of the form “user i preferes
item j over item k”, for different ordered user-item-item
triples i, j, k. Pairwise preference data is wide-spread; indeed, almost any setting where a user is presented with a
menu of options – and chooses one of them – can be considered to be providing a pairwise preference between the
chosen item and every other item that is presented.
Crucially, we are interested in the collaborative filtering
setting, where (a) on the one hand the number of such pairwise preferences we have for any one user is woefully insufficient to infer anything for that user in isolation; and
(b) on the other hand, we aim for personalization, i.e. for
every user to possibly have different inferred preferences
from every other. To reconcile these two requirements, our
method relates the preferences of users to each other via a
low-rank matrix, which we (implicitly) assume governs the
observed preferences. Essentially, we fit a low-rank users
× items score matrix X to pairwise comparison data by trying to ensure that Xij − Xik is positive when user i prefers
item j to item k.
Our contributions: We present two algorithms to infer
the score matrix X from training data; once inferred, this
can be used for predicting future preferences. While there
has been some recent work on fitting low-rank score matrices to pairwise preference data (which we review and compare to below), in this paper we present the following two
contributions:
(a) A statistical analysis for the convex relaxation: we
bound the generalization error of the solution to our convex program. Essentially, we show that the minimizer of
the empirical loss also almost minimizes the true expected
loss. We also give a lower bound showing that our error
rate is sharp up to logarithmic factors.
(b) A large-scale non-convex implementation: We provide
a non-convex algorithm that we call Alternating Support

