Universal Value Function Approximators

Tom Schaul
Dan Horgan
Karol Gregor
David Silver
Google DeepMind, 5 New Street Square, EC4A 3TW London

Abstract
Value functions are a core component of reinforcement learning systems. The main idea is
to to construct a single function approximator
V (s; θ) that estimates the long-term reward from
any state s, using parameters θ. In this paper
we introduce universal value function approximators (UVFAs) V (s, g; θ) that generalise not
just over states s but also over goals g. We develop an efficient technique for supervised learning of UVFAs, by factoring observed values into
separate embedding vectors for state and goal,
and then learning a mapping from s and g to
these factored embedding vectors. We show how
this technique may be incorporated into a reinforcement learning algorithm that updates the
UVFA solely from observed rewards. Finally, we
demonstrate that a UVFA can successfully generalise to previously unseen goals.

1. Introduction
Value functions are perhaps the most central idea in reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The main idea
is to cache knowledge in a single function V (s) that represents the utility of any state s in achieving the agent’s overall goal or reward function. Storing this knowledge enables
the agent to immediately assess and compare the utility of
states and/or actions. The value function may be efficiently
learned, even from partial trajectories or under off-policy
evaluation, by bootstrapping from value estimates at a later
state (Precup et al., 2001).
However, value functions may be used to represent knowledge beyond the agent’s overall goal. General value functions Vg (s) (Sutton et al., 2011) represent the utility of any
state s in achieving a given goal g (e.g. a waypoint), represented by a pseudo-reward function that takes the place of
the real rewards in the problem. Each such value function
represents a chunk of knowledge about the environment:
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SCHAUL @ GOOGLE . COM
HORGAN @ GOOGLE . COM
KAROLG @ GOOGLE . COM
DAVIDSILVER @ GOOGLE . COM

how to evaluate or control a specific aspect of the environment (e.g. progress toward a waypoint). A collection of
general value functions provides a powerful form of knowledge representation that can be utilised in several ways. For
example, the Horde architecture (Sutton et al., 2011) consists of a discrete set of value functions (‘demons’), all of
which may be learnt simultaneously from a single stream
of experience, by bootstrapping off-policy from successive
value estimates (Modayil et al., 2014). Each value function
may also be used to generate a policy or option, for example
by acting greedily with respect to the values, and terminating at goal states. Such a collection of options can be used
to provide a temporally abstract action-space for learning
or planning (Sutton et al., 1999). Finally, a collection of
value functions can be used as a predictive representation
of state, where the predicted values themselves are used as
a feature vector (Sutton & Tanner, 2005; Schaul & Ring,
2013).
In large problems, the value function is typically represented by a function approximator V (s, θ), such as a linear
combination of features or a neural network with parameters θ. The function approximator exploits the structure
in the state space to efficiently learn the value of observed
states and generalise to the value of similar, unseen states.
However, the goal space often contains just as much structure as the state space (Foster & Dayan, 2002). Consider
for example the case where the agent’s goal is described by
a single desired state: it is clear that there is just as much
similarity between the value of nearby goals as there is between the value of nearby states. Our main idea is to extend the idea of value function approximation to both states
s and goals g, using a universal value function approximator (UVFA1 ) V (s, g, θ). A sufficiently expressive function
approximator can in principle identify and exploit structure
across both s and g. By universal, we mean that the value
function can generalise to any goal g in a set G of possible
goals: for example a discrete set of goal states; their power
set; a set of continuous goal regions; or a vector representation of arbitrary pseudo-reward functions.
This UVFA effectively represents an infinite Horde of
1

Pronounce ‘YOU-fah’.

