Rebuilding Factorized Information Criterion:
Asymptotically Accurate Marginal Likelihood

Kohei Hayashi
Global Research Center for Big Data Mathematics, National Institute of Informatics
Kawarabayashi Large Graph Project, ERATO, JST

HAYASHI . KOHEI @ GMAIL . COM

Shin-ichi Maeda
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University

ICHI @ SYS . I . KYOTO - U . AC . JP

Ryohei Fujimaki
NEC Knowledge Discovery Research Laboratories

RFUJIMAKI @ NEC - LABS . COM

Abstract
Factorized information criterion (FIC) is a recently developed approximation technique for
the marginal log-likelihood, which provides an
automatic model selection framework for a few
latent variable models (LVMs) with tractable inference algorithms. This paper reconsiders FIC
and ﬁlls theoretical gaps of previous FIC studies.
First, we reveal the core idea of FIC that allows
generalization for a broader class of LVMs. Second, we investigate the model selection mechanism of the generalized FIC, which we provide
a formal justiﬁcation of FIC as a model selection criterion for LVMs and also a systematic
procedure for pruning redundant latent variables.
Third, we uncover a few previously-unknown relationships between FIC and the variational free
energy. A demonstrative study on Bayesian principal component analysis is provided and numerical experiments support our theoretical results.

1. Introduction
The marginal log-likelihood is a key concept of Bayesian
model identiﬁcation of latent variable models (LVMs),
such as mixture models (MMs), probabilistic principal
component analysis, and hidden Markov models (HMMs).
Determination of dimensionality of latent variables is an
essential task to uncover hidden structures behind the observed data as well as to mitigate overﬁtting. In general, LVMs are singular (i.e., mapping between paramProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

eters and probabilistic models is not one-to-one) and
such classical information criteria based on the regularity assumption as the Bayesian information criterion
(BIC) (Schwarz, 1978) are no longer justiﬁed. Since exact evaluation of the marginal log-likelihood is often not
available, approximation techniques have been developed
using sampling (i.e., Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (MCMCs) (Hastings, 1970)), a variational lower bound
(i.e., the variational Bayes methods (VB) (Attias, 1999;
Jordan et al., 1999)), or algebraic geometry (i.e., the widely
applicable BIC (WBIC) (Watanabe, 2013)). However,
model selection using these methods requires heavy computational cost (e.g., a large number of MCMC sampling in
a high-dimensional space, an outer loop for WBIC.)
In the last few years, a new approximation technique
and an inference method, factorized information criterion (FIC) and factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference (FAB), have been developed for some binary
LVMs (Fujimaki & Morinaga, 2012; Fujimaki & Hayashi,
2012; Hayashi & Fujimaki, 2013; Eto et al., 2014;
Liu et al., 2015). Unlike existing methods that evaluate
approximated marginal log-likelihoods calculated for
each latent variable dimensionality (and therefore need an
outer loop for model selection), FAB ﬁnds an effective
dimensionality via an EM-style alternating optimization
procedure.
For example, let us consider a K-component MM for N
observations X> = (x1 , . . . , xN ) with one-of-K coding
latent variables Z> = (z1 , . . . , zN ), mixing coefﬁcients
β = (β1 , . . . , βK ), and DΞ -dimensional component-wise
parameters Ξ = {ξ1 , . . . , ξK }. By using Laplace’s
method to the marginalization of the log-likelihood, FIC

