Complex Event Detection using Semantic Saliency and Nearly-Isotonic SVM

Xiaojun Chang
CXJ 273@ GMAIL . COM
Yi Yang
YEE . I . YANG @ GMAIL . COM
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Eric P. Xing
Yao-Liang Yu
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

EPXING @ CS . CMU . EDU
YAOLIANG @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
We aim to detect complex events in long Internet videos that may last for hours. A major challenge in this setting is that only a few shots in
a long video are relevant to the event of interest while others are irrelevant or even misleading.
Instead of indifferently pooling the shots, we first
define a novel notion of semantic saliency that assesses the relevance of each shot with the event
of interest. We then prioritize the shots according to their saliency scores since shots that are
semantically more salient are expected to contribute more to the final event detector. Next, we
propose a new isotonic regularizer that is able to
exploit the semantic ordering information. The
resulting nearly-isotonic SVM classifier exhibits
higher discriminative power. Computationally,
we develop an efficient implementation using
the proximal gradient algorithm, and we prove
new, closed-form proximal steps. We conduct
extensive experiments on three real-world video
datasets and confirm the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Modern consumer electronics (e.g. smart phones) have
made video acquisition convenient for the general public.
Consequently, the number of videos on Internet has grown
at an unprecedented rate, thanks also to the appearance of
large video hosting websites (e.g. YouTube). How to store,
index, classify, and eventually make sense of the vast information contained in these videos has become an important challenge for the machine learning and computer viProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Two Internet video examples, where the same event
Rock Climbing happened in very different time frames. The number in each frame indicates its saliency score, which describes
how this keyframe is relevant to the specified event. We use this
saliency information to prioritize the video shot representations.

sion communities. Reflecting this challenge, the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) hosts an annual competition on a variety of retrieval tasks, of which
the multimedia event detection (MED) task has received
considerable attention and is also the focus of this work.
In MED, a large number of unseen videos is presented and
the learning algorithm must rank them according to their
likelihood of containing an event of interest, such as birthday party or dog show. To start, a compact representation of the video is first sought using feature extraction.
Deep learning approaches, e.g. convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have become increasingly popular in this
regard. The standard way (Aly et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014)
is to extract local descriptors using CNNs on each frame of
a video clip and then aggregate video-wise, through either
average-pooling or max-pooling or even more complicated
pooling strategies (e.g. Cao et al., 2012; Li et al., 2013).
While effective in reducing size, pooling may result in the

