Deterministic Independent Component Analysis

Ruitong Huang
RUITONG @ UALBERTA . CA
András György
GYORGY @ UALBERTA . CA
Csaba Szepesvári
SZEPESVA @ UALBERTA . CA
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G2E8 Canada

Abstract
We study independent component analysis with
noisy observations. We present, for the first time
in the literature, consistent, polynomial-time algorithms to recover non-Gaussian source signals
and the mixing matrix√with a reconstruction error
that vanishes at a 1/ T rate using T observations and scales only polynomially with the natural parameters of the problem. Our algorithms
and analysis also extend to deterministic source
signals whose empirical distributions are approximately independent.

1. Introduction
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) has received
much attention in the past decades. In the standard ICA
model one can observe a d-dimensional vector X that is a
linear mixture of d independent variables (S1 , . . . , Sd ) with
Gaussian noise:
X = AS + ,
(1)
where  ∼ N (0, Σ) is a d-dimensional Gaussian noise with
zero mean and covariance matrix Σ, and A is a nonsingular
d × d mixing matrix. The goal of the observer is to recover
(separate) the source signals and the mixing matrix given
several independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations from the above model. The ICA literature is vast
in both practical algorithms and theoretical analyses; we
refer to the book of Comon and Jutten (2010) for a comprehensive survey. In this paper we investigate one of he
most important problems in ICA: finding consistent, computationally efficient algorithms with finite-sample performance guarantees. In particular, we aim to develop algorithms whose computational and sample complexity are
polynomial in the natural parameters of the problem.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

A popular approach to the ICA problem is to find a linear
transformation W for X by optimizing a, so-called, contrast function that measures dependence or non-gaussianity
of the resulting coordinates of W X. The optimal W then
can serve as an estimate of A−1 , thereby recovering the
mixing matrix A. One of the most popular ICA algorithms,
FastICA (Hyvarinen, 1999), follows this approach for a
specific contrast function. FastICA has been analyzed theoretically from many aspects (Tichavsky et al., 2006; Oja
and Yuan, 2006; Ollila, 2010; Dermoune and Wei, 2013;
Wei, 2014). In particular, recently Miettinen et al. (2014)
showed that in the noise-free case (i.e., when X = AS), the
error of FastICA (when using a particular forth-moments√
based contrast function) vanishes at a rate of 1/ T where
T is the sample size. In addition, several other methods
have been shown to achieve similar error rates in the noisefree setting (e.g., Eriksson and Koivunen, 2003; Samarov
et al., 2004; Chen and Bickel, 2005; Chen et al., 2006).
However, to our knowledge, no similar finite sample results
are available in the noisy case.
On the other hand, several promising algorithms are available in the noisy case that make significant advances towards provably efficient and effective ICA algorithms, albeit fall short of providing a complete solution. Using a
quasi-whitening procedure, Arora et al. (2012) reduces the
problem to finding all the local optima of a specific function defined using the forth order cumulant, and propose a
polynomial-time algorithm to find them with appealing theoretical guarantees. However, the results depend on an unspecified parameter (β in the original paper) whose proper
tuning is essential; note that even an exhaustive search over
β is problematic, since its valid range is not well understood.
The exploitation of the special algebraic structure of the
forth moments induced by the independence leads to several other works related to ICA (Hsu and Kakade, 2013;
Anandkumar et al., 2012a;b). A similar idea is also discussed earlier as a intuitive argument to construct a contrast
function (Cardoso, 1999). The first rigorous proofs for this
idea are developed using matrix perturbation tools in a gen-

