Dynamic Sensing: Better Classification under Acquisition Constraints

Oran Richman
RORAN @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
Shie Mannor
SHIE @ EE . TECHNION . AC . IL
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract
In many machine learning applications the quality of the data is limited by resource constraints
(may it be power, bandwidth, memory, ...). In
such cases, the constraints are on the average resources allocated, therefore there is some control
over each sample’s quality. In most cases this
option remains unused and the data’s quality is
uniform over the samples. In this paper we propose to actively allocate resources to each sample such that resources are used optimally overall. We propose a method to compute the optimal
resource allocation. We further derive generalization bounds for the case where the problem’s
model is unknown. We demonstrate the potential
benefit of this approach on both simulated and
real-life problems.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning methods take feature vectors as input. These features are often acquired using some noisy
process resulting in less than optimal data quality. In many
scenarios, the data quality depends on the resources allocated for the data acquisition process. Frequently, resources (power, memory, bandwidth,...) can be dynamically allocated while maintaining some global constraint
on their average. Examples of such scenarios are:
• Due to bandwidth constraints the use of vector quantization (VQ) is popular (Linde et al., 1980). Such
quantization can be viewed as adding noise to the input. One can dynamically switch VQ schemes while
maintaining the average bandwidth rate.
• Due to power constraints, mobile devices often use
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

lower than possible sampling rate. A feature’s accuracy is often related to the sampling rate (Anderson,
2011), and therefore low sampling rate results in low
accuracy. One can employ non-uniform sampling rate.
• Due to memory constraints, it is common practice
to use sliding windows in spectral features calculation which causes spectral features to be inaccurate
(Anderson, 2011). One may dynamically choose the
length of the window to use.
• Due to computation constraints, features that require
averaging are calculated using only part of the data
(for example acquiring word frequencies from only
part of the text). This causes these features to be inaccurately estimated. One can dynamically choose
which part of the data to use.
Resources are usually allocated passively, such that all
samples are acquired in the same way. We propose to actively allocate the resources across samples while maintaining the global resource constraints. In this way “easy” decisions require less resources. Therefore allowing to invest
more resources in the “harder” cases. Figure 1 illustrates
this approach in the case of support vector machine (SVM)
classification. The figure shows the optimal resource allocation for the case of Gaussian noise (high amount of
resources results in low noise). Far away from the decision boundary, few resources are needed, since even with
large uncertainty the correct result is clear. Surprisingly,
very near the decision boundary few resources are needed
also. This is since the error will be close to 0.5 even when
a lot of resources are allocated. Therefore, most of the resources should be allocated to samples which fall between
those two extremes.
In this paper we propose a method for allocating resources
in the decision making phase. We assume that special effort
is made such that the training data is of the highest quality.
During the test phase, however, resources are limited and
should be allocated sparingly. This is often the case in applications where the number of samples to be classified is

