High Confidence Policy Improvement

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts Amherst

PTHOMAS @ CS . UMASS . EDU

Georgios Theocharous
Adobe Research

THEOCHAR @ ADOBE . COM

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Adobe Research & INRIA

GHAVAMZA @ ADOBE . COM

Abstract
We present a batch reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithm that provides probabilistic guarantees
about the quality of each policy that it proposes,
and which has no hyper-parameters that require
expert tuning. The user may select any performance lower-bound, ρ− , and confidence level, δ,
and our algorithm will ensure that the probability
that it returns a policy with performance below
ρ− is at most δ. We then propose an incremental
algorithm that executes our policy improvement
algorithm repeatedly to generate multiple policy
improvements. We show the viability of our approach with a simple gridworld and the standard
mountain car problem, as well as with a digital
marketing application that uses real world data.

1. Introduction
Most reinforcement learing (RL) algorithms do not provide
any guarantees that they will work properly with high confidence. This plays a major role in precluding their use for
applications in which execution of a bad policy could be
costly (Jonker et al., 2004) or even dangerous (Moore et al.,
2010). To overcome this limitation, rather than focusing on
learning speed, sample complexity, or computational complexity, we focus on ensuring “safety”. In this paper, we
mean by safety that the probability that our algorithm returns a policy with performance below a baseline ρ− is at
most δ, where both ρ− and δ are chosen by the user to specify how much risk is reasonable for the application at hand.
We present batch and incremental policy improvement algorithms that provide safety guarantees for every policy

they propose. Our algorithms do not have any hyperparameters that require expert tuning (there is one hyperparameter that should be set based on runtime limitations).
The primary drawbacks of our algorithms are their high
computational complexity and that, in order to provide their
guarantees, they tend to require more data to produce a policy improvement than ordinary RL algorithms.
To the best of our knowledge, conservative policy iteration (CPI) (Kakade & Langford, 2002) and its derivatives
(Pirotta et al., 2013) are the only RL algorithms with monotonically improving behavior. However, CPI was not intended to be implemented as a safe algorithm—the analysis
that shows it is safe was meant to provide insight into how
it scales to larger problems, not a practical guarantee of
safety. This is evidenced by its use of big-O notation when
specifying how many trajectories to generate before updating the policy (Kakade, 2003).1 We found that CPI requires
an impractical number of trajectories to ensure safety—for
the gridworld that we use it requires more trajectories than
the span of our plots to make a single change to the policy.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We review relevant material in Section 2 before formalizing the
problem in Section 3. We present a batch version of our algorithm in Section 4 and an incremental version in Section
5. In Section 6 we provide case studies including a digital
marketing study using data from a Fortune 20 company to
show the viability of our approach before concluding.

2. Preliminaries
We assume that the environment can be modeled as
a Markov decision process (MDP) or partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) (Sutton & Barto,
1

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

CPI requires m + k trajectories for each change to the policy.
Sham Kakade’s thesis specified m using big-O notation in Lemma
7.3.4, and k can be derived from the appendix of the work of
Kakade & Langford (2002).

