Online Time Series Prediction with Missing Data

Oren Anava
Technion, Haifa, Israel

OANAVA @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL

Elad Hazan
Princeton University, NY, USA

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Assaf Zeevi
Columbia University, NY, USA

ASSAF @ GSB . COLUMBIA . EDU

Abstract
We consider the problem of time series prediction in the presence of missing data. We cast the
problem as an online learning problem in which
the goal of the learner is to minimize prediction
error. We then devise an efficient algorithm for
the problem, which is based on autoregressive
model, and does not assume any structure on the
missing data nor on the mechanism that generates the time series. We show that our algorithm’s
performance asymptotically approaches the performance of the best AR predictor in hindsight,
and corroborate the theoretic results with an empirical study on synthetic and real-world data.

1. Introduction
A time series is a sequence of signal observations, typically
measured at uniform time intervals. Perhaps one of the
most well-studied models for time series analysis and prediction is the autoregressive (AR) model. Roughly speaking, the AR model is based on the assumption that each
observation can be represented as a (noisy) linear combination of some previous observations. This model has been
successfully used in many real-world applications such as
DNA microarray data analysis, stock market prediction,
and noise cancelation, to name but a few.
Recently there has been growing interest in the problem
of time series prediction in the presence of missing data,
mainly in the “proper learning” setting, in which an underlying model is assumed and the goal is to recover its
parameters. Most of the current work relies on statistical
assumptions on the error terms, such as independence and
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Gaussian distribution. These assumptions allow the use of
Maximum Likelihood (ML) techniques to recover consistent (and sometimes optimal) estimators for the model parameters. However, these assumptions are many times not
met in practice, causing the resulting estimators to be no
longer consistent. Occasionally, additional assumptions on
the structure of the missing data are added, and the statistical modeling becomes even more distant from the data.
In this paper we argue that assumptions on the model generating the time series and the structure of its missing data
can be relaxed in a substantial manner while still supporting
the development of efficient methods to solve the problem.
Our main contribution is a novel online learning approach
for time series prediction with missing data, that allows the
observations (along with the missing data) to be arbitrarily
or even adversarially generated. The goal of this paper is
to show that the new approach is theoretically more robust,
and is thus capable of coping with a wider range of time
series and missing data structures.
1.1. Informal Statement of Our Results
We cast the problem of AR prediction in the presence of
missing data as an online learning problem. A major modeling challenge arises as AR prediction is not well defined
when some of the data is missing. To overcome this issue,
we define a new family of AR predictors; each such predictor makes use of its own past predictions to “fill in” the
missing data, and then provides an AR prediction using the
completed data. To be slightly more formal, a predictor in
this family has the following recursive form:

REC

X̃t (α) =

p
X

αk Xt−k 1{Xt−k is revealed}

k=1
p
X

+

k=1

REC
αk X̃t−k
(α)1{Xt−k is not revealed},

