Non-Stationary Approximate Modified Policy Iteration

Boris Lesner
BORIS . LESNER . DATEXIM @ GMAIL . COM
Bruno Scherrer
BRUNO . SCHERRER @ INRIA . FR
Inria, Villers-ls-Nancy, F-54600, France
Universit de Lorraine, LORIA, UMR 7503, Vanduvre-ls-Nancy, F-54506, France

Abstract
We consider the infinite-horizon γ-discounted
optimal control problem formalized by Markov
Decision Processes. Running any instance of
Modified Policy Iteration—a family of algorithms that can interpolate between Value and
Policy Iteration—with an error  at each iteration is known to lead to stationary policies that
2γ
are at least (1−γ)
2 -optimal. Variations of Value
and Policy Iteration, that build `-periodic nonstationary policies, have recently been shown to
2γ
display a better (1−γ)(1−γ
` ) -optimality guarantee. We describe a new algorithmic scheme,
Non-Stationary Modified Policy Iteration, a family of algorithms parameterized by two integers
m ≥ 0 and ` ≥ 1 that generalizes all the
above mentionned algorithms. While m allows
one to interpolate between Value-Iteration-style
and Policy-Iteration-style updates, ` specifies the
period of the non-stationary policy that is output. We show that this new family of algorithms
2γ
also enjoys the improved (1−γ)(1−γ
` ) -optimality
guarantee. Perhaps more importantly, we show,
by exhibiting an original problem instance, that
this guarantee is tight for all m and `; this tightness was to our knowledge only known in two
specific cases, Value Iteration (m = 0, ` = 1)
and Policy Iteration (m = ∞, ` = 1).

1. Introduction
Dynamic Programming (DP) is an elegant approach
for addressing γ-discounted infinite-horizon optimal control problems formalized as Markov Decision Processes
(MDP) (Puterman, 1994). The two most well-known DP
algorithms in this framework are Value Iteration (VI) and
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Policy Iteration (PI). While the former has typically lighter
iterations, the latter usually converges much faster. Modified Policy Iteration (MPI), that interporlates between the
two, was introduced to improve the convergence rate of VI
while remaining lighter than PI (Puterman & Shin, 1978).
When the optimal control problem one considers is large,
an option is to consider approximate versions of these DP
algorithms, where each iteration may be corrupted with
some noise . An important question is the sensitivity
of such an approach to the noise. Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis
(1996) gather several results regarding approximate versions of VI and PI (thereater named AVI and API). It is
known that the policy output by such procedures is guaran2γ
teed to be (1−γ)
2 -optimal. In particular, when the perturbation  tends to 0, one recovers an optimal solution. This
analysis was recently generalized to an approximate implementation of MPI (AMPI) independently by Canbolat
& Rothblum (2012) and Scherrer et al. (2012). The bet2γ
ter guarantee, obtained by the latter— (1−γ)
2 -optimality—
exactly matches that of AVI and API. The algorithmic
scheme AMPI can be implemented in various ways, reducing the original control problem to a series of (more
standard) regression and classification problems (Scherrer et al., 2012), and lead to state-of-the-art results on
large benchmark problems, in particular on the Tetris domain (Gabillon et al., 2013).
An apparent weakness of these sensitivity analyses is that
the dependence with respect to the discount factor γ is bad:
since γ is typically close to 1, the denominator of the con2γ
stant (1−γ)
2 often makes the guarantee uninformative in
practice. Unfortunately, it turns out that it is not so much a
weakness of the analyses but a weakness of the very algorithmic approach since Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis (1996) and
2γ
Scherrer & Lesner (2012) showed that the bound (1−γ)
2
is tight respectively for API and AVI and thus cannot be
improved in general. Interestingly, the authors of the latter article described a trick for modifying AVI and API
so as to improve the guarantee: even though one knows
that there exists a stationary policy that is optimal, Scherrer & Lesner (2012) showed that variations of AVI and API

