Complete Dictionary Recovery Using Nonconvex Optimization

Ju Sun
Qing Qu
John Wright
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering a complete
(i.e., square and invertible) dictionary A0 , from
Y = A0 X0 with Y ∈ Rn×p . This recovery setting is central to the theoretical understanding of
dictionary learning. We give the first efficient algorithm that provably recovers A0 when X0 has
O (n) nonzeros per column, under suitable probability model for X0 . Prior results provide
√ recovery guarantees when X0 has only O ( n) nonzeros per column. Our algorithm is based on nonconvex optimization with a spherical constraint,
and hence is naturally phrased in the language of
manifold optimization. Our proofs give a geometric characterization of the high-dimensional objective landscape, which shows that with high probability there are no spurious local minima. Experiments with synthetic data corroborate our theory. Full version of this paper is available online:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.06785.

1. Introduction
Dictionary learning (DL) is the problem of finding a sparse
representation for a collection of input signals. Its applications span classical image processing, visual recognition,
compressive signal acquisition, and also recent deep architectures for signal classification. Recent surveys on applications and algorithms of DL include Elad (2010) and Mairal
et al (2014).
Formally, given a data matrix Y ∈ Rn×p , DL seeks an approximation Y ≈ AX, where A lies in a certain admissible
set A, and X is as sparse as possible. Typical formulations
for DL are nonconvex: the admissible set A is typically
nonconvex, and the observation map (A, X) 7→ AX is
bilinear. There is also an intrinsic symmetry in the problem
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JS 4038@ COLUMBIA . EDU
QQ 2105@ COLUMBIA . EDU
JW 2966@ COLUMBIA . EDU

due to sign-permutation ambiguity, which seems to preclude convexification (Gribonval & Schnass (2010), Geng
& Wright (2011)). Thus, despite many empirical successes,
relatively little is known about the theoretical properties of
DL algorithms.
Towards theoretical understanding, it is natural to start with
the dictionary recovery (DR) problem: suppose that the data
matrix Y is generated as Y = A0 X0 , where A0 ∈ Rn×m
and X0 ∈ Rm×p , and try to recover A0 and X0 . One might
imagine putting favorable structural assumptions on A0 and
X0 to make DR well-posed and amenable to efficient algorithms. However, under natural assumptions for A0 and X0 ,
even proving that the target solution is a local minimum of
certain popular practical DL formulations requires nontrivial analysis (Gribonval & Schnass, 2010; Geng & Wright,
2011; Schnass, 2014a;b; 2015). Obtaining global solutions
with efficient algorithms is a standing challenge.
Existing results on global dictionary recovery pertain only
to highly sparse X0 . For example, Spielman et al (2012)
showed that solving a sequence of certain linear programs
can recover a complete dictionary A
√0 from Y , when X0
is a sparse random matrix with O( n) nonzeros per column. Agarwal et al (2013a; 2013b) and Arora et al (2013;
2015) have subsequently given efficient algorithms for the
overcomplete setting (m ≥ n), based on a combination
of {clustering or spectral initialization} and local refinee √n)
ment. These algorithms again succeed when X0 has O(
e suppresses some logarithm facnonzeros per column (The O
tors). Barak et al (2014) provides efficient algorithms based
on sum-of-square hierarchy that guarantees recovery of complete dictionaries when X0 has O(nc ) nonzeros per column
for any c < 1. Giving efficient algorithms which provably
succeeds in linear sparsity regime (i.e., O(n) nonzeros per
column) is an open problem. 1
1
Recent works, including Arora et al (2014) and Barak et
al (2014), contain guarantees for recovery with linear sparsity,
but run in super-polynomial (quasipolynomial) time. Aside from
efficient recovery, other theoretical work on DL includes results on identifiability (Hillar & Sommer, 2011), generalization
bounds (Vainsencher et al., 2011; Mehta & Gray, 2013), and noise

