Community Detection Using Time-Dependent Personalized PageRank

Haim Avron
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

HAIMAV @ US . IBM . COM

Lior Horesh
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

LHORESH @ US . IBM . COM

Abstract
Local graph diffusions have proven to be valuable tools for solving various graph clustering
problems. As such, there has been much interest
recently in efficient local algorithms for computing them. We present an efficient local algorithm
for approximating a graph diffusion that generalizes both the celebrated personalized PageRank
and its recent competitor/companion - the heat
kernel. Our algorithm is based on writing the diffusion vector as the solution of an initial value
problem, and then using a waveform relaxation
approach to approximate the solution. Our experimental results suggest that it produces rankings that are distinct and competitive with the
ones produced by high quality implementations
of personalized PageRank and localized heat kernel, and that our algorithm is a useful addition to
the toolset of localized graph diffusions.

1. Introduction
In community detection problems (i.e., graph clustering
problems), one seeks to identify sets of nodes in a graph
that are both internally cohesive and well separated from
the rest of the graph. Such sets are then referred to as communities or clusters. In one important variant, the goal is to
build a community around a given seed node or set of seed
nodes. That is, the algorithm is given, as an input, a node
(or nodes) in the graph, and the goal is to find a cluster in
which it is a member.
One popular technique for identifying communities using
seed nodes is to use local graph diffusions (Andersen et al.,
2006; Chung, 2007). The general framework is as follows. Using the seed, a diffusion vector is computed. The
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

diffusion vector is reweighted based on the degrees, and
the nodes are sorted according to their magnitude in the
reweighted diffusion vector. The community is found by
making a sweep over the nodes according to their rank,
selecting the prefix that minimizes (or maximizes) some
scoring function. If the input vector is sparse, most of the
entries in the diffusion vectors tend to be tiny, in which case
a sparse approximation is viable (the exact diffusion vector
is generally dense), and this is allows algorithms that work
even on massive graphs. Algorithms that find sparse approximations to diffusion vectors are local graph diffusion
algorithms.
One widely used scoring function is conductance. The conductance of a subset of nodes S is given by
φ(S) ≡

∂S
 ,
min(vol (S) , vol S̄ )

where S̄ is the complementary set of nodes, ∂S is the number of edges with one end-point in S and the other in S̄, and
vol (S) is the sum of degrees of nodes in S. Selecting sets
with low conductance tends to produce high quality clusters (Yang & Leskovec, 2015), and the performance of the
aforementioned algorithm with respect to minimizing the
conductance can be rigorously analyzed for certain diffusions (Andersen et al., 2006; Chung, 2009). However, we
stress that other scoring functions have been applied successfully (Yang & Leskovec, 2015).
The classical graph diffusion vector is the PageRank vector (Brin & Page, 1998). Assume, without loss of generality, that the set of nodes is {1, . . . , n}. Let A ∈ Rn×n
be the adjacency matrix of the graph, and let D ∈ Rn×n
be a diagonal matrix with the degrees on the diagonal. Let
P ≡ AD−1 be the random walk transition matrix. The
PageRank vector is equal to
p ≡ (1 − α)(In − αP)−1 s
where α ∈ (0, 1) and s ∈ Rn are parameters. The vector
s is typically referred to as the teleportation vector. The

