Intersecting Faces: Non-negative Matrix Factorization With New Guarantees

Rong Ge
Microsoft Research New England

RONGGE @ MICROSOFT. COM

James Zou
Microsoft Research New England

JAZO @ MICROSOFT. COM

Abstract

We assume that there are r latent sources, modeled by the
unobserved matrix W ∈ Rr×m , where each row of M
characterizes one source. Each observed data-point is a
linear combination of the r sources and the combination
weights are encoded in a matrix A ∈ Rn×r . Moreover, in
many natural settings, the sources are non-negative and the
combinations are additive. The computational problem is
then is to factor a given matrix M as M = AW , where all
the entries of M, A and W are non-negative. We call r the
inner-dimension of the factorization, and the smallest possible r is usually called the nonnegative rank of M . NMF
was first purposed by (Lee & Seung, 1999), and has been
widely applied in computer vision (Lee & Seung, 2000),
document clustering (Xu et al., 2003), hyperspectral unmixing(Nascimento & Dias, 2004; Gomez et al., 2007),
computational biology (Devarajan, 2009), etc. We give two
concrete examples

Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is a
natural model of admixture and is widely used
in science and engineering. A plethora of algorithms have been developed to tackle NMF,
but due to the non-convex nature of the problem, there is little guarantee on how well these
methods work. Recently a surge of research
have focused on a very restricted class of NMFs,
called separable NMF, where provably correct
algorithms have been developed. In this paper,
we propose the notion of subset-separable NMF,
which substantially generalizes the property of
separability. We show that subset-separability is
a natural necessary condition for the factorization
to be unique or to have minimum volume. We developed the Face-Intersect algorithm which provably and efficiently solves subset-separable NMF
under natural conditions, and we prove that our
algorithm is robust to small noise. We explored
the performance of Face-Intersect on simulations
and discuss settings where it empirically outperformed the state-of-art methods. Our work is a
step towards finding provably correct algorithms
that solve large classes of NMF problems.

1. Introduction
In many settings in science and engineering the observed
data are admixtures of multiple latent sources. We would
typically want to infer the latent sources as well as
the admixture distribution given the observations. Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) is a natural mathematical framework to model many admixture problems.
In NMF we are given an observation matrix M ∈ Rn×m ,
where each row of M corresponds to a data-point in Rm .
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Example 1. In topic modeling, M is the n-by-m word-bydocument matrix, where n is the vocabulary size and m is
the number of documents. Each column of M corresponds
to one document and the entry M (i, j) is the frequency
with which word i appears in document j. The topics are
the columns of A, and A(i, k) is the probability that topic k
uses word i. W is the topic-by-document matrix and captures how much each topic contributes to each document.
Since all the entries of M, A and W are frequencies, they
are all non-negative. Given M from a corpus of documents,
we would like to factor M = AW and recover the relevant
topics in these documents. (Note that in this example A
is the matrix of “sources” and W is the matrix of mixing
weights, so it is the transpose of what we just introduced.
We use this notation to be consistent with previous works
(Arora et al., 2012).)
Example 2. In many bio-medical applications, we collect samples and for each sample perform multiple measurements (e.g. expression of 104 genes or DNA methylation at 106 positions in the genome; all the values are
non-negative). M is the sample-by-measurement matrix,
where M (i, j) is the value of the jth measurement in sam-

