Active Nearest Neighbors in Changing Environments

Christopher Berlind
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA

CBERLIND @ GATECH . EDU

Ruth Urner
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
While classic machine learning paradigms assume training and test data are generated from
the same process, domain adaptation addresses
the more realistic setting in which the learner has
large quantities of labeled data from some source
task but limited or no labeled data from the target task it is attempting to learn. In this work,
we give the first formal analysis showing that using active learning for domain adaptation yields a
way to address the statistical challenges inherent
in this setting. We propose a novel nonparametric algorithm, ANDA, that combines an active
nearest neighbor querying strategy with nearest
neighbor prediction. We provide analyses of its
querying behavior and of finite sample convergence rates of the resulting classifier under covariate shift. Our experiments show that ANDA
successfully corrects for dataset bias in multiclass image categorization.

1. Introduction
Most machine learning paradigms operate under the assumption that the data generating process remains stable.
Training and test data are assumed to be from the same task.
However, this is often not an adequate model of reality. For
example, image classifiers are often trained on previously
collected data before deployment in the real world, where
the instances encountered can be systematically different.
An e-commerce company may want to predict the success
of a product in one country when they only have preference
data on that product from consumers in a different country.
These and numerous other examples signify the importance
of developing learning algorithms that adapt to and perform
well in changing environments. This is usually referred to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

RUTH . URNER @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE

as transfer learning or domain adaptation.
In a common model for domain adaptation, the learner receives large amounts of labeled data from a source distribution and unlabeled data from the actual target distribution (and possibly a small amount of labeled data from the
target task as well). The goal of the learner is to output
a good model for the target task. Designing methods for
this scenario that are statistically consistent with respect to
the target task is important, yet challenging. This difficulty
occurs even in the so-called covariate shift setting, where
the change in the environments is restricted to the marginal
over the covariates, while the regression functions (the labeling rules) of the involved distributions are identical.
In this work, we give the first formal analysis showing that
using active learning for domain adaptation yields a way
to address these challenges. In our model, the learner can
make a small number of queries for labels of target examples. Now the goal is to accurately learn a classifier for the
target task while making as few label requests as possible.
We design and analyze an algorithm showing that being active adaptive can yield a consistent learner that uses target
labels only where needed.
We propose a simple nonparametric algorithm, ANDA,
that combines an active nearest neighbor querying strategy
with nearest neighbor prediction. ANDA receives a labeled
sample from the source distribution and an unlabeled sample from the target task. It first actively selects a subset of
the target data to be labeled based on the amount of source
data among the k 0 nearest neighbors of each target example. Then it outputs a k-nearest neighbor classifier on the
combined source and target labeled data.
We prove that ANDA enjoys strong performance guarantees. We first provide a finite sample bound on the expected
loss of the resulting classifier in the covariate shift setting.
Remarkably, the bound does not depend on source-target
relatedness; it only depends on the size of the given unlabeled target sample and properties of the target distribution.
This is in stark contrast to most theoretical results for do-

