Optimal and Adaptive Algorithms for Online Boosting

Alina Beygelzimer
Yahoo Labs, New York, NY 10036

BEYGEL @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Satyen Kale
Yahoo Labs, New York, NY 10036

SATYEN @ YAHOO - INC . COM

Haipeng Luo
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540

Abstract
We study online boosting, the task of converting any weak online learner into a strong online
learner. Based on a novel and natural definition
of weak online learnability, we develop two online boosting algorithms. The first algorithm is
an online version of boost-by-majority. By proving a matching lower bound, we show that this
algorithm is essentially optimal in terms of the
number of weak learners and the sample complexity needed to achieve a specified accuracy.
The second algorithm is adaptive and parameterfree, albeit not optimal.

HAIPENGL @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

From a theoretical viewpoint, recent work by Chen et al.
(2012) is perhaps most interesting. The authors proposed
an online generalization of the batch weak learning assumption, and made a connection between online boosting
and batch boosting that produces smooth distributions over
the training examples. The resulting algorithm is guaranteed to achieve an arbitrarily small error rate as long as the
number of weak learners and the number of examples are
sufficiently large. No assumptions need to be made about
how the data is generated. Indeed, the data can even be
generated by an adversary.
We present a new online boosting algorithm, based on
the boost-by-majority (BBM) algorithm of (Freund, 1995).
This algorithm, called Online BBM, improves upon the
work of Chen et al. (2012) in several ways:

1. Introduction
We study online boosting, the task of boosting the accuracy of any weak online learning algorithm. The theory
of boosting in the batch setting has been studied extensively, leading to a huge practical success. See the book
by Schapire & Freund (2012) for a thorough discussion.
Online learning algorithms receive examples one by one,
updating the predictor after seeing each new example. In
contrast to the batch setting, online learning algorithms
typically don’t make any stochastic assumptions about the
data. They are often much faster, more memory-efficient,
and can adapt to the best predictor changing over time.
The success of boosting in batch learning prompted an investigation of whether online learning algorithms can be
boosted as well (Oza & Russell, 2001; Grabner & Bischof,
2006; Liu & Yu, 2007; Grabner et al., 2008; Chen et al.,
2012; 2014).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Our assumption on online weak learners is weaker and
can be seen as a direct online analogue of the standard
batch weak learning assumption.
2. Our algorithm doesn’t require importance weighted
online learning, instead using a sampling technique
similar to the one used in boosting by filtering in
the batch setting (Freund, 1992; Bradley & Schapire,
2008).
3. Our algorithm is optimal in the sense that no online
boosting algorithm can achieve the same error rate
with fewer weak learners or examples asymptotically
(see the lower bounds in Section 3.2).
The following table presents a comparison of the two papers for the setting where the weak learner
√ is derived from
an online learning algorithm with an O( T ) regret bound.
Here N is the number of weak learners and T is the number of examples needed to achieve error rate , and γ is an
online analog of the “edge” of the weak learning oracle.1
1
In this paper, we use the Õ(·) and Ω̃(·) notation to suppress
dependence on polylogarithmic factors in the natural parameters.

