K-hyperplane Hinge-Minimax Classifier

Margarita Osadchy
Tamir Hazan
Daniel Keren
Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa 31905, Israel

Abstract
We explore a novel approach to upper bound
the misclassification error for problems with data
comprising a small number of positive samples
and a large number of negative samples. We assign the hinge-loss to upper bound the misclassification error of the positive examples and use
the minimax risk to upper bound the misclassification error with respect to the worst case distribution that generates the negative examples. This
approach is computationally appealing since the
majority of training examples (belonging to the
negative class) are represented by the statistics
of their distribution, in contrast to kernel SVM
which produces a very large number of support
vectors in such settings. We derive empirical
risk bounds for linear and non-linear classification and show that they √
are dimensionally independent and decay as 1/ m for m samples. We
propose an efficient algorithm for training an intersection of finite number of hyperplanes and
demonstrate its effectiveness on real data, including letter and scene recognition.

1. Introduction
Linear classifiers are the cornerstone of several applications in machine learning. The generalization ability
of linear classifiers has been long studied in the context
of support vector machines (SVMs), e.g., using VC dimension, covering numbers, and Rademacher complexity
(Vapnik, 2000; Zhang, 2002; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2003;
Bousquet et al., 2004; Kakade et al., 2009). SVMs upper
bound the misclassification loss of the linear classifier using the hinge-loss. This setting is computationally appealing when there are fairly small number of support vectors.
Alternatively, the minimax risk upper bounds the distriProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

RITA @ CS . HAIFA . AC . IL
TAMIR @ CS . HAIFA . AC . IL
DKEREN @ CS . HAIFA . AC . IL

bution that generates the instances-labels examples in the
world (Lanckriet et al., 2003; Honorio & Jaakkola, 2014).
This approach is computationally appealing when there are
(infinitely) many training examples since it only utilizes
their statistical properties, such as mean and covariance.
In our work we consider real-life data that consists of a
small number of positive data points and a large number
of negative data points, a setting that is prominent in machine learning applications, e.g., in computer vision, such
as object detection, and in security, such as fraud or malicious attack detection. We suggest to combine the hingerisk with the minimax risk to enjoy the best of both worlds.
The idea of combining minimax for the negative class and
svm-like formulation for the positive samples was introduced in (Osadchy et al., 2012) for training a single hyperplane. No generalization bounds have been shown in that
work. Here we derive an empirical mixed-risk bound, that
uses the Rademacher complexities to bound the hinge-risk
and vector Bernstein’s inequalities to bound the minimax
risk. Recently, (Honorio & Jaakkola, 2014) derived a generalization bound for the minimax risk using PAC-Bayesian
approach, a setting that bounds the expected loss with respect to a posterior distribution over all possible classifiers.
Our work differs as we use stronger assumptions - that the
norm of the data points is bounded, an assumption that is
natural in many applications. Thus we are able to avoid
the variance while computing the expected loss of PACBayesian bounds.
Our work mainly considers non-linear classifiers. Nonlinear classifiers are usually attained by applying kernel methods. Unfortunately, the computational complexity of kernel methods increases linearly with the size
of the training sample (Steinwart, 2003). Instead we
apply non-linearity by using intersection of hyperplanes
(Klivans & Servedio, 2004; Arriaga & Vempala, 1999).
Unfortunately, the proposed algorithms for intersection of
hyperplanes are computationally costly when considering
large sets of negative data points. To deal with this computational difficulty we extend the minimax risk to deal with
intersection of hyperplanes over (infinitely many) negative
examples. As this risk bound is loose when there are few

