Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tübingen, GERMANY

BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE

David W. Hogg
DAVID . HOGG @ NYU . EDU
Dun Wang
DW 1519@ NYU . EDU
Daniel Foreman-Mackey
FOREMAN . MACKEY @ GMAIL . COM
Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA
Dominik Janzing
DOMINIK . JANZING @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel
CARL - JOHANN . SIMON - GABRIEL @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Jonas Peters
JONAS . PETERS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tübingen, GERMANY

Abstract
We describe a method for removing the effect of
confounders in order to reconstruct a latent quantity of interest. The method, referred to as halfsibling regression, is inspired by recent work in
causal inference using additive noise models. We
provide a theoretical justification and illustrate
the potential of the method in a challenging astronomy application.

1. Introduction
The present paper proposes and analyzes a method for
removing the effect of confounding noise. The analysis is based on a hypothetical underlying causal structure. The method does not infer causal structures; rather,
it is influenced by a recent thrust to try to understand
how causal structures facilitate machine learning tasks
(Schölkopf et al., 2012).

of jointly independent noise variables, one for each vertex,
and a “structural equation” for each variable that describes
how the latter is computed by evaluating a deterministic
function of its noise variable and its parents. This view,
referred to as a functional causal model (or nonlinear structural equation model), leads to the same class of joint distributions over all variables (Pearl, 2000; Peters et al., 2014),
and we may thus choose either representation.
The functional point of view is useful in that it often makes
it easier to come up with assumptions on the causal mechanisms that are at work, i.e., on the functions associated with
the variables. For instance, it was recently shown (Hoyer
et al., 2009) that assuming nonlinear functions with additive noise renders the two–variable case identifiable — i.e.,
a case where conditional independence tests do not provide
any information, and it was thus previously believed that it
is impossible to infer the structure of the graph based on
observational data.

Causal graphical models as pioneered by Pearl (2000);
Spirtes et al. (1993) are joint probability distributions over
a set of variables X1 , . . . , Xn , along with directed graphs
(usually, acyclicity is assumed) with vertices Xi , and arrows indicating direct causal influences. By the causal
Markov assumption, each vertex Xi is independent of its
non-descendants, given its parents.

In this work we start from the functional point of view and
assume the underlying causal graph shown in Fig. 1. Here,
N, Q, X, Y are jointly random variables (RVs) (i.e., RVs
defined on the same underlying probability space), taking
values denoted by n, q, x, y. We do not require the ranges
of the random variables to be R, in particular, they may be
vectorial. All equalities regarding random variables should
be interpreted to hold with probability one. We further (implicitly) assume the existence of conditional expectations.

There is an alternative view of causal models, which does
not start from a joint distribution. Instead, it assumes a set

2. Half-Sibling Regression

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Suppose we are interested in the quantity Q, but unfortunately we cannot observe it directly. Instead, we observe
Y , which we think of as a degraded version of Q that is

