The Fundamental Incompatibility of
Scalable Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and Naive Data Subsampling

Michael Betancourt
Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK CV4 7AL

Abstract
Leveraging the coherent exploration of Hamiltonian flow, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo produces
computationally efficient Monte Carlo estimators, even with respect to complex and highdimensional target distributions. When confronted with data-intensive applications, however, the algorithm may be too expensive to implement, leaving us to consider the utility of
approximations such as data subsampling. In
this paper I demonstrate how data subsampling
fundamentally compromises the scalability of
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.

With the preponderance of applications featuring enormous
data sets, methods of inference requiring only subsamples
of data are becoming more and more appealing. Subsampled Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms, (Neiswanger
et al., 2013; Welling & Teh, 2011), are particularly desired
for their potential applicability to most statistical models.
Unfortunately, careful analysis of these algorithms reveals
unavoidable biases unless the data are tall, or highly redundant (Bardenet et al., 2014; Teh et al., 2014; Vollmer
et al., 2015). Because redundancy can be defined only relative to a given model, the utility of these subsampled algorithms is then a consequence of not only the desired accuracy and also the particular model and data under consideration, severely restricting practicality.
Recently (Chen et al., 2014) considered subsampling
within Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Duane et al., 1987; Neal,
2011; Betancourt et al., 2014b) and demonstrated that the
biases induced by naive subsampling lead to unacceptably
large biases. Ultimately the authors rectified this bias by
sacrificing the coherent exploration of Hamiltonian flow
for a diffusive correction, fundamentally compromising the
scalability of the algorithm with respect to the complexity
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

BETANALPHA @ GMAIL . COM

of the target distribution. An algorithm scalable with respect to both the size of the data and the complexity of the
target distribution would have to maintain the coherent exploration of Hamiltonian flow while subsampling and, unfortunately, these objectives are mutually exclusive in general.
In this paper I review the elements of Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo critical to its robust and scalable performance in practice and demonstrate how different subsampling strategies
all compromise those properties and consequently induce
poor performance.

1. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo in Theory
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo utilizes deterministic, measurepreserving maps to generate efficient Markov transitions
(Betancourt et al., 2014b). Formally, we begin by complementing a target distribution,
π ∝ exp[−V (q)] dn q,
with a conditional distribution over auxiliary momenta parameters,
πq ∝ exp[−T (p, q)] dn p.
Together these define a joint distribution,
$H ∝ exp[− (T (q, p) + V (q))] dn q dn p
∝ exp[−H(q, p)] dn q dn p,
and a Hamiltonian system corresponding to the Hamiltonian, H(q, p). We refer to T (q, p) and V (q) as the kinetic
energy and potential energy, respectively.
The Hamiltonian immediately defines a Hamiltonian vector field,
~ = ∂H ∂ − ∂H ∂ ,
H
∂p ∂q
∂q ∂p
and an application of the exponential map yields a Hamilto~
τH
nian flow on the joint space, φH
(Lee, 2013), which
τ =e
exactly preserves the joint distribution under a pullback,

φH
t ∗ πH = πH .

