Information Geometry and Minimum Description Length Networks

Ke Sun
SUNK . EDU @ GMAIL . COM
Viper Group, Computer Vision and Multimedia Laboratory, University of Geneva, Switzerland
Jun Wang
Expedia, Switzerland

JWANG 1@ EXPEDIA . COM

Alexandros Kalousis
A LEXANDROS .K ALOUSIS @ HESGE . CH
Business Informatics Department, University of Applied Sciences, Western Switzerland
Department of Computer Science, University of Geneva, Switzerland
Stéphane Marchand-Maillet
S TEPHANE .M ARCHAND -M AILLET @ UNIGE . CH
Viper Group, Computer Vision and Multimedia Laboratory, University of Geneva, Switzerland

Abstract
We study parametric unsupervised mixture learning. We measure the loss of intrinsic information from the observations to complex mixture
models, and then to simple mixture models. We
present a geometric picture, where all these representations are regarded as free points in the
space of probability distributions. Based on minimum description length, we derive a simple geometric principle to learn all these models together. We present a new learning machine with
theories, algorithms, and simulations.

1. Introduction
Knowledge is often gradually perceived from simple to
complex. In the realm of mixture modeling (Hinton et al.,
1995; Rasmussen, 2000; Vincent & Bengio, 2003), a simple representation with a few components and a complex
representation with many components are both meaningful in the learning path. For example, the point cloud in
fig. 1 (a) can either be perceived as 3 blobs, or as 9 blobs,
which are both “correct”.
A stack of mixture models, or clustering schemes, with
a different number of components at each layer can be
learned (Ward, 1963; Heller & Ghahramani, 2005; Goldberger & Roweis, 2005; Garcia et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2012;
Schwander & Nielsen, 2012; Krishnamurthy et al., 2012).
Often, such learning is split into stages, and the learners
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) a point cloud; (b) a simple perception (colors and
circles denote mixture components); (c) a complex perception;
(d) a stacked mixture model.

at different stages are not fully communicating with each
other. For example, while successively merging small clusters (Ward, 1963), these clusters are often not re-adjusted
based on the latter-learned hierarchy. As another example,
consider a stage-À learner for complex mixture modeling
using many components, and a stage-Á learner for simplification (Goldberger & Roweis, 2005; Schwander & Nielsen,
2012). The communication from À to Á is unidirectional.
What are the intrinsic principles of stacked mixture learning, and how to implement full communication within this
stack, so that different representation layers help each other
to learn, are still open problems.
This paper studies such a stacked mixture model as in
fig. 1 (d). This model fits in a minimum description length
(MDL, Rissanen, 1978; 1989) network, where all mixture
components at different layers are regarded as free points
in the space of probability distributions. Based on a global
cost function, these points are learned so that the whole
network is compact in the geometric sense. Under this concept, we implement one specific method, where the mixture
components are Gaussian distributions. We show empirical
results on the effectiveness of the network-structured regularization.

