A Probabilistic Model for Dirty Multi-task Feature Selection

Daniel Hernández-Lobato
DANIEL . HERNANDEZ @ UAM . ES
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Computer Science Department, Madrid, 28049, Spain
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
JMH @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
Harvard University, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK

Abstract
Multi-task feature selection methods often make
the hypothesis that learning tasks share relevant
and irrelevant features. However, this hypothesis may be too restrictive in practice. For example, there may be a few tasks with specific relevant and irrelevant features (outlier tasks). Similarly, a few of the features may be relevant for
only some of the tasks (outlier features). To account for this, we propose a model for multi-task
feature selection based on a robust prior distribution that introduces a set of binary latent variables to identify outlier tasks and outlier features.
Expectation propagation can be used for efficient
approximate inference under the proposed prior.
Several experiments show that a model based on
the new robust prior provides better predictive
performance than other benchmark methods.

1. Introduction
When the number of samples is smaller or equal to the
number of attributes or features, regression problems are
under-determined. In this case, a linear model is too complex to explain the observed data since an infinite number
of model coefficients perfectly fit the data. In this context,
sparsity, i.e., the assumption of zeros in the model coefficients, plays a strong regularization role that can be useful to obtain estimates with good generalization properties.
Sparsity can be favored by using sparsity enforcing priors
in probabilistic models or by optimizing a loss function penalized by a sparsity inducing norm (Carvalho et al., 2009;
Jalali et al., 2010; Vogt & Roth, 2010). The assumption of
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ZOUBIN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

zeros in the model coefficients is equivalent to the assumption of only a few of relevant features for prediction.
Multi-task feature selection methods are used to improve
the process of inferring the model coefficients from the observed data under the sparsity assumption (Vogt & Roth,
2010; Hernández-Lobato et al., 2010; Obozinski et al.,
2009; Xiong et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2008). In these
methods several tasks that have a common feature space are
solved simultaneously, often under the assumption that the
tasks share relevant and irrelevant features, as illustrated by
Figure 2 (top). However, in some situations this hypothesis
may be too restrictive (Jalali et al., 2010). As illustrated by
Figure 2 (bottom), a few of the tasks may have specific relevant / irrelevant features (outlier tasks), and a few of the
features may be arbitrarily relevant / irrelevant across tasks
(outlier features). In this situation, traditional multi-task
feature selection methods are expected to perform poorly.
In this paper we propose a multi-task feature selection
model, based on a robust prior distribution, that is expected
to have better properties in the presence of diverse tasks,
i.e., data with the properties described above. Exact inference is intractable in such a model. However, expectation
propagation can be used for efficient approximate inference
(Minka, 2001). Several experiments involving the reconstruction of gene regulatory networks, the denoising of natural images and the prediction of drug sensitivity from microarray data illustrate the benefits of the model proposed.
Specifically, it has better prediction properties than other
methods from the literature and it can be used to successfully identify relevant attributes for prediction, alongside
with outlier tasks and features, which may be useful to better understand the characteristics of the observed data.

2. Dirty Multi-task Feature Selection
Assume K regression tasks with data {X(k) , y(k) }K
k=1 ,
where X(k) and y(k) are the design matrix and the vector

