Qualitative Multi-Armed Bandits: A Quantile-Based Approach

Balázs Szörényi1,5,6
Róbert Busa-Fekete2
Paul Weng3,4
Eyke Hüllermeier2

SZORENYI @ INF. U - SZEGED . HU
BUSAROBI @ UPB . DE
PAWENG @ CMU . EDU
EYKE @ UPB . DE

1

INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, SequeL project, 40 avenue Halley, 59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Department of Computer Science, University of Paderborn, Warburger Str. 100, 33098 Paderborn, Germany
3
SYSU-CMU Joint Institute of Engineering, 132 East Waihuan Road, Guangzhou, 510006, China
4
SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute, 9 Eastern Nanguo Road, Shunde, 528300, China
5
MTA-SZTE Research Group on Artificial Intelligence, Tisza Lajos krt. 103., H-6720 Szeged, Hungary
6
Department of Electrical Engineering, The Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 32000
2

Abstract
We formalize and study the multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problem in a generalized stochastic setting, in which rewards are not assumed to be
numerical. Instead, rewards are measured on a
qualitative scale that allows for comparison but
invalidates arithmetic operations such as averaging. Correspondingly, instead of characterizing an arm in terms of the mean of the underlying distribution, we opt for using a quantile of
that distribution as a representative value. We address the problem of quantile-based online learning both for the case of a finite (pure exploration)
and infinite time horizon (cumulative regret minimization). For both cases, we propose suitable
algorithms and analyze their properties. These
properties are also illustrated by means of first
experimental studies.

1. Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem (or simply bandit problem) refers to an iterative decision making problem
in which an agent repeatedly chooses among K options,
metaphorically corresponding to pulling one of K arms of a
bandit machine. In each round, the agent receives a random
reward that depends on the arm being selected. The agent’s
goal is to optimize an evaluation metric, e.g., the error rate
(expected percentage of playing a suboptimal arm) or the
cumulative regret (difference between the sum of rewards
obtained and the (expected) rewards that could have been
obtained by selecting the best arm in each round).
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

In the stochastic multi-armed bandit setup, the distributions
can vary with the arms but do not change with time. To
achieve the desired goal, the agent has to tackle the classical exploration/exploitation dilemma: It has to properly
balance the pulling of arms that were found to yield high
rewards in earlier rounds and the selection of arms that have
not yet been tested often enough (Auer et al., 2002; CesaBianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Lai & Robbins, 1985).
MAB algorithms have not only been studied quite thoroughly from a theoretical point of view but have also
been used in many real applications, such as medical treatment allocation design (Kuleshov & Precup, 2014), feature
selection (Gaudel & Sebag, 2010; Busa-Fekete & Kégl,
2010) and crowdsourced labeling (Zhou et al., 2014). In
many practical applications, however, numerical rewards
are not provided in a natural way. Consider the example
of clinical trials for testing pain medication. Here, the patients are asked to value their pain on a scale such as no
pain—mild—moderate—severe, which is of qualitative nature. Computing averages on ordinal scales of that
kind is clearly invalid and may lead to disputable conclusions.
In this paper, we therefore propose a setting in which the
arm distributions are defined over a complete totally ordered set (L, ); the corresponding online learning framework will be introduced formally in Section 3, after reviewing related work in Section 2. The quality of an arm
is expressed in terms of a τ -quantile of the arm’s distribution over L. Thus, arms are compared in terms of their
τ -quantiles, and an arm is considered to be τ -optimal if its
τ -quantile coincides with the highest τ -quantile of all arms.
We consider two quantile-based learning frameworks that
we refer to as the finite and the infinite horizon cases, respectively. The finite horizon case (Section 4) is formalized
in the PAC framework: the goal of the learner is to find a

