Online Learning of Eigenvectors
Dan Garber
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

DANGAR @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL

Elad Hazan
Princeton University

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Tengyu Ma
Princeton University

TENGYUL @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Abstract
Computing the leading eigenvector of a symmetric real matrix is a fundamental primitive of numerical linear algebra with numerous applications. We consider a natural online extension
of the leading eigenvector problem: a sequence
of matrices is presented and the goal is to predict for each matrix a unit vector, with the overall goal of competing with the leading eigenvector of the cumulative matrix. Existing regretminimization algorithms for this problem either
require to compute an eigen decompostion every
iteration, or suffer from a large dependency of the
regret bound on the dimension. In both cases the
algorithms are not practical for large scale applications.
In this paper we present new algorithms that
avoid both issues. On one hand they do not require any expensive matrix decompositions and
on the other, they guarantee regret rates with a
mild dependence on the dimension at most. In
contrast to previous algorithms, our algorithms
also admit implementations that enable to leverage sparsity in the data to further reduce computation. We extend our results to also handle
non-symmetric matrices.

1. Introduction
Computing the leading eigenvector of a symmetric real matrix is one of the most important problems in numerical linear algebra and an important primitive in many algorithms.
Perhaps the best known application of this problem is the
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Principal Component Analysis problem, in which, roughly
speaking, given a set of high-dimensional vectors, the problem is to find a low-dimensional subspace such that the projection of the vectors onto this low-dimensional subspace is
close on average to the original vectors. It is well known
that the optimal solution to this problem is to project the
high-dimensional vectors over the several leading eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of the data. In this paper we consider an online learning problem that is a natural extension of the leading eigenvector problem. A decision maker observes a sequence of matrices. Before a new
matrix is revealed, the decision maker must commit to a
unit vector. Once the matrix is revealed the decision maker
gains the quadratic product of the selected unit vector with
the revealed matrix, and his overall goal is to maximize the
total reward. As standard in such settings, the performance
of the decision maker is measured via the regret which is
given by the difference between the total reward of the best
fixed unit vector in hindsight and the total reward of the decision maker. Indeed the best fixed unit vector in hindsight
is simply given by the leading eigenvector of the sum of
revealed matrices and the associated total reward is the corresponding leading eigenvalue. This problem captures as a
special case the problem known as Online Principal Component Analysis that was studied in (Warmuth & Kuzmin,
2006a), (Warmuth & Kuzmin, 2006b), (Nie et al., 2013), in
case of a single principal component.
From an optimization theory point of view, the offline leading eigenvector problem is a non-convex quadratic optimization problem, since w.l.o.g. it requires to maximize a
convex function over a non convex set, i.e. the unit sphere.
However, it could be solved to high precision via eigendecomposition which takes O(n3 ) time where n is the size of
the matrix, or via iterative approximation algorithms such
as the Power or Lanczos algorithms whose running time for
well-conditioned matrices is roughly O(nnz) where nnz denotes the number of non-zeros entries in the input matrix.

