Moderated and Drifting Linear Dynamical Systems

Jinyan Guan 1
JGUAN 1@ EMAIL . ARIZONA . EDU
Kyle Simek 1
KSIMEK @ EMAIL . ARIZONA . EDU
Ernesto Brau 2
BRAUAVIL @ BC . EDU
Clayton T. Morrison 3
CLAYTONM @ EMAIL . ARIZONA . EDU
Emily A. Butler 4
EABUTLER @ EMAIL . ARIZONA . EDU
Kobus Barnard 1
KOBUS @ CS . ARIZONA . EDU
1
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Arizona Department of Computer Science, Boston College
3
School of Information: Science, Technology, and Arts, University of Arizona
4
Norton School of Family and Consumer Sciences, University of Arizona

Abstract
We consider linear dynamical systems, particularly coupled linear oscillators, where the parameters represent meaningful values in a domain
theory, and thus learning what affects them contributes to explanation. Rather than allow perturbations of latent states, we assume that temporal
variation beyond noise is explained by parameter drift, and variation across coupled systems is
a function of moderating variables. This change
in model structure reduces opportunities for efficient inference, and we propose sampling procedures to learn and fit the models. We test our
approach on a real dataset of self-recalled emotional experience measurements of heterosexual
couples engaged in a conversation about a potentially emotional topic, with body mass index
(BMI) being considered as a moderator. We evaluate several models on their ability to predict future conversation dynamics (the last 20% of the
data for each test couple), with shared parameters
being learned using held out data. We validate
the hypothesis that BMI affects the conversation
dynamic in the experimentally chosen topic.

1. Introduction
In many standard applications of linear dynamical systems
(LDS), such as tracking an object moving under Newton’s
laws, the parameters are known, and the latent states (e.g.,
the true object position) are the target of inference. Further, it may make sense that the latent state is subject to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

perturbations (e.g., the object is buffeted by air), in which
case it is convenient to model the latent state with Gaussian
perturbations at each time step. In other applications, the
parameters need to be inferred for a predictive task. In this
case, the trade-offs in parameter, latent state, and observation errors might be optimized for prediction, and the relation between them may not matter so much. By contrast,
for the kind of applications considered here, the parameters correspond directly to quantities in a scientific model,
and therefore understanding what affects those parameters
across individual examples is important. Here it makes less
sense to allow latent state noise, especially when observation noise is substantive. Further, given that we consider the
model itself as indicative of individuals and their circumstances, this suggests that temporal variation beyond noise
processes might be better explained by changes (drift) in
the model. Hence, in this paper we force all variation beyond observation noise to be the result of deterministic process with stochastic parameters.
We take as a motivating example a class of social psychological models aimed at explaining the emotional dynamics of interacting couples. Growing evidence suggests that
coupled linear oscillators (CLOs), a subset of LDS models,
are well-suited to model the oscillatory dynamics of emotional interactions. However, most work to-date (Boker &
Ghisletta, 2001; Boker et al., 2004; Chow et al., 2005; Butner et al., 2005; Boker & Laurenceau, 2006; Finan et al.,
2010; Ferrer & Steele, 2011; Steele & Ferrer, 2011; Ferrer & Helm, 2013) has been limited to fitting the data using regression methods that rely on necessarily noisy estimates of first and second derivatives of the observations.
While convenient to implement using common statistical
packages, there are serious limitations to this regressionbased approach underlying all CLO modeling work in the
social sciences domain. These limitations include the following: 1) there is a fundamental disconnect between error

