Attribute Efficient Linear Regression with Distribution-Dependent Sampling

DORON . KUKLIANSKY @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL
Doron Kukliansky
OHAD . SHAMIR @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL
Ohad Shamir
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

Abstract
We consider a budgeted learning setting, where
the learner can only choose and observe a small
subset of the attributes of each training example.
We develop efficient algorithms for Ridge and
Lasso linear regression, which utilize the geometry of the data by a novel distribution-dependent
sampling scheme, and have excess p
risk bounds
which are better a factor of up to O( d/k) over
the state-of-the-art, where d is the dimension and
k + 1 is the number of observed attributes per
example. Moreover, under reasonable assumptions, our algorithms are the first in our setting
which can provably use less attributes than fullinformation algorithms, which is the main concern in budgeted learning. We complement our
theoretical analysis with experiments which support our claims.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem of medical diagnosis, in which the
learner wishes to determine whether a patient has some disease based on a series of medical tests. In order to build a
model, the learner has to gather a set of volunteers, perform diagnostic tests on them and use the tests results as
features. However, some of the volunteers may be reluctant to undergo a large number of tests, as medical tests
may cause physical discomfort, and will prefer to undergo
only a small number of them. During prediction time, however, patients are more likely to agree to undergo all tests,
to find a diagnosis to their illness.
This problem is an example of budgeted learning (Madani
et al., 2004) or learning with limited attribute observation
(LAO) (Ben-David & Dichterman, 1993). Formally, we
use the local budget setting presented in (Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2011): For each training example (composed of a
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

d-dimensional attribute vector x and a target value y), we
have a budget of k + 1 attributes, where k  d, and we are
able to choose which k+1 attributes we wish to reveal. Our
goal is to find a good predictor that uses all the attributes
despite the partial information at training time.
This problem has been previously studied in (Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2011; Hazan & Koren, 2012), in the context of linear predictors and the squared loss, under both L2 (Ridge)
and L1 (Lasso) norm constraints (see also (Zolghadr et al.,
2013) for a related but different setting, where the cost of
observing attributes is incorporated into the loss function).
Their algorithmic approach is based on online/stochastic
gradient descent, using unbiased gradients estimates of
the loss w.r.t. each example. The gradient estimator requires uniform sampling of attributes (up to the budget constraint), eventually leading to algorithms with expected excess risk bounds
over the optimal
predictor in the hypoth
p
e
(d/k)/m after m examples, compared
esis class of O
p

e
with O
1/m for full-information algorithms that can
view all the attributes (Kakade et al., 2009) (see Table 1).
Another interpretation of these results is that even though
the algorithms view only k + 1 out of d attributes, the algo
e d/2 ,
rithms need the same total number of attributes, O
to obtain the same accuracy . Moreover, (Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2011; Hazan & Koren, 2012) provide a lower bound
establishing that Ridge bound is not improvable in general.
In this paper, despite these seemingly unimprovable results,
we show that they can in fact be improved. We do this by
developing a novel sampling scheme which samples the attributes in a distribution-dependent manner: We sample attributes with large second moments more than others, thus
gaining a distribution-dependent improvement factor. In
other words, our sampling methods take advantage of the
geometry of the data distribution, and utilize it to extract
more ’information’ out of each sample. Under reasonable
assumptions, our methods need less attributes to reach the
same accuracy than the online full-information algorithms,
which is beneficial in budgeted learning scenarios. As far
as we know, these are the first methods provably able to do
so in our setting.

