Multiview Triplet Embedding:
Learning Attributes in Multiple Maps

Ehsan Amid
Aalto University and Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Finland

EHSAN . AMID @ AALTO . FI

Antti Ukkonen
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland

ANTTI . UKKONEN @ TTL . FI

Abstract
For humans, it is usually easier to make statements about the similarity of objects in relative,
rather than absolute terms. Moreover, subjective comparisons of objects can be based on a
number of different and independent attributes.
For example, objects can be compared based on
their shape, color, etc. In this paper, we consider the problem of uncovering these hidden attributes given a set of relative distance judgments
in the form of triplets. The attribute that was used
to generate a particular triplet in this set is unknown. Such data occurs, e.g., in crowdsourcing
applications where the triplets are collected from
a large group of workers.
We propose the Multiview Triplet Embedding
(MVTE) algorithm that produces a number of
low-dimensional maps, each corresponding to
one of the hidden attributes. The method can be
used to assess how many different attributes were
used to create the triplets, as well as to assess the
difficulty of a distance comparison task, and find
objects that have multiple interpretations in relation to the other objects.

1. Introduction
High-dimensional data can be analyzed by first embedding
it into a low-dimensional space (Kruskal, 1964; Tenenbaum et al., 2000; Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Saul & Roweis,
2003). A usual input to such methods is a distance matrix of the items, and the objective is to create an embedding that aims to preserve these distances as well as
possible. However, eliciting absolute distance informaProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

tion can be hard in a number of cases. This is especially true if the judgments must be collected from human evaluators. Therefore, a number of recent methods,
such as Generalized Non-metric Multidimensional Scaling
(GNMDS) (Agarwal et al., 2007), the Crowd Kernel algorithm (Tamuz et al., 2011), and Stochastic Triplet Embedding (STE) (van der Maaten & Weinberger, 2012), only use
relative distance judgments, or some other type of qualitative information (Gomes et al., 2011). These are more
amenable to applications in, e.g., crowdsourcing and human computation.
Relative distances are often collected in the form of triplets,
where the evaluator must answer the following task:
“Which of the items A and B is closer to item
X?”
A common problem when collecting such data is that the
evaluators may provide inconsistent answers. Someone
might say that A is closer to X, while somebody else might
says that B is closer. A lot of research on human computation tends to make the assumption that the tasks have a
single correct solution, and all other solutions are incorrect. This is clearly a good approach in some applications,
e.g., labeling tasks where the items unambiguously either
do or do not satisfy some property. In such cases, it is important to aggregate the solutions of a single task to provide
the most probable correct answer (Dawid & Skene, 1979;
Whitehill et al., 2009; Raykar & Yu, 2012).
However, with some tasks, the situation can be more ambiguous. Consider the following toy example in the context of the comparison task given above. We are given a set
of objects, each having two attributes: shape (o or x) and
color (‘red’ or ‘green’). The user is asked to compare item
X = ‘a red o’, with item A = ‘a red x’ and item B = ‘a
green o’. We argue that A and B are both correct answers
depending on the point of view taken by the evaluator. In
the absence of more precise instructions, the decision can

