Atomic Spatial Processes

Sean Jewell
SEAN . JEWELL @ STAT. UBC . CA
Neil Spencer
NEIL . SPENCER @ STAT. UBC . CA
Alexandre Bouchard-Côté
BOUCHARD @ STAT. UBC . CA
Department of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada

Abstract
The emergence of compact GPS systems and
the establishment of open data initiatives has resulted in widespread availability of spatial data
for many urban centres. These data can be leveraged to develop data-driven intelligent resource
allocation systems for urban issues such as policing, sanitation, and transportation. We employ techniques from Bayesian non-parametric
statistics to develop a process which captures a
common characteristic of urban spatial datasets.
Specifically, our new spatial process framework
models events which occur repeatedly at discrete spatial points, the number and locations
of which are unknown a priori. We develop a
representation of our spatial process which facilitates posterior simulation, resulting in an interpretable and computationally tractable model.
The framework’s superiority over both empirical
grid-based models and Dirichlet process mixture
models is demonstrated by fitting, interpreting,
and comparing models of graffiti prevalence for
both downtown Vancouver and Manhattan.

1. Introduction
There has been a recent rise in the quantity and quality of
spatial data due to the emergence of new technologies, such
as the widespread availability of cheap and compact global
positioning device systems (GPS). The availability of this
new data represents an opportunity in machine learning and
artificial intelligence to develop intelligent resource allocation systems for urban centres. Accordingly, these opportunities have been accompanied by a rise in the prominence of spatial statistics, in particular urban spatial statistics. Data-driven analyses have been conducted in areas
such as transportation (Páez & Scott, 2005), health (Boruff
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

et al., 2012), and crime (Malleson & Andresen, 2014). In
particular, applying machine learning to predictive policing
(Short et al., 2008; Mohler et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012;
2013) calls for new types of spatial models.
Spatial datasets are often comprised of geospatial coordinates recording locations of phenomena of interest (e.g.
graffiti locations, shown in Figures 1a and 1c). A classical
modelling approach involves conceptualizing the data as a
realization of a Poisson process (PP). A PP is parametrized
by a rate measure from which all observations are independently chosen. Lately, attention has been devoted to
Bayesian non-parametric approaches to modelling this rate
measure (e.g. Gelfand et al. (2005); Guindani et al. (2009);
Taddy (2010); Ding et al. (2012)).
PP models employing continuous (or piecewise continuous) rate measures are not appropriate for all urban spatial
datasets, specifically those datasets in which multiple observations can occur in the same location. Henceforth, we
refer to such datasets as atomic data. A location exhibiting
multiple observations demonstrates positive probability associated with that location. Informally, points with positive
probability violate the assumption of a piecewise continuous rate measure, in which all points should be (almostsurely) unique. We formalize this intuition in terms of predictive power below.
In order for a rate measure to capture multiple identical observations, it must possess atoms (points of positive probability) at the location of these observations. We call such
rate measures atomic rate measures. Note that in this paper, we employ purely atomic rate measures. That is, we
use rate measures with no continuous components. We utilize urban graffiti locations as a running example of atomic
data throughout this paper. Consider Figure 1a which illustrates the locations of graffiti in Vancouver. There are
many locations possessing more than five incidents of graffiti, drastically violating the assumption of a continuous
rate measure. The New York OpenData catalog contains
many atomic urban datasets which are relevant to designing resource allocation systems, such as noise complaints,
housing code violations, and service requests. Manage-

