On the Rate of Convergence and Error Bounds for LSTD(λ)

Manel Tagorti
Bruno Scherrer
Inria, Villers-lès-Nancy, F-54600, France
Université de Lorraine, LORIA, UMR 7503, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, F-54506, France

Abstract
We consider LSTD(λ), the least-squares
temporal-difference algorithm with eligibility
traces algorithm proposed by Boyan (2002). It
computes a linear approximation of the value
function of a fixed policy in a large Markov
Decision Process. Under a β-mixing assumption, we derive, for any value of λ ∈ (0, 1), a
high-probability bound on the rate of convergence of this algorithm to its limit. We deduce
a high-probability bound on the error of this
algorithm, that extends (and slightly improves)
that derived by Lazaric et al. (2012) in the
specific case where λ = 0. In the context
of temporal-difference algorithms with value
function approximation, this analysis is to our
knowledge the first to provide insight on the
choice of the eligibility-trace parameter λ with
respect to the approximation quality of the space
and the number of samples.

1. Introduction
In a large Markov Decision Process context, we consider
LSTD(λ), the least-squares temporal-difference algorithm
with eligibility traces proposed by Boyan (2002). It is a
popular algorithm for performing a projection onto a linear space of the value function of a fixed policy. Such a
value estimation procedure can for instance be useful in a
policy iteration context to eventually estimate an approximately optimal controller (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996;
Szepesvári, 2010).
The asymptotic almost sure convergence of LSTD(λ) was
proved by Nedic & Bertsekas (2002). Under a β-mixing assumption, and given a finite number of samples n, Lazaric
et al. (2012) derived a high-probability error bound with a
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MANEL . TAGORTI @ INRIA . FR
BRUNO . SCHERRER @ INRIA . FR

Õ( √1n ) rate1 in the restricted situation where λ = 0. Pires
& Szepesvári (2012) also sketch an analysis of variations
of LSTD(0) with several sorts of regularizations. To our
knowledge, however, similar finite-sample error bounds are
not known in the literature for λ > 0. The main goal of
this paper is to fill this gap. This is all the more important that it is known that the parameter λ allows to control the quality of the asymptotic solution of the value: by
moving λ from 0 to 1, one can continuously move from
an oblique projection of the value (Scherrer, 2010) to its
orthogonal projection and consequently improve the corresponding guarantee (Tsitsiklis & Roy, 1997) (restated in
Theorem 2, Section 3).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 starts by describing the necessary background. Section 3 then contains our main results. Theorem 1 shows that unpenalized
LSTD(λ) converges to its limit at the rate Õ( √1n ). We then
deduce a global error (Corollary 1) that sheds some light on
the role of the parameter λ, and discuss some of its practical consequences. Theorem 3 then extends this result to
the case of penalized LSTD(λ). Section 4 will go on by
providing a detailed proof of our claims. Finally, Section 5
concludes by describing related and potential future work.

2. LSTD(λ) and Related Background
We consider a Markov chain taking its values on a finite or
countable state space X , with transition kernel P , and that
is ergodic2 ; consequently, it admits a unique stationary distribution µ. For any K ∈ R+ , we denote B(X , K) the set
of functions defined on X and bounded by K. We consider
a reward function r ∈ B(X , Rmax ) for some Rmax ∈ R, that
provides the quality of being in some state. The value function v related to the Markov chain is defined, for any state
i, as the average discounted sum of rewards along infinitely
1

Throughout the paper, we shall write f (n) = Õ(g(n)) as a
shorthand for f (n) = O(g(n) logk g(n)) for some k ≥ 0.
2
We focus on finite/countable state spaces essentially because
it eases the presentation. We believe that extensions to more general state spaces is straight-forward.

