A New Generalized Error Path Algorithm for Model Selection

Bin Gu1,2
JSGUBIN @ NUIST. EDU . CN
Charles X. Ling1
CLING @ CSD . UWO . CA
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario, Canada
2
School of Computer & Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, China

Abstract
Model selection with cross validation (CV) is
very popular in machine learning. However, CV
with grid and other common search strategies
cannot guarantee to find the model with minimum CV error, which is often the ultimate goal
of model selection. Recently, various solution
path algorithms have been proposed for several
important learning algorithms including support
vector classification, Lasso, and so on. However,
they still do not guarantee to find the model with
minimum CV error. In this paper, we first show
that the solution paths produced by various algorithms have the property of piecewise linearity. Then, we prove that a large class of error
(or loss) functions are piecewise constant, linear,
or quadratic w.r.t. the regularization parameter,
based on the solution path. Finally, we propose a
new generalized error path algorithm (GEP), and
prove that it will find the model with minimum
CV error for the entire range of the regularization
parameter. The experimental results on a variety
of datasets not only confirm our theoretical findings, but also show that the best model with our
GEP has better generalization error on the test
data, compared to the grid search, manual search,
and random search.

1. Introduction
In machine learning, most of learning algorithms are parameterized (normally continuously). For example, support vector machines (SVMs) (Vapnik, 1998) have a regularization parameter controlling the trade-off between a
large margin and a small error penalty. Lasso (Tibshirani,
1996) has a regularization parameter on model’s L1 penalty
to lead to sparse solutions. It is obvious that one fundamenProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

tal task of the parameterized learning algorithms is model
selection: tuning the parameters of models to achieve optimal generalization performance.
Model selection with cross validation (CV) (Arlot et al.,
2010) is very popular in machine learning. The main idea
of CV is to divide data into two parts (once or several
times): one (the training set) used to train a model and the
other (the validation set) used to estimate the error of the
model. CV selects the parameter among a group of candidates with the smallest CV error, where the CV error is
the average of the multiple validation errors. Normally, Kfold, leave-one-out, or repeated random sub-sampling procedures were used for CV. For example, Jahrer & Töscher
(2012) used 16-fold CV for collaborative filtering. Foster et al. (2014) used leave-one-out CV on SVM for medical diagnosis. Usai et al. (2009) used repeated random
sub-sampling validation on Lasso for genomic selection.
Izbicki (2013); Pahikkala et al. (2012) proposed fast algorithms for computing CV error for each candidate. Because
of the simplicity and the universality, CV is a widespread
strategy for model selection (Arlot et al., 2010).
As mentioned above, CV works with a group of candidate values of parameter. Normally, the parameter are
searched by some strategies. The most popular strategy
is grid searching. For example, the regularization parameter C of SVM is searched on a 18 grid linearly spaced
in the region {(log2 C)| − 9 ≤ log2 C ≤ 8}, as used in
Yang & Ong (2011). Grid search is reliable in low dimensional parameter spaces. For high dimensional parameter
spaces (such as parameters in Deep Belief Networks (Hinton et al., 2006)), manual search (Hinton, 2010), and random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) were often used for
CV. However, as we know, CV with grid, manual, and random search strategies only considers finite candidates due
to the limited computing resources. It cannot guarantee to
find the model with the minimum CV error in the whole
parameter space, which is often the ultimate goal of model
selection.
In this decade, a novel learning methodology called solution path (Hastie et al., 2004) has been developed for con-

