Hidden Markov Anomaly Detection

Nico Görnitz
Berlin Institute of Technology, 10587 Berlin, Germany

NICO . GOERNITZ @ TU - BERLIN . DE

Mikio Braun
Berlin Institute of Technology, 10587 Berlin, Germany

MIKIO . BRAUN @ TU - BERLIN . DE

Marius Kloft
Humboldt University of Berlin, 10099 Berlin, Germany

KLOFT @ HU - BERLIN . DE

Abstract
We introduce a new anomaly detection methodology for data with latent dependency structure.
As a particular instantiation, we derive a hidden
Markov anomaly detector that extends the regular one-class support vector machine. We optimize the approach, which is non-convex, via a
DC (difference of convex functions) algorithm,
and show that the parameter ν can be conveniently used to control the number of outliers in
the model. The empirical evaluation on artificial
and real data from the domains of computational
biology and computational sustainability shows
that the approach can achieve significantly higher
anomaly detection performance than the regular
one-class SVM.

1. Introduction
In the age of big data, effective filtering methodologies for
unlabeled data such as the framework of learning-based
anomaly detection (Markou & Singh, 2003; Chandola
et al., 2009) are gaining increasing interest by the machine
learning community (Blanchard et al., 2010; Saligrama &
Zhao, 2012; Kloft & Laskov, 2012; Görnitz et al., 2014).
Learning-based anomaly detection methods are at the heart
of several important applications areas, including, in computer security, the detection of yet unsignatured attacks
and novel intrusions in computer networks (Jyothsna et al.,
2011) and, in computational biology, the characterization
of systematic anomalies in microarray analysis (Noto et al.,
2014) and deep sequencing data (Kukita et al., 2013).
Prominent approaches to learning-based anomaly detection include prevalent kernel-based approaches such as the
one-class support vector machine (OC-SVM) (Schölkopf
et al., 2001) or support vector data description (Tax & Duin,
2004). Such methods use a kernel approach to learn a nonProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

linear representation of the class membership that can be
used to predict the anomaly score of new and yet unseen inputs. These methods are based on the fundamental assumption that the nominal inputs xi are realized independently
from a common probability distribution P , without exploiting any potential patterns contained in the outputs yi . However, in many real-world applications, the data is associated
with an inherently underlying output structure: e.g., in intrusion detection or speech and text recognition the data
naturally admits a language and grammar structure (Rieck
et al., 2010; Joachims et al., 2009); in bioinformatics, the
annotation into exonic, intronic, and intergenic regions inherently underlies genomic data (Schweikert et al., 2009).
It has been shown that methodologies exploiting such potential structure such as the structured support vector machine (SSVM) (Tsochantaridis et al., 2005a) can substantially help performance in such contexts (Rätsch & Sonnenburg, 2007; Joachims et al., 2009; Rieck et al., 2010).
In this paper, we propose a novel kernel-based framework
for the detection of anomalies with underlying sequence
structure, called hidden Markov anomaly detection. This
approach can be introduced in a general way for data with
latent dependency structure, and, for a specific choice of
loss function and joint feature map, we obtain a hidden
Markov analogue to the one-class SVM. Just like the original OC-SVM, the method has a parameter ν that controls the fraction of the outliers, and enjoys deep theoretical
guarantees: we prove that a large deviation bound holds on
the generalization error (measured with respect to the loss
function).
The presented approach is general enough to work with
many problems that can be addressed within the structured
output prediction framework. In this paper though, we focus on using hidden Markov chain type structured output
models, as common in label sequence learning, to facilitate
the detection of anomalous sequences where changes follow a hidden Markov model. That way, we achieve much
better performance compared to the standard OC-SVM,
which treats each position independently, as our empirical
evaluation shows.

