A Bayesian nonparametric procedure for comparing algorithms

Alessio Benavoli
Francesca Mangili
Giorgio Corani
Marco Zaffalon
IDSIA, Manno, Switzerland

Abstract
A fundamental task in machine learning is to
compare the performance of multiple algorithms.
This is usually performed by the frequentist
Friedman test followed by multiple comparisons.
This implies dealing with the well-known shortcomings of null hypothesis significance tests. We
propose a Bayesian approach to overcome these
problems. We provide three main contributions.
First, we propose a nonparametric Bayesian version of the Friedman test using a Dirichlet process (DP) based prior. We show that, from a
Bayesian perspective, the Friedman test is an inference for a multivariate mean based on an ellipsoid inclusion test. Second, we derive a joint procedure for the multiple comparisons which accounts for their dependencies and which is based
on the posterior probability computed through
the DP. The proposed approach allows verifying
the null hypothesis, not only rejecting it. Third,
as a practical application we show the results in
our algorithm for racing, i.e. identifying the best
algorithm among a large set of candidates sequentially assessed. Our approach consistently
outperforms its frequentist counterpart.

1. Introduction
A fundamental task in machine learning is to compare
multiple algorithms. The non-parametric Friedman test
(Demšar, 2006) is recommended to this end. The advantages of the non-parametric approach are that it does not
average measures taken on different data sets; it does not
assume normality of the sample means; it is robust to outliers. The Friedman test is a null-hypothesis significance
tests. It thus controls the Type I error, namely the probaProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ALESSIO @ IDSIA . CH
FRANCESCA @ IDSIA . CH
GIORGIO @ IDSIA . CH
ZAFFALON @ IDSIA . CH

bility of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is true. The
framework of null hypothesis significance tests has however important drawbacks. For instance one usually sets the
significance level to 0.01 or 0.05, without having the possibility of an optimal trade-off between Type I and Type II
errors.
Instead, Bayesian tests of hypothesis (Kruschke, 2010) estimate the posterior probability of the null and of the alternative hypothesis, which allows to take decisions which
minimize the posterior risk. See (Kruschke, 2010) for a
detailed discussion of further advantages of Bayesian hypothesis testing. However there are currently no Bayesian
counterparts of the Friedman test. Our first contribution
is a Bayesian version of the Friedman test. We adopt
the Dirichlet process (DP) (Ferguson, 1973) as a model
for the prior. The DP has been already used to develop Bayesian counterparts of frequentist non-parametric
estimators such as Kaplan-Meier (Susarla & Van Ryzin,
1976), the Kendall’s tau (Dalal & Phadia, 1983) and the
Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Benavoli et al., 2014). Our
novel derivation shows that, from a Bayesian perspective,
the Friedman test is an inference for a multivariate mean
based on an ellipsoid inclusion test.
When the frequentist Friedman test rejects the null hypothesis, a series of multiple pairwise comparison are
performed in order to assess which algorithm is significantly different from which. The traditional post-hoc
analysis controls the family-wise Type I error (FWER),
namely the probability of finding at least one Type I error
among the null hypotheses which are rejected when performing the multiple comparisons. The traditional Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons controls the
FWER but yields too conservative inferences. More modern approaches for controlling the FWER are discussed
in (Demšar, 2006; Garcia & Herrera, 2008). All such approaches simplistically treat the multiple comparisons as
independent from each other. But when comparing algorithms {a, b, c}, the outcome of the comparisons (a,b),
(a,c), (b,c) are not independent.

