Entropy evaluation based on confidence intervals of frequency estimates :
Application to the learning of decision trees

Mathieu Serrurier
IRIT - Université Paul Sabatier 118 route de Narbonne 31062, Toulouse Cedex 9, France

SERRURIER @ IRIT. FR

Henri Prade
PRADE @ IRIT. FR
IRIT - Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France & QCIS, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Entropy gain is widely used for learning decision
trees. However, as we go deeper downward the
tree, the examples become rarer and the faithfulness of entropy decreases. Thus, misleading
choices and over-fitting may occur and the tree
has to be adjusted by using an early-stop criterion or post pruning algorithms. However, these
methods still depends on the choices previously
made, which may be unsatisfactory. We propose
a new cumulative entropy function based on confidence intervals on frequency estimates that together considers the entropy of the probability
distribution and the uncertainty around the estimation of its parameters. This function takes
advantage of the ability of a possibility distribution to upper bound a family of probabilities
previously estimated from a limited set of examples and of the link between possibilistic specificity order and entropy. The proposed measure
has several advantages over the classical one. It
performs significant choices of split and provides
a statistically relevant stopping criterion that allows the learning of trees whose size is wellsuited w.r.t. the available data. On the top of that,
it also provides a reasonable estimator of the performances of a decision tree. Finally, we show
that it can be used for designing a simple and efficient online learning algorithm.

1. Introduction
Although decision tree methods have been one of the first
machine learning approaches, they remain popular because
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

of their simplicity and flexibility. Most algorithms for
building decision trees are based on the use of information
gain function for choosing the best attribute for splitting
the data at each step of the learning process. Thus, the
ID3 algorithm is based on logarithmic entropy (Quinlan,
1986), while CART (Breiman et al., 1984) is based on the
Gini impurity measure. Numerous alternatives have been
proposed for the gain function (Buntine & Niblett, 1992;
Lee, 2001; Nowozin, 2012). However, one drawback in
this kind of approach is that the gain function becomes less
and less significant when the number of examples in the
considered node decreases. In the particular case of log
entropy-based gain, which is still one of the most largely
used, splitting a node always decreases the weighted entropy of the leaves obtained. It then leads to learn trees that
may overfit the data and then decreases the performance
of the algorithm. This can be avoided by using early-stop
criterion or post-pruning methods. However, these methods still depend on the initial choices based on the entropy
calculus, even if this evaluation may be not significant.
The main limitation of the log-based entropy (but this also
applies to some extent to its multiple refinements) is that
it does not take into account the amount of data used for
estimating the frequencies on the different classes.
The goal of this paper is to show how to extend the
classical entropy calculus in order to take into account
the amount of information available and then having a
single entropy measure that addresses the different issues
of the decision tree learning process in an elegant way.
We propose to use the upper bound of the frequency
estimates for defining a so-called possibilistic cumulative entropy. The approach relies on the building of a
possibility distribution. Quantitative possibility measures
can be viewed as upper bounds of probabilities. Then, a
possibility distribution represents a family of probability
distributions (Dubois & Prade, 1992). In agreement with
this view, a probability-possibility transformation has

