Faster Rates for the Frank-Wolfe Method over Strongly-Convex Sets
Dan Garber
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

DANGAR @ TX . TECHNION . AC . IL

Elad Hazan
Princeton University

EHAZAN @ CS . PRINCETON . EDU

Abstract
The Frank-Wolfe method (a.k.a. conditional gradient algorithm) for smooth optimization has regained much interest in recent years in the context of large scale optimization and machine
learning. A key advantage of the method is that
it avoids projections - the computational bottleneck in many applications - replacing it by a linear optimization step. Despite this advantage, the
known convergence rates of the FW method fall
behind standard first order methods for most settings of interest. It is an active line of research
to derive faster linear optimization-based algorithms for various settings of convex optimization.
In this paper we consider the special case of optimization over strongly convex sets, for which
we prove that the vanila FW method converges
at a rate of t12 . This gives a quadratic improvement in convergence rate compared to the general case, in which convergence is of the order 1t ,
and known to be tight. We show that various balls
induced by `p norms, Schatten norms and group
norms are strongly convex on one hand and on
the other hand, linear optimization over these sets
is straightforward and admits a closed-form solution. We further show how several previous fastrate results for the FW method follow easily from
our analysis.

1. Introduction
The Frank-Wolfe method, originally introduced by Frank
and Wolfe in the 1950’s (Frank & Wolfe, 1956), is a first
order method for the minimization of a smooth convex
function over a convex set. Its main advantage in largend

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

scale problems is that it is a first-order and projection-free
method - i.e. the algorithm proceeds by iteratively solving a
linear optimization problem and remaining inside the feasible domain. For matrix completion problems, metric learning, sparse PCA, structural SVM and other large-scale machine learning problems, this feature enabled the derivation
of algorithms that are practical on one hand and come with
provable convergence rates on the other (Jaggi & Sulovský,
2010; Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013; Dudı́k et al., 2012; Harchaoui et al., 2012; Hazan & Kale, 2012; Shalev-Shwartz
et al., 2011; Laue, 2012).
Despite its empirical success, the main drawback of the
method is its relatively slow convergence rate in comparison to optimal first order methods. The convergence rate
of the method is on the order of 1/t where t is the number of iterations, and this is known to be tight. In contrast, Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent method gives
a rate of 1/t2 for general convex smooth problems and a
rate e ⇥(t) is known for smooth and strongly convex problems. The following question arises: are there projectionfree methods with convergence rates matching that of projected gradient-descent and its extensions?
Motivated by this question, in this work we advance the line
of research for faster convergence rates of projection free
methods. We prove that in case both the objective function
and the feasible set are strongly convex (in fact a slightly
weaker assumption than strong convexity of the objective is
required), the vanilla Frank-Wolfe method converges at an
accelerated rate of 1/t2 . The improved convergence rate is
independent of the dimension. This is also the first convergence result for the FW that we are aware of that achieves
a rate that is between the standard 1/t rate and a linear rate.
We further show how the analysis used to prove the latter result enables to easily derive previous fast convergence
rates for the FW method.
We motivate the study of optimization over strongly convex
sets by demonstrating that various norms that serve as popular regularizes in machine learning problems, including
`p norms, matrix Schatten norms and matrix group norms,

