Spectral MLE: Top-K Rank Aggregation from Pairwise Comparisons

Yuxin Chen
Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

YXCHEN @ STANFORD . EDU

Changho Suh
CHSUH @ KAIST. AC . KR
Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea

Abstract
This paper explores the preference-based top-K
rank aggregation problem. Suppose that a collection of items is repeatedly compared in pairs, and
one wishes to recover a consistent ordering that
emphasizes the top-K ranked items, based on
partially revealed preferences. We focus on the
Bradley-Terry-Luce model that postulates a set
of latent preference scores underlying all items,
where the odds of paired comparisons depend
only on the relative scores of the items involved.
We characterize the minimax limits on identifiability of top-K ranked items, in the presence
of random and non-adaptive sampling. Our results highlight a separation measure that quantifies the gap of preference scores between the
K th and (K + 1)th ranked items. The minimum
sample complexity required for reliable top-K
ranking scales inversely with the separation measure. To approach this minimax limit, we propose a nearly linear-time ranking scheme, called
Spectral MLE, that returns the indices of the topK items in accordance to a careful score estimate. In a nutshell, Spectral MLE starts with an
initial score estimate with minimal squared loss
(obtained via a spectral method), and then successively refines each component with the assistance of coordinate-wise MLEs. Encouragingly,
Spectral MLE allows perfect top-K item identification under minimal sample complexity. The
practical applicability of Spectral MLE is further
corroborated by numerical experiments.

1. Introduction and Motivation
The task of rank aggregation is encountered in a wide spectrum of contexts like social choice (Caplin & Nalebuff,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1991; Soufiani et al., 2014b), web search and information
retrieval (Dwork et al., 2001), crowd sourcing (Chen et al.,
2013), recommendation systems (Baltrunas et al., 2010), to
name just a few. Given partial preference information over
a collection of items, the aim is to identify a consistent ordering that best respects the revealed preference. In the
high-dimensional regime, one is often faced with two challenges: 1) the number of items to be ranked is ever growing,
which makes it increasingly harder to recover a consistent
total ordering over all items; 2) the observed data is highly
incomplete and inconsistent: only a small number of noisy
pairwise / listwise preferences can be acquired.
In an effort to address such challenges, this paper explores a
popular pairwise preference-based model, which postulates
the existence of a ground-truth ranking. Specifically, consider a parametric model involving n items, each assigned
a preference score that determines its rank. Concrete examples of preference scores include the overall rating of an
athlete, the academic performance and competitiveness of
a university, the dining quality of a restaurant, etc. Each
item is then repeatedly compared against a few others in
pairs, yielding a set of noisy binary comparisons generated
based on the relative preference scores. In many situations,
the number of repeated comparisons essentially reflects the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) / quality of the information revealed for each pair of items. The goal is then to develop a
“denoising” procedure that recovers the ground-truth ranking with minimal sample complexity.
There has been a proliferation of ranking schemes that suggest partial solutions. While the ranking that we are seeking is better treated as a function of the preference parameters, most of the aforementioned schemes adopt the natural
“plug-in” procedure, that is, start by inferring the preference scores, and then return a ranking in accordance to the
parametric estimates. The most popular paradigm is arguably the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) (Ford,
1957), where the main appeal of MLE is its inherent convexity under several comparison models, e.g. the BradleyTerry-Luce (BTL) model (Bradley & Terry, 1952; Luce,
1959). Encouragingly, MLE often achieves low `2 estimation loss while retaining efficient finite-sample complexity.
Another prominent alternative concerns a family of spectral

