Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

Adarsh Prasad*
Harsh Pareek*
Pradeep Ravikumar
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA

Abstract
The rank aggregation problem has been studied
with varying desiderata in varied communities
such as Theoretical Computer Science, Statistics,
Information Retrieval and Social Welfare Theory. We introduce a variant of this problem we
call distributional rank aggregation, where the
ranking data is only available via the induced distribution over the set of all permutations. We provide a novel translation of the usual social welfare theory axioms to this setting. As we show
this allows for a more quantitative characterization of these axioms: which then are not only less
prone to misinterpretation, but also allow simpler proofs for some key impossibility theorems.
Most importantly, these quantitative characterizations lead to natural and novel relaxations of
these axioms, which as we show, allow us to get
around celebrated impossibility results in social
choice theory. We are able to completely characterize the class of positional scoring rules with
respect to our axioms and show that Borda Count
is optimal in a certain sense.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of rank aggregation: a set of agents
provide their ranked preferences over a set of alternatives,
and we wish to aggregate them into a consensus ranking.
Due in part to its generality and importance, this problem
has been studied with varying desiderata in varied communities.
In Theoretical Computer Science, this has been framed as a
combinatorial optimization problem of finding the ranking
that minimizes the average distance (for some appropriate
distance measure such as the Kemeny distance) to the set of
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ADARSH @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
HARSHP @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

agent rankings. These resulting problems are however typically NP-hard, and research effort has been devoted to developing polynomial time algorithms with approximation
guarantees (Ailon, 2010; Dwork et al., 2001a;b). These can
also be cast as maximizing the average utility (in contrast to
minimizing the average distance); Pivato (2013); Conitzer
& Sandholm (2005) in particular showed that a large class
of existing voting rules could also be interpreted as such
average utility maximizers. Lu & Boutilier (2010) design
a suitable utility measure that in their context captured the
facet of uncertainty about the availability of alternatives.
In the field of Information Retrieval, the problem of rank
aggregation arises as a “meta-algorithm” where for instance we are given the output rankings from multiple
search engines, and we are to combine these into a single ranking (Dwork et al., 2001a;b). Also in this domain,
Cheng et al. (2010) cast the aggregation task in a conditional or supervised setting, where we are given a training
set of (feature-vector, ranking) pairs, and the task is to learn
a map from the feature vector space to the set of permutations.
In Sociometrics, “social welfare theories” by Condorcet
(1785); Arrow (1951) specify normative properties (axioms) that any reasonable rank aggregation should satisfy.
Some results (including the celebrated impossibility theorem of Arrow (1951)) then state that some subsets of axioms cannot be jointly compatible. Several voting rules
such as Condorcet methods, Borda Count, Runoff procedures, etc. have then been suggested, which satisfy different subsets of these axioms.
In Statistics, the agents’ preferences are viewed as i.i.d.
samples from a statistical model and the problem is reformulated to that of learning a distribution over permutations and of computing the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) of the parameters; the final aggregation returned is then typically just the mode of this distribution.
The focus in this line of work has then been on investigating efficiently learnable models for different types of in* Denotes equal contribution by the authors

