Manifold-valued Dirichlet Processes
Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Jia Xu†
Baba C. Vemuri§
Vikas Singh†
†
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
§
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA

HWKIM @ CS . WISC . EDU
JIAXU @ CS . WISC . EDU
VEMURI @ CISE . UFL . EDU
VSINGH @ BIOSTAT. WISC . EDU

http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/˜hwkim/projects/dp-mglm/

Abstract
Statistical models for manifold-valued data permit capturing the intrinsic nature of the curved
spaces in which the data lie and have been a topic
of research for several decades. Typically, these
formulations use geodesic curves and distances
defined locally for most cases — this makes it
hard to design parametric models globally on
smooth manifolds. Thus, most (manifold specific) parametric models available today assume
that the data lie in a small neighborhood on the
manifold. To address this ‘locality’ problem, we
propose a novel nonparametric model which unifies multivariate general linear models (MGLMs)
using multiple tangent spaces. Our framework
generalizes existing work on (both Euclidean
and non-Euclidean) general linear models providing a recipe to globally extend the locallydefined parametric models (using a mixture of
local models). By grouping observations into
sub-populations at multiple tangent spaces, our
method provides insights into the hidden structure (geodesic relationships) in the data. This
yields a framework to group observations and
discover geodesic relationships between covariates X and manifold-valued responses Y , which
we call Dirichlet process mixtures of multivariate general linear models (DP-MGLM) on Riemannian manifolds. Finally, we present proof of
concept experiments to validate our model.

1. Introduction
The regression problem is amongst the most fundamental
statistical tools in data analysis. If x ∈ X is a set of
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

covariates and y ∈ Y is a measured response variable,
the inference task is to identify the function `(·) such that
y = `(x) + , where  is the noise term. Linear regression corresponds to the setting where `(·) is a linear function. Depending on other forms of `(·) and/or distributional
assumptions on the response variables, we obtain progressively richer formulations such as logistic and Poisson regression. Often, one wants to determine non-linear relationships between the response variable and the covariates.
While occasionally, applying a non-linearity to the output
of a linear function is sufficient, such models fall short of
characterizing arbitrarily shaped response functions — for
instance, a mixture of simple (e.g., linear) models which
pertain to clusters of the covariates which have similar relationships to the response variable, y. One solution is to
impose a non-parametric Bayesian prior on a set of linear
models. A constructive example of this idea is the Dirichlet Process Mixtures of Generalized Linear Models (DPGLM) (Hannah et al., 2011).
While the family of linear regression models is very well
studied, they are not directly applicable when the response
variables y do not live in a vector space. Various scientific disciplines routinely acquire measurements where y is
manifold-valued. For instance, the response variable may
be a probability distribution function, a parametric family such as a multinomial, a covariance matrix or samples drawn from a high dimensional unit sphere. Such
data arise routinely in machine learning (Lebanon, 2005;
Ho et al., 2013b; Cherian & Sra, 2011; Sra & Hosseini,
2013), medical imaging (Cetingul & Vidal, 2011; Lenglet
et al., 2006) and computer vision (Srivastava et al., 2007;
Porikli et al., 2006; Cherian & Sra, 2014). Even when performing a basic statistical analysis on such datasets, we
cannot apply vector-space operations (such as addition and
multiplication) because the manifold is not a vector space.
Forcibly assuming a Euclidean structure on such response
variables may yield poor goodness of fit and/or weak statistical power for a fixed sample size. Driven by these motiva-

