Proteins, Particles, and Pseudo-Max-Marginals: A Submodular Approach

Jason L. Pacheco
Erik B. Sudderth
Department of Computer Science, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA

Abstract
Variants of max-product (MP) belief propagation
effectively find modes of many complex graphical models, but are limited to discrete distributions. Diverse particle max-product (D-PMP) robustly approximates max-product updates in continuous MRFs using stochastically sampled particles, but previous work was specialized to treestructured models. Motivated by the challenging problem of protein side chain prediction, we
extend D-PMP in several key ways to create a
generic MAP inference algorithm for loopy models. We define a modified diverse particle selection objective that is provably submodular, leading to an efficient greedy algorithm with rigorous
optimality guarantees, and corresponding maxmarginal error bounds. We further incorporate
tree-reweighted variants of the MP algorithm to
allow provable verification of global MAP recovery in many models. Our general-purpose
MATLAB library is applicable to a wide range of
pairwise graphical models, and we validate our
approach using optical flow benchmarks. We further demonstrate superior side chain prediction
accuracy compared to baseline algorithms from
the state-of-the-art Rosetta package.

1. Introduction
Continous random variables are often used to model complex interactions among objects in the world around us,
leading to challenging multi-modal posterior distributions.
The maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference objective for
such models is typically non-convex, and optimization algorithms become trapped in local optima. Approaches that
discretize the latent space and apply max-product (MP)
belief propagation (Pearl, 1988; Wainwright et al., 2005;
Wainwright & Jordan, 2008) can be effective in few dimensions, but for high-dimensional models only coarse
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

PACHECOJ @ CS . BROWN . EDU
SUDDERTH @ CS . BROWN . EDU

discretizations are feasible. Continuous optimization can
be performed via Monte Carlo sampling and simulated annealing (Geman & Geman, 1984; Andrieu et al., 2003), but
these methods often require long computation times.
A number of stochastic local search methods have been
developed (Trinh & McAllester, 2009; Peng et al., 2011;
Besse et al., 2012; Kothapa et al., 2011) that combine
the flexibility of sampling-based approaches with the efficiency of MP message passing. This family of particle
max-product (PMP) methods share a general framework:
at each iteration new hypotheses are sampled from stochastic proposals, evaluated via discrete max-product message
updates, and accepted or rejected based on some criterion.
PMP algorithms differ primarily in their choice of stochastic proposals and particle selection criteria.
The diverse particle max-product (D-PMP) (Pacheco et al.,
2014) algorithm maintains hypotheses near multiple local
optima via an optimization-based selection step that minimizes distortions in MP message values. D-PMP has excellent empirical performance on a human pose estimation
task, but there is little theoretical justification for its particle selection integer program (IP), and the proposed greedy
algorithm has no optimality guarantees. Previous D-PMP
formulations also assumed a tree-structured Markov random field (MRF) where MP provides exact max-marginals,
and several key assumptions would be violated by a naive
generalization to loopy graphical models.
In this paper, we generalize D-PMP to arbitrary pairwise MRFs with cycles by adapting tree-reweighted maxproduct (RMP) belief propagation (Wainwright et al.,
2005). We define an alternative message distortion metric which leads to a submodular particle selection IP. An
efficient greedy algorithm is guaranteed to produce message errors within a fraction of (1 − 1e ) of the best achievable, and thus provide provably accurate max-marginal estimates. Our MATLAB library implements the D-PMP algorithm for general pairwise MRFs. For the tasks of optical flow estimation and protein side chain prediction, we
demonstrate substantial improvements over previous PMP
algorithms, and performance levels that match or exceed
state-of-the-art domain-specific inference algorithms.

