Learning Local Invariant Mahalanobis Distances

Ethan Fetaya
Weizmann Institute of science

ETHAN . FETAYA @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Shimon Ullman
Weizmann Institute of science

SHIMON . ULLMAN @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL

Abstract

simplicity we will not make this distinction. Various algorithms (Weinberger & Saul, 2009; Bar-Hillel et al., 2005;
Davis et al., 2007) differ by the objective through which
they learn the matrix M from the data. As M is a PSD
matrix, it can be written as M = LT L and therefore

For many tasks and data types, there are natural transformations to which the data should be
invariant or insensitive. For instance, in visual
recognition, natural images should be insensitive to rotation and translation. This requirement and its implications have been important
in many machine learning applications, and tolerance for image transformations was primarily
achieved by using robust feature vectors. In this
paper we propose a novel and computationally
efficient way to learn a local Mahalanobis metric
per datum, and show how we can learn a local
invariant metric to any transformation in order to
improve performance.

d(x, y)2M = (x − y)T M (x − y) = ||x̃ − ỹ||22
x̃ = Lx, ỹ = Ly.
This means that finding an optimal Mahalanobis distance
is equivalent to finding the optimal linear transformation
on the data, and then using L2 distance on the transformed
data. This approach has two limitations, first it is limited to
linear transformation. Second, it requires a large amount
of labeled data.

Metric learning is a machine learning task which learns a
distance metric d(x, y) between data points, based on data
instances. As distances play an important role in many
machine learning algorithms, e.g. k-Nearest Neighbor
and k-Means clustering, finding an appropriate metric
for the task can improve performance considerably. This
approach has been applied successfully to many problems
such as face identification (Guillaumin et al., 2009), image
retrieval (Hoi et al., 2008; Chechik et al., 2010), ranking
(Lim & Lanckriet, 2014) and clustering (Xiang et al.,
2008) to name just a few.
A standard approach to metric learning is to learn a global
Mahalanobis metric
d(x, y)2M = (x − y)T M (x − y)

(1)

Where M is a positive semi-definite matrix (PSD). The
PSD constraint only assures this is a pseudometric , but for
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

One approach that can be used to overcome the first
limitation is to use local distances (Frome et al., 2006)
where we learn a unique distance function per training
datum. Local approaches do not produce, in general, a
global metric (as they are usually not symmetrical) but are
commonly considered metric learning nonetheless. These
methods, in general, need similar and dissimilar training
data for each local metric.
In our current work we use a local approach inspired by
the work on exemplar-SVM (Malisiewicz et al., 2012), that
showed that using only negative examples can suffice for
good performance. The intuition behind this is that objects
of the same class do not necessarily have to be similar,
but objects from different classes must be dissimilar. We
will show how to learn a local Mahalanobis distance that
for each datum tries to keep the non-class as far away as
possible. This approach can use a large amount of weakly
supervised data, as in many cases negative examples are
easier than positive examples to acquire. For example, if
we are interested in face identification, we can learn a local
metric around a query face image given a bank of training
face images, which we only assume does not belong to the
queried person. Unlike other metric learning methods, we

