Theory of Dual-sparse Regularized Randomized Reduction

Tianbao Yang
Department of Computer Science, the University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA

TIANBAO - YANG @ UIOWA . EDU

Lijun Zhang
ZHANGLJ @@ LAMDA . NJU . EDU . CN
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Rong Jin
RONGJIN @ CSE . MSU . EDU
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA
Institute of Data Science and Technologies at Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA
Shenghuo Zhu
Institute of Data Science and Technologies at Alibaba Group, Seattle, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we study randomized reduction
methods, which reduce high-dimensional features into low-dimensional space by randomized
methods (e.g., random projection, random hashing), for large-scale high-dimensional classification. Previous theoretical results on randomized
reduction methods hinge on strong assumptions
about the data, e.g., low rank of the data matrix or
a large separable margin of classification, which
hinder their applications in broad domains. To
address these limitations, we propose dual-sparse
regularized randomized reduction methods that
introduce a sparse regularizer into the reduced
dual problem. Under a mild condition that the
original dual solution is a (nearly) sparse vector, we show that the resulting dual solution is
close to the original dual solution and concentrates on its support set. In numerical experiments, we present an empirical study to support
the analysis and we also present a novel application of the dual-sparse regularized randomized
reduction methods to reducing the communication cost of distributed learning from large-scale
high-dimensional data.

1. Introduction
As the scale and dimensionality of data continue to grow
in many applications (e.g., bioinformatics, finance, comProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SHENGHUO @ GMAIL . COM

puter vision, medical informatics) (Sánchez et al., 2013;
Mitchell et al., 2004; Simianer et al., 2012; Bartz et al.,
2011), it becomes critical to develop efficient and effective algorithms to solve big data machine learning problems. Randomized reduction methods for large-scale or
high-dimensional data analytics have received a great deal
of attention in recent years (Mahoney & Drineas, 2009; Shi
et al., 2012; Paul et al., 2013; Weinberger et al., 2009; Mahoney, 2011). By either reducing the dimensionality (referred to as feature reduction) or reducing the number of
training instances (referred to as instance reduction), the
resulting problem has a smaller size of training data that is
not only memory-efficient but also computation-efficient.
While randomized instance reduction has been studied a
lot for fast least square regression (Drineas et al., 2008;
2006; 2011; Ma et al., 2014), randomized feature reduction
is more popular for linear classification (Blum, 2005; Shi
et al., 2012; Paul et al., 2013; Weinberger et al., 2009; Shi
et al., 2009a) (e.g., random hashing is a noticeable built-in
tool in Vowpal Wabbit 1 , a fast learning library, for solving
high-dimensional problems.). In this paper, we focus on the
latter technique and refer to randomized feature reduction
as randomized reduction for short.
Although several theoretical properties have been examined for randomized reduction methods when applied to
classification, e.g., generalization performance (Paul et al.,
2013), preservation of margin (Blum, 2005; Balcan et al.,
2006; Shi et al., 2012) and the recovery error of the
model (Zhang et al., 2014), these previous results reply
on strong assumptions about the data. For example, both
(Paul et al., 2013) and (Zhang et al., 2014) assume the
data matrix is of low-rank, and (Blum, 2005; Balcan et al.,
1

http://hunch.net/˜vw/

