A Convex Exemplar-based Approach to
MAD-Bayes Dirichlet Process Mixture Models

Ian E. H. Yen 1
IANYEN @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Xin Lin 1
JIMMYLIN @ UTEXAS . EDU
Kai Zhong 2
ZHONGKAI @ ICES . UTEXAS . EDU
Pradeep Ravikumar 1,2,3
PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
Inderjit S. Dhillon 1,2
INDERJIT @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA.
2
Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA.
3
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Abstract
MAD-Bayes (MAP-based Asymptotic Derivations) has been recently proposed as a general technique to derive scalable algorithm for
Bayesian Nonparametric models. However, the
combinatorial nature of objective functions derived from MAD-Bayes results in hard optimization problem, for which current practice employs heuristic algorithms analogous to k-means
to find local minimum. In this paper, we consider the exemplar-based version of MAD-Bayes
formulation for DP and Hierarchical DP (HDP)
mixture model. We show that an exemplarbased MAD-Bayes formulation can be relaxed
to a convex structural-regularized program that,
under cluster-separation conditions, shares the
same optimal solution to its combinatorial counterpart. An algorithm based on Alternating Direction Method of Multiplier (ADMM) is then
proposed to solve such program. In our experiments on several benchmark data sets, the proposed method finds optimal solution of the combinatorial problem and significantly improves existing methods in terms of the exemplar-based
objective.

1. Introduction
In the recent years, MAD-Bayes (MAP-based Asymptotic Derivations) has been proposed as a technique to obtain scalable algorithm for Bayesian Nonparametric modProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

els such as Dirichlet Process (DP) Mixture, Latent Feature
Allocation and Infinite Hidden Markov Model (Broderick
et al., 2013; Kulis & Jordan, 2012; Roychowdhury et al.,
2013; Jiang et al., 2012; Campbell et al., 2013). The objective function derived from MAD-Bayes, however, hard to
optimize and existing approaches employ algorithms analogous to k-means that only guarantees to find local optimum. In this paper, we consider exemplar-based version of
the MAD-Bayes objective, where the mean parameters of
each mixture are restricted to be one of the data samples.
The exemplar-based clustering, namely k-medoids problem, has been investigated since 1987 and known for its
ability to handle arbitrary dissimilarity measure (Kaufman
& Rousseeuw, 1987). The k-medoids problem, however,
is still NP-hard in general (Papadimitriou, 1981; Megiddo
& Supowit, 1984) and the best known approximate
√ algorithm guarantees an approximation ratio of 1 + 3 +
 ≈ 2.732 with theoretical limit being 1 + 2/e ≈ 1.736.
Commonly used algorithms such as Partitioning Around
Medoids (PAM) (Van der Laan et al., 2003) and Affinity
Propagation (AP) (Frey & Dueck, 2007) only guarantee to
find local optimum. On the other hand, a recent interest
in the exemplar-based formulation arose due to its natural convex relaxation (Yaron & Shalev-Shwartz, 2010; Elhamifar et al., 2012; Awasthi et al., 2015; Nellore & Ward,
2013) . The convex relaxation, without additional assumptions, could lead to fractional solutions and thus does not
guarantee to find optimum of the original problem (Yaron
& Shalev-Shwartz, 2010). However, Elhamifar et al. (Elhamifar et al., 2012) and later on Nellore et al. (Nellore
& Ward, 2013) proved that, when there exists clustering
assignments satisfying certain separation requirement (that
is, the dissimilarities within cluster are small enough compared to the dissimilarities between clusters), the convex relaxation guarantees to find the optimal solution of its com-

