Accelerated Online Low-Rank Tensor Learning
for Multivariate Spatio-Temporal Streams
Rose Yu
Dehua Cheng
Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California

Abstract
Low-rank tensor learning has many applications
in machine learning. A series of batch learning
algorithms have achieved great successes. However, in many emerging applications, such as climate data analysis, we are confronted with largescale tensor streams, which pose significant challenges to existing solutions. In this paper, we
propose an accelerated online low-rank tensor
learning algorithm (ALTO) to solve the problem.
At each iteration, we project the current tensor
to a low-dimensional tensor, using the information of the previous low-rank tensor, in order to
perform efficient tensor decomposition, and then
recover the low-rank approximation of the current tensor. By randomly selecting additional
subspaces, we successfully overcome the issue of
local optima at an extremely low computational
cost. We evaluate our method on two tasks in
online multivariate spatio-temporal analysis: online forecasting and multi-model ensemble. Experiment results show that our method achieves
comparable predictive accuracy with significant
speed-up.

1. Introduction
Low-rank tensor learning enjoys a broad range of applications in practical machine learning problems (Kolda &
Bader, 2009), ranging from signal processing, computer
vision, to neuroscience. One classical example is learning a low-rank tensor for multivariate regression, for which
a series of effective batch learning algorithms have been
developed (De Lathauwer et al., 2000; Guo et al., 2012;
Zhou et al., 2013; Bahadori et al., 2014). We notice that in
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

QIYU @ USC . EDU
DEHUA . CHENG @ USC . EDU
YANLIU . CS @ USC . EDU

many emerging applications, large-scale tensor data come
in streams, such as the spatio-temporal climate observations in climate data analysis. Batch learning algorithms
would suffer from computational bottleneck, especially
facing the challenge of short response time. Therefore, effective and fast online learning algorithms are a must for
enabling real-time large-scale tensor analysis.
Online learning of low-rank tensors aims to dynamically
update a tensor while preserving the low-rank structure.
While online low-rank matrix learning has been intensively
studied, e.g. (Brand, 2002; Meka et al., 2008; Shalit et al.,
2010), online tensor learning remains underexplored. The
problem is extremely challenging due to the inherent complexity of tensor analysis (Hillar & Lim, 2013). Local solutions (Sun et al., 2008) have achieved wide success in
real applications but lack rigorous theoretical understanding. For certain rank structures, we can use the nuclear
norm as a convex surrogate for the rank constraint and solve
the problem with off-the-shelf online low-rank matrix algorithms (Avron et al., 2012; Ouyang et al., 2013). Nevertheless, it is known that optimizing over convex surrogate
loss may lead to sub-optimal solutions (Zhang et al., 2013).
Moreover, solving an optimization problem with nuclear
norm regularization itself is computationally expensive.
In this paper, we develop a novel framework, namely the
Accelerated Low-rank Tensor Online Learning (ALTO) algorithm to address the problem. Our solution follows a
two-step procedure: we first solve an unconstrained tensor learning problem, and then adjust the solution tensor
to satisfy the low-rank constraint. ALTO significantly accelerates the online learning process by keeping track of
the low-rank components of the solution obtained at each
iteration: It performs a dimension reduction of the tensor using previous low-rank components and tensor matrix
multiplications, in order to avoid the expensive operations
of singular value decomposition (SVD) on unfolded matrices of the full tensor. In addition, it employs randomization techniques to select additional dimensions so as to
overcome the issue of local optima in existing incremental

