Robust Estimation of Transition Matrices in High Dimensional Heavy-tailed
Vector Autoregressive Processes

Huitong Qiu
Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21210 USA

HQIU 7@ JHU . EDU

Sheng Xu
Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21210 USA

SHXU @ JHU . EDU

Fang Han
Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21210 USA

FHAN @ JHU . EDU

Han Liu
Princeton University, 98 Charlton Street, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

HANLIU @ PRINCETON . EDU

Brian Caffo
Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21210 USA

Abstract
Gaussian vector autoregressive (VAR) processes
have been extensively studied in the literature.
However, Gaussian assumptions are stringent for
heavy-tailed time series that frequently arises in
finance and economics. In this paper, we develop a unified framework for modeling and estimating heavy-tailed VAR processes. In particular, we generalize the Gaussian VAR model by
an elliptical VAR model that naturally accommodates heavy-tailed time series. Under this model,
we develop a quantile-based robust estimator for
the transition matrix of the VAR process. We
show that the proposed estimator achieves parametric rates of convergence in high dimensions.
This is the first work in analyzing heavy-tailed
high dimensional VAR processes. As an application of the proposed framework, we investigate
Granger causality in the elliptical VAR process,
and show that the robust transition matrix estimator induces sign-consistent estimators of Granger
causality. The empirical performance of the proposed methodology is demonstrated by both synthetic and real data. We show that the proposed
estimator is robust to heavy tails, and exhibit superior performance in stock price prediction.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

BCAFFO @ JHU . EDU

1. Introduction
Vector autoregressive models are widely used in analyzing
multivariate time series. Examples include financial time
series (Tsay, 2005), macroeconomic time series (Sims,
1980), gene expression series (Fujita et al., 2007; OpgenRhein & Strimmer, 2007), and functional magnetic resonance images (Qiu et al., 2015).
Let X1 , . . . , XT P Rd be a stationary multivariate time
series. We consider VAR models1 such that
Xt “ AXt´1 ` Et for t “ 2, . . . , T,
where A is the transition matrix, and E2 , . . . , ET are latent innovations. The transition matrix characterizes the
dependence structure of the VAR process, and plays a fundamental role in forecasting. Moreover, the sparsity pattern
of the transition matrix is often closely related to Granger
causality. In this paper, we focus on estimating the transition matrix in high dimensional VAR processes.
VAR models have been extensively studied under the Gaussian assumption. The Gaussian VAR model assumes that
the latent innovations are i.i.d. Gaussian random vectors,
and are independent from past observations (Lütkepohl,
2007). Under this model, there is vast literature on estimating the transition matrix under high dimensional settings.
These estimators can be categorized into regularized estimators and Dantzig-selector-type estimators. The former
1

For simplicity, we only consider order one VAR models in
this paper. Extensions to higher orders can be obtained using the
same technique as in Chapter 2.1 of Lütkepohl (2007).

