Un-regularizing: approximate proximal point and faster stochastic algorithms
for empirical risk minimization

Roy Frostig
Stanford University

RF @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Rong Ge
Sham M. Kakade
Microsoft Research, New England

RONGGE @ MICROSOFT. COM
SKAKADE @ MICROSOFT. COM

Aaron Sidford
MIT

SIDFORD @ MIT. EDU

Abstract

This problem underlies supervised learning (e.g. the training of logistic regressors when φi (z) = log(1 + e−zbi )
and their regularized form when φi (z) = log(1 + e−zbi ) +
γ
2
2n kxk2 ) and captures the widely-studied problem of linear
least-squares regression when φi (z) = 21 (z − bi )2 .

We develop a family of accelerated stochastic algorithms that optimize sums of convex functions.
Our algorithms improve upon the fastest running
time for empirical risk minimization (ERM),
and in particular linear least-squares regression,
across a wide range of problem settings.

Over the past five years, problems such as (1) have received
increased attention, with a recent burst of activity in the
design of fast randomized algorithms. Iterative methods
that randomly sample the φi have been shown to outperform standard first-order methods under mild assumptions
(Bottou & Bousquet, 2008; Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Xiao
& Zhang, 2014; Defazio et al., 2014; Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang, 2014).

To achieve this, we establish a framework, based
on the classical proximal point algorithm, useful for accelerating recent fast stochastic algorithms in a black-box fashion. Empirically, we
demonstrate that the resulting algorithms exhibit
notions of stability that are advantageous in practice. Both in theory and in practice, the provided algorithms reap the computational benefits
of adding a large strongly convex regularization
term, without incurring a corresponding bias to
the original ERM problem.

Despite the breadth of these recent results, their use in solving the ERM problem (1) lead to sub-optimal dependence
on a natural notion of the problem’s condition number.
This dependence does, however, significantly impact the
guarantees on running time, as high-dimensional problems
encountered in practice are often poorly conditioned (due
to strong correlation structure among variables). In particular, among the recent randomized algorithms, each either:

1. Introduction
A general optimization problem central to machine learning is that of empirical risk minimization (ERM): finding
a predictor or regressor that minimizes a sum of loss functions defined by a data sample. In this paper, we focus on
empirical risk minimization of linear predictors: given a set
of n data points ai , . . . , an ∈ Rd and convex loss functions
φi : R → R for i = 1, . . . , n, solve
min F (x),

x∈Rn

where

def Pn
T
i=1 φi (ai x).

F (x) =

(1)

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

• Solves the ERM problem (1), under an assumption of
strong convexity, with convergence that depends linearly on the problem’s condition number (Johnson &
Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014).
• Solves only an explicitly regularized ERM problem, minx {F (x) + λr(x)} where the regularizer r
is a known strongly convex function and λ must be
strictly positive, even when F is itself strongly convex. The first such result is due to Shalev-Shwartz &
Zhang (2014) and achieves acceleration, i.e. dependence only on the square root of the regularized problem’s condition number, which scales inversely with
λ. Hence, taking small λ to solve the ERM problem

