Correlation Clustering in Data Streams

Kook Jin Ahn1
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

KOOKJIN @ CIS . UPENN . EDU

Graham Cormode
University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.

G . CORMODE @ WARWICK . AC . UK

Sudipto Guha
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

SUDIPTO @ CIS . UPENN . EDU

Andrew McGregor
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

MCGREGOR @ CS . UMASS . EDU

Anthony Wirth
AWIRTH @ UNIMELB . EDU . AU
Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Vic 3010, Australia.

Abstract

1

1. Introduction

In this paper, we address the problem of correlation clustering in the dynamic data stream
model. The stream consists of updates to the edge
weights of a graph on n nodes and the goal is to
find a node-partition such that the end-points of
negative-weight edges are typically in different
clusters whereas the end-points of positive-weight
edges are typically in the same cluster. We present
polynomial-time, O(n · polylog n)-space approximation algorithms for natural problems that arise.

The correlation clustering problem was first formulated as
an optimization problem by Bansal et al. (2004). The input
is a complete weighted graph G on n nodes, where each pair
of nodes uv has weight wuv ∈ R. A positive-weight edge
indicates that u and v should be in the same cluster, whereas
a negative-weight edge indicates that u and v should be in
different clusters. Given a node-partition C = {C1 , C2 , . . .},
we say edge uv agrees with C, denoted by uv ∼ C, if the
relevant soft constraint is observed. Summing over all edges,

We first develop data structures based on linear
sketches that allow the “quality” of a given nodepartition to be measured. We then combine these
data structures with convex programming and
sampling techniques to solve the relevant approximation problem. However the standard LP and
SDP formulations are not obviously solvable in
O(n · polylog n)-space. Our work presents spaceefficient algorithms for the convex programming
required, as well as approaches to reduce the adaptivity of the sampling. Note that the improved
space and running-time bounds achieved from
streaming algorithms are also useful for offline
settings such as MapReduce models.

agree(G, C) :=

Currently at Google, Inc. Email:kookjin@google.com

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

X
uv∼C

|wuv | =

X

|wuv | − disagree(G, C) .

uv

The goal is to find the partition C that maximizes
agree(G, C) or, equivalently for optimization, minimizes
disagree(G, C). Solving this problem exactly is known
to be NP-hard. A large body of work has been devoted
to approximating max-agree(G) = maxC agree(G, C) and
min-disagree(G) = minC disagree(G, C), along with variants min-disagreek (G) and max-agreek (G), where we consider partitions with at most k clusters. In this paper, we
focus on multiplicative approximation results exclusively.
If all weights are ±1, there is a polynomial time approximation scheme PTAS for max-agree (Bansal et al., 2004;
Giotis & Guruswami, 2006) and a 2.06-approximation for
min-disagree (Chawla et al., 2015). When there is an upper
bound k on the number of clusters in C, and all weights
are ±1, Giotis & Guruswami (2006) introduced a PTAS for
both problems. Even k = 2 is interesting and an efficient
local-search approximation was introduced by Coleman
et al. (2008).

