Learning Transferable Features with Deep Adaptation Networks

Mingsheng Long†♯
MINGSHENG @ TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Yue Cao†
YUE - CAO 14@ MAILS . TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Jianmin Wang†
JIMWANG @ TSINGHUA . EDU . CN
Michael I. Jordan♯
JORDAN @ BERKELEY. EDU
†
School of Software, TNList Lab for Info. Sci. & Tech., Institute for Data Science, Tsinghua University, China
♯
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

Abstract
Recent studies reveal that a deep neural network
can learn transferable features which generalize
well to novel tasks for domain adaptation. However, as deep features eventually transition from
general to specific along the network, the feature
transferability drops significantly in higher layers
with increasing domain discrepancy. Hence, it is
important to formally reduce the dataset bias and
enhance the transferability in task-specific layers.
In this paper, we propose a new Deep Adaptation
Network (DAN) architecture, which generalizes
deep convolutional neural network to the domain
adaptation scenario. In DAN, hidden representations of all task-specific layers are embedded in a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space where the mean
embeddings of different domain distributions can
be explicitly matched. The domain discrepancy
is further reduced using an optimal multi-kernel
selection method for mean embedding matching.
DAN can learn transferable features with statistical guarantees, and can scale linearly by unbiased
estimate of kernel embedding. Extensive empirical evidence shows that the proposed architecture
yields state-of-the-art image classification error
rates on standard domain adaptation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The generalization error of supervised learning machines
with limited training samples will be unsatisfactorily large,
while manual labeling of sufficient training data for diverse
application domains may be prohibitive. Therefore, there is
incentive to establishing effective algorithms to reduce the
labeling cost, typically by leveraging off-the-shelf labeled
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

data from relevant source domains to the target domains.
Domain adaptation addresses the problem that we have data
from two related domains but under different distributions.
The domain discrepancy poses a major obstacle in adapting
predictive models across domains. For example, an object
recognition model trained on manually annotated images
may not generalize well on testing images under substantial
variations in the pose, occlusion, or illumination. Domain
adaptation establishes knowledge transfer from the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled target domain by exploring
domain-invariant structures that bridge different domains
of substantial distribution discrepancy (Pan & Yang, 2010).
One of the main approaches to establishing knowledge
transfer is to learn domain-invariant models from data,
which can bridge the source and target domains in an isomorphic latent feature space. In this direction, a fruitful line
of prior work has focused on learning shallow features by
jointly minimizing a distance metric of domain discrepancy
(Pan et al., 2011; Long et al., 2013; Baktashmotlagh et al.,
2013; Gong et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013; Ghifary et al.,
2014; Wang & Schneider, 2014). However, recent studies
have shown that deep neural networks can learn more transferable features for domain adaptation (Glorot et al., 2011;
Donahue et al., 2014; Yosinski et al., 2014), which produce
breakthrough results on some domain adaptation datasets.
Deep neural networks are able to disentangle exploratory
factors of variations underlying the data samples, and group
features hierarchically in accordance with their relatedness
to invariant factors, making representations robust to noise.
While deep neural networks are more powerful for learning
general and transferable features, the latest findings also reveal that the deep features must eventually transition from
general to specific along the network, and feature transferability drops significantly in higher layers with increasing
domain discrepancy. In other words, the features computed
in higher layers of the network must depend greatly on
the specific dataset and task (Yosinski et al., 2014), which
are task-specific features and are not safely transferable to

