HawkesTopic: A Joint Model for Network Inference and Topic Modeling
from Text-Based Cascades
Xinran He1
XINRANHE @ USC . EDU
Theodoros Rekatsinas2
THODREK @ CS . UMD . EDU
James Foulds3
JFOULDS @ UCSC . EDU
Lise Getoor3
GETOOR @ SOE . UCSC . EDU
Yan Liu1
YANLIU . CS @ USC . EDU
1
University of Southern California, 2 University of Maryland, College Park, 3 University of California, Santa Cruz

Abstract
Understanding the diffusion of information in social networks and social media requires modeling the text diffusion process. In this work, we
develop the HawkesTopic model (HTM) for analyzing text-based cascades, such as “retweeting a
post” or “publishing a follow-up blog post.” HTM combines Hawkes processes and topic modeling to simultaneously reason about the information diffusion pathways and the topics characterizing the observed textual information. We
show how to jointly infer them with a mean-field
variational inference algorithm and validate our
approach on both synthetic and real-world data
sets, including a news media dataset for modeling information diffusion, and an ArXiv publication dataset for modeling scientific influence.
The results show that HTM is significantly more
accurate than several baselines for both tasks.

1. Introduction
There has been an increasing interest in understanding the
processes and dynamics of information diffusion through
networks and modeling the influence across the nodes of
the underlying networks. Such processes play a fundamental role in a variety of domains, such as evaluating the effects of networks in marketing (Domingos & Richardson,
2001; Kempe et al., 2003; Leskovec et al., 2007; Wang
et al., 2010), monitoring the spread of news, opinions, and
scientific ideas via citation networks (Adar et al., 2004;
Gruhl et al., 2004; Leskovec et al., 2005), and detecting
the spread of erroneous information (Dong et al., 2009).
Most prior work focuses on modeling the diffusion of information by solely exploiting the observed timestamps when
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

different nodes in the network post (i.e., publicize) information. In such scenarios diffusion is modeled either using
cascade models, for example, NetInf (Gomez-Rodriguez
et al., 2012) and NetRate (Gomez-Rodriguez et al., 2011),
or point process models such as MMHP (Yang & Zha,
2013) and LowRankSparse (Zhou et al., 2013). These techniques do not leverage textual information and focus mainly on context-agnostic tasks such as product purchasing.
However, text-based cascades are abundant in a variety of
social platforms, ranging from well-established social networking websites such as Facebook, Google+, and Twitter,
to increasingly popular social media websites such as Reddit, Pinterest, and Tumblr. Moreover, a growing number of
platforms such as GDELT and EventRegistry1 extract and
analyze textual information from diverse news data sources
which often borrow content from each other or influence
each other (Dong et al., 2010).
Text is, in many cases, the medium by which information
is propagated, making it particularly salient for inferring
information diffusion. Models that are based on observed
timestamps have been shown to become more effective at
discovering topic-dependent transmission rates or diffusion
processes when combined with the textual information associated with the information propagation (Du et al., 2013;
Wang et al., 2014). Nevertheless, this line of work assumes
that either the topics associated with the diffusion process
are specified in advance or that the influence paths are fully
observed. It is easy to see that due to these assumptions,
the aforementioned models are not applicable in many scenarios, such as discovering influence relationships between
news data sources or users of social media, and detecting
information diffusion paths.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of inferring the diffusion of information together with the topics characterizing the information. We assume that only the textual information and timestamp of posted information is known. We
1

See gdeltproject.org and eventregistry.org.

