Enabling scalable stochastic gradient-based inference for Gaussian processes
by employing the Unbiased LInear System SolvEr (ULISSE)

Maurizio Filippone
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, UK

M AURIZIO .F ILIPPONE @ GLASGOW. AC . UK

Raphael Engler
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, UK

R APHAEL .E NGLER @ WEB . DE

Abstract
In applications of Gaussian processes where
quantification of uncertainty is of primary interest, it is necessary to accurately characterize the posterior distribution over covariance parameters. This paper proposes an adaptation of
the Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics algorithm to draw samples from the posterior distribution over covariance parameters with negligible bias and without the need to compute the
marginal likelihood. In Gaussian process regression, this has the enormous advantage that
stochastic gradients can be computed by solving
linear systems only. A novel unbiased linear systems solver based on parallelizable covariance
matrix-vector products is developed to accelerate the unbiased estimation of gradients. The results demonstrate the possibility to enable scalable and exact (in a Monte Carlo sense) quantification of uncertainty in Gaussian processes without imposing any special structure on the covariance or reducing the number of input vectors.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic kernel machines based on Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) are popular
in a number of applied domains as they offer the possibility to flexibly model complex data and, depending on
the choice of covariance function, to gain some understanding on the underlying behavior of the system under
study. When quantification of uncertainty is of primary
interest, it is necessary to accurately characterize the posterior distribution over covariance parameters. This has
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

been argued in a number of papers where this is done by
means of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
(Williams & Rasmussen, 1995; Williams & Barber, 1998;
Neal, 1999; Murray & Adams, 2010; Taylor & Diggle,
2012; Filippone et al., 2013; Filippone & Girolami, 2014).
The limitation of MCMC approaches to draw samples from
the posterior distribution over covariance parameters is that
they need to compute the marginal likelihood at every iteration. In GP regression, a standard way to compute
the marginal likelihood involves storing and factorizing an
n × n matrix, leading to O(n3 ) time and O(n2 ) space complexities, where n is the size of the data set. For large data
sets this becomes unfeasible, so a large number of contributions can be found in the literature on how to make
these calculations tractable. For example, when the GP
covariance matrix has some particular properties, e.g., it
has sparse inverse (Rue et al., 2009; Simpson et al., 2013;
Lyne et al., 2015), it is computed on regularly spaced inputs (Saatçi, 2011), or it is computed on univariate inputs (Gilboa et al., 2015), it is possible to considerably reduce the complexity in computing the marginal likelihood.
When these properties do not hold, which is common in
several Machine Learning applications, approximations are
usually employed. Some examples involve the use subsets
of the data (Candela & Rasmussen, 2005), the determination of a small number of surrogate input vectors that represent the full set of inputs (Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al.,
2013), and the application of GPs to subsets of the data
obtained by partitioning the input space (Gramacy et al.,
2004), to name a few. Unfortunately, it is difficult to assess to what extent approximations affect the quantification
of uncertainty in predictions, although some interesting results in this direction are reported in (Banerjee et al., 2013).
The focus of this paper are applications of GP regression
where the structure of the covariance matrix is not necessarily special and quantification of uncertainty is of primary
interest, so that approximations should be avoided. This
paper proposes an adaptation of the Stochastic Gradient

