DiSCO: Distributed Optimization for Self-Concordant Empirical Loss

Yuchen Zhang
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

YUCZHANG @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Lin Xiao
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98053, USA

Abstract
We propose a new distributed algorithm for empirical risk minimization in machine learning.
The algorithm is based on an inexact damped
Newton method, where the inexact Newton steps
are computed by a distributed preconditioned
conjugate gradient method. We analyze its iteration complexity and communication efficiency
for minimizing self-concordant empirical loss
functions, and discuss the results for distributed
ridge regression, logistic regression and binary
classification with a smoothed hinge loss. In a
standard setting for supervised learning, where
the n data points are i.i.d. sampled and
√ when
the regularization parameter scales as 1/ n, we
show that the proposed algorithm is communication efficient: the required round of communication does not increase with the sample size n, and
only grows slowly with the number of machines.

1. Introduction
Many optimization problems in machine learning are formulated with a large amount of data as input. With the
amount of data we collect and process growing at a fast
pace, it happens more often that the dataset involved in an
optimization problem cannot fit into the memory or storage of a single computer (machine). To solve such “big
data” optimization problems, we need to use distributed algorithms that rely on inter-machine communication.
In this paper, we focus on distributed algorithms for regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM). Suppose that
our distributed computing system consists of m machines,
and each machine has access to n samples zi,1 , . . . , zi,n ,
for i = 1, . . . , m. Then each machine can evaluate a local
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

LIN . XIAO @ MICROSOFT. COM

empirical loss function
n

def

fi (w) =

1X
λ
φ(w, zi,j ) + kwk22 ,
n j=1
2

(1)

where zi,j are random vectors whose probability distribution is supported on a set Z ⊂ Rp , and the cost function
φ : Rd × Z → R is convex in w for every z ∈ Z. Here
the quadratic term λ2 kwk22 is a regularizer, which helps to
prevent overfitting. Our goal is to minimize the overall empirical loss defined with all mn samples:
m

1 X
f (w) =
fi (w).
m i=1
def

(2)

Since the functions fi (w) can be accessed only locally, we
consider distributed algorithms that alternate between a local computation procedure at each machine, and a round of
inter-machine communication. Compared with local computation at each machine, the cost of inter-machine communication is much higher in terms of both speed/delay
and energy consumption (e.g., Bekkerman et al., 2011;
Shalf et al., 2011), thus it is often considered as the bottleneck for distributed computing. Our goal is to develop
communication-efficient distributed algorithms, which try
to use a minimal number of communication rounds to reach
certain precision in minimizing f (w).
1.1. Communication Efficiency of Distributed
Algorithms
We assume that each communication round requires only
simple map-reduce type of operations, such as broadcasting
a vector in Rd to the m machines and computing the sum
or average of m vectors in Rd (Dean & Ghemawat, 2008).
Typically, if a distributed iterative algorithm takes T iterations to converge, then it communicates at least T rounds.
Therefore, we can measure the communication efficiency
of a distributed algorithm by its iteration complexity T (),
which is the number of iterations required by the algorithm
to find a solution wT such that f (wT ) − f (w? ) ≤ , where
w? = arg min f (w) is the optimal solution.

