Distributed Inference for Dirichlet Process Mixture Models
Hong Ge
Yutian Chen
Moquan Wan
Zoubin Ghahramani
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK

Abstract
Bayesian nonparametric mixture models based
on the Dirichlet process (DP) have been widely
used for solving problems like clustering, density estimation and topic modelling. These models make weak assumptions about the underlying
process that generated the observed data. Thus,
when more data are collected, the complexity of
these models can change accordingly. These theoretical properties often lead to superior predictive performance when compared to traditional
finite mixture models. However, despite the increasing amount of data available, the application
of Bayesian nonparametric mixture models is so
far limited to relatively small data sets.
In this paper, we propose an efficient distributed
inference algorithm for the DP and the HDP mixture model. The proposed method is based on a
variant of the slice sampler for DPs. Since this
sampler does not involve a pre-determined truncation, the stationary distribution of the sampling
algorithm is unbiased. We provide both local
thread-level and distributed machine-level parallel implementations and study the performance
of this sampler through an extensive set of experiments on image and text data. When compared to existing inference algorithms, the proposed method exhibits state-of-the-art accuracy
and strong scalability with up to 512 cores.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic modelling is a mainstay of modern AI, providing necessary tools for analysing the vast amount of
complex data from science, scholarship and daily life. Successful applications of such models range from information
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

HG 344@ CAM . AC . UK
YUTIAN . CHEN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK
MW 545@ CAM . AC . UK
ZOUBIN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

retrieval (Blei et al., 2003) to large scale recommender systems (Mnih & Salakhutdinov, 2007). In particular, nonparametric mixture models based on the DP (Ferguson,
1973) and its extensions are one of the most popular family
of probabilistic models for applications in clustering, density estimation, language modelling, and topic modelling
(Teh, 2010). Mixture models based on DPs treat the number of represented mixture components as a latent variable,
and infer it automatically from observed data. This formulation allows model complexity to grow dynamically as
more data are collected. However, despite the the sharply
increasing available amount of data (e.g., DNA and protein
sequences, text data), the applicability of DP mixture models is so far constrained by the absence of scalable inference
algorithms.
One approach to address this problem is through parallelisation. Indeed, recently it has become an active area to
improve the efficiency of Bayesian inference via exploiting distributed computation. For instance, Newman et al.
(2009) described two distributed approximate algorithms
for the widely-used Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
model; Doshi-Velez et al. (2009) proposed a parallel inference algorithm for the Indian buffet process (IBP) model;
Ahn et al. (2014) proposed another distributed method for
LDA based on the stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics sampler. Parallel algorithms for DP mixture models
have also been proposed. An example is to re-parametrise
the DP mixture model as a mixture of DPs, and then perform inference for each DP in parallel at a thread-level
(Williamson et al., 2013). This method does not involve
approximation, but as suggested by Gal & Ghahramani
(2014) its scalability is limited due to unbalanced loading
in the computing units. Chang & Fisher III (2013) studied
another thread-level parallel inference algorithm for DPs
based on the split-merge framework (Jain & Neal, 2004).
In this paper, we propose an unbiased distributed inference
algorithm for the DP and HDP mixture models based on
an improved slice sampler of DPs. We demonstrate that
the proposed sampler has superb scalability in both local

