Learning Word Representations with Hierarchical Sparse Coding

Dani Yogatama
DYOGATAMA @ CS . CMU . EDU
Manaal Faruqui
MFARUQUI @ CS . CMU . EDU
Chris Dyer
CDYER @ CS . CMU . EDU
Noah A. Smith
NASMITH @ CS . CMU . EDU
Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
We propose a new method for learning word representations using hierarchical regularization in
sparse coding inspired by the linguistic study of
word meanings. We show an efficient learning
algorithm based on stochastic proximal methods that is significantly faster than previous approaches, making it possible to perform hierarchical sparse coding on a corpus of billions of
word tokens. Experiments on various benchmark
tasks—word similarity ranking, syntactic and semantic analogies, sentence completion, and sentiment analysis—demonstrate that the method outperforms or is competitive with state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
When applying machine learning to text, the classic categorical representation of words as indices of a vocabulary fails
to capture syntactic and semantic similarities that are easily
discoverable in data (e.g., pretty, beautiful, and lovely have
similar meanings, opposite to unattractive, ugly, and repulsive). In contrast, recent approaches to word representation
learning apply neural networks to obtain low-dimensional,
continuous embeddings of words (Bengio et al., 2003; Mnih
& Teh, 2012; Collobert et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2012;
Mikolov et al., 2010; 2013a; Pennington et al., 2014).
In this work, we propose an alternative approach based
on decomposition of a high-dimensional matrix capturing
surface statistics of association between a word and its “contexts” with sparse coding. As in past work, contexts are
words that occur nearby in running text (Turney & Pantel,
2010). Learning is performed by minimizing a reconstruction loss function to find the best factorization of the input
matrix.
nd

Proceedings of the 32 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

The key novelty in our method is to govern the relationships
among dimensions of the learned word vectors, introducing
a hierarchical organization imposed through a structured
penalty known as the group lasso (Yuan & Lin, 2006). The
idea of regulating the order in which variables enter a model
was first proposed by Zhao et al. (2009), and it has since
been shown useful for other applications (Jenatton et al.,
2011). Our approach is motivated by coarse-to-fine organization of words’ meanings often found in the field of lexical
semantics (see §2.2 for a detailed description), which mirrors evidence for distributed nature of hierarchical concepts
in the brain (Raposo et al., 2012). Related ideas have also
been explored in syntax (Petrov & Klein, 2008). It also has
a foundation in cognitive science, where hierarchical structures have been proposed as representations of semantic
cognition (Collins & Quillian, 1969). We propose a stochastic proximal algorithm for hierarchical sparse coding that is
suitable for problems where the input matrix is very large
and sparse. Our algorithm enables application of hierarchical sparse coding to learn word representations from a
corpus of billions of word tokens and 400,000 word types.
On standard evaluation tasks—word similarity ranking,
analogies, sentence completion, and sentiment analysis—
we find that our method outperforms or is competitive
with the best published representations. Our word representations are available at: http://www.ark.cs.cmu.
edu/dyogatam/wordvecs/.

2. Model
2.1. Background and Notation
The observable representation of word v is taken to be a
vector xv ∈ RC of cooccurrence statistics with C different contexts. Most commonly, each context is a possible
neighboring word within a fixed window.1 Following many
1

Others include: global context (Huang et al., 2012), multilingual context (Faruqui & Dyer, 2014), geographic context (Bamman
et al., 2014), brain activation (Fyshe et al., 2014), and second-order
context (Schutze, 1998).

