How Hard is Inference for Structured Prediction?
Amir Globerson
Tim Roughgarden
David Sontag
Cafer Yildirim

GAMIR @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL
TIM @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
DSONTAG @ CS . NYU . EDU
CAFERTYILDIRIM @ GMAIL . COM

Abstract
Structured prediction tasks in machine learning
involve the simultaneous prediction of multiple
labels. This is often done by maximizing a score
function on the space of labels, which decomposes as a sum of pairwise elements, each depending on two specific labels. The goal of this
paper is to develop a theoretical explanation of
the empirical effectiveness of heuristic inference
algorithms for solving such structured prediction
problems. We study the minimum-achievable expected Hamming error in such problems, highlighting the case of 2D grid graphs, which are
common in machine vision applications. Our
main theorems provide tight upper and lower
bounds on this error, as well as a polynomialtime algorithm that achieves the bound.

1. Introduction
In recent years, an increasing number of problems in machine learning are being solved using structured prediction (Collins, 2002; Lafferty et al., 2001; Taskar et al.,
2003). Examples of structured prediction include dependency parsing for natural language processing, part-ofspeech tagging, named entity recognition, and protein folding. In this setting, the input X is some observation (e.g.,
an image, a sentence) and the output is a labeling Y , such
as an assignment of each pixel in the image to foreground
or background, or the parse tree for the sentence. The advantage of performing structured prediction is that one can
use local features to infer global structure. For example,
one could include a feature that encourages two neighboring pixels to be assigned to different segments (e.g., one
to foreground and one to background) whenever there is a
large difference in their colors. The feature vector can then
be used within an exponential family distribution over the
space of labels, conditioned on the input. The parameters
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

are learned using maximum likelihood estimation, as with
conditional random fields (Lafferty et al., 2001), or using
structured SVMs (Altun et al., 2003; Taskar et al., 2003).
Both marginal and MAP inference in many of these model
families are well known to be NP-hard. Despite this, the
inference task seems to be much easier than the theoretical worst case. In particular, approximate inference algorithms can be extremely effective, often obtaining state-ofthe-art results for these structured prediction tasks. Examples of heuristic MAP inference algorithms that work well
in practice include those based on linear programming relaxations and dual decomposition (Koo et al., 2010; Sontag et al., 2008), policy-based search (Daumé et al., 2009),
graph cuts (Kolmogorov & Rother, 2007), and branch-andbound (Sun et al., 2012).
Real-world instances presumably have structure not possessed by worst-case instances, making the corresponding
inference tasks relatively tractable. What would a theoretical explanation of this hypothesis look like? The first step
in tackling such a problem is to decide on a performance
measure for inference. In all of the applications above, performance is naturally quantified as the discrepancy between
the correct “ground truth” labels Y and the predicted labels
Yb . The most common performance measure, which we
also focus on here, is Hamming error (i.e., the number of
disagreements between Y and Yb ).
The current theoretical understanding of the minimumachievable Hamming error is limited. What makes the
problem interesting and challenging is that it involves both
a statistical and a computational perspective. The statistical question is whether there exists any algorithm that can
predict the true labels with high accuracy, when ignoring
computational constraints. Of course, in practice we cannot afford to wait arbitrarily long for each prediction, which
motivates the need to understand the computational and
statistical trade-offs for structured prediction. This is an
increasingly important question for machine learning, discussed in a different context in Chandrasekaran & Jordan
(2013) and other recent papers (see Section 3).
The goal of our paper is to initiate the theoretical study of

