Geometric Conditions for Subspace-Sparse Recovery

Chong You
René Vidal
Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA

Abstract
Given a dictionary Π and a signal ξ = Πx generated by a few linearly independent columns of
Π, classical sparse recovery theory deals with the
problem of uniquely recovering the sparse representation x of ξ. In this work, we consider
the more general case where ξ lies in a lowdimensional subspace spanned by a few columns
of Π, which are possibly linearly dependent. In
this case, x may not unique, and the goal is
to recover any subset of the columns of Π that
spans the subspace containing ξ. We call such
a representation x subspace-sparse. We study
conditions under which existing pursuit methods
recover a subspace-sparse representation. Such
conditions reveal important geometric insights
and have implications for the theory of classical
sparse recovery as well as subspace clustering.

1. Introduction
Classical sparse recovery theory studies the problem of representing a signal in terms of an over-complete dictionary
by using as few dictionary atoms as possible (Baraniuk,
2007; Candès & Wakin, 2008). Since this problem is generally intractable, it is usually approached using approximate
algorithms such as Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP)
(Pati et al., 1993) and Basis Pursuit (BP) (Chen et al.,
1998). The study of these algorithms has been the topic
of various works in the past two decades, see e.g., (Tropp,
2004; Candès & Tao, 2005; Donoho et al., 2006; Davenport & Wakin, 2010; Cai & Zhang, 2014). Such work has
shown that if the dictionary is incoherent or satisfies the socalled restricted isometry property (RIP), the true sparsest
solution can be found by these algorithms.
More recently, motivated by applications in subspace classification (Wright et al., 2009) and subspace clustering (ViProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

CYOU @ CIS . JHU . EDU
RVIDAL @ CIS . JHU . EDU

dal, 2011), sparse recovery theory has been extended to the
analysis of subspace-structured dictionaries where the dictionary atoms lie in a union of several low-dimensional subspaces of the ambient space. In this case, the data permits
a subspace-sparse representation, where any atom from a
given subspace can be written as a sparse linear combination of other atoms from the same subspace, a concept that
is fundamental to several subspace clustering techniques
(see below). While in principle a subspace-sparse representation could possibly be recovered via BP or OMP, classical sparse recovery theory typically requires that the dictionary atoms satisfy certain incoherence or RIP properties.
For the problem of finding subspace-sparse representations,
the data points themselves function as the dictionary elements, so these properties are rarely satisfied. For example,
the dictionary could be highly coherent since points from
the same subspace could be arbitrarily close. This severely
limits the applicability of classical sparse recovery theory
to subspace-sparse models.
Following the initial work of (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2009),
several recent works (Elhamifar & Vidal, 2010; 2013;
Soltanolkotabi & Candès, 2013; Soltanolkotabi et al., 2014;
Wang & Xu, 2013; Dyer et al., 2013) have studied this
subspace-sparse recovery problem in the context of subspace clustering, where the task is to cluster a collection
of points lying in a union of subspaces. In this case, the
problem is solved by first finding a subspace-sparse representation of each point in terms of a dictionary composed
of all other points and then applying spectral clustering
to these subspace-sparse representations. Notice, however,
that these analyses are specific for the correctness of subspace clustering. In this work we study the more general
problem where the dictionary is composed of some “inlier” points lying in a subspace and some arbitrary “outlier”
points in the ambient space, while the signal to be represented is an arbitrary point in the inlier subspace. The goal
of this paper is to study this more general subspace-sparse
recovery problem, and to derive conditions on the dictionary under which the OMP and BP algorithms are guaranteed to give subspace-sparse solutions. Furthermore, we
obtain new theoretical conditions for classical sparse recovery as well as subspace clustering.

