Causal Inference by Identification of Vector Autoregressive Processes with
Hidden Components

Philipp Geigera
PGEIGER @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Kun Zhanga,b
KZHANG @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Mingming Gongc
GONGMINGNJU @ GMAIL . COM
Dominik Janzinga
JANZING @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Bernhard Schölkopfa
BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
a
Empirical Inference Department, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
b
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, USA
c
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
A widely applied approach to causal inference
from a time series X, often referred to as
“(linear) Granger causal analysis”, is to simply
regress present on past and interpret the regression matrix B̂ causally. However, if there is an
unmeasured time series Z that influences X, then
this approach can lead to wrong causal conclusions, i.e., distinct from those one would draw if
one had additional information such as Z. In this
paper we take a different approach: We assume
that X together with some hidden Z forms a first
order vector autoregressive (VAR) process with
transition matrix A, and argue why it is more
valid to interpret A causally instead of B̂. Then
we examine under which conditions the most important parts of A are identifiable or almost identifiable from only X. Essentially, sufficient conditions are (1) non-Gaussian, independent noise
or (2) no influence from X to Z. We present two
estimation algorithms that are tailored towards
conditions (1) and (2), respectively, and evaluate them on synthetic and real-world data. We
discuss how to check the model using X.

1. Introduction
Inferring the causal structure of a stochastic dynamical
system from a time series of measurements is an important problem in many fields such as economics (Lütkepohl,
2006) and neuroscience (Roebroeck et al., 2005; Besserve
et al., 2010).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

In the present paper, we approach this problem as follows:
We assume that the measurements are a finite sample from
a random process X = (Xt )t∈Z which, together with another random process Z = (Zt )t∈Z , forms a first order vector autoregressive (VAR) process. That is, (X, Z)> obeys

 


Xt
B C
Xt−1
=
+ Nt ,
Zt
D E
Zt−1
for all t ∈ Z, some matrices B, C, D, E, and some i.i.d.
Ni , i ∈ Z. So far this is a purely statistical model. Now
we additionally assume that the variables in Z correspond
to real properties of the underlying system that are in principle measurable and intervenable. Based on this we consider B, C, D, E to have a causal meaning. More precisely,
we assume that B’s entries express the direct causal influences between the respective variables in X. And more
generally, we assume that for all variables in (X, Z)> the
matrices B, C, D, E capture the respective direct and indirect causal influences. Note that in this sense C is particularly interesting because it tells which components of X
are jointly influenced by an unmeasured quantity, i.e., have
a hidden confounder, and how strong the influence is.
This way causal inference on X is reduced to a statistical
problem: examining to what extent, i.e., under which assumptions, B as well as C, D, E are identifiable from the
distribution of the process X, and how they can be estimated from a sample of X. It is worth mentioning that this
approach can be justified in two different ways, following
either (Granger, 1969) or (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000).
We will briefly elaborate on this later (Section 4.2).
The first and main contribution of this paper is on the theoretical side: we present several results that show under
which conditions B and C are identifiable or almost (i.e.
up to a small number of possibilities) identifiable from only
the distribution of X. Generally we assume that Z has at

