Scalable Variational Inference in Log-supermodular Models

Josip Djolonga
Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

Abstract
We consider the problem of approximate
Bayesian inference in log-supermodular models.
These models encompass regular pairwise MRFs
with binary variables, but allow to capture highorder interactions, which are intractable for existing approximate inference techniques such as
belief propagation, mean field, and variants. We
show that a recently proposed variational approach to inference in log-supermodular models
–L-F IELD– reduces to the widely-studied minimum norm problem for submodular minimization. This insight allows to leverage powerful existing tools, and hence to solve the variational problem orders of magnitude more efficiently than previously possible. We then provide another natural interpretation of L-F IELD,
demonstrating that it exactly minimizes a specific type of Rényi divergence measure. This insight sheds light on the nature of the variational
approximations produced by L-F IELD. Furthermore, we show how to perform parallel inference
as message passing in a suitable factor graph at a
linear convergence rate, without having to sum
up over all the configurations of the factor. Finally, we apply our approach to a challenging
image segmentation task. Our experiments confirm scalability of our approach, high quality of
the marginals, and the benefit of incorporating
higher-order potentials.

JOSIPD @ INF. ETHZ . CH
KRAUSEA @ ETHZ . CH

tance of this problem is witnessed by the amount of interest
it has attracted in the research community, which has resulted in a large family of approximations, most notably the
mean-field (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008) and belief propagation (Pearl, 1986) algorithms and their variants. One major drawback of these and many other techniques is the exponential dependence on the size of the largest factor which
restricts the class of models one can use. In addition, these
methods generally involve non-convex objectives, resulting
in local optima (or even non-convergence).
We consider the problem of inference in distributions over
sets, also known as point processes. Formally, we have
some finite ground set V and a measure P that assigns
some probability P (A) to every subset A ⊆ V . We would
like to point out that we can equivalently see such distributions as being defined over |V | Bernoulli random variables
Xi ∈ {0, 1}, one for every element in the ground set i ∈ V
indicating if element i has been selected. As a concrete example showing this equivalence consider the task of image
segmentation in computer vision, where one wants to separate the foreground from the background pixels. Traditionally, one defines one random variable Xp ∈ {0, 1} for each
pixel p indicating if the pixel is in the foreground or the
background. We can also isomorphically treat the distribution as being defined over subsets of the set of all pixels V .
In this case, for any subset A ⊆ V the quantity P (A) is the
probability of pixels A belonging to the foreground. In the
remaining of the paper we will employ this latter view of
distributions over sets. The additional assumption that we
make is that the distribution is log-supermodular, i.e. can
be written as P (A) = Z1 exp(−F (A)), where F is some
submodular function.

1. Introduction
Performing inference in probabilistic models is one of the
central challenges in machine learning, providing a foundation for making decisions with uncertain data. Unfortunately, the general problem is intractable and one must
resort to approximate inference techniques. The imporProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Related work. Submodular functions are a family of set
functions exhibiting a natural diminishing returns property, originating first in the field of combinatorial optimization (Edmonds, 1970). They have been applied to
many problems in machine learning, including clustering (Narasimhan et al., 2005), variable selection (Krause
& Guestrin, 2005), structured norms (Bach, 2010), dictionary learning (Cevher & Krause, 2011), etc. Submodular
functions have huge implications for the tractability of (ap-

