Learning Fast-Mixing Models for Structured Prediction

Jacob Steinhardt
Percy Liang
Stanford University, 353 Serra Street, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms
are often used for approximate inference inside
learning, but their slow mixing can be difficult
to diagnose and the resulting approximate gradients can seriously degrade learning. To alleviate
these issues, we define a new model family using strong Doeblin Markov chains, whose mixing
times can be precisely controlled by a parameter.
We also develop an algorithm to learn such models, which involves maximizing the data likelihood under the induced stationary distribution of
these chains. We show empirical improvements
on two inference tasks.

1. Introduction
Conventional wisdom suggests that rich features and
highly-dependent variables necessitate intractable inference. Indeed, the dominant paradigm is to first define
a joint model, and then use approximate inference (e.g.,
MCMC) to learn that model. While this recipe can generate good results in practice, it has two notable drawbacks:
(i) diagnosing convergence of Markov chains is extremely
difficult (Gelman & Rubin, 1992; Cowles & Carlin, 1996);
and (ii) approximate inference can be highly suboptimal
in the context of learning (Wainwright, 2006; Kulesza &
Pereira, 2007).
In this paper, we instead use MCMC to define the model
family itself: for a given T , we construct a family of
Markov chains using arbitrary rich features, but whose
mixing time is guaranteed to be at most O(T ). The corresponding stationary distributions determine the model family, with larger T leading to more expressive model families. We can think of our Markov chains as parameterizing a family of “computationally accessible” distributions,
where the amount of computation is controlled by T .
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JSTEINHARDT @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
PLIANG @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Concretely, suppose we are performing a structured prediction task from an input x to an output y. We construct
Markov chains of the following form, called strong Doeblin chains (Doeblin, 1940):
Ãθ (yt | yt−1 , x) = (1 − )Aθ (yt | yt−1 , x) +  uθ (yt | x),
(1)
where  is a mixture coefficient and θ parameterizes Aθ and
uθ . For intuition, think of uθ as a simple tractable model
and Aθ as Gibbs sampling in a complex intractable model.
With probability 1 − , we progress according to Aθ , and
with probability , we draw a fresh sample from uθ , which
corresponds to an informed random restart. Importantly, uθ
does not depend on the previous state yt−1 . When  = 1,
we are drawing i.i.d. samples from uθ ; we therefore mix in
a single step, but our stationary distribution must necessarily be very simple. When  = 0, the stationary distribution
can be much richer, but we have no guarantees on the mixing time. For intermediate values of , we trade off between
representational power and mixing time.
A classic result is that a given strong Doeblin chain mixes
in time at most 1 (Doeblin, 1940), and that we can draw an
exact sample from the stationary distribution in expected
time O( 1 ) (Corcoran & Tweedie, 1998). In this work, we
prove new results that help us understand the strong Doeblin model families. Let F and F̃ be the family of stationary distributions corresponding to Aθ and Ãθ as defined in
(1), respectively. Our first result is that as  decreases, the
stationary distribution of any Ãθ monotonically approaches
the stationary distribution of Aθ (as measured by either direction of the KL divergence). Our second result is that if
1
 is much larger than the mixing time of Aθ , then the stationary distributions of Aθ and Ãθ are close under a certain
Mahalanobis distance. This shows that any member of F
that is computationally accessible via the Markov chain is
well-approximated by its counterpart in F̃.
F̃

F
F0

