Improving the Gaussian Process Sparse Spectrum Approximation by
Representing Uncertainty in Frequency Inputs
Yarin Gal
Richard Turner
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Standard sparse pseudo-input approximations to
the Gaussian process (GP) cannot handle complex functions well. Sparse spectrum alternatives
attempt to answer this but are known to over-fit.
We suggest the use of variational inference for
the sparse spectrum approximation to avoid both
issues. We model the covariance function with
a finite Fourier series approximation and treat it
as a random variable. The random covariance
function has a posterior, on which a variational
distribution is placed. The variational distribution transforms the random covariance function
to fit the data. We study the properties of our
approximate inference, compare it to alternative
ones, and extend it to the distributed and stochastic domains. Our approximation captures complex functions better than standard approaches
and avoids over-fitting.

1

Introduction

The Gaussian process (GP, Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
is a powerful tool for modelling distributions over nonlinear functions. It offers robustness to over-fitting, a
principled way to tune hyper-parameters, and uncertainty
bounds over the outputs. These properties are critical for
tasks including non-linear function regression, reinforcement learning, density estimation, and more (Brochu et al.,
2010; Rasmussen et al., 2003; Engel et al., 2005; Titsias &
Lawrence, 2010). But the advantages of the Gaussian process come with a great computational cost. Evaluating the
GP posterior involves a large matrix inversion – for N data
points the model requires O(N 3 ) time complexity.
Many approximations to the GP have been proposed to reduce the model’s time complexity. Quiñonero-Candela &
Rasmussen (2005) survey approaches relying on “sparse
pseudo-input” approximations. In these, a small number of
points in the input space with corresponding outputs (“inducing inputs and outputs”) are used to define a new GausProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YG 279@ CAM . AC . UK
RET 26@ CAM . AC . UK

sian process. The new GP is desired to be as close as possible to the GP defined on the entire dataset, and the matrix
inversion is now done with respect to the inducing points
alone. These approaches are suitable for locally complex
functions. The approximate model would place most of the
inducing points in regions where the function is complex,
and only a small number of points would be placed in regions where the function is not. Highly complex functions
cannot be modelled well with this approach.
Lázaro-Gredilla et al. (2010) suggested an alternative approximation to the GP model. In their paper they suggest the decomposition of the GP’s stationary covariance
function into its Fourier series. The infinite series is then
approximated with a finite one. They optimise over the
frequencies of the series to minimise some divergence
from the full Gaussian process. This approach was named
a “sparse spectrum” approximation. This approach is
closely related to the one suggested by Rahimi & Recht
(2007) in the randomised methods community (random
projections). In Rahimi & Recht (2007)’s approach, the
frequencies are randomised (sampled from some distribution rather than optimised) and the Fourier coefficients are
computed analytically. Both approaches capture globally
complex behaviour, but the direct optimisation of the different quantities often leads to some form of over-fitting (as
reported in (Wilson et al., 2014) for the SSGP and shown
below for random projections). Similar over-fitting problems observed with the sparse pseudo-input approximation
were answered with variational inference (Titsias, 2009).
We suggest the use of variational inference for the sparse
spectrum approximation. This allows us to avoid overfitting while efficiently capturing globally complex behaviour. We replace the stationary covariance function with
a finite approximation obtained from Monte Carlo integration. This finite approximation is a random variable,
and conditioned on a dataset this random variable has an
intractable posterior. We approximate this posterior with
variational inference, resulting in a non-stationary finite
rank covariance function. The approximating variational
distribution transforms the covariance function to fit the
data well. The prior from the GP model keeps the approximating distribution from over-fitting to the data.

