Kernel Interpolation for Scalable Structured Gaussian Processes (KISS-GP)

Andrew Gordon Wilson
Carnegie Mellon University

ANDREWGW @ CS . CMU . EDU

Hannes Nickisch
Philips Research Hamburg

HANNES @ NICKISCH . ORG

Abstract
We introduce a new structured kernel interpolation (SKI) framework, which generalises
and unifies inducing point methods for scalable Gaussian processes (GPs). SKI methods
produce kernel approximations for fast computations through kernel interpolation. The SKI
framework clarifies how the quality of an inducing point approach depends on the number of
inducing (aka interpolation) points, interpolation
strategy, and GP covariance kernel. SKI also provides a mechanism to create new scalable kernel methods, through choosing different kernel
interpolation strategies. Using SKI, with local
cubic kernel interpolation, we introduce KISSGP, which is 1) more scalable than inducing point
alternatives, 2) naturally enables Kronecker and
Toeplitz algebra for substantial additional gains
in scalability, without requiring any grid data,
and 3) can be used for fast and expressive kernel
learning. KISS-GP costs O(n) time and storage
for GP inference. We evaluate KISS-GP for kernel matrix approximation, kernel learning, and
natural sound modelling.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) are exactly the types of models
we want to apply to big data: flexible function approximators, capable of using the information in large datasets to
learn intricate structure through interpretable and expressive covariance kernels. However, their O(n3 ) computation and O(n2 ) storage requirements limit GPs to all but
the smallest datasets, containing at most a few thousand
training points n. Their impressive empirical successes
thus far are only a glimpse of what might be possible, if
only we could overcome these computational limitations
(Rasmussen, 1996).
Inducing point methods (Snelson & Ghahramani, 2006;
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Hensman et al., 2013; Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen,
2005; Silverman, 1985) have been introduced to scale up
GPs to larger datasizes. These methods cost O(m2 n + m3 )
computations and O(mn + m2 ) storage, for m inducing
points, and n training data points. Inducing methods are
popular for their general purpose “out of the box” applicability, without requiring any special structure in the data.
However, these methods are limited by requiring a small
m  n number of inducing inputs, which can cause a deterioration in predictive performance, and the inability to
perform expressive kernel learning (Wilson et al., 2014).
Structure exploiting approaches for scalability, such as
Kronecker (Saatchi, 2011) or Toeplitz (Cunningham et al.,
2008) methods, have orthogonal advantages to inducing
point methods. These methods exploit the existing structure in the covariance kernel for highly accurate and scalable inference, and can be used for flexible kernel learning on large datasets (Wilson et al., 2014). However, Kronecker methods require that inputs (predictors) are on a
multidimensional lattice (a Cartesian product grid), which
makes them inapplicable to most datasets. Although Wilson et al. (2014) has extended Kronecker methods for partial grid structure, these extensions do not apply to arbitrarily located inputs. Likewise, the Kronecker based approach
in Luo & Duraiswami (2013) is not generally applicable for
arbitrarily located inputs, and involves costly rank-1 updates. Toeplitz methods are similarly restrictive, requiring
that the data are on a regularly spaced 1D grid.
It is tempting to assume we could place inducing points on
a grid, and then take advantage of Kronecker or Toeplitz
structure for further gains in scalability. However, this
naive approach only helps reduce the m3 complexity term
in inducing point methods, and not the more critical m2 n
term, which arises from a matrix of cross covariances between training and inducing inputs.
In this paper, we introduce a new unifying framework for
inducing point methods, called structured kernel interpolation (SKI). This framework improves the scalability and
accuracy of fast kernel methods, and naturally combines
the advantages of inducing point and structure exploiting
approaches. In particular,

