Yinyang K-Means: A Drop-In Replacement of the Classic K-Means
with Consistent Speedup
Yufei Ding⇤
Yue Zhao⇤
Xipeng Shen⇤
Madanlal Musuvathi⇧
Todd Mytkowicz⇧
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University ⇤
Microsoft Research ⇧

Abstract
This paper presents Yinyang K-means, a new
algorithm for K-means clustering. By clustering the centers in the initial stage, and leveraging efficiently maintained lower and upper
bounds between a point and centers, it more
effectively avoids unnecessary distance calculations than prior algorithms. It significantly outperforms prior K-means algorithms consistently
across all experimented data sets, cluster numbers, and machine configurations. The consistent, superior performance—plus its simplicity,
user-control of overheads, and guarantee in producing the same clustering results as the standard K-means—makes Yinyang K-means a dropin replacement of the classic K-means with an
order of magnitude higher performance.

1. Introduction
The classic K-means algorithm (Lloyd’s algorithm) consists of two steps. For an input of n data points of d dimensions and k initial cluster centers, the assignment step
assigns each point to its closest cluster, and the update step
updates each of the k cluster centers with the centroid of the
points assigned to that cluster. The algorithm repeats until
all the cluster centers remain unchanged in an iteration.
Because of its simplicity and general applicability, the algorithm is one of the most widely used clustering algorithms in practice, and is identified as one of the top 10
data mining algorithms (Wu et al., 2008). However, when
n, k,or d is large, the algorithm runs slow due to its linear
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YDING 8@ NCSU . EDU
YZHAO 30@ NCSU . EDU
XSHEN 5@ NCSU . EDU
MADANM @ MICROSOFT. COM
TODDM @ MICROSOFT. COM

dependence on n, k,and d.
There have been a number of efforts trying to improve its
speed. Some try to come up with better initial centers (e.g.,
K-means++ (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007; Bahmani et al.,
2012)) or parallel implementations (Zhao et al., 2009). A
complementary approach is to speed up the algorithm itself, which is the focus of this paper.
Prior efforts in this direction include approximation (Czumaj & Sohler, 2007; Sculley, 2010; Philbin et al., 2007;
Guha et al., 1998; Wang et al., 2012), structural optimization (Pelleg & Moore, 1999; Kanungo et al., 2002), and
incremental optimization (Elkan, 2003; Drake & Hamerly,
2012; Hamerly, 2010). They each have made significant contributions. However, the classic Lloyd’s algorithm still remains the dominant choice in practice, exemplified by the implementations in popular libraries, such
as GraphLab (Low et al., 2010), OpenCV (OpenCV), mlpack (Curtin et al., 2013), and so on. They offer some seeding options, but are primarily based on Lloyd’s algorithm.
For an alternative algorithm to get widely accepted, we believe that it needs to meet several requirements: (1) It must
inherit the level of trust that Lloyd’s algorithm has attained
through the many decades of practical use; (2) it must produce significant speedups consistently; (3) it must be simple to develop and deploy.
The previous proposals unfortunately fall short in at least
one of the three requirements. The approximation methods (Czumaj & Sohler, 2007; Sculley, 2010; Philbin et al.,
2007; Guha et al., 1998; Wang et al., 2012), for instance,
produce clustering results different from the results of the
standard K-means. It is possible that their outputs could be
good enough (or even better) for some usage, but in general
such a confidence is yet to be established, in both theory
and practice: Users still face the uncertainty on whether
the output from these algorithms is good enough on an ar-

