Trust Region Policy Optimization
John Schulman
JOSCHU @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Sergey Levine
SLEVINE @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Philipp Moritz
PCMORITZ @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Michael Jordan
JORDAN @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU
Pieter Abbeel
PABBEEL @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU
University of California, Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences

Abstract
In this article, we describe a method for optimizing control policies, with guaranteed monotonic
improvement. By making several approximations to the theoretically-justified scheme, we develop a practical algorithm, called Trust Region
Policy Optimization (TRPO). This algorithm is
effective for optimizing large nonlinear policies such as neural networks. Our experiments
demonstrate its robust performance on a wide variety of tasks: learning simulated robotic swimming, hopping, and walking gaits; and playing
Atari games using images of the screen as input.
Despite its approximations that deviate from the
theory, TRPO tends to give monotonic improvement, with little tuning of hyperparameters.

1 Introduction
Most algorithms for policy optimization can be classified
into three broad categories: policy iteration methods, which
alternate between estimating the value function under the
current policy and improving the policy (Bertsekas, 2005);
policy gradient methods, which use an estimator of the gradient of the expected cost obtained from sample trajectories (Peters & Schaal, 2008a) (and which, as we later
discuss, have a close connection to policy iteration); and
derivative-free optimization methods, such as the crossentropy method (CEM) and covariance matrix adaptation
(CMA), which treat the cost as a black box function to be
optimized in terms of the policy parameters (Fu et al., 2005;
Szita & Lörincz, 2006).
General derivative-free stochastic optimization methods
such as CEM and CMA are preferred on many problems, because they achieve good results while being simple to understand and implement. For example, while
Tetris is a classic benchmark problem for approximate dyProceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

namic programming (ADP) methods, stochastic optimization methods are difficult to beat on this task (Gabillon
et al., 2013). For continuous control problems, methods
like CMA have been successful at learning control policies for challenging tasks like locomotion when provided
with hand-engineered policy classes with low-dimensional
parameterizations (Wampler & Popović, 2009). The inability of ADP and gradient-based methods to consistently
beat gradient-free random search is unsatisfying, since
gradient-based optimization algorithms enjoy much better
sample complexity guarantees than gradient-free methods
(Nemirovski, 2005). Continuous gradient-based optimization has been very successful at learning function approximators for supervised learning tasks with huge numbers of
parameters, and extending their success to reinforcement
learning would allow for efficient training of complex and
powerful policies.
In this article, we first prove that minimizing a certain surrogate loss function guarantees policy improvement with
non-trivial step sizes. Then we make a series of approximations to the theoretically-justified algorithm, yielding a
practical algorithm, which we call trust region policy optimization (TRPO). We describe two variants of this algorithm: first, the single-path method, which can be applied
in the model-free setting; second, the vine method, which
requires the system to be restored to particular states, which
is typically only possible in simulation. These algorithms
are scalable and can optimize nonlinear policies with tens
of thousands of parameters, which have previously posed a
major challenge for model-free policy search (Deisenroth
et al., 2013). In our experiments, we show that the same
TRPO methods can learn complex policies for swimming,
hopping, and walking, as well as playing Atari games directly from raw images.

2

Preliminaries

Consider an infinite-horizon discounted Markov decision
process (MDP), defined by the tuple (S, A, P, c, ⇢0 , ),
where S is a finite set of states, A is a finite set of actions,
P : S ⇥ A ⇥ S ! R is the transition probability distribution, c : S ! R is the cost function, ⇢0 : S ! R is

