Non-Gaussian Discriminative Factor Models
via the Max-Margin Rank-Likelihood
Xin Yuan∗
EIEXYUAN @ GMAIL . COM
Ricardo Henao∗
R . HENAO @ DUKE . EDU
Ephraim L. Tsalik
E . T @ DUKE . EDU
Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708, USA
Raymond J. Langley
RLANGLEY @ LRRI . ORG
Department of Immunology, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA
Lawrence Carin
LCARIN @ DUKE . EDU
Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708, USA

Density

We consider the problem of discriminative factor analysis for data that are in general nonGaussian. A Bayesian model based on the
ranks of the data is proposed. We first introduce a new max-margin version of the ranklikelihood. A discriminative factor model is then
developed, integrating the max-margin ranklikelihood and (linear) Bayesian support vector machines, which are also built on the
max-margin principle. The discriminative factor model is further extended to the nonlinear case through mixtures of local linear classifiers, via Dirichlet processes. Fully local conjugacy of the model yields efficient inference
with both Markov Chain Monte Carlo and variational Bayes approaches. Extensive experiments
on benchmark and real data demonstrate superior
performance of the proposed model and its potential for applications in computational biology.

a large proportion of statistical analyses performed on these
data assume Gaussianity in one way or another. This is because customary preprocessing pipelines employ normalization and/or domain transformation approaches aimed at
making the data as Gaussian, or at least as symmetric, as
possible. For example, one popular yet simple strategy for
RNA sequencing data is to rescale each sample to correct
for technical variability, followed by log-transformation or
quantile normalization (Dillies et al., 2013). This and many
other examples have the same rationale: the data transformations are order preserving, while also trying to achieve
a desired distribution, typically Gaussian. Figure 1 shows

log(x)

Abstract

Active TB
Latent TB

Rank(x)

1. Introduction
Modern applications in computational biology and bioinformatics routinely involve data coming from different
sources, measured and quantified in different ways, e.g.,
averaged intensities in gene expression, cytokines and proteomics, or fragment counts in RNA and microRNA sequencing. However, they all share a common trait: data are
rarely Gaussian, and they are often discrete, the latter due to
digital technologies used for quantification. Nevertheless,
∗

Equal contributions.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Density

Figure 1. Intuition behind data modeling with ranks. Top and
right panels are group-wise empirical distributions for rank(x)
and log(x), respectively.

expression for a particular gene and two phenotypes (active and latent tuberculosis), from the dataset described in
Section 4.2. The horizontal and vertical axes show respectively log(x) (log-transformed) and rank(x) (ranked) gene
intensities. We see that from either axis we could derive
a decision rule to separate the two groups, so that we can
predict the label of new data, without worrying too much
about the actual values or scaling of the axes. In fact, from
their group-wise empirical distributions, we see that log(x)
and rank(x) seem to have nearly the same optimal decision rule. Note that in general we are not required to logtransform the data, and in principle we could either use raw

