A Unified Framework for Outlier-Robust PCA-like Algorithms

Wenzhuo Yang
A 0096049@ NUS . EDU . SG
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576
Huan Xu
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576

Abstract
We propose a unified framework for making a
wide range of PCA-like algorithms – including
the standard PCA, sparse PCA and non-negative
sparse PCA, etc. – robust when facing a constant
fraction of arbitrarily corrupted outliers. Our
analysis establishes solid performance guarantees of the proposed framework: its estimation
error is upper bounded by a term depending on
the intrinsic parameters of the data model, the
selected PCA-like algorithm and the fraction of
outliers. Our experiments on synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate that the outlier-robust
PCA-like algorithms derived from our framework have outstanding performance.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901),
arguably the most widely applied dimension reduction
method, plays a significant role in data analysis in a broad
range of areas including machine learning, statistics, finance, biostatistics and many others. The standard PCA
performs the spectral decomposition of the sample covariance matrix, selects the eigenvectors corresponding to the
largest eigenvalues, and then constructs a low dimensional
subspace based on the selected eigenvectors. It is well
known that standard PCA, depending on different applications, may suffer from three weaknesses (Montanari &
Richard, 2014; Xu et al., 2013; Johnstone & Lu, 2009): 1)
PCA is notoriously fragile to outliers – indeed, its performance can significantly degrade in the presence of even few
corrupted samples, due to the quadratic error criterion used;
2) PCA cannot utilize additional information of the principal components: e.g., in certain applications, it is known
that the principal components should lie in the positive orProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MPEXUH @ NUS . EDU . SG

thant; 3) its output may lack interpretability since it does
not encourage sparse solutions.
Many efforts have been made to mitigate these weaknesses
of PCA. In recent years, numerous robust PCA algorithms
have been proposed to address the first issue (Devlin et al.,
1981; Xu & Yuille, 1995; Yang & Wang, 1999; la Torre &
Black, 2003; Dasgupta, 2003; Xu et al., 2013; Feng et al.,
2012). Among them, Xu et al. (2013) successfully tackles
the case where a constant fraction of samples are corrupted
in the high dimensional regime. Their proposed method,
termed HR-PCA (which stands for High-dimensional Robust PCA), is tractable, easily kernelizable, and is able to
robustly estimate the principal components even in the face
of a constant fraction of outliers and very low signal-tonoise ratio. To overcome the computational issue of HRPCA, Feng et al. (Feng et al., 2012) proposed a deterministic approach (DHR-PCA) that dramatically reduces the
computational work. However, neither HR-PCA nor DHRPCA deals with the last two weaknesses mentioned above.
To address the second weakness, Montanari & Richard
(2014) recently proposed a new algorithm called nonnegative PCA which handles the case that the principal
components are known to lie in the positive orthant, and
showed that near-optimal non-negative principal components can be extracted in nearly linear time. But similar
to the standard PCA, this algorithm is sensitive to outliers.
Indeed, the estimated principal components can be far from
the true ones in the face of even few outliers.
To address the third weakness, previous works focus on a
class of methods called sparse PCA that adapt the standard
PCA so that only a few of attributes of the resulting principle components are non-zero (e.g., Vu et al., 2013; Zou
et al., 2006; Shen & Huang, 2008; Journee & Y. Nesterov,
2008; Birnbaum et al., 2013; Vu & Lei, 2013; d’Aspremont
et al., 2007; Thiao et al., 2010). Some of these methods
are based on non-convex optimization formulations (Jolliffe et al., 2003; Moghaddam et al., 2005) while others use
ℓ1 -norm regularization (Zou et al., 2006). Recently, Vu et
al. (Vu et al., 2013) proposed FPS – a convex relaxation for-

