Improved Regret Bounds for
Undiscounted Continuous Reinforcement Learning

K.Lakshmanan
Montanuniversität Leoben, Franz-Josef-Strasse 18, 8700 Leoben, AUSTRIA

LKSHMNAN . K @ GMAIL . COM

Ronald Ortner
Montanuniversität Leoben, Franz-Josef-Strasse 18, 8700 Leoben, AUSTRIA

RORTNER @ UNILEOBEN . AC . AT

Daniil Ryabko
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, 40 Avenue Halley, 59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, FRANCE

Abstract
We consider the problem of undiscounted reinforcement learning in continuous state space. Regret bounds in this setting usually hold under
various assumptions on the structure of the reward and transition function. Under the assumption that the rewards and transition probabilities
are Lipschitz, for 1-dimensional state space a re3
gret bound of Õ(T 4 ) after any T steps has been
given by Ortner and Ryabko (2012). Here we
improve upon this result by using non-parametric
kernel density estimation for estimating the transition probability distributions, and obtain regret
bounds that depend on the smoothness of the
transition probability distributions. In particular,
under the assumption that the transition probability functions are smoothly differentiable, the re2
gret bound is shown to be Õ(T 3 ) asymptotically
for reinforcement learning in 1-dimensional state
space. Finally, we also derive improved regret
bounds for higher dimensional state space.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) in continuous domains is still
a big challenge, from the practical as well as from the theoretical point of view. The setting theoretically best understood is the continuous multi-armed bandit problem. Under
Hölder conditions on the reward function, regret bounds
have been given by Kleinberg (2005), Auer et al. (2007),
Kleinberg et al. (2008), and Bubeck et al. (2010).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

DANIIL @ RYABKO . NET

In more general RL settings, often strong assumptions on
the transition structure are made. Thus, there are theoretical
results for RL with deterministic transitions in the discounted setting (Bernstein and Shimkin, 2010), as well as
for RL with transition functions that are linear in state and
action (Strehl and Littman, 2008; Brunskill et al., 2009;
Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári, 2011; Ibrahmi et al.,
2012). More generally, the work of Kakade et al. (2003)
considers PAC-learning for continuous RL in metric
state spaces.
Recently, Osband and Van Roy (2014)
have derived bounds on the expected regret under the
assumption that the reward and the transition probability
function belong to a given class of functions. The bounds
then depend on particular parameters of these function
classes, called the Kolmogorov dimension and the eluder
dimension. Unlike that, here we try to assume the most
general setting making only smoothness assumptions on
rewards and transition probabilities.
Our research is based on the work of Ortner and Ryabko
(2012), which has given the most general regret bounds in
a continuous state RL setting so far. Under the assumption that reward and transition functions are Hölder continuous, sublinear regret bounds depending on the Hölder
parameters have been shown. The suggested algorithm discretizes the state space and employs the UCRL algorithm
of Jaksch et al. (2010) on the discretized MDP. We improve
upon this algorithm and the respective regret bound by using kernel density estimation instead of histograms for estimating the probability density functions. Kernel-based
methods have been employed in RL before, starting with
(Ormoneit and Sen, 2002). Here we provide the first regret
bounds for a kernel-based algorithm for RL in continuous
state space. In order to derive our regret bounds we need
concentration bounds for the employed kernel density estimator. Such bounds can be found e.g. in (Devroye, 1987).
However, for our particular case, we extend results of

