Large-Scale Markov Decision Problems with KL Control Cost
and its Application to Crowdsourcing

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
Queensland University of Technology

YASIN . ABBASIYADKORI @ QUT. EDU . AU

Peter L. Bartlett
University of California, Berkeley and Queensland University of Technology

BARTLETT @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU

Xi Chen
Stern School of Business, New York University

XICHEN @ NYU . EDU

Alan Malek
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
We study average and total cost Markov decision
problems with large state spaces. Since the computational and statistical cost of finding the optimal policy scales with the size of the state space,
we focus on searching for near-optimality in a
low-dimensional family of policies. In particular, we show that for problems with a KullbackLeibler divergence cost function, we can recast
policy optimization as a convex optimization and
solve it approximately using a stochastic subgradient algorithm. This method scales in complexity with the family of policies but not the state
space. We show that the performance of the
resulting policy is close to the best in the lowdimensional family. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach by optimizing a policy for budget
allocation in crowd labeling, an important crowdsourcing application.

1. Introduction
This paper studies Markov decision problems (MDPs) with
expected average cost and total cost criteria. Given a transition matrix and loss function, the objective is to find a
near-optimal policy in a reasonable amount of time. Let
X be the state space with finite cardinality X ∈ N, A be
the action space with finite cardinality A ∈ N, and `(x, a)
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MALEK @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

be the loss of taking an action a ∈ A at the state x ∈ X .
The average cost MDP policy design problem is to find the
optimal state-to-action mapping (a.k.a.
i
hPpolicy) π that minit
1
π
π
mizes the average cost limt→∞ t E
s=1 ` (xs , π(xs )) ,
where xπs is the state at time s under policy π. We will
write the transition matrix as P ∈ R(X×A)×X and use the
shorthand P(x,a),: for the (x, a) row of P , i.e. the distribution of the state subsequent to x under action a. The total
cost case is similar and the explicit formulation is given in
the next section.
Finding the optimal policy is equivalent to solving the following linear program (Manne, 1960),
max

λ∈R,h∈RX

λ,

s.t.

∀x ∈ X , (Lh)(x) ≤ λ + h(x) ,

where L is the Bellman operator defined by

(Lh)(x) = min `(x, a) + P(x,a),: h .
a∈A

(1)

The scalar λ is the average loss and the vector h is called
the differential value function. An optimal action achieves
the minimum on the right-hand side of (1).
In general, exactly solving an MDP is computationally expensive (it is known to be P-complete (Papadimitriou &
Tsitsiklis, 1987)). The widely used policy iteration and
value iteration approaches require at least O(X 2 A) periteration complexity which precludes their use for problems with large state spaces. For large problems, it is reasonable to constrain the search to a low-dimensional family of policies. In particular, we follow the popular approach (Schweitzer & Seidmann, 1985; de Farias & Van
Roy, 2003; Sutton & Barto, 1998) of using a linear approximation for the value function: for some fixed feature ma-

