Guaranteed Tensor Decomposition: A Moment Approach
Gongguo Tang
Colorado School of Mines, 1500 Illinois Street, Golden, CO, USA
Parikshit Shah
Yahoo! Labs, 701 First Ave, Sunnyvale CA, USA

Abstract
We develop a theoretical and computational
framework to perform guaranteed tensor decomposition, which also has the potential to accomplish other tensor tasks such as tensor completion and denoising. We formulate tensor decomposition as a problem of measure estimation
from moments. By constructing a dual polynomial, we demonstrate that measure optimization returns the correct CP decomposition under
an incoherence condition on the rank-one factors. To address the computational challenge,
we present a hierarchy of semidefinite programs
based on sums-of-squares relaxations of the measure optimization problem. By showing that the
constructed dual polynomial is a sum-of-squares
modulo the sphere, we prove that the smallest
SDP in the relaxation hierarchy is exact and the
decomposition can be extracted from the solution
under the same incoherence condition. One implication is that the tensor nuclear norm can be
computed exactly using the smallest SDP as long
as the rank-one factors of the tensor are incoherent. Numerical experiments are conducted to test
the performance of the moment approach.

1. Introduction
Tensors provide a compact and natural representation
for high-dimensional, multi-view datasets encountered in
fields such as communication, signal processing, largescale data analysis, and computational neuroscience, to
name a few. In many data analysis tasks, tensor-based approaches outperform matrix-based ones due to the ability
to identify non-orthogonal components, a property derived
from having access to higher order moments (Landsberg,
2009). In this work, we investigate the problem of decomposing a tensor into a linear combination of a small number
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

GTANG @ MINES . EDU

PSHAH @ DISCOVERY. WISC . EDU

of rank one tensors, also known as the CP decomposition
or the PARAFAC decomposition. Such low-rank tensor decomposition extends the idea of singular value decomposition for matrices and finds numerous applications in data
analysis (Papalexakis et al., 2013; Anandkumar et al., 2013;
2012; Cichocki et al., 2014; Comon, 2009; Kolda & Bader,
2009; Lim & Comon, 2010).
We approach tensor decomposition from the point of view
of measure estimation from moments. To illustrate the idea,
consider determining the CP
of a third orPdecomposition
r
der symmetric tensor A = p=1 p xp ⌦ xp ⌦ xp , which
?
can
Pr be viewed asp estimating a discrete measure µ =
x ) supported on the unit sphere from its
p=1 p (x
R
3rd order moments Aijl = Sn 1 xi xj xl dµ? . This formulation offers several advantages. First, it provides a natural
way to enforce a low-rank decomposition by minimizing an
infinite-dimensional generalization of the `1 norm, the total
variation norm of the measure. Second, the optimal value
of the total variation norm minimization problem, which is
a convex problem in the space of measures, defines a norm
for tensors. This norm, termed as the tensor nuclear norm,
is an instance of atomic norms, which, as argued by the
authors of (Chandrasekaran et al., 2012), is the best possible convex proxy for recovering simple models. Just like
the matrix nuclear norm, the tensor nuclear norm can be
used to enforce low-rankness in tensor completion, robust
tensor principal component analysis, and stable tensor recovery. Finally, finite computational schemes developed
for atomic tensor decomposition can be readily modified to
accomplish these more complex tensor tasks.
The theoretical analysis of atomic tensor decomposition is
fundamental in understanding the regularization and estimation power of the tensor nuclear norm in solving other
tensor problems. For instance, it tells us what types of rankone tensor combinations are identifiable given full, noisefree data. Moreover, the dual polynomial constructed to
certify a particular decomposition is useful in investigating the performance of tensor nuclear norm minimization
for data corrupted by missing observations, noise, and outliers. This work parallels similar measure estimation ideas
as applied to line spectral estimation in signal processing

