BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word
Alignments

Stephan Gouws
Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA

SGOUWS @ GOOGLE . COM

Yoshua Bengio
Dept. IRO, Université de Montréal, QC, Canada & Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
Greg Corrado
Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA

Abstract
We introduce BilBOWA (Bilingual Bag-ofWords without Alignments), a simple and
computationally-efficient model for learning
bilingual distributed representations of words
which can scale to large monolingual datasets
and does not require word-aligned parallel training data. Instead it trains directly on monolingual
data and extracts a bilingual signal from a smaller
set of raw-text sentence-aligned data. This is
achieved using a novel sampled bag-of-words
cross-lingual objective, which is used to regularize two noise-contrastive language models for efficient cross-lingual feature learning. We show
that bilingual embeddings learned using the proposed model outperform state-of-the-art methods
on a cross-lingual document classification task as
well as a lexical translation task on WMT11 data.

1. Introduction
Raw text data is freely available in many languages, yet
labeled data – e.g. text marked up with parts-of-speech
or named-entities – is expensive and mostly available for
English. Although several techniques exist that can learn
to map hand-crafted features from one domain to another
(Blitzer et al., 2006; Daumé III, 2009; Pan & Yang, 2010),
it is in general non-trivial to come up with good features
which generalize well across tasks, and even harder across
different languages. It is therefore very desirable to have
unsupervised techniques which can learn useful syntactic
and semantic features that are invariant to the tasks or lanProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

guages that we are interested in. Unsupervised distributed
representations of words capture important syntactic and
semantic information about languages and these techniques
have been succesfully applied to a wide range of tasks (Collobert et al., 2011; Turian et al., 2010), across many different languages (Al-Rfou’ et al., 2013). Traditionally, inducing these representations involved training a neural network
language model (Bengio et al., 2003) which was slow to
train. However, contemporary word embedding models are
much faster in comparison, and can scale to train on billions
of words per day on a single desktop machine (Mnih &
Teh, 2012; Mikolov et al., 2013b; Pennington et al., 2014).
In all these models, words are represented by learned, realvalued feature vectors referred to as word embeddings and
trained from large amounts of raw text. These models have
the property that similar embedding vectors are learned for
similar words during training. Additionally, the vectors
capture rich linguistic relationships such as male-female
relationships or verb tenses, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a)
and (b). These two properties improve generalization when
the embedding vectors are used as features on word- and
sentence-level prediction tasks.
Distributed representations can also be induced over different language-pairs and can serve as an effective way
of learning linguistic regularities which generalize across
languages, in that words with similar distributional syntactic and semantic properties in both languages are represented using similar vectorial representations (i.e. embed
nearby in the embedded space, as shown in Figure 1 (c)).
This is especially useful for transferring limited label information from high-resource to low-resource languages,
and has been demonstrated to be effective for document
classification (Klementiev et al., 2012), outperforming a
strong machine-translation baseline; as well as namedentity recognition and machine translation (Zou et al.,
2013; Mikolov et al., 2013a).

