Learning Deep Structured Models
Liang-Chieh Chen*
University of California Los Angeles, USA
Alexander G. Schwing*
University of Toronto, 10 King’s College Rd., Toronto, Canada
Alan L. Yuille
University of California Los Angeles, USA
Raquel Urtasun
University of Toronto, 10 King’s College Rd., Toronto, Canada

LCCHEN @ CS . UCLA . EDU
ASCHWING @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
YUILLE @ STAT. UCLA . EDU
URTASUN @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
*

Abstract
Many problems in real-world applications involve predicting several random variables that
are statistically related. Markov random fields
(MRFs) are a great mathematical tool to encode
such dependencies. The goal of this paper is to
combine MRFs with deep learning to estimate
complex representations while taking into account the dependencies between the output random variables. Towards this goal, we propose a
training algorithm that is able to learn structured
models jointly with deep features that form the
MRF potentials. Our approach is efficient as it
blends learning and inference and makes use of
GPU acceleration. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm in the tasks of predicting
words from noisy images, as well as tagging of
Flickr photographs. We show that joint learning
of the deep features and the MRF parameters results in significant performance gains.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms attempt to model high-level abstractions of the data using architectures composed of multiple non-linear transformations. A multiplicity of variants have been proposed (Hinton et al., 1984; LeCun et al.,
1998; Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Bengio et al., 2007;
Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2012; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014) and
shown to be extremely successful in a wide variety of applications including computer vision, speech recognition
as well as natural language processing (Lee et al., 2009;
Socher et al., 2012; Jia, 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2013;
Eigen et al., 2014). Recently, state-of-the-art results have
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

equal contribution

been achieved in many computer vision tasks, outperforming competitive methods by a large margin (Krizhevsky
et al., 2013; Girshick et al., 2014).
Deep neural networks can, however, be even more powerful when combined with graphical models in order to capture the statistical dependencies between the variables of
interest. For example, Deng et al. (2014) exploit mutual
exclusion, overlapping and subsumption properties of class
labels in order to better predict in large scale classification
tasks. In pose estimation, more accurate predictions can be
obtained when encoding the spatial relationships between
joint locations (Tompson et al., 2014).
It is, however, an open problem how to develop scalable
deep learning algorithms that can learn higher-order knowledge taking into account the output variables’ dependencies. Existing approaches often rely on a two-step process
(Nowozin et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2014) where a non-linear
classifier that employs deep features is trained first, and its
output is used to generate potentials for the structured predictor. This piece-wise training is, however, suboptimal as
the deep features are learned while ignoring the dependencies between the variables of interest. For example, in object recognition, independently learned segmentation and
detection features (Hariharan et al., 2014) might be focusing on predicting the same examples correctly, but when
learned jointly, they can improve their predictive power
by exploiting complementary information to fix additional
mistakes.
In this paper we extend deep learning algorithms to learn
complex representations taking into account the dependencies between the output random variables. Towards this
goal, we propose a learning algorithm that is able to learn
structured models with arbitrary graphs jointly with deep
features that form potentials in a Markov random field
(MRF). Our approach is efficient as it blends learning and
inference, resulting in a single loop algorithm which makes
use of GPU acceleration. We demonstrate the effectiveness

