A trust-region method for stochastic variational inference
with applications to streaming data
Lucas Theis
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, Otfried-Müller-Str. 25, BW 72076 Germany

LUCAS @ BETHGELAB . ORG

Matthew D. Hoffman
Adobe Research, 601 Townsend St., San Francisco, CA 94103 USA

MATHOFFM @ ADOBE . COM

Abstract
Stochastic variational inference allows for fast
posterior inference in complex Bayesian models. However, the algorithm is prone to local
optima which can make the quality of the posterior approximation sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters and initialization. We address this
problem by replacing the natural gradient step of
stochastic varitional inference with a trust-region
update. We show that this leads to generally better results and reduced sensitivity to hyperparameters. We also describe a new strategy for variational inference on streaming data and show that
here our trust-region method is crucial for getting
good performance.

1. Introduction
Stochastic variational inference (SVI; Hoffman et al.,
2013) has enabled variational inference on massive datasets
for a large class of complex Bayesian models. It has been
applied to, for example, topic models (Hoffman et al.,
2010), nonparametric models (Wang et al., 2011; Paisley
et al., 2012), mixture models (Hughes & Sudderth, 2013),
and matrix factorizations (Gopalan et al., 2014). However, it has been observed that SVI can be sensitive to
the choice of hyperparameters and is prone to local optima (Ranganath et al., 2013; Hughes & Sudderth, 2013;
Hoffman & Blei, 2014). Successful attempts to improve
its performance include the automatic tuning of learning
rates (Ranganath et al., 2013) and variance reduction techniques (Mandt & Blei, 2014). The results of Hoffman &
Blei (2014) suggest that local optima in the objective function caused by a mean-field approximation (Wainwright &
Jordan, 2008) can be eliminated by means of more complex
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

families of approximating distributions. They also find that
the standard search heuristics used in variational inference
consistently fail to find the best local optima of the meanfield objective function, suggesting that variational inference algorithms could be improved by employing more robust optimization algorithms. In the first part of this paper
we propose a new learning algorithm that replaces the natural gradient steps at the core of SVI with trust-region updates. We show that these trust-region updates are feasible
in practice and lead to a more robust algorithm generally
yielding better performance.
In the second part of the paper we study the setting of
continuous streams of data. SVI is a promising candidate
for fitting Bayesian models to data streams, yet the dependence of its updates on the dataset size and its underlying
assumption of uniform sampling from the entire dataset
have hampered its application in practice. We therefore
propose a new strategy for applying SVI in the streaming
setting. We show that this strategy fails when used with
natural gradient steps but works well with our trust-region
method. When applied to latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA;
Blei et al., 2003), our method is able to continuously integrate new data points not only at the document level but
also at the word level, which existing methods for variational inference on streaming data cannot do.

2. A trust-region method for stochastic
variational inference
In the following section, after introducing some notation
and outlining the model class studied in this paper, we
briefly review stochastic variational inference (SVI) in order to facilitate comparison with our trust-region extension.
2.1. Model assumptions
Our basic model assumptions are summarized by1
⇣
p( ) = h( ) exp ⌘ > t( )

⌘
a(⌘) ,

(1)

