Fictitious Self-Play in Extensive-Form Games

Johannes Heinrich
University College London, UK

J . HEINRICH @ CS . UCL . AC . UK

Marc Lanctot
Google DeepMind, London, UK

LANCTOT @ GOOGLE . COM

David Silver
Google DeepMind, London, UK

DAVIDSILVER @ GOOGLE . COM

Abstract
Fictitious play is a popular game-theoretic model
of learning in games. However, it has received
little attention in practical applications to large
problems. This paper introduces two variants
of fictitious play that are implemented in behavioural strategies of an extensive-form game.
The first variant is a full-width process that is realization equivalent to its normal-form counterpart and therefore inherits its convergence guarantees. However, its computational requirements
are linear in time and space rather than exponential. The second variant, Fictitious Self-Play, is
a machine learning framework that implements
fictitious play in a sample-based fashion. Experiments in imperfect-information poker games
compare our approaches and demonstrate their
convergence to approximate Nash equilibria.

1. Introduction
Fictitious play, introduced by Brown (1951), is a popular game-theoretic model of learning in games. In fictitious play, players repeatedly play a game, at each iteration
choosing a best response to their opponents’ average strategies. The average strategy profile of fictitious players converges to a Nash equilibrium in certain classes of games,
e.g. two-player zero-sum and potential games. Fictitious
play is a standard tool of game theory and has motivated
substantial discussion and research on how Nash equilibria could be realized in practice (Brown, 1951; Fudenberg, 1998; Hofbauer & Sandholm, 2002; Leslie & Collins,
2006). Furthermore, it is a classic example of self-play
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

learning from experience that has inspired artificial intelligence algorithms in games.
Despite the popularity of fictitious play to date, it has seen
use in few large-scale applications, e.g. (Lambert III et al.,
2005; McMahan & Gordon, 2007; Ganzfried & Sandholm,
2009; Heinrich & Silver, 2015). One possible reason for
this is its reliance on a normal-form representation. While
any extensive-form game can be converted into a normalform equivalent (Kuhn, 1953), the resulting number of actions is typically exponential in the number of game states.
The extensive-form offers a much more efficient representation via behavioural strategies whose number of parameters is linear in the number of information states. Hendon et al. (1996) introduce two definitions of fictitious play
in behavioural strategies and show that each convergence
point of their variants is a sequential equilibrium. However,
these variants are not guaranteed to converge in imperfectinformation games.
The first fictitious play variant that we introduce in this paper is full-width extensive-form fictitious play (XFP). It is
realization equivalent to a normal-form fictitious play and
therefore inherits its convergence guarantees. However, it
can be implemented using only behavioural strategies and
therefore its computational complexity per iteration is linear in the number of game states rather than exponential.
XFP and many other current methods of computational
game theory (Sandholm, 2010) are full-width approaches
and therefore require reasoning about every state in the
game at each iteration. Apart from being given stateaggregating abstractions, that are usually hand-crafted from
expert knowledge, the algorithms themselves do not generalise between strategically similar states. Leslie &
Collins (2006) introduce generalised weakened fictitious
play which explicitly allows certain kinds of approximations in fictitious players’ strategies. This motivates the use
of approximate techniques like machine learning which ex-

