Towards a Lower Sample Complexity for Robust One-bit Compressed Sensing

Rongda Zhu
RZHU 4@ ILLINOIS . EDU
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Quanquan Gu
QG 5 W @ VIRGINIA . EDU
Department of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm based
on nonconvex sparsity-inducing penalty for onebit compressed sensing. We prove that our algorithm has a sample complexity of O(s/2 ) for
strong signals, and O(s log d/2 ) for weak signals, where s is the number of nonzero entries in
the signal vector, d is the signal dimension and
 is the recovery error. For general signals, the
sample complexity of our algorithm lies between
O(s/2 ) and O(s log d/2 ). This is a remarkable improvement over the existing best sample complexity O(s log d/2 ). Furthermore, we
show that our algorithm achieves exact support
recovery with high probability for strong signals.
Our theory is verified by extensive numerical experiments, which clearly illustrate the superiority
of our algorithm for both approximate signal and
support recovery in the noisy setting.

1. Introduction
Compressed sensing (Donoho, 2006; Candes & Tao, 2006)
is a technique to design measurement matrices and recovery algorithms to estimate a sparse signal vector using a
few linear measurements. Recently, one-bit compressed
sensing (Boufounos & Baraniuk, 2008), which is a variant of conventional compressed sensing, has received increasing attention for its low computational cost and robustness to noise and non-linearity (Boufounos, 2010). In
contrast to conventional compressed sensing, which uses
real-valued measurement, one-bit compressed sensing uses
one-bit measurement to recover the unknown signals. For
example, suppose x∗ is the unknown signal vector, and
{ui }ni=1 is a set of measurement vectors. The sign of realProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

valued measurement is observed as follows:
yi = sign(hui , x∗ i), i = 1, 2, . . . , n,
where yi is the binary one-bit measurement. Since signs
of real-valued measurements are used, scaling x∗ will not
make changes on the measurements.
 In othern words, we
cannot recover the norm of x∗ from (yi , ui ) i=1 . For this
reason, when studying approximate vector recovery in onebit compressed sensing, we always assume that the original
signal x∗ is a unit vector, i.e., kx∗ k2 = 1.
In general, there are two major tasks in one-bit compressed
sensing: (1) support recovery (Gupta et al., 2010; Haupt &
Baraniuk, 2011; Gopi et al., 2013), which recovers the support of the unknown signal vector x∗ ; and (2) approximate
signal vector recovery (Gopi et al., 2013; Jacques et al.,
2013; Zhang et al., 2014), which aims at finding a unit vecb such that kb
tor x
x − x∗ k2 is small.
In this paper, we aim at presenting an algorithm, which
is able to achieve both approximate signal recovery and
support recovery with strong theoretical guarantees. At
the core of our method is the nonconvex sparsity-inducing
penalty. While nonconvex sparsity-inducing penalties have
achieved great success in the statistics community (Fan &
Li, 2001; Zhang, 2010; Wang et al., 2014; Gu et al., 2014),
it is unclear whether nonconvex sparsity-inducing penalties are advantageous for one-bit compressed sensing. In
our study, we show that the answer is in the affirmative.
More specifically, the main contributions of this work are
summarized as follows:
• We propose to incorporate sparsity-inducing penalty
functions into one-bit compressed sensing, and derive an
algorithm to efficiently solve the resulting problem. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work on onebit compressed sensing that utilizes nonconvex penalty
functions.
• We prove that our proposed method improves sample complexity from previous best results O(s log d/2 )
to O(s/2 ) for strong signals. And for general signals, our algorithm attains a sample complexity between

