Harmonic Exponential Families on Manifolds

Taco S. Cohen
University of Amsterdam

T. S . COHEN @ UVA . NL

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam
University of California Irvine
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research

M . WELLING @ UVA . NL

Abstract
In a range of fields including the geosciences,
molecular biology, robotics and computer vision,
one encounters problems that involve random
variables on manifolds. Currently, there is a lack
of flexible probabilistic models on manifolds that
are fast and easy to train. We define an extremely
flexible class of exponential family distributions
on manifolds such as the torus, sphere, and rotation groups, and show that for these distributions the gradient of the log-likelihood can be
computed efficiently using a non-commutative
generalization of the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT). We discuss applications to Bayesian camera motion estimation (where harmonic exponential families serve as conjugate priors), and modelling of the spatial distribution of earthquakes
on the surface of the earth. Our experimental results show that harmonic densities yield a significantly higher likelihood than the best competing
method, while being orders of magnitude faster
to train.

1. Introduction
Many problems in science and engineering involve random variables on manifolds. In the geosciences, for example, one deals with measurements such as the locations
of earthquakes and weather events on the spherical surface
of the earth. In robotics and computer vision, unobserved
Lie group transformations such as rotations and rigid-body
motions play an important role in motion understanding,
localization and alignment problems. Classical probabilistic models cannot be applied to data on manifolds because
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

these models do not respect the manifold topology (having discontinuities at the value 0 ≡ 2π of a circular variable, for instance), and because they are not equivariant (a
manifold-preserving transformation of the data would take
the distribution outside the model family). Among manifold distributions there are currently none that are both flexible and efficiently trainable.
In this paper we study a very flexible class of densities
on compact Lie groups (such as the group of rotations in
two or three dimensions) and homogeneous spaces (such
as the circle, torus, and sphere). We refer to these densities as harmonic exponential families, because they are
based on a generalized form of Fourier analysis known
as non-commutative harmonic analysis (Chirikjian & Kyatkin, 2001). Specifically, the sufficient statistics of these
families are given by functions that are analogous to the
sinusoids on the circle.
We show that the moment map (Wainwright & Jordan,
2007) that takes the natural parameters of an exponential
family and produces the moments of the distribution can be
computed very efficiently for harmonic exponential families using generalized Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithms. This leads directly to a very efficient maximumlikelihood estimation procedure that is applicable to any
manifold for which an FFT algorithm has been developed,
and that enjoys the convexity and convergence properties
of exponential families.
We apply the harmonic exponential family of the sphere to
the problem of modeling the spatial distribution of earthquakes on the surface of the earth. Our model significantly
outperforms the best competing method (a mixture model),
while being orders of magnitude faster to train.
Harmonic exponential families also arise naturally as conjugate priors in a Bayesian framework for estimating transformations from correspondence pairs. In this case the
points on the manifold (the transformations) are not observed directly. Instead we see a pair of vectors x and y

