Inference in a Partially Observed Queuing Model with Applications in Ecology

Kevin Winner1
KWINNER @ CS . UMASS . EDU
Garrett Bernstein1
GBERNSTEIN @ CS . UMASS . EDU
Daniel Sheldon1,2
SHELDON @ CS . UMASS . EDU
1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01002, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA 01075, USA

Abstract
We consider the problem of inference in a probabilistic model for transient populations where
we wish to learn about arrivals, departures, and
population size over all time, but the only available data are periodic counts of the population
size at specific observation times. The underlying model arises in queueing theory (as an
Mt /G/∞ queue) and also in ecological models for short-lived animals such as insects. Our
work applies to both systems. Previous work
in the ecology literature focused on maximum
likelihood estimation and made a simplifying independence assumption that prevents inference
over unobserved random variables such as arrivals and departures. The contribution of this
paper is to formulate a latent variable model and
develop a novel Gibbs sampler based on Markov
bases to perform inference using the correct, but
intractable, likelihood function. We empirically
validate the convergence behavior of our sampler
and demonstrate the ability of our model to make
much finer-grained inferences than the previous
approach.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of inference in a probabilistic
model for transient populations where we wish to learn as
much as possible about the complete state of the population over time, including arrivals, departures, and population size, but the only available data are periodic counts of
the population size at specific observation times.
Our work applies to a simple probabilistic model that arises
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

in two distinct places. It is most precisely described in
queuing theory, where it is known as the Mt /G/∞ queue
(Eick et al., 1993) and describes a situation where: (1) customers arrive at a queue over time according to a Poisson
process with arbitrary intensity function, (2) they are assigned to a server immediately upon arriving at the queue,
and (3) their service time is drawn independently from an
arbitrary, shared, service-time distribution. In this terminology, our paper addresses the problem of making inferences about arrivals and departures from the queue when
only the total number of customers in service is observable
and only at discrete observation times.
We are primarily motivated by a specific application in
ecology. Zonneveld (1991) proposed what is in essence
an Mt /G/∞ queue for analyzing transient or short-lived
animal populations, specifically, insects. Adults enter the
population (arrive at the queue) either by advancing from
a previous life stage or immigrating from outside the survey area and then remain in the survey area for a specified
amount of time (service time) before dying or leaving the
area (departing the queue). Counts of abundance (number
of customers in service) are made over time at the survey
location. From this information, ecologists would like to
make inferences about life history events such as migration,
birth, and death that correspond to arrivals and departures
from the queue.
Information about arrivals and departures in insect populations is important for several reasons. First, the timing of
arrivals (e.g., the emergence of adult butterflies from cocoons) is linked to climate. Shifts in timing are important
to detect because they may result from climate change and
have the potential to disrupt the synchrony of ecosystems.
Second, understanding lifespans (departure rates) is key to
monitoring population size and trends over time, because
lifespans are confounded with abundance when interpreting survey counts. For example, it can be hard to distinguish between a population where many individuals arrive
but die quickly from one where few arrive but individuals

