Scalable Model Selection for Large-Scale Factorial Relational Models
Chunchen Liu ∗
Lu Feng ∗
NEC Laboratories China
Ryohei Fujimaki
Yusuke Muraoka
NEC Knowledge Discovery Research Laboratories

Abstract
With a growing need to understand large-scale
networks, factorial relational models, such as
binary matrix factorization models (BMFs), have
become important in many applications. Although BMFs have a natural capability to uncover overlapping group structures behind network
data, existing inference techniques have issues of
either high computational cost or lack of model
selection capability, and this limits their applicability. For scalable model selection of BMFs,
this paper proposes stochastic factorized asymptotic Bayesian (sFAB) inference that combines
concepts in two recently-developed techniques:
stochastic variational inference (SVI) and FAB
inference. sFAB is a highly-efficient algorithm,
having both scalability and an inherent model
selection capability in a single inference framework. Empirical results show the superiority
of sFAB/BMF in both accuracy and scalability
over state-of-the-art inference methods for overlapping relational models.

1. Introduction
Relational modeling has been an actively-studied research
topic due to its increasing significance in such important
applications as social network analyses (Kim et al., 2012),
recommendation systems (Hsu, 2005), and bioinformatics
(Jaimovich et al., 2006). Relational modeling has two main
purposes: (1) to reveal latent group structures underlying
the networks (partition entities into several groups on the
basis of their connectivities) and (2) to predict unseen links
on the basis of known links (i.e. link prediction). With
respect to (1), identification of the appropriate number of
groups (a.k.a. model selection) is one of the most important
∗

Equal contribution.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

LIU CHUNCHEN @ NEC . CN
FENG LU @ NEC . CN

RFUJIMAKI @ NEC - LABS . COM
YMURAOKA @ NEC - LABS . COM

challenges in the learning of relational models.
Recently, research interests have been particularly focused
on overlapping relational data (a single entity may belong
to multiple groups), which is a natural property commonly
observed in real-world relational networks. One pioneering work proposes mixed-membership stochastic blockmodels (MMSB) (Airoldi et al., 2008; Gopalan et al., 2012)
that express “overlaps” using multinomial distributions.
Analogous models like mixed membership relational clustering (Long et al., 2007) and modular structures (Azizi
et al., 2014) take node information into consideration.
For model selection, state-of-the-art algorithms usually
follow non-parametric Bayesian frameworks by employing
infinite priors such as hierarchical Dirichlet processes (Kim
et al., 2013) and Chinese restaurant processes (Koutsourelakis & Eliassi-Rad, 2008), which automatically select the
effective number of groups from among “infinite groups”.
An alternative approach for expressing overlapping group
structures is factorial modeling. Unlike multinomial modeling, in which individual entities are essentially generated
from one group (similar to the situation in which each
sample belongs to a single component in standard mixture
models), factorial models express entities by combining
multiple binary latent features, and, therefore, they can literally express overlapping structures. Binary matrix factorization models (BMFs) (Meeds et al., 2007) are powerful
factorial relational models. Although they provide natural
overlapping structures, their high computational cost of
model selection, arising from non-parametric Bayesian
priors, restricts their applicability to large-scale datasets.
To address the problem of Bayesian modeling on massive
data, stochastic variational inference (SVI) has been recently developed (Hoffman et al., 2012) and has already
been extended to several applications, such as topic models
(Wang & Blei, 2012; Ranganath et al., 2013), time series
modeling (Johnson & Willsky, 2014), multinomial relational models (Gopalan & Blei, 2013; Kim et al., 2013), and
matrix factorization (Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014). SVI
relies on external mechanisms for model selection (such as

