Multi-instance multi-label learning in the presence of novel class instances

Anh T. Pham
PHAMAN @ EECS . OREGONSTATE . EDU
Raviv Raich
RAICH @ EECS . OREGONSTATE . EDU
Xiaoli Z. Fern
XFERN @ EECS . OREGONSTATE . EDU
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Corvallis, OR 97330-5501 USA
Jesús Pérez Arriaga
JPEREZ @ GTAS . DICOM . UNICAN . ES
Departamento de Ingenierı́a de Comunicaciones, Universidad de Cantabria, 39005 Santander, Spain

Abstract
Multi-instance multi-label learning (MIML) is a
framework for learning in the presence of label
ambiguity. In MIML, experts provide labels for
groups of instances (bags), instead of directly
providing a label for every instance. When labeling efforts are focused on a set of target classes,
instances outside this set will not be appropriately modeled. For example, ornithologists label bird audio recordings with a list of species
present. Other additional sound instances, e.g., a
rain drop or a moving vehicle sound, are not labeled. The challenge is due to the fact that for
a given bag, the presence or absence of novel
instances is latent. In this paper, this problem
is addressed using a discriminative probabilistic model that accounts for novel instances. We
propose an exact and efficient implementation of
the maximum likelihood approach to determine
the model parameters and consequently learn an
instance-level classifier for all classes including
the novel class. Experiments on both synthetic
and real datasets illustrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Multi-instance multi-label learning is a framework for
learning in the presence of label ambiguity. In conventional
single instance single label learning (SISL), a label is provided for every instance. In contrast, in MIML learning,
instances are grouped into bags and labels are provided
at the bag-level. MIML learning has many applications
where data is complex and the labeling process is costly.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

For instance, in birdsong recognition, instead of providing a species label for each bird syllable, experts prefer to
provide species labels for longer intervals, each containing
multiple bird syllables (Briggs et al., 2012).
A common assumption in MIML is that the set of classes in
which we are interested is a closed set and all instances we
encounter in both training and testing are assumed to belong to this fixed set of classes. However, this assumption
is frequently violated in real applications. For example,
in birdsong recognition, experts label long audio intervals
with a fix set of bird species. Other categories of sound
such as rain or car sound are not included in the labeling
process. Yet, such sounds are present in the data. Another
example is image annotation, as shown in Fig. 1, where
the annotator considers only a fixed set of tags and ignores
‘grass’ as it is not included in the tag set. We refer to this as
the novel instance problem in MIML data. Properly modeling the novel instances in MIML data can have positive
impacts on several applications. First, it enables effective
detecting of novel instances in the data. Second, by modeling and recognizing the novel instances in MIML data, we
can better model the instances of known classes, and consequently improve the ability to predict the class both at the
bag-level and at the instance-level.
There are several lines of work that are related to the problem of MIML learning with novel instances. The problem
of detecting instances from novel class has been studied
under the SISL setting (Saligrama & Zhao, 2012), (Hsiao
et al., 2012), (Da et al., 2014). However, a common assumption in the SISL setting is that we only observe instances from the known classes during training. In contrast, in MIML setting, we may in fact observe instances
of the novel class during training; they are just not labeled.
For example, consider the 2nd and 4th images in Fig. 1.
Even though these bag labels, which are {‘building’} and
{‘bird’} respectively, do not indicate the presence of novel
instances from ‘grass’, however, two grass segments are

