The Hedge Algorithm on a Continuum

Walid Krichene
University of California, 652 Sutardja Dai Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

WALID @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Maximilian Balandat
University of California, 736 Sutardja Dai Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

BALANDAT @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Claire Tomlin
University of California, 721 Sutardja Dai Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

TOMLIN @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Alexandre Bayen
University of California, 642 Sutardja Dai Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

BAYEN @ BERKELEY. EDU

Abstract
We consider an online optimization problem on
a compact subset S ⊂ Rn (not necessarily convex), in which a decision maker chooses, at each
iteration t, a probability distribution x(t) over
S, and
to minimize a cumulative expected
Pseeks
T
loss, t=1 Es∼x(t) [`(t) (s)], where `(t) is a Lipschitz loss function revealed at the end of iteration t. Building on previous work, we propose
√ a generalized Hedge algorithm and show a
O( t log t) bound on the regret when the losses
are uniformly Lipschitz and S is uniformly fat
(a weaker condition than convexity). Finally, we
propose a generalization to the dual averaging
method on the set of Lebesgue-continuous distributions over S.

1. Introduction
We consider the online optimization setting used by
Zinkevich (2003) and Hazan et al. (2007), where a decision maker chooses, at each iteration t, a probability
distribution x(t) over some compact feasible set S ⊂ Rn ,
and incurs a loss Es∼x(t) [`(t) (s)]. When choosing x(t) , the
decision maker only has access to (`(τ ) (·))1≤τ ≤t−1 , i.e.
the loss functions up to iteration t − 1. The cumulative
regret is a natural measure of performance in sequential
decision problems; it was introduced by Hannan (1957)
in the context of repeated games, then later used in the
analysis of general sequential decision problems, see
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

for example Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi (2006) and Bubeck
& Cesa-Bianchi (2012). The cumulative regret R(t) at
iteration t is defined as the difference between the loss
incurred by the decision maker and the loss of the best
fixed decision in hindsight, that is,
Pt
Pt
R(t) = τ =1 Es∼x(t) [`(τ ) (s)] − inf s∈S τ =1 `(τ ) (s).
Zinkevich (2003) shows that if the feasible set S is convex,
and the loss functions `(t) are convex with a bounded gradient,√a simple online gradient descent algorithm achieves
a O( t) cumulative regret. In 2007, Hazan et al. show
that if the loss functions `(t) are exp-concave, uniformly
in t, a generalized Hedge algorithm achieves a O(log t) regret. The Hedge algorithm, also known as the multiplicative weights update (Arora et al., 2012), has been extensively studied in the discrete case, i.e. when S is a discrete set. The Hedge algorithm was introduced as the exponentially weighted average forecaster by Littlestone &
Warmuth (1989). It has also been analyzed in the context
of convex optimization, and is known as the exponentiated gradient method (Kivinen & Warmuth, 1997), or the
entropic descent method (Beck & Teboulle, 2003). The
Hedge algorithm is a simple method to implement and to
analyze, and achieves sublinear regret in the discrete case
whenever the loss functions `(t) are uniformly bounded.
More precisely, if the action
√ set has size N and the the
learning rates have
a
1/
t decay rate, then the regret is
√
bounded by O( t log N ), see for example the analysis
in (Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012).
We seek to generalize this regret bound to a setting in which
the action set is a continuum, while making only mild assumptions on the geometry of the set and the class of loss
functions. The logarithmic regret bound achieved by Hazan
et al. (2007) requires the feasible set to be convex, and the
loss functions to be exp-concave. We extend their analy-

