A Convex Optimization Framework for Bi-Clustering

Shiau Hong Lim
National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, Singapore 117575
Yudong Chen
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

YUDONG . CHEN @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Huan Xu
National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, Singapore 117575

Abstract
We present a framework for biclustering and
clustering where the observations are general labels. Our approach is based on the maximum
likelihood estimator and its convex relaxation,
and generalizes recent works in graph clustering
to the biclustering setting. In addition to standard biclustering setting where one seeks to discover clustering structure simultaneously in two
domain sets, we show that the same algorithm
can be as effective when clustering structure only
occurs in one domain. This allows for an alternative approach to clustering that is more natural
in some scenarios. We present theoretical results
that provide sufficient conditions for the recovery of the true underlying clusters under a generalized stochastic block model. These are further
validated by our empirical results on both synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
In a regular clustering task, we look for clustering structure
within a set F through observing the pairwise interactions
between elements in this set. In biclustering, we instead
have two sets F and G and the observed pairwise interactions are between object pairs (i, j) with i ∈ F and j ∈ G.
The aim is to discover clustering structure within F, G or
both through these observations. For example, in a recommender system, F consists of customers and G a set of
products. In DNA microarray analysis, F could be biological samples and G a set of genes. The standard clustering
task can be viewed as a special case of biclustering with
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

SHONGLIM @ GMAIL . COM

MPEXUH @ NUS . EDU . SG

F = G.
While many biclustering algorithms have been proposed
and applied to a variety of problems, most are without
formal guarantees in terms of the actual clustering performance. A typical approach begins with an objective
function that measures the quality or cost of a candidate
clustering, and then searches for one that optimizes the
objective. Many interesting objective functions have intractable computational complexity and the focus of many
past works have been on finding efficient approximate solutions to these problems.
We propose a tractable biclustering algorithm based on
convex optimization. The algorithm can be viewed as a
convex relaxation to the computationally intensive problem of finding a maximum likelihood solution under a
generalized stochastic block model. The stochastic block
model (Holland et al., 1983; Rohe et al., 2011) has been
widely used in graph clustering. In this model, it is assumed that a true but unknown underlying clustering exists
in both F and G. A probabilistic generative model is defined for the observations and the performance of the clustering algorithm is evaluated in terms of the ability to recover the true underlying clusters.
Our main contribution is in extending the current advances
in standard graph clustering to the biclustering setting. We
provide the conditions under which our biclustering algorithm can recover the true clusters with high probability.
Our theoretical results are consistent with existing results
in graph clustering, which have been shown to be optimal
in some cases.
One novel aspect of our result is in providing new insight
on the case where clustering structure only occurs in one
domain set, say F but not necessarily in G. We show that
under reasonable assumptions, the same algorithm can be
used to recover the clusters in F regardless of the clustering structure in G. This provides an alternative approach to

