Streaming Sparse Principal Component Analysis

Wenzhuo Yang
A 0096049@ NUS . EDU . SG
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576
Huan Xu
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576

Abstract
This paper considers estimating the leading k
principal components with at most s non-zero
attributes from p-dimensional samples collected
sequentially in memory limited environments.
We develop and analyze two memory and computational efficient algorithms called streaming
sparse PCA and streaming sparse ECA for analyzing data generated according to the spike
model and the elliptical model respectively. In
particular, the proposed algorithms have memory complexity O(pk), computational complexity O(pk min{k, s log p}) and sample complexity Θ(s log p). We provide their finite sample
performance guarantees, which implies statistical consistency in the high dimensional regime.
Numerical experiments on synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate good empirical performance of the proposed algorithms.

1. Introduction
Principal component analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901), arguably the most widely used dimension reduction method,
is a fundamental tool in data analysis in a wide range of
areas including machine learning, finance, statistics and
many others. Standard PCA extracts the principal components (PCs) of a set of samples by computing the leading
eigenvectors of the sample covariance matrix. However, in
the face of modern high dimensional data with p ≫ n, PCA
is no longer statistically solid. Indeed, Johnstone & Lu
(2009) showed that the consistency of PCA depends crucially on the limiting value of p/n: the angle between the
PCA estimate and the true leading PC does not converge to
zero unless p/n goes to zero.
To address this inconsistency issue and encourage more inProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MPEXUH @ NUS . EDU . SG

terpretable solutions, most of previous works focus on the
sparse setting assuming that the leading PCs are sparse,
i.e., only a few of their attributes are non-zero. In this setting, many variants of sparse PCA have been developed
(e.g., Zou et al., 2006; d’Aspremont et al., 2007; Shen
& Huang, 2008; Journee & Y. Nesterov, 2008; Birnbaum
et al., 2013; Vu et al., 2013; Yuan & Zhang, 2013; Wang
et al., 2014). For example, Zou et al. (2006) proposed
to use a regression-type optimization problem based on
the elastic-net to compute sparse PCs. d’Aspremont et al.
(2007) considered a convex semidefinite program formulation for sparse PCA. Yuan & Zhang (2013) and Ma (2013)
proposed the TPower method and the iterative thresholding sparse PCA respectively, which are essentially modified
variants of the classical power method. Vu et al. (2013) proposed the Fantope projection selection method (FPS) which
is a convex relaxation formulation of sparse principal subspace estimation based on a semidefinite program.
Yet, it can be hard to apply these sparse PCA methods to
real large scale data, as 1) they need to explicitly compute the sample covariance matrix or store all the samples, which means that at least O(p min{p, n}) storage
is required; 2) their computational cost may become prohibitive when the dimensionality is high. For example, FPS
is solved via an ADMM algorithm that requires to perform
spectral decomposition on a p × p matrix in each iteration.
For non-sparse PCA, many computation/memory efficient
algorithms have been proposed in recent years. For example, Warmuth & Kuzmin (2008) proposed a multiplicative update algorithm called online PCA under the streaming data model – i.e., the samples are received sequentially. Although each update of online PCA can be calculated efficiently, it still requires O(p2 ) storage. Brand
(2002) and Arora et al. (2012) developed two variants of
PCA – incremental PCA and the stochastic power method
– both of which have low memory and computational complexity. Yet, they only showed the empirical performance
and provided no theoretical performance guarantees. Recently, Mitliagkas et al. (2013) proposed streaming PCA

