Cheap Bandits

Manjesh Kumar Hanawal
Department of ECE, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, 02215 USA

MHANAWAL @ BU . EDU

Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of ECE, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, 02215 USA

SRV @ BU . EDU

Michal Valko
MICHAL . VALKO @ INRIA . FR
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, SequeL team, 40 avenue Halley 59650, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Rémi Munos
INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, SequeL team, France and Google DeepMind, United Kingdom

Abstract
We consider stochastic sequential learning problems where the learner can observe the average
reward of several actions. Such a setting is interesting in many applications involving monitoring
and surveillance, where the set of the actions to
observe represent some (geographical) area. The
importance of this setting is that in these applications, it is actually cheaper to observe average
reward of a group of actions rather than the reward of a single action. We show that when the
reward is smooth over a given graph representing the neighboring actions, we can maximize
the cumulative reward of learning while minimizing the sensing cost. In this paper we propose
CheapUCB, an algorithm that matches the regret
guarantees of the known algorithms for this setting and at the same time guarantees a linear cost
again over them. As a√by-product of our analysis, we establish a Ω( dT ) lower bound on the
cumulative regret of spectral bandits for a class
of graphs with effective dimension d.

1. Introduction
In many online learning and bandit problems, the learner is
asked to select a single action for which it obtains a (possibly contextual) feedback. However, in many scenarios
such as surveillance, monitoring and exploration of a large
area or network, it is often cheaper to obtain an average reward for a group of actions rather than a reward for a single
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

REMI . MUNOS @ INRIA . FR

one. In this paper, we therefore study group actions and
formalize this setting as cheap bandits on graph structured
data. Nodes and edges in our graph model the geometric structure of the data and we associate signals (rewards)
with each node. We are interested in problems where the
actions are a collection of nodes. Our objective is to locate
nodes with largest rewards.
The cost-aspect of our problem arises in sensor networks (SNETs) for target localization and identification.
In SNETs sensors have limited sensing range (Ermis &
Saligrama, 2010; 2005) and can reliably sense/identify targets only in their vicinity. To conserve battery power,
sleep/awake scheduling is used (Fuemmeler & Veeravalli,
2008; Aeron et al., 2008), wherein a group of sensors is woken up sequentially based on probable locations of target.
The group of sensors minimize transmit energy through
coherent beamforming of sensed signal, which is then received as an average reward/signal at the receiver. While
coherent beam forming is cheaper, it nevertheless increases
target ambiguity since the sensed field degrades with distance from target. A similar scenario arises in aerial reconnaissance as well: Larger areas can be surveilled at higher
altitudes more quickly (cheaper) but at the cost of more target ambiguity.
Moreover, sensing average rewards through group actions,
in the initial phases, is also meaningful. Rewards in many
applications are typically smooth band-limited graph signals (Narang et al., 2013) with the sensing field decaying smoothly with distance from the target. In addition
to SNETs (Zhu & Rabbat, 2012), smooth graph signals
also arise in social networks (Girvan & Newman, 2002),
and recommender systems. Signals on graphs is an emerging area in signal processing (SP) but the emphasis is on
reconstruction through sampling and interpolation from a

