Statistical and Algorithmic Perspectives on Randomized
Sketching for Ordinary Least-Squares

Garvesh Raskutti
RASKUTTI @ STAT. WISC . EDU
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Department of Statistics, Department of Computer Science, Wisconsin Institute for
Discovery, Madison, WI 53706 USA
Michael W. Mahoney
MMAHONEY @ STAT. BERKELEY. EDU
University of California, Berkeley, ICSI, Department of Statistics, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
We consider statistical and algorithmic aspects of
solving large-scale least-squares (LS) problems
using randomized sketching algorithms. Prior results show that, from an algorithmic perspective,
when using sketching matrices constructed from
random projections and leverage-score sampling,
if the number of samples r much smaller than
the original sample size n, then the worst-case
(WC) error is the same as solving the original
problem, up to a very small relative error. From
a statistical perspective, one typically considers
the mean-squared error performance of randomized sketching algorithms, when data are generated according to a statistical linear model. In
this paper, we provide a rigorous comparison of
both perspectives leading to insights on how they
differ. To do this, we first develop a framework
for assessing, in a unified manner, algorithmic
and statistical aspects of randomized sketching
methods. We then consider the statistical prediction efficiency (PE) and the statistical residual efficiency (RE) of the sketched LS estimator; and
we use our framework to provide upper bounds
for several types of random projection and random sampling algorithms. Among other results,
we show that the RE can be upper bounded when
r is much smaller than n, while the PE typically
requires the number of samples r to be substantially larger. Lower bounds developed in subsequent work show that our upper bounds on PE
can not be improved.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Recent work in large-scale data analysis and Randomized
Linear Algebra (RLA) has focused on developing so-called
sketching algorithms: given a data set and an objective
function of interest, construct a small “sketch” of the full
data set, e.g., by using random sampling or random projection methods, and use that sketch as a surrogate to perform
computations of interest for the full data set (see (Mahoney,
2011) for a review). Most effort in this area has adopted an
algorithmic perspective, whereby one shows that, when the
sketches are constructed appropriately, one can obtain answers that are approximately as good as the exact answer
for the input data at hand, in less time than would be required to compute an exact answer for the data at hand.
From a statistical perspective, however, one is often more
interested in how well a procedure performs relative to an
hypothesized model than how well it performs on the particular data set at hand. Thus an important question to consider is whether the insights from the algorithmic perspective of sketching carry over to the statistical setting. To
address this, in this paper, we develop a unified approach
that considers both the statistical perspective and algorithmic perspective on recently-developed randomized sketching algorithms in RLA, and we provide bounds on two statistical objectives for several types of random projection
and random sampling sketching algorithms.
1.1. Overview of the problem
The problem we consider in this paper is the ordinary leastsquares (LS or OLS) problem: given as input a matrix X ∈
Rn×p of observed features or covariates and a vector Y ∈
Rn of observed responses, return as output a vector βOLS
that solves the following optimization problem:

βOLS = arg minp kY − Xβk22 .
β∈R

(1)

