Learning Parametric-Output HMMs with Two Aliased States

Roi Weiss
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, 84105, Israel.

ROIWEI @ CS . BGU . AC . IL

Boaz Nadler
BOAZ . NADLER @ WEIZMANN . AC . IL
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel.

Abstract
In various applications involving hidden Markov
models (HMMs), some of the hidden states are
aliased, having identical output distributions.
The minimality, identifiability and learnability
of such aliased HMMs have been long standing
problems, with only partial solutions provided
thus far. In this paper we focus on parametricoutput HMMs, whose output distributions come
from a parametric family, and that have exactly
two aliased states. For this class, we present
a complete characterization of their minimality
and identifiability. Furthermore, for a large family of parametric output distributions, we derive
computationally efficient and statistically consistent algorithms to detect the presence of aliasing and learn the aliased HMM transition and
emission parameters. We illustrate our theoretical analysis by several simulations.

1. Introduction
HMMs are a fundamental tool in the analysis of time series. A discrete time HMM with n hidden states is characterized by a n × n transition matrix and by the emissions
probabilities from these n states. In several applications,
the HMMs, or more general processes such as partially observable Markov decision processes, are aliased, with some
states having identical output distributions. In modeling of
ion channel gating, for example, a common assumption is
that at any given time an ion channel can be in only one of a
finite number of hidden states, some of which are open and
conducting current while others are closed, see e.g. Fredkin
& Rice (1992). Fitting an aliased HMM to electric current
measurements, allows biologists to gain important insights
regarding the gating process. Other examples appear in the
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

fields of reinforcement learning (Chrisman, 1992; McCallum, 1995; Brafman & Shani, 2004; Shani et al., 2005) and
robot navigation (Jefferies & Yeap, 2008; Zatuchna & Bagnall, 2009). In the latter case, aliasing occurs whenever different spatial locations appear (statistically) identical to the
robot, given its limited sensing devices. As a last example,
HMMs with several silent states that do not emit any output (Leggetter & Woodland, 1994; Stanke & Waack, 2003;
Brejova et al., 2007), can also be viewed as aliased.
Key notions related to the study of HMMs, be them aliased
or not, are their minimality, identifiability and learnability:
Minimality. Is there an HMM with fewer states that induces the same distribution over all output sequences?
Identifiability. Does the distribution over all output sequences uniquely determines the HMM’s parameters, up
to a permutation of its hidden states?
Learning. Given a long output sequence from a minimal
and identifiable HMM, efficiently learn its parameters.
For non-aliased HMMs, these notions have been intensively studied and by now are relatively well understood,
see for example Petrie (1969); Finesso (1990); Leroux
(1992); Allman et al. (2009) and Cappé et al. (2005). The
most common approach to learn the parameters of an HMM
is via the Baum-Welch iterative algorithm (Baum et al.,
1970). Recently, tensor decompositions and other computationally efficient spectral methods have been developed
to learn non-aliased HMMs (Hsu et al., 2009; Siddiqi et al.,
2010; Anandkumar et al., 2012; Kontorovich et al., 2013).
In contrast, the minimality, identifiability and learnability of aliased HMMs have been long standing problems,
with only partial solutions provided thus far. For example, Blackwell & Koopmans (1957) characterized the identifiability of a specific aliased HMM with 4 states. The
identifiability of deterministic output HMMs, where each
hidden state outputs a deterministic symbol, was partially
resolved by Ito et al. (1992). To the best of our knowledge,
precise characterizations of the minimality, identifiability
and learnability of probabilistic output HMMs with aliased

