Non-Linear Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering via Hyper-Structure
Transfer
Yan-Fu Liu
National Tsing Hua University, ROC

YFLIU @ NETDB . CS . NTHU . EDU . TW

Cheng-Yu Hsu
National Tsing Hua University, ROC

CYHSU @ NETDB . CS . NTHU . EDU . TW

Shan-Hung Wu
National Tsing Hua University, ROC

SHWU @ CS . NTHU . EDU . TW

Abstract
The Cross Domain Collaborative Filtering
(CDCF) exploits the rating matrices from multiple domains to make better recommendations.
Existing CDCF methods adopt the sub-structure
sharing technique that can only transfer linearly
correlated knowledge between domains. In this
paper, we propose the notion of Hyper-Structure
Transfer (HST) that requires the rating matrices
to be explained by the projections of some more
complex structure, called the hyper-structure,
shared by all domains, and thus allows the nonlinearly correlated knowledge between domains
to be identified and transferred. Extensive experiments are conducted and the results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our HST models empirically.

1. Introduction
Collaborative Filtering (CF) (Hofmann, 2004; Hu et al.,
2008; Koren et al., 2009) is a major technique used by the
recommender systems to find out items interesting to a user.
The problem of CF can be defined as follows: given a rating matrix X ∈ Rn×m whose each entry X i,j denotes
either the rating (or other similar feedback) from the user
i to the item j if i has interacted with j or blank otherwise, fill the blanks in X so that a recommender systems
can recommend to the user i those items having the top
filled/predicted values in the row X i,: . One common approach to CF is to approximate X by a dense matrix Y
whose entries can be explained by some common knowledge such as latent factors. Traditionally, CF methods foProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

cus on items in one domain. For example, a video-rental
recommender system like Netflix may regard items as all
its available videos. In practice, the rating matrix in a single domain can be too sparse to learn satisfactory latent
factors (Su & Khoshgoftaar, 2009). Furthermore, with the
popularity of e-commerce systems (e.g., Amazon, TripAdvisor, etc.) and social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, etc.),
users can provide feedbacks to items in multiple domains
(e.g., books, DVDs, music, electronics, etc. in Amazon).
It is desirable to have a cross-domain recommender system
that is able to recommend items in different domains to a
user, helping cross-selling the products and/or discovering
new customers.
The above motivates recent studies on the Cross Domain
Collaborative Filtering (CDCF) (Li, 2011) problem: given
(k)
(k)
d rating matrices X (k) ∈ Rn ×m , 1 ≤ k ≤ d, each
corresponding to n(k) users1 and m(k) items in a specific
domain k, fill the blanks in X (k) ’s jointly. The CDCF
methods are expected to improve the quality of recommendations because blanks in each X (k) can be predicted based
on not only the knowledge/latent factors in that domain,
but also the correlated knowledge transferred from other
domains. The correlation is less obscured by the sparsity
since it can be inferred from multiple X (k) ’s. Furthermore, with plenty domains available in an e-commerce system and social media, CDCF methods are also expected to
further improve the quality of recommendations as d increases.
However, we find that in practice, existing CDCF methods usually give limited improvement in performance, and
sometimes, adding new domains even results in worse performance. This is mainly due to how the correlation between domains is captured. To transfer knowledge between domains, most existing CDCF methods employ a
1

Users in different domains can overlap.

