Scalable Bayesian Optimization Using Deep Neural Networks

Jasper Snoek∗
Oren Rippel†∗
Kevin Swersky§
Ryan Kiros§
Nadathur Satish‡
Narayanan Sundaram‡
Md. Mostofa Ali Patwary‡
Prabhat?
Ryan P. Adams∗

JSNOEK @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU
RIPPEL @ MATH . MIT. EDU
KSWERSKY @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
RKIROS @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
NADATHUR . RAJAGOPALAN . SATISH @ INTEL . COM
NARAYANAN . SUNDARAM @ INTEL . COM
MOSTOFA . ALI . PATWARY @ INTEL . COM
PRABHAT @ LBL . GOV
RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

∗

Harvard University, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Mathematics
§
University of Toronto, Department of Computer Science
‡
Intel Labs, Parallel Computing Lab
?
NERSC, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
†

Abstract

1. Introduction

Bayesian optimization is an effective methodology for the global optimization of functions with
expensive evaluations. It relies on querying a distribution over functions defined by a relatively
cheap surrogate model. An accurate model for
this distribution over functions is critical to the
effectiveness of the approach, and is typically fit
using Gaussian processes (GPs). However, since
GPs scale cubically with the number of observations, it has been challenging to handle objectives whose optimization requires many evaluations, and as such, massively parallelizing the optimization.

Recently, the field of machine learning has seen unprecedented growth due to a new wealth of data, increases in
computational power, new algorithms, and a plethora of
exciting new applications. As researchers tackle more ambitious problems, the models they use are also becoming
more sophisticated. However, the growing complexity of
machine learning models inevitably comes with the introduction of additional hyperparameters. These range from
design decisions such as the shape of a neural network
architecture, to optimization parameters such as learning
rates, to regularization hyperparameters such as weight decay. Proper setting of these hyperparameters is critical for
performance on difficult problems.

In this work, we explore the use of neural networks as an alternative to GPs to model distributions over functions. We show that performing adaptive basis function regression with a
neural network as the parametric form performs
competitively with state-of-the-art GP-based approaches, but scales linearly with the number
of data rather than cubically. This allows us to
achieve a previously intractable degree of parallelism, which we apply to large scale hyperparameter optimization, rapidly finding competitive
models on benchmark object recognition tasks
using convolutional networks, and image caption
generation using neural language models.

There are many methods for optimizing over hyperparameter settings, ranging from simplistic procedures like grid or
random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012), to more sophisticated model-based approaches using random forests (Hutter et al., 2011) or Gaussian processes (Snoek et al., 2012).
Bayesian optimization is a natural framework for modelbased global optimization of noisy, expensive black-box
functions. It offers a principled approach to modeling uncertainty, which allows exploration and exploitation to be
naturally balanced during the search. Perhaps the most
commonly used model for Bayesian optimization is the
Gaussian process (GP) due to its simplicity and flexibility
in terms of conditioning and inference.

nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

However, a major drawback of GP-based Bayesian optimization is that inference time grows cubically in the number of observations, as it necessitates the inversion of a
dense covariance matrix. For problems with a very small

