Convex Learning of Multiple Tasks and their Structure

Carlo Ciliberto1,2
CCILIBER @ MIT. EDU
Youssef Mroueh1,2
YMROUEH @ MIT. EDU
Tomaso Poggio1,2
TP @ AI . MIT. EDU
1
Laboratory for Computational and Statistical Learning, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, Genova, Italy
2
Center for Brains Minds and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Lorenzo Rosasco1,2,3
3
DIBRIS, Università di Genova, Via Dodecaneso, 35, 16146, Genova, Italy

Abstract
Reducing the amount of human supervision is
a key problem in machine learning and a natural approach is that of exploiting the relations
(structure) among different tasks. This is the idea
at the core of multi-task learning. In this context a fundamental question is how to incorporate
the tasks structure in the learning problem. We
tackle this question by studying a general computational framework that allows to encode a-priori
knowledge of the tasks structure in the form of a
convex penalty; in this setting a variety of previously proposed methods can be recovered as
special cases, including linear and non-linear approaches. Within this framework, we show that
tasks and their structure can be efficiently learned
considering a convex optimization problem that
can be approached by means of block coordinate
methods such as alternating minimization and for
which we prove convergence to the global minimum.

1. Introduction
Current machine learning systems achieve remarkable results in several challenging tasks, but are limited by the
amount of human supervision required. Leveraging similarity among different problems is widely acknowledged
to be a key approach to reduce the need for supervised
data. Indeed, this idea is at the basis of multi-task learning, where the joint solution of different problems (tasks)
has the potential to exploit tasks relatedness (structure) to
improve learning accuracy. This idea has motivated a variProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

LROSASCO @ MIT. EDU

ety of methods, including frequentist (Micchelli & Pontil,
2004; Argyriou et al., 2008a;b) and Bayesian methods (see
e.g. (Álvarez et al., 2012) and references therein), with connections to structured learning (Bakir et al., 2007; Tsochantaridis et al., 2004).
The focus of our study is the development of a general regularization framework to learn multiple tasks as well as their
structure. Following (Micchelli & Pontil, 2004; Evgeniou
et al., 2005) we consider a setting where tasks are modeled
as the components of a vector-valued function and their
structure corresponds to the choice of suitable functional
spaces. Exploiting the theory of reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces for vector-valued functions (RKHSvv) (Micchelli
& Pontil, 2004), we consider and analyze a flexible regularization framework, within which a variety of previously
proposed approaches can be recovered as special cases, see
e.g. (Jacob et al., 2008; Lozano & Sindhwani, 2011; Minh
& Sindhwani, 2011; Zhang & Yeung, 2010; Dinuzzo et al.,
2011; Sindhwani et al., 2012). Our main technical contribution is a unifying study of the minimization problem
corresponding to such a regularization framework. More
precisely, we devise an optimization approach that can efficiently compute a solution and for which we prove convergence under weak assumptions. Our approach is based on a
barrier method that is combined with block coordinate descent techniques (Tseng, 2001; Razaviyayn et al., 2013). In
this sense our analysis generalizes the results in (Argyriou
et al., 2008a) for which a low-rank assumption was considered; however the extension is not straightforward, since
we consider a much larger class of regularization schemes
(any convex penalty). Up to our knowledge, this is the first
result in multi-task learning proving the convergence of alternating minimization schemes for such a general family
of problems.
The RKHSvv setting allows to naturally deal both with linear and non-linear models and the approach we propose
provides a general computational framework for learning

