Low-Rank Matrix Recovery from Row-and-Column Affine Measurements

Avishai Wagner
AVISHAI . WAGNER @ MAIL . HUJI . AC . IL
Or Zuk
OR . ZUK @ MAIL . HUJI . AC . IL
Dept. of Statistics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem, 91905, Israel

Abstract
We propose and study a row-and-column affine
measurement scheme for low-rank matrix recovery. Each measurement is a linear combination of
elements in one row or one column of a matrix
X. This setting arises naturally in applications
from different domains. However, current algorithms developed for standard matrix recovery
problems do not perform well in our case, hence
the need for developing new algorithms and theory for our problem. We propose a simple algorithm for the problem based on Singular Value
Decomposition (SV D) and least-squares (LS),
which we term SVLS . We prove that (a simplified version of) our algorithm can recover X exactly with the minimum possible number of measurements in the noiseless case. In the general
noisy case, we prove performance guarantees on
the reconstruction accuracy under the Frobenius
norm. In simulations, our row-and-column design and SVLS algorithm show improved speed,
and comparable and in some cases better accuracy compared to standard measurements designs
and algorithms. Our theoretical and experimental results suggest that the proposed row-andcolumn affine measurements scheme, together
with our recovery algorithm, may provide a powerful framework for affine matrix reconstruction.

1. Introduction
In the low-rank affine matrix recovery problem, an unknown matrix X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 with rank(X) = r is
measured indirectly via an affine transformation A :
Rn1 ×n2 → Rd and possibly with additive (typically Gaussian) noise z ∈ Rd . Our goal is to recover X from the
vector of noisy measurements b = A(X) + z. The problem has found numerous applications throughout science
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

and engineering, in different fields such as collaborative
filtering (Koren et al., 2009), face recognition (Basri & Jacobs, 2003), quantum state tomography (Gross et al., 2010)
and computational biology (Chi et al., 2013). The problem has been studied mathematically quite extensively in
the last few years. Most attention thus far has been given
to two particular ensembles of random transformations A:
(i) the Matrix Completion (MC) setting, in which each
element of A(X) is a single entry of the matrix where
the subset of the observed measurements is sampled uniformly at random (Candès & Recht, 2009; Candès & Plan,
2010; Candès & Tao, 2010; Keshavan et al., 2009; 2010;
Recht, 2011) (ii) Gaussian-Ensemble (GE) affine-matrixrecovery, in which each element of A(X) is a weighted
sum of all elements of X with i.i.d. Gaussian weights
(Candès & Plan, 2011; Recht et al., 2010). Remarkably,
although the recovery problem is in general NP-hard, when
r ≪ min(n1 , n2 ) and under certain conditions on the matrix X or the measurement operator A, one can recover X
from d ≪ n1 n2 measurements with high probability and
using efficient algorithms (Candès & Recht, 2009; Recht
et al., 2010; Candès & Tao, 2010; Recht, 2011). However,
it is desirable to study the problem with other affine transformations A beyond the two ensembles mentioned above
for the following reasons: (i) In some applications we cannot control the measurements operator A, and different
models for the measurements may be needed to allow a realistic analysis of the problem (ii) When we can control and
design the measurement operator A, other measurement
operators may outperform the two ensembles mentioned
above with respect to optimizing different resources such
as the number of measurements required, computation time
and storage. The main goal of this paper is to present and
study a different set of affine transformations, which we
term row-and-column affine measurements. This setting
may arise naturally in many applications, since it is often
natural and possibly cheap to measure a single row or column of a matrix, or a linear combination of a few such rows
and columns. For example, (i) In collaborative filtering, we
may wish to recover a users-items preference matrix and
have access to only a subset of the users, but can observe
their preference scores for all items (ii) When recovering

