A Theoretical Analysis of Metric Hypothesis Transfer Learning

Michaël Perrot
MICHAEL . PERROT @ UNIV- ST- ETIENNE . FR
Amaury Habrard
AMAURY. HABRARD @ UNIV- ST- ETIENNE . FR
Université de Lyon, Université Jean Monnet de Saint-Etienne,
Laboratoire Hubert Curien, CNRS, UMR5516, F-42000, Saint-Etienne, France.

Abstract
We consider the problem of transferring some
a priori knowledge in the context of supervised
metric learning approaches. While this setting
has been successfully applied in some empirical
contexts, no theoretical evidence exists to justify
this approach. In this paper, we provide a theoretical justification based on the notion of algorithmic stability adapted to the regularized metric learning setting. We propose an on-averagereplace-two-stability model allowing us to prove
fast generalization rates when an auxiliary source
metric is used to bias the regularizer. Moreover,
we prove a consistency result from which we
show the interest of considering biased weighted
regularized formulations and we provide a solution to estimate the associated weight. We also
present some experiments illustrating the interest
of the approach in standard metric learning tasks
and in a transfer learning problem where few labelled data are available.

1. Introduction
A lot of machine learning problems, such as clustering,
classification or ranking, require to accurately compare examples by means of distances or similarities. Designing
a good metric for a task at hand is thus of crucial importance. Manually tuning a metric is in general difficult and
tedious, a recent trend consists to learn the metrics directly
from data. This has led to the emergence of supervised
metric learning, see (Bellet et al., 2013; Kulis, 2013) for
up-to-date surveys. The underlying idea is to infer automatically the parameters of a metric in order to capture the
idiosyncrasies of the data. In a supervised classification
perspective, this is generally done by trying to satisfy pairbased constraints aiming at assigning a small (resp. large)
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

score to pairs of examples of the same class (resp. different class). Most of the existing work has notably focused on learning
p Mahalanobis-like distances of the form
dM (x, x0 ) = (x − x0 )T M(x − x0 ) where M is a positive semi-definite (PSD) matrix1 , the learned matrix being
typically plugged in a k-Nearest Neighbor classifier allowing one to achieve a better accuracy than the standard Euclidean distance.
Recently, there is a growing interest for methods
able to take into account some background knowledge
(Parameswaran & Weinberger, 2010; Cao et al., 2013;
Bohné et al., 2014) for learning M. This is in particular the
case for supervised regularized metric learning approaches
where the regularizer is biased with respect to an auxiliary
metric given under the form of a matrix. The main objective here is to make use of this a priori knowledge in a
setting where only few labelled data are available to help
learning. For example, in the context of learning a PSD
matrix M plugged into a Mahalanobis-like distance as discussed above, let I be the identity matrix used as an auxiliary knowledge, kM − Ik is a biased regularizer often
considered. This regularization can be interpreted as follows: learn M while trying to stay close to the Euclidean
distance, or from another standpoint try to learn a matrix M
which performs better than I. Other standard matrices can
be used such as Σ−1 the inverse of the variance-covariance
matrix, note that if we take the 0 matrix, we retrieve the
classical unbiased regularization term.
Another useful setting comes when I is replaced by any
auxiliary matrix MS learned from another task. This corresponds to a transfer learning approach where the biased
regularization can be interpreted as transferring the knowledge brought by MS for learning M. This setting is appropriate when the distributions over training and testing domains are different but related. Domain adaptation strate1
Note that this distance is a generalization of some wellknown distances: when M = I, I being the identity matrix, we
retrieve the Euclidean distance, when M = Σ−1 where Σ is the
variance-covariance matrix of the data at hand, it actually corresponds to the original definition of a Mahalanobis distance.

