Generative Moment Matching Networks

Yujia Li1
Kevin Swersky1
Richard Zemel1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, CANADA
2
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, ON, CANADA

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning deep generative models from data. We formulate a method
that generates an independent sample via a single feedforward pass through a multilayer perceptron, as in the recently proposed generative
adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014).
Training a generative adversarial network, however, requires careful optimization of a difficult
minimax program. Instead, we utilize a technique from statistical hypothesis testing known
as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), which
leads to a simple objective that can be interpreted
as matching all orders of statistics between a
dataset and samples from the model, and can be
trained by backpropagation. We further boost
the performance of this approach by combining
our generative network with an auto-encoder network, using MMD to learn to generate codes that
can then be decoded to produce samples. We
show that the combination of these techniques
yields excellent generative models compared to
baseline approaches as measured on MNIST and
the Toronto Face Database.

1. Introduction
The most visible successes in the area of deep learning have
come from the application of deep models to supervised
learning tasks. Models such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and long short term memory (LSTM) networks are now achieving impressive results on a number of
tasks such as object recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Sermanet et al., 2014; Szegedy et al., 2014), speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014; Hinton et al., 2012a), image
caption generation (Vinyals et al., 2014; Fang et al., 2014;
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YUJIALI @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
KSWERSKY @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
ZEMEL @ CS . TORONTO . EDU

Kiros et al., 2014), machine translation (Cho et al., 2014;
Sutskever et al., 2014), and more. Despite their successes,
one of the main bottlenecks of the supervised approach is
the difficulty in obtaining enough data to learn abstract features that capture the rich structure of the data. It is well
recognized that a promising avenue is to use unsupervised
learning on unlabelled data, which is far more plentiful and
cheaper to obtain.
A long-standing and inherent problem in unsupervised
learning is defining a good method for evaluation. Generative models offer the ability to evaluate generalization
in the data space, which can also be qualitatively assessed.
In this work we propose a generative model for unsupervised learning that we call generative moment matching
networks (GMMNs). GMMNs are generative neural networks that begin with a simple prior from which it is easy
to draw samples. These are propagated deterministically
through the hidden layers of the network and the output is
a sample from the model. Thus, with GMMNs it is easy
to quickly draw independent random samples, as opposed
to expensive MCMC procedures that are necessary in other
models such as Boltzmann machines (Ackley et al., 1985;
Hinton, 2002; Salakhutdinov & Hinton, 2009). The structure of a GMMN is most analogous to the recently proposed generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), however unlike GANs, whose training involves a difficult minimax optimization problem, GMMNs
are comparatively simple; they are trained to minimize a
straightforward loss function using backpropagation.
The key idea behind GMMNs is the use of a statistical hypothesis testing framework called maximum mean discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2007). Training a GMMN to minimize this discrepancy can be interpreted as matching all
moments of the model distribution to the empirical data distribution. Using the kernel trick, MMD can be represented
as a simple loss function that we use as the core training
objective for GMMNs. Using minibatch stochastic gradient descent, training can be kept efficient, even with large
datasets.

