Learning Program Embeddings to Propagate Feedback on Student Code

Chris Piech
Jonathan Huang
Andy Nguyen
Mike Phulsuksombati
Mehran Sahami
Leonidas Guibas

PIECH @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
JONATHANHUANG @ GOOGLE . COM
TANONEV @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
MIKEP 15@ CS . STANFORD . EDU
SAHAMI @ CS . STANFORD . EDU
GUIBAS @ CS . STANFORD . EDU

Abstract
Providing feedback, both assessing final work
and giving hints to stuck students, is difficult
for open-ended assignments in massive online
classes which can range from thousands to millions of students. We introduce a neural network
method to encode programs as a linear mapping
from an embedded precondition space to an embedded postcondition space and propose an algorithm for feedback at scale using these linear maps as features. We apply our algorithm
to assessments from the Code.org Hour of Code
and Stanford University’s CS1 course, where we
propagate human comments on student assignments to orders of magnitude more submissions.

1. Introduction
Online computer science courses can be massive with numbers ranging from thousands to even millions of students.
Though technology has increased our ability to provide
content to students at scale, assessing and providing feedback (both for final work and partial solutions) remains difficult. Currently, giving personalized feedback, a staple
of quality education, is costly for small, in-person classrooms and prohibitively expensive for massive classes. Autonomously providing feedback is therefore a central challenge for at scale computer science education.
It can be difficult to apply machine learning directly to data
in the form of programs. Program representations such as
the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) are not directly conducive
to standard statistical methods and the edit distance metric between such trees are not discriminative enough to be
used to share feedback accurately since programs with similar ASTs can behave quite differently and require different
comments. Moreover, though unit tests are a useful way to
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

test if final solutions are correct they are not well suited for
giving help to students with an intermediate solution and
they are not able to give feedback on stylistic elements.
There are two major goals of our paper. The first is to automatically learn a feature embedding of student submitted programs that captures functional and stylistic elements
and can be easily used in typical supervised machine learning systems. The second is to use these features to learn
how to give automatic feedback to students. Inspired by
recent successes of deep learning for learning features in
other domains like NLP and vision, we formulate a novel
neural network architecture that allows us to jointly optimize an embedding of programs and memory-state in a
feature space. See Figure 1 for an example program and
corresponding matrix embeddings.
To gather data, we exploit the fact that programs are executable — that we can evaluate any piece of code on an arbitrary input (i.e., the precondition), and observe the state
after, (the postcondition). For a program and its constituent
parts we can thus collect arbitrarily many such precondition/postcondition mappings. This data provides the training set from which we can learn a shared representation
for programs. To evaluate our program embeddings we test
our ability to amplify teacher feedback. We use real student data from the Code.org Hour of Code which has been
attempted by over 27 million learners making it, to the best
of our knowledge, the largest online course to-date. We
then show how the same approach can be used for submissions in Stanford University’s Programming Methodologies course which has thousands of students and assignments that are substantially more complex. The programs
we analyze are written in a Turing-complete language but
do not allow for user-defined variables.
Our main contributions are as follows. First, we present
a method for computing features of code that capture both
functional and stylistic elements. Our model works by simultaneously embedding precondition and postcondition
spaces of a set of programs into a feature space where programs can be viewed as linear maps on this space. Second,

