Ordinal Mixed Membership Models

Seppo Virtanen
Mark Girolami
Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, CV4 7AL Coventry UK

Abstract
We present a novel class of mixed membership
models for joint distributions of groups of observations that co-occur with ordinal response variables for each group for learning statistical associations between the ordinal response variables
and the observation groups. The class of proposed models addresses a requirement for predictive and diagnostic methods in a wide range
of practical contemporary applications. In this
work, by way of illustration, we apply the models
to a collection of consumer-generated reviews of
mobile software applications, where each review
contains unstructured text data accompanied with
an ordinal rating, and demonstrate that the models infer useful and meaningful recurring patterns
of consumer feedback. We also compare the developed models to relevant existing works, which
rely on improper statistical assumptions for ordinal variables, showing significant improvements
both in predictive ability and knowledge extraction.

1. Introduction
There exist large repositories of user-generated assessment,
preference or review data consisting of free-form text data
associated with ordinal variables for quality or preference.
Examples include product reviews, user feedback, recommendation systems, expert assessments, clinical records,
survey questionnaires, economic or health status reports,
to name a few. The ubiquitous need to statistically model
the underlying processes and analyse such data collections
presents significant methodological research challenges necessitating the development of proper statistical models and
inference approaches.
In this work, our interest focuses on, but is not limited
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

S . VIRTANEN @ WARWICK . AC . UK
M . GIROLAMI @ WARWICK . AC . UK

to, analysing reviews of mobile software applications provided by consumers. Such analysis is useful for both software developers and consumers, inferring and understanding themes or properties of mobile applications that consumers comment about. These themes may involve consumers’ preferences and experiences on properties they
(dis)appreciate or direct feature requests or problems directed to the software developers.
Our work belongs in the field of mixed membership modelling, which is a powerful and important statistical modelling methodology. Observations are grouped and each
group is modelled with a mixture model; mixture components are common to all groups, whereas mixture proportions are group-specific. The components are deemed to
capture recurring patterns of observations and each group
to exhibit a subset of components. The class of models has
been shown to be able to extract interpretable meaningful
themes, also referred to as topics, based on, for example,
text data (Blei et al., 2003). These models, however, are not
able to capture statistical associations between the groups
and co-occurring quantitative information, that is, response
variables, related to each group.
Previous work on joint models utilising both the textual
data and response variables (Blei & McAuliffe, 2007; Dai
& Storkey, 2015; Lacoste-Julien et al., 2009; Nguyen et al.,
2013; Ramage et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2009) has demonstrated the utility of joint modelling by inferring topics that
are predictive of the response leading to increased interpretability. However, these models lack proper statistical
formulations suitable for ordinal response variables and it
is not at all straightforward to correct this shortcoming. In
this work, we remove this hindrance by presenting a novel
class of joint mixed membership models.
The proposed class of models builds on our new statistical
generative response model for ordinal variables. In more
detail, we introduce a certain stick-breaking formulation to
parameterise underlying data-generating probabilities over
the ordinal variables. The response model contains groupspecific latent scores as well as mean variables that transform the scores into ordinal variables using the developed
construction. We compare the response model with exist-

