Coordinate Descent Converges Faster with the
Gauss-Southwell Rule Than Random Selection
Julie Nutini
Mark Schmidt
Issam H. Laradji
University of British Columbia

JNUTINI @ CS . UBC . CA
SCHMIDTM @ CS . UBC . CA
ISSAMOU @ CS . UBC . CA

Michael Friedlander
University of California, Davis

MPF @ MATH . UCDAVIS . EDU

Hoyt Koepke
Dato

HOYTAK @ DATO . COM

Abstract
There has been significant recent work on the
theory and application of randomized coordinate descent algorithms, beginning with the work
of Nesterov [SIAM J. Optim., 22(2), 2012], who
showed that a random-coordinate selection rule
achieves the same convergence rate as the GaussSouthwell selection rule. This result suggests
that we should never use the Gauss-Southwell
rule, as it is typically much more expensive than
random selection. However, the empirical behaviours of these algorithms contradict this theoretical result: in applications where the computational costs of the selection rules are comparable, the Gauss-Southwell selection rule tends
to perform substantially better than random coordinate selection. We give a simple analysis of the Gauss-Southwell rule showing that—
except in extreme cases—it’s convergence rate is
faster than choosing random coordinates. Further, in this work we (i) show that exact coordinate optimization improves the convergence rate
for certain sparse problems, (ii) propose a GaussSouthwell-Lipschitz rule that gives an even faster
convergence rate given knowledge of the Lipschitz constants of the partial derivatives, (iii) analyze the effect of approximate Gauss-Southwell
rules, and (iv) analyze proximal-gradient variants
of the Gauss-Southwell rule.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Coordinate Descent Methods
There has been substantial recent interest in applying coordinate descent methods to solve large-scale optimization problems, starting with the seminal work of Nesterov
(2012), who gave the first global rate of convergence analysis for coordinate descent methods for minimizing convex
functions. This analysis suggests that choosing a random
coordinate to update gives the same performance as choosing the “best” coordinate to update via the more expensive Gauss-Southwell (GS) rule. (Nesterov also proposed
a more clever randomized scheme, which we consider later
in this paper.) This result gives a compelling argument to
use randomized coordinate descent in contexts where the
GS rule is too expensive. However, it also suggests that
there is no benefit to using the GS rule in contexts where it
is relatively cheap. But in these contexts, the GS rule often
substantially outperforms randomized coordinate selection
in practice. This suggests that either the analysis of GS is
not tight, or that there exists a class of functions for which
the GS rule is as slow as randomized coordinate descent.
After discussing contexts in which it makes sense to use
coordinate descent and the GS rule, we answer this theoretical question by giving a tighter analysis of the GS rule
(under strong-convexity and standard smoothness assumptions) that yields the same rate as the randomized method
for a restricted class of functions, but is otherwise faster
(and in some cases substantially faster). We further show
that, compared to the usual constant step-size update of the
coordinate, the GS method with exact coordinate optimization has a provably faster rate for problems satisfying a certain sparsity constraint (Section 5). We believe that this is
the first result showing a theoretical benefit of exact coordinate optimization; all previous analyses show that these

