Finding Galaxies in the Shadows of Quasars with Gaussian Processes

GARNETT @ WUSTL . EDU

Roman Garnett
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, United States
Shirley Ho
Jeff Schneider
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States

SHIRLEYH @ ANDREW. CMU . EDU

JEFF . SCHNEIDER @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
We develop an automated technique for detecting
damped Lyman-˛ absorbers (DLAs) along spectroscopic sightlines to quasi-stellar objects (QSOs
or quasars). The detection of DLAs in large-scale
spectroscopic surveys such as SDSS – III is critical
to address outstanding cosmological questions,
such as the nature of galaxy formation. We use
nearly 50 000 QSO spectra to learn a tailored Gaussian process model for quasar emission spectra,
which we apply to the DLA detection problem
via Bayesian model selection. We demonstrate
our method’s effectiveness with a large-scale validation experiment on over 100 000 spectra, with
excellent performance.

1. Introduction
Damped Lyman-˛ systems (DLAs) are large gaseous objects containing large amounts of neutral hydrogen (HI) gas.
DLA s emit little light and cannot be observed directly; however, they can be detected indirectly in the spectroscopic
measurements of high-redshift quasi-stellar objects (QSOs
or quasars), due to their leaving telltale wide absorption
phenomena.
DLA s currently represent our only probe of normal (neither high-mass nor star-forming) galaxies at high redshift.
DLA s are known to have dominated the neutral-gas content
of the Universe from redshift ´ D 5 (when the Universe
was 1.2 Gyr old) to today (Wolfe et al., 2005). These systems likely played a significant role in fueling star formation across the cosmic time. Due to their importance, it
is common practice for astronomers to visually inspect every measured quasar spectrum to identify potential DLAs.
This is a daunting task: the large-scale Sloan Digital Sky
Survey III (SDSS – III) has measured nearly 300 000 quasar

Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Figure 1. A cartoon of Lyman-˛ emission and absorption (Wright,
2004). Lyman-˛ photons are emitted by a high-redshift quasar
(top right). On their way to Earth, these photons travel through
clouds containing neutral hydrogen gas, each at a different redshift.
Each may absorb some photons, tracing an absorption feature in
the measured spectrum; these together form the Lyman-˛ forest.

spectra over its brief history (Eisenstein et al., 2011). With
several large-scale spectroscopic surveys of QSOs due to
start soon (including SDSS – IV and DESI1 ), which plan to
observe 1–2 million quasars, it would be unimaginable to
continue the status quo of visually inspecting every spectrum. We present a fully automated and scalable method to
find DLAs in quasar spectra, based on Gaussian processes
and Bayesian model selection, using a massive dataset from
the SDSS – III project.2
1.1. Relevant Spectroscopic Concepts
In spectroscopy, we use an instrument to measure the spectral flux (electromagnetic radiation emitted per unit area per
unit wavelength) of an object over a range of wavelengths
of light, binned into discrete intervals called “pixels.” Due
to the expansion of the Universe, flux corresponding to a
wavelength rest in the restframe of an observed object will
be observed on Earth at a redshifted wavelength obs ; the
relationship between these quantities is obs D .1 C ´/rest ,
where ´ is the cosmological redshift.
1 http://desi.lbl.gov/
2 http://www.sdss.org/

