Efficient Learning in Large-Scale Combinatorial Semi-Bandits

Zheng Wen
Yahoo Labs, Sunnyvale, CA
Branislav Kveton
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA
Azin Ashkan
Technicolor Research, Los Altos, CA

Abstract
A stochastic combinatorial semi-bandit is an online learning problem where at each step a learning agent chooses a subset of ground items subject to combinatorial constraints, and then observes stochastic weights of these items and receives their sum as a payoff. In this paper, we
consider efficient learning in large-scale combinatorial semi-bandits with linear generalization, and as a solution, propose two learning algorithms called Combinatorial Linear Thompson Sampling (CombLinTS) and Combinatorial
Linear UCB (CombLinUCB). Both algorithms
are computationally efficient as long as the offline version of the combinatorial problem can be
solved efficiently. We establish that CombLinTS
and CombLinUCB are also provably statistically
efficient under reasonable assumptions, by developing regret bounds that are independent of the
problem scale (number of items) and sublinear
in time. We also evaluate CombLinTS on a variety of problems with thousands of items. Our
experiment results demonstrate that CombLinTS
is scalable, robust to the choice of algorithm parameters, and significantly outperforms the best
of our baselines.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization is a mature field (Papadimitriou & Steiglitz, 1998), which has countless practical applications. One of the most studied problems in combinatorial optimization is maximization of a modular function
subject to combinatorial constraints. Many important problems, such as minimum spanning tree (MST), shortest path,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ZHENGWEN @ YAHOO - INC . COM

KVETON @ ADOBE . COM

AZIN . ASHKAN @ TECHNICOLOR . COM

and maximum-weight bipartite matching, can be viewed as
instances of this problem.
In practice, the optimized modular function is often unknown and needs to be learned while repeatedly solving
the problem. This class of learning problems was recently
formulated as a combinatorial bandit/semi-bandit, depending on the feedback model (Audibert et al., 2014). Since
then, many combinatorial bandit/semi-bandit algorithms
have been proposed: for the stochastic setting (Gai et al.,
2012; Chen et al., 2013; Russo & Van Roy, 2014; Kveton
et al., 2015b); for the adversarial setting (Cesa-Bianchi &
Lugosi, 2012; Audibert et al., 2014; Neu & Bartók, 2013);
and for subclasses of combinatorial problems, matroid and
polymatroid bandits (Kveton et al., 2014a;b;c), submodular maximization (Wen et al., 2013; Gabillon et al., 2013),
and cascading bandits (Kveton et al., 2015a). Many regret
bounds have been established for the √
combinatorial semibandit algorithms. To achieve an O( n)
√ dependence on
time n, all of the regret bounds are Ω( L), where L is
the number of items. The dependence on L is intrinsic because the algorithms estimate the weight of each item separately, and matching lower bounds have been established
(Section 3.2).
However, in many real-world problems, the number of
items L is intractably large. For instance, online advertising in a mainstream commercial website can be viewed as a
bipartite matching problem with millions of users and products; routing in the Internet can be formulated as a shortest
path problem with
√ billions of edges. Thus, learning algorithms with Ω( L) regret are impractical in such problems.
On the other hand, in many problems, items have features
and their weights are similar when the features are similar. In movie recommendation, for instance, the expected
ratings of movies that are close in the latent space are also
similar. In this work, we show how to leverage this structure to learn to make good decisions more efficiently. More
specifically, we assume a linear generalization across the
items: conditioned on the features of an item, the expected

