Stochastic Primal-Dual Coordinate Method for Regularized
Empirical Risk Minimization

Yuchen Zhang
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
Lin Xiao
Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98053, USA

Abstract
We consider a generic convex optimization problem associated with regularized empirical risk
minimization of linear predictors. The problem structure allows us to reformulate it as a
convex-concave saddle point problem. We propose a stochastic primal-dual coordinate method,
which alternates between maximizing over one
(or more) randomly chosen dual variable and
minimizing over the primal variable. We also
develop an extension to non-smooth and nonstrongly convex loss functions, and an extension with better convergence rate on unnormalized data. Both theoretically and empirically, we
show that the SPDC method has comparable or
better performance than several state-of-the-art
optimization methods.

1. Introduction
We consider a generic convex optimization problem in
machine learning: regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) of linear predictors. More specifically, let
a1 , . . . , an ∈ Rd be the feature vectors of n data samples,
φi : R → R be a convex loss function associated with the
linear prediction aTi x, for i = 1, . . . , n, and g : Rd → R be
a convex regularization function for the predictor x ∈ Rd .
Our goal is to solve the following optimization problem:
)
(
n
X
def 1
T
min
P (x) =
φi (ai x) + g(x) . (1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
Examples of the above formulation include many wellknown classification and regression problems. For binary
nd

Proceedings of the 32
International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YUCZHANG @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

LIN . XIAO @ MICROSOFT. COM

classification, each feature vector ai is associated with a label bi ∈ {±1}. We obtain the linear SVM (support vector
machine) by setting φi (z) = max{0, 1 − bi z} (the hinge
loss) and g(x) = (λ/2)kxk22 , where λ > 0 is a regularization parameter. Regularized logistic regression is obtained
by setting φi (z) = log(1 + exp(−bi z)). For linear regression problems, each feature vector ai is associated with a
dependent variable bi ∈ R, and φi (z) = (1/2)(z − bi )2 .
Then we get ridge regression with g(x) = (λ/2)kxk22 , and
the Lasso with g(x) = λkxk1 . Further backgrounds on
regularized ERM in machine learning and statistics can be
found, e.g., in the book by Hastie et al. (2009).
We are especially interested in developing efficient algorithms for solving problem (1) when the number of samples n is very large. In this case, evaluating the full gradient or subgradient of the function P (x) is expensive,
thus incremental methods that operate on a single component function φi at each iteration can be very attractive. There have been extensive research on incremental
(sub)gradient methods (e.g., Tseng, 1998; Nedić & Bertsekas, 2001; Blatt et al., 2007; Bertsekas, 2011) as well
as variants of the stochastic gradient method (e.g., Zhang,
2004; Bottou, 2010; Duchi & Singer, 2009; Langford et al.,
2009; Xiao, 2010). While the computational cost per iteration of these methods is only a small fraction, say 1/n, of
that of the batch gradient methods, their iteration complexities are much higher (it takes many more iterations for them
to reach the same precision). In order to better quantify the
complexities of various algorithms and position our contributions, we need to make some concrete assumptions and
introduce the notion of condition number and batch complexity.
1.1. Condition number and batch complexity
Let γ and λ be two positive real parameters. We make the
following assumption:
Assumption A. Each φi is convex and differentiable, and
its derivative is (1/γ)-Lipschitz continuous (same as φi be-

