Latent Gaussian Processes for Distribution Estimation of Multivariate
Categorical Data
Yarin Gal
Yutian Chen
Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Multivariate categorical data occur in many applications of machine learning. One of the main
difficulties with these vectors of categorical variables is sparsity. The number of possible observations grows exponentially with vector length,
but dataset diversity might be poor in comparison. Recent models have gained significant improvement in supervised tasks with this data.
These models embed observations in a continuous space to capture similarities between them.
Building on these ideas we propose a Bayesian
model for the unsupervised task of distribution
estimation of multivariate categorical data.
We model vectors of categorical variables as
generated from a non-linear transformation of
a continuous latent space. Non-linearity captures multi-modality in the distribution. The continuous representation addresses sparsity. Our
model ties together many existing models, linking the linear categorical latent Gaussian model,
the Gaussian process latent variable model, and
Gaussian process classification. We derive inference for our model based on recent developments in sampling based variational inference.
We show empirically that the model outperforms
its linear and discrete counterparts in imputation
tasks of sparse data.

1

Introduction

Multivariate categorical data is common in fields ranging
from language processing to medical diagnosis. Recently
proposed supervised models have gained significant improvement in tasks involving big labelled data of this form
(see for example Bengio et al. (2006); Collobert & Weston
(2008)). These models rely on information that had been
largely ignored before: similarity between vectors of categorical variables. But what should we do in the unsuperProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

YG 279@ CAM . AC . UK
YC 373@ CAM . AC . UK
ZOUBIN @ CAM . AC . UK

vised setting, when we face small unlabelled data of this
form?
Medical diagnosis provides good examples of small unlabelled data. Consider a dataset composed of test results of
a relatively small number of patients. Each patient has a
medical record composed often of dozens of examinations,
taking various categorical test results. We might be faced
with the task of deciding which tests are necessary for a
patient under examination to take, and which examination
results could be deduced from the existing tests. This can
be achieved with distribution estimation.
Several tools in the Bayesian framework could be used
for this task of distribution estimation of unlabelled small
datasets. Tools such as the Dirichlet-Multinomial distribution and its extensions are an example of such. These rely
on relative frequencies of categorical variables appearing
with others, with the addition of various smoothing techniques. But when faced with long multivariate sequences,
these models run into problems of sparsity. This occurs
when the data consists of vectors of categorical variables
with most configurations of categorical values not in the
dataset. In medical diagnosis this happens when there is a
large number of possible examinations compared to a small
number of patients.
Building on ideas used for big labelled discrete data, we
propose a Bayesian model for distribution estimation of
small unlabelled data. Existing supervised models for discrete labelled data embed the observations in a continuous
space. This is used to find the similarity between vectors of
categorical variables. We extend this idea to the small unlabelled domain by modelling the continuous embedding as
a latent variable. A generative model is used to find a distribution over the discrete observations by modelling them
as dependent on the continuous latent variables.
Following the medical diagnosis example, patient n would
be modelled by a continuous latent variable xn ∈ X . For
each examination d, the latent xn induces a vector of probabilities f = (fnd1 , ..., fndK ), one probability for each possible test result k. A categorical distribution returns test result ynd based on these probabilities, resulting in a patient’s
medical assessment yn = (yn1 , ..., ynD ). We need to de-

