Algorithms for the Hard Pre-Image Problem of String Kernels and
the General Problem of String Prediction

Sébastien Giguère 1,2∗
GIGUERE . SEBASTIEN @ GMAIL . COM
Amélie Rolland 2∗
AMELIE . ROLLAND .1@ ULAVAL . CA
François Laviolette 2
FRANCOIS . LAVIOLETTE @ IFT. ULAVAL . CA
Mario Marchand 2
MARIO . MARCHAND @ IFT. ULAVAL . CA
1
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Laval University, Quebec, Canada
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
We address the pre-image problem encountered
in structured output prediction and the one of
finding a string maximizing the prediction function of various kernel-based classifiers and regressors. We demonstrate that these problems reduce to a common combinatorial problem valid
for many string kernels. For this problem, we
propose an upper bound on the prediction function which has low computational complexity
and which can be used in a branch and bound
search algorithm to obtain optimal solutions. We
also show that for many string kernels, the complexity of the problem increases significantly
when the kernel is normalized.
On the optical word recognition task, the exact
solution of the pre-image problem is shown to
significantly improve the prediction accuracy in
comparison with an approximation found by the
best known heuristic. On the task of finding
a string maximizing the prediction function of
kernel-based classifiers and regressors, we highlight that existing methods can be biased toward long strings that contain many repeated
symbols. We demonstrate that this bias is removed when using normalized kernels. Finally,
we present results for the discovery of lead compounds in drug discovery. The source code can
be found at https://github.com/a-ro/
preimage.

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
This work addresses two combinatorial problems related to
string prediction. For both problems, let A be the set of all
symbols from an alphabet and A∗ be the set of all possible
strings of symbols from that alphabet.
1.1. Structured Output Pre-image
In the structured output prediction framework, the learner
has access to a set S = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym )} ∈ X ×Y
of input-output pairs. The input space X is arbitrary but we
assume that the output space Y is the set A∗ of strings from
an alphabet A. We assume the existence of an input feature
map φ X : X → HX and an output feature map φ Y : Y →
HY , where both HX and HY are high-dimensional vector
spaces and, more generally, RKHS. The input kernel KX :
X 2 → R is defined by the inner product between vectors
in HX , i.e., KX (x, x0 ) = hφ X (x), φ X (x0 )i ∀(x, x0 ) ∈ X 2 .
A similar definition holds for the output kernel KY .
We consider predictors that are linear operators W :
HX → HY . Given any such W, and any x ∈ X , the predicted output yw (x) of W on input x is given by solving
the following structured output pre-image problem
yw (x) = argmin φ Y (y) − Wφ X (x) ,

(1)

y∈Y

where k · k denotes the L2 norm in HY . Hence, the preimage problem arises when trying to reconstruct the output from the output feature vector predicted by W. A preimage is said to be exact when there exists y ∈ Y for which
its feature vector φ Y (y) is exactly equal to Wφ X (x). Unfortunately, an exact pre-image rarely exists for linear operators obtained by vector-valued ridge regression. Hence,
in practice, we have to deal with a hard pre-image problem.
Let us consider normalized output feature vectors. Hence,
def
φ Y (y)
b (y) =
given any φ Y , let us use φ
Y
kφ (y)k . Then, equaY

