Asymmetric Transfer Learning with Deep Gaussian Processes

Melih Kandemir
Heidelberg University, HCI/IWR

Abstract
We introduce a novel Gaussian process based
Bayesian model for asymmetric transfer learning. We adopt a two-layer feed-forward deep
Gaussian process as the task learner of source
and target domains. The first layer projects the
data onto a separate non-linear manifold for each
task. We perform knowledge transfer by projecting the target data also onto the source domain and linearly combining its representations
on the source and target domain manifolds. Our
approach achieves the state-of-the-art in a benchmark real-world image categorization task, and
improves on it in cross-tissue tumor detection
from histopathology tissue slide images.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
attract wide interest as generic supervised learners. This
is not only due to them being effective kernel methods,
but also to their probabilistic nature. They can be plugged
into a larger probabilistic model of a particular purpose as a
component. Furthermore, unlike non-probabilistic discriminative models, they take into account the variance of the
predicted data points, which is known to boost up prediction performance (Seeger, 2003). This probabilistic nature
and the predictive variance has also been used to develop
simple, effective, and theoretically well-grounded active
learning models (Houlsby et al., 2012). GPs also allow a
principled framework for learning kernel hyperparameters,
for which a grid search has to be performed in the support
vector machine (SVM) (Vapnik, 1998) framework.
In this paper, we benefit from the probabilistic nature of
GPs, and show how Deep GPs (Damianou & Lawrence,
2013) can be used as design components to easily build
an effective transfer learning model. We adopt a two-layer
feed-forward deep GP model as the task learner. The firstProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

MELIH . KANDEMIR @ IWR . UNI - HEIDELBERG . DE

layer GP non-linearly projects the instances onto a latent
intermediary representation. This latent representation is
then fed into the second-layer GP as input. The knowledge transfer takes place asymmetrically (i.e. from source
task to target task only) by projecting the target instances
onto the latent source manifold, and this representation is
linearly combined with the representation of the target instances on their native manifold. The resultant combination
is then fed into the second-layer target GP, which maps it
to the output labels. Figure 1 illustrates the idea.
We evaluate our approach on two applications. The first
is a real-world image categorization benchmark, where the
domains are different image data sets collected by cameras
of different resolutions and for different purposes. The second is tumor detection in histopathology tissue slide images
(Gürcan et al., 2009). We treat each of the two tissue types,
breast and esophagus, as different domains. Our model
reaches state-of-the-art prediction performance in the first
application, and improves it in the second. The source code
of our model is publicly available1 .

Source Domain

Target Domain

Figure 1. The proposed idea for knowledge transfer from a source
deep GP to a target deep GP. We project the target data set Xt
onto the latent source domain space Ds→t by the first-layer GP
(GP 1 ) of the source task. We then combine the outcome with the
latent representation of Xt on the target domain Dt . Finally, we
feed the resultant representation into the second-layer GP (GP 2 ).

1

https://github.com/melihkandemir/atldgp

