Distributed Estimation of Generalized Matrix Rank:
Efficient Algorithms and Lower Bounds

Yuchen Zhang
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

YUCZHANG @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU

Martin J. Wainwright
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

WAINWRIG @ STAT. BERKELEY. EDU

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

JORDAN @ CS . BERKELEY. EDU

Abstract
We study the following generalized matrix rank
estimation problem: given an n × n matrix and
a constant c ≥ 0, estimate the number of eigenvalues that are greater than c. In the distributed
setting, the matrix of interest is the sum of m matrices held by separate machines. We show that
any deterministic algorithm solving this problem
must communicate Ω(n2 ) bits, which is orderequivalent to transmitting the whole matrix. In
contrast, we propose a randomized algorithm
e
that communicates only O(n)
bits. The upper bound is matched by an Ω(n) lower bound
on the randomized communication complexity.
We demonstrate the practical effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm with some numerical experiments.

1. Introduction
Given a parameter c ≥ 0, the generalized rank of an n × n
positive semi-definite matrix A corresponds to the number of eigenvalues that are larger than c. It is denoted
by rank(A, c), with the usual rank corresponding to the
special case c = 0. Estimating the generalized rank of
a matrix is useful for many applications. Many machine
learning algorithms require knowledge of the approximate
rank of the data matrix in order to set hyper-parameters.
In the context of large-scale principal component analysis (PCA) (Eckart & Young, 1936; Jolliffe, 2005), it is
overly expensive to compute the full eigen-decomposition
before deciding when to truncate it. Thus, an important
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

first step is to estimate the rank of the matrix of interest
in order to determine how many dimensions will be sufficient to describe the data. The rank also provides useful information for determining the tuning parameter of
robust PCA (Candès et al., 2011) and collaborative filtering algorithms for personalized recommendation (Sarwar
et al., 2001; Rendle et al., 2009). In the context of numerical linear algebra, a number of eigensolvers (Schofield
et al., 2012; Polizzi, 2009; Sakurai & Sugiura, 2003) for
large-scale scientific applications are based on divide-andconquer paradigms. It is a prerequisite of these algorithms
to know the approximate number of eigenvalues located in
a given interval. Estimating the generalized rank of a matrix is also needed in the context of sampling-based methods for randomized numerical linear algebra (Halko et al.,
2011; Mahoney, 2011). For these methods, the rank of a
matrix determines the number of samples required for a desired approximation accuracy.
Motivated by large-scale data analysis problems, in this paper we study the generalized rank estimation problem in a
distributed setting, in which the matrix A can be decomposed as the the sum of m matrices
A :=

m
X

Ai ,

(1)

i=1

where each matrix Ai is stored on a separate machine i.
Thus, a distributed algorithm needs to communicate between m machines to perform the estimation. There are
other equivalent formulations of this problem. For example, suppose that machine i has a design matrix Xi ∈
Rn×Ni and we want to determine the rank of the aggregated design matrix
Pm
X := (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xm ) ∈ Rn×N where N := i=1 Ni .
Recall that the singular values of matrix X are equal to the
square root of the eigenvalues of the matrix XX T . If we

