Tracking Approximate Solutions of Parameterized Optimization Problems
over Multi-Dimensional (Hyper-)Parameter Domains

Katharina Blechschmidt
Joachim Giesen
Sören Laue
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Germany

Abstract
Many machine learning methods are given as parameterized optimization problems. Important
examples of such parameters are regularizationand kernel hyperparameters. These parameters
have to be tuned carefully since the choice of
their values can have a significant impact on
the statistical performance of the learning methods. In most cases the parameter space does not
carry much structure and parameter tuning essentially boils down to exploring the whole parameter space. The case when there is only one
parameter received quite some attention over the
years. First, algorithms for tracking an optimal
solution for several machine learning optimization problems over regularization- and hyperparameter intervals had been developed, but since
these algorithms can suffer from numerical problems more robust and efficient approximate path
tracking algorithms have been devised and analyzed recently. By now approximate path tracking algorithms are known for regularization- and
kernel hyperparameter paths with optimal path
complexities that depend only on the prescribed
approximation error. Here we extend the work
on approximate path tracking algorithms with approximation guarantees to multi-dimensional parameter domains. We show a lower bound on the
complexity of approximately exploring a multidimensional parameter domain that is the product
of the corresponding path complexities. We also
show a matching upper bound that can be turned
into a theoretically and practically efficient algorithm. Experimental results for kernelized support vector machines and the elastic net confirm
the theoretical complexity analysis.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

KATHI . JENA @ WEB . DE
JOACHIM . GIESEN @ UNI - JENA . DE
SOEREN . LAUE @ UNI - JENA . DE

1. Introduction
We consider parameterized optimization problems of the
form
(1)
min ft (x),
x∈Ft

where t ∈ Ω ⊆ Rp is a parameter vector, Ω is the parameter domain whose dimension is p, ft : Rd → R is some
function depending on t, and Ft ⊆ Rd is the feasible region
of the optimization problem at parameter value t ∈ Ω.
The parameter vector t is typically tuned by minimizing
some measure of generalization error on test data while an
optimal solution to Problem (1) at a given parameter vector t is computed from training data. Other criteria like the
sparsity of the solution can also be relevant for the choice
of t. In any case, for optimizing t it is necessary to track an
optimal or approximately optimal solution of Problem (1)
over the whole parameter domain Ω.
The one-dimensional case. The case p = 1, i.e., onedimensional parameter domains, has been extensively studied mostly in the context of regularization paths, i.e., parameterized optimization problems of the form
ft (x) = r(x) + t · l(x),
where l : Rd → R is a loss function and r : Rd → R is
some regularizer, e.g., r(x) = kxk22 that enables the kernel
trick, or r(x) = kxk1 that promotes sparse solutions.
The work on regularization paths started with the work
by (Efron et al., 2004) who observed that the regularization
path of the LASSO is piecewise linear. In (Rosset & Zhu,
2007) a fairly general theory of piecewise linear regularization paths has been developed and exact path following
algorithms have been devised. Important special cases
are support vector machines whose regularization paths
have been studied in (Zhu et al., 2003; Hastie et al., 2004),
support vector regression, where also the loss-sensitivity
parameter can be tracked (Wang et al., 2006b), and the
generalized LASSO (Tibshirani & Taylor, 2011). From
the beginning it was known, see for example (Allgower &

