Distributed Gaussian Processes
Marc Peter Deisenroth
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom

M . DEISENROTH @ IMPERIAL . AC . UK

Jun Wei Ng
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom

JUNWEI . NG 10@ ALUMNI . IMPERIAL . AC . UK

Abstract
To scale Gaussian processes (GPs) to large data
sets we introduce the robust Bayesian Committee Machine (rBCM), a practical and scalable product-of-experts model for large-scale
distributed GP regression. Unlike state-of-theart sparse GP approximations, the rBCM is conceptually simple and does not rely on inducing
or variational parameters. The key idea is to
recursively distribute computations to independent computational units and, subsequently, recombine them to form an overall result. Efficient
closed-form inference allows for straightforward
parallelisation and distributed computations with
a small memory footprint. The rBCM is independent of the computational graph and can
be used on heterogeneous computing infrastructures, ranging from laptops to clusters. With sufficient computing resources our distributed GP
model can handle arbitrarily large data sets.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
are the method of choice for probabilistic nonlinear regression: Their non-parametric nature allows for flexible modelling without specifying low-level assumptions
(e.g., the degree of a polynomial) in advance. Inference
can be performed in a principled way simply by applying Bayes’ theorem. GPs have had substantial impact in
geostatistics (Cressie, 1993), optimisation (Jones et al.,
1998; Brochu et al., 2009), data visualisation (Lawrence,
2005), robotics and reinforcement learning (Deisenroth
et al., 2015), spatio-temporal modelling (Luttinen & Ilin,
2012), and active learning (Krause et al., 2008). A strength
of GPs is that they are a fairly reliable black-box funcProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

tion approximator, i.e., they produce reasonable predictions
without manual parameter tuning. However, their inherent weakness is that they scale poorly with the size N of
the data set: Training and predicting scale in O(N 3 ) and
O(N 2 ), respectively, which practically limits GPs to data
sets of size O(104 ).
For large data sets (e.g., N > 104 ) sparse approximations are often used (Williams & Seeger, 2001; QuiñoneroCandela & Rasmussen, 2005; Hensman et al., 2013; Titsias, 2009; Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2006;
Gal et al., 2014). Typically, they lower the computational
burden by implicitly (or explicitly) using a subset of the
data, which scales (sparse) GPs to training set sizes N ∈
O(106 ). Recently, Gal et al. (2014) proposed an approach
that scales variational sparse GPs (Titsias, 2009) further by
exploiting distributed computations. In particular, they derive an exact re-parameterisation of the variational sparse
GP by Titsias (2009) to update the variational parameters
independently on different computing nodes. However,
even with sparse approximations it is inconceivable to apply GPs to training set sizes of N ≥ O(107 ).
An alternative to sparse approximations is to distribute the
computations by using independent local “expert” models,
which operate on subsets of the data. These local models typically require stationary kernels for a notion of “distance” and “locality”. Shen et al. (2006) used KD-trees to
recursively partition the data space into a multi-resolution
tree data structure, which scale GPs to O(104 ) training
points. However, no solutions for variance predictions are
provided, and the approach is limited to stationary kernels.
Along the lines of exploiting locality, mixture-of-experts
(MoE) models (Jacobs et al., 1991) have been applied to
GP regression (Rasmussen & Ghahramani, 2002; Meeds
& Osindero, 2006; Yuan & Neubauer, 2009). However,
these models have not primarily been used to speed up
GP regression, but rather to increase the expressiveness of
the model, i.e., allowing for heteroscedasticity and nonstationarity. Each local model possesses its own set of
hyper-parameters to be optimised. Predictions are made
by collecting the predictions of all local expert models, and

