Variational Generative Stochastic Networks with Collaborative Shaping
Philip Bachman
McGill University, School of Computer Science

PHIL . BACHMAN @ GMAIL . COM

Doina Precup
McGill University, School of Computer Science

DPRECUP @ CS . MCGILL . CA

Abstract
We develop an approach to training generative
models based on unrolling a variational autoencoder into a Markov chain, and shaping the
chain’s trajectories using a technique inspired
by recent work in Approximate Bayesian computation. We show that the global minimizer
of the resulting objective is achieved when the
generative model reproduces the target distribution. To allow finer control over the behavior
of the models, we add a regularization term inspired by techniques used for regularizing certain
types of policy search in reinforcement learning.
We present empirical results on the MNIST and
TFD datasets which show that our approach offers state-of-the-art performance, both quantitatively and from a qualitative point of view.

1. Introduction
Significant research effort has been directed towards developing models capable of effectively synthesizing samples
from complicated distributions. We propose an approach
to this problem whose goal is two-fold. We want to learn a
distribution which is practically indistinguishable from the
target distribution and we also want training, inference and
sampling to be efficient. Our approach can be viewed as
a class of Generative Stochastic Networks (GSNs) (Bengio et al., 2014). We show that any model trained with
the walkback procedure (Bengio et al., 2013) is encompassed by our approach. Instead of using denoising autoencoders, we leverage recent variational methods for deep,
directed generative models, e.g. (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014), and build
our approach starting from variational auto-encoders. By
feeding the output of such an auto-encoder back into itself,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

we construct a Markov chain whose stationary distribution
provably (in the non-parametric, infinite-data limit) converges to the target distribution. A bound on the log-density
of the model distribution is also efficiently computable.
As an alternative to the walkback procedure for training
GSNs, we propose an approach based on recent work in
Approximate Bayesian Computation. We partner a generative model with a function approximator that estimates the
log-density ratio between the model-generated distribution
and the target distribution, in what can be seen as a collaborative alternative to the adversarial approaches in (Gutmann et al., 2014a;b; Goodfellow et al., 2014). We show
that the global minimizer of the resulting objective (in the
non-parametric, infinite-data limit) is achievable only when
the model distribution matches the target distribution.
To control the model complexity, we introduce a regularization term close in spirit to reinforcement learning methods such as relative entropy policy search (Peters et al.,
2010) and other approaches which depend on a notion of
“natural system dynamics”, e.g. (Todorov, 2009). Specifically, we re-weigh the standard KL(posterior || prior) term
that appears in the variational free-energy. Because in
this
P type of model, almost all complexity in p(x) =
z p(x|z)p(z) is captured by the value of the latent variables z 2 Z, this approach provides a direct mechanism
to trade off the complexity of p(x) against the ability to
exactly reproduce the training distribution.
Our models permit efficient generation of independent
samples, efficient generation of sequences of samples representing “locally-coherent” random walks along the data
manifold, and efficient evaluation of a variational lowerbound on the log-likelihood assigned to arbitrary inputs.
We show that our approach produces models which significantly outperform the GSNs in (Bengio et al., 2014) and the
adversarial networks in (Goodfellow et al., 2014) in terms
of test-set log-likelihood and qualitative behavior.

