An embarrassingly simple approach to zero-shot learning
Bernardino Romera-Paredes
BERNARDINO . ROMERAPAREDES @ ENG . OX . AC . UK
University of Oxford, Department of Engineering Science, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PJ, UK
Philip H. S. Torr
PHILIP. TORR @ ENG . OX . AC . UK
University of Oxford, Department of Engineering Science, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PJ, UK

Abstract
Zero-shot learning consists in learning how to
recognise new concepts by just having a description of them. Many sophisticated approaches
have been proposed to address the challenges this
problem comprises. In this paper we describe a
zero-shot learning approach that can be implemented in just one line of code, yet it is able to
outperform state of the art approaches on standard datasets. The approach is based on a more
general framework which models the relationships between features, attributes, and classes as
a two linear layers network, where the weights
of the top layer are not learned but are given by
the environment. We further provide a learning
bound on the generalisation error of this kind
of approaches, by casting them as domain adaptation methods. In experiments carried out on
three standard real datasets, we found that our
approach is able to perform signiﬁcantly better
than the state of art on all of them, obtaining a
ratio of improvement up to 17%.

1. Introduction
Automatic classiﬁcation is arguably the ﬁrst problem considered in machine learning, thus it has been thoroughly
studied and analysed, leading to a wide variety of classiﬁcation approaches which have been proved useful in many
areas such as computer vision and document classiﬁcation.
However, these approaches cannot generally tackle challenging scenarios in which new classes may appear after
the learning stage. We ﬁnd this scenario in lots of real
world situations. One happens when dealing with an ever
growing set of classes, such as detecting new species of
living beings. Another scenario occurs when the granularProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ity of the description of the categories to be distinguished
makes it unfeasible to obtain training instances for each
of them, e.g. when a user wants to recognise a particular
model of dress.
There is an increasing interest in the study of zero-shot
learning (ZSL) approaches with the aim of solving this
problem. ZSL consists in recognising new categories of
instances without training examples, by providing a highlevel description of the new categories that relate them to
categories previously learned by the machine. This can be
done by means of leveraging an intermediate level: the attributes that provide semantic information about the categories to classify. This paradigm is inspired by the way
human beings are able to identify a new object by just
reading a description of it, leveraging similarities between
the description of the new object and previously learned
concepts. Similarly, zero-shot learning approaches are designed to learn this intermediate semantic layer, the attributes, and apply them at inference time to predict new
classes, provided with their description in terms of these
attributes. Hereafter we use the term signature to refer to
the attribute description of a class.
Zero-shot learning is inherently a two stage process: training and inference. In the training stage, knowledge about
the attributes is captured, and in the inference stage this
knowledge is used to categorise instances among a new set
of classes. Many efforts have been made to improve the
training stage (Hwang et al., 2011; Farhadi et al., 2009; Jayaraman et al., 2014), whereas the inference stage has received little attention (Jayaraman & Grauman, 2014). For
example many approaches are unable to fully exploit the
discriminative capacity of attributes, and cannot harness the
uncertainty of the attribute prediction obtained in the ﬁrst
stage.
We study a framework that is able to integrate both stages,
overcoming the general deﬁciencies previously described.
This framework, introduced in (Akata et al., 2013), is based
on modelling the relationship between features, attributes,
and classes as a (linear) model composed of two layers.

