Adaptive Belief Propagation

Georgios Papachristoudis
John W. Fisher III
CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
Graphical models are widely used in inference
problems. In practice, one may construct a single large-scale model to explain a phenomenon
of interest, which may be utilized in a variety of
settings. The latent variables of interest, which
can differ in each setting, may only represent
a small subset of all variables. The marginals
of variables of interest may change after the addition of measurements at different time points.
In such adaptive settings, naı̈ve algorithms, such
as standard belief propagation (BP), may utilize
many unnecessary computations by propagating
messages over the entire graph. Here, we formulate an efficient inference procedure, termed
adaptive BP (AdaBP), suitable for adaptive inference settings. We show that it gives exact results for trees in discrete and Gaussian Markov
Random Fields (MRFs), and provide an extension to Gaussian loopy graphs. We also provide
extensions on finding the most likely sequence
of the entire latent graph. Lastly, we compare
the proposed method to standard BP and to that
of (Sümer et al., 2011), which tackles the same
problem. We show in synthetic and real experiments that it outperforms standard BP by orders
of magnitude and explore the settings that it is
advantageous over (Sümer et al., 2011).

1. Introduction
Many estimation problems can be cast as inference in
graphical models, where nodes represent variables of interest and edges between them indicate dependence relations. Naı̈ve inference may have exponential complexity
in the number of variables. Message passing algorithms,
such as BP (Pearl, 1982) reduce the complexity significantly. Despite the fact that BP performs exact inference
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

GEOPAPA @ MIT. EDU
FISHER @ CSAIL . MIT. EDU

only on trees, it is often applied to loopy graphs (for which
it is approximate) due to its computational efficiency.
We consider the problem of inference in large-scale models. Such models which arise, for example, in complex
spatio-temporal phenomena, may be utilized in multiple
settings. It is often the case that only a subset of latent
variables is of interest for different applications which may
vary from instance to instance (Rosales & Jaakkola, 2005;
Chechetka & Guestrin, 2010; Wick & McCallum, 2011).
Additionally, the set of available measurements may vary
with use or become available at different points in time.
The latter is common for any sequential estimation problem. In such situations, general-purpose inference algorithms, such as BP may utilize many unnecessary computations when only a small subset is desired. The complexity of such approaches becomes prohibitive as the size of
graph increases, e.g., due to constant re-evaluation of messages. There exist several examples that fall into this category of problems. Patient monitoring provides one such
practical example. Large-scale systems may monitor the
health status of many patients; however, different physicians limit their interest to patients under their immediate
care. Temperature monitoring sensors provide data over
time and space, but sensitive areas (e.g., server room) may
require more careful examination for the timely response in
case of abnormal behavior. Lastly, in computational biology, the effects of mutations are explored (computational
mutagenesis), with each putative mutation resulting in a
very similar problem.
This motivates methods for problems where measurements
are added incrementally and the interest is in a subset of
node marginals at a given time point or the MAP sequence
of the full latent graph. This is the problem of adaptive inference, where the goal is to take advantage of previously
computed quantities instead of performing inference from
scratch. In these cases, standard BP results in many redundant computations. Consequently, we develop an adaptive
inference approach which avoids redundant computations
and whose average-case performance shows significantly
lower complexity compared to BP. The main idea is to send
only messages between the node where a measurement has

