Predictive Entropy Search for Bayesian
Optimization with Unknown Constraints

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato1
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

JMH @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Michael A. Gelbart1
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

MGELBART @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Matthew W. Hoffman
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK

MWH 30@ CAM . AC . UK

Ryan P. Adams
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

RPA @ SEAS . HARVARD . EDU

Zoubin Ghahramani
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK

ZOUBIN @ ENG . CAM . AC . UK

Abstract
Unknown constraints arise in many types of expensive black-box optimization problems. Several methods have been proposed recently for
performing Bayesian optimization with constraints, based on the expected improvement (EI)
heuristic. However, EI can lead to pathologies
when used with constraints. For example, in the
case of decoupled constraints—i.e., when one
can independently evaluate the objective or the
constraints—EI can encounter a pathology that
prevents exploration. Additionally, computing
EI requires a current best solution, which may
not exist if none of the data collected so far satisfy the constraints. By contrast, informationbased approaches do not suffer from these failure modes. In this paper, we present a new
information-based method called Predictive Entropy Search with Constraints (PESC). We analyze the performance of PESC and show that it
compares favorably to EI-based approaches on
synthetic and benchmark problems, as well as
several real-world examples. We demonstrate
that PESC is an effective algorithm that provides
a promising direction towards a unified solution
for constrained Bayesian optimization.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
We are interested in finding the global minimum x? of an
objective function f (x) over some bounded domain, typically X ⊂ Rd , subject to the non-negativity of a series of
constraint functions c1 , . . . , cK . This can be formalized as
min f (x) s.t.

x∈X

c1 (x) ≥ 0, . . . , cK (x) ≥ 0 .

(1)

However, f and c1 , . . . , cK are unknown and can only
be evaluated pointwise via expensive queries to blackboxes that provide noise-corrupted evaluations of f and
c1 , . . . , cK . We assume that f and each of the constraints ck are defined over the entire space X . We seek
to find a solution to (1) with as few queries as possible.
Bayesian optimization (Mockus et al., 1978) methods approach this type of problem by building a Bayesian model
of the unknown objective function and/or constraints, using this model to compute an acquisition function that represents how useful each input x is thought to be as a next
evaluation, and then maximizing this acquisition function
to select a suggestion for function evaluation.
In this we work we extend Predictive Entropy Search (PES)
(Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014) to solve (1), an approach
that we call Predictive Entropy Search with Constraints
(PESC). PESC is an acquisition function that approximates
the expected information gain about the value of the constrained minimizer x? . As we will show below, PESC is
effective in practice and can be applied to a much wider
variety of constrained problems than existing methods.
1

Authors contributed equally.

