Unsupervised Learning of Video Representations using LSTMs

Nitish Srivastava
Elman Mansimov
Ruslan Salakhutdinov
University of Toronto, 6 Kings College Road, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4 CANADA

Abstract
We use Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
networks to learn representations of video sequences. Our model uses an encoder LSTM to
map an input sequence into a fixed length representation. This representation is decoded using single or multiple decoder LSTMs to perform
different tasks, such as reconstructing the input
sequence, or predicting the future sequence. We
experiment with two kinds of input sequences
– patches of image pixels and high-level representations (“percepts”) of video frames extracted
using a pretrained convolutional net. We explore different design choices such as whether
the decoder LSTMs should condition on the generated output. We analyze the outputs of the
model qualitatively to see how well the model
can extrapolate the learned video representation
into the future and into the past. We further
evaluate the representations by finetuning them
for a supervised learning problem – human action recognition on the UCF-101 and HMDB-51
datasets. We show that the representations help
improve classification accuracy, especially when
there are only few training examples. Even models pretrained on unrelated datasets (300 hours of
YouTube videos) can help action recognition performance.

1. Introduction
Understanding temporal sequences is important for solving many problems in the AI-set. Recently, recurrent neural networks using the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
architecture have been used successfully to perform various supervised sequence learning tasks, such as speech
recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014), machine translation
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

NITISH @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
EMANSIM @ CS . TORONTO . EDU
RSALAKHU @ CS . TORONTO . EDU

(Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014), and caption generation for images (Vinyals et al., 2014). They have also
been applied on videos for recognizing actions and generating natural language descriptions (Donahue et al., 2014).
A general sequence to sequence learning framework was
described by Sutskever et al. (2014) in which a recurrent
network is used to encode a sequence into a fixed length
representation, and then another recurrent network is used
to decode a sequence out of that representation. In this
work, we apply and extend this framework to learn representations of sequences of images. We choose to work
in the unsupervised setting where we only have access to a
dataset of unlabelled videos.
1.1. Why Unsupervised Learning?
Supervised learning has been extremely successful in learning good visual representations that not only produce good
results at the task they are trained for, but also transfer well
to other tasks and datasets. Therefore, it is natural to extend the same approach to learning video representations.
This has led to research in 3D convolutional nets (Ji et al.,
2013; Tran et al., 2014), different temporal fusion strategies
(Karpathy et al., 2014) and exploring different ways of presenting visual information to convolutional nets (Simonyan
& Zisserman, 2014a). However, videos are much higher dimensional entities compared to single images. Therefore, it
becomes increasingly difficult to do credit assignment and
learn long range structure, unless we collect much more
labelled data or do a lot of feature engineering (for example computing the right kinds of flow features) to keep the
dimensionality low. The costly work of collecting more
labelled data and the tedious work of doing more clever engineering can go a long way in solving particular problems,
but this is ultimately unsatisfying as a machine learning
solution. This highlights the need for using unsupervised
learning to find and represent structure in videos. Moreover, videos have a lot of structure in them (spatial and
temporal regularities) which makes them particularly well
suited as a domain for building unsupervised learning models.

