Approximate Dynamic Programming for Two-Player Zero-Sum Markov Games

Julien Perolat(1)
Bruno Scherrer(2)
Bilal Piot(1)
Olivier Pietquin(1,3)
(1)
Univ. Lille, CRIStAL, SequeL team, France
(2)
Inria, Villers-lès-Nancy, F-54600, France
(3)
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), France

Abstract
This paper provides an analysis of error propagation in Approximate Dynamic Programming applied to zero-sum two-player Stochastic Games.
We provide a novel and unified error propagation analysis in Lp -norm of three well-known algorithms adapted to Stochastic Games (namely
Approximate Value Iteration, Approximate Policy Iteration and Approximate Generalized Policy Iteratio,n). We show that we can achieve a
2γ+0
stationary policy which is (1−γ)
2 -optimal, where
 is the value function approximation error and 0
is the approximate greedy operator error. In addition, we provide a practical algorithm (AGPI-Q)
to solve infinite horizon γ-discounted two-player
zero-sum Stochastic Games in a batch setting. It
is an extension of the Fitted-Q algorithm (which
solves Markov Decisions Processes from data)
and can be non-parametric. Finally, we demonstrate experimentally the performance of AGPIQ on a simultaneous two-player game, namely
Alesia.

1. Introduction
A wide range of complex problems (e.g. computer networks, human-computer interfaces, games as chess or
checkers) can be addressed as multi-agent systems. This
is why Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) (Busoniu et al., 2008) has received a growing interest in the last
few years. While, in decision theory, Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 1994) are widely used to control
a single agent in a complex environment, Markov Games
(MGs) (also named Stochastic Games (SGs)) (Shapley,
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JULIEN . PEROLAT @ ED . UNIV- LILLE 1. FR
BRUNO . SCHERRER @ INRIA . FR
BILAL . PIOT @ UNIV- LILLE 3. FR
OLIVIER . PIETQUIN @ UNIV- LILLE 1. FR

1953) are an extension of this formal framework to describe
multi-agent systems. As for MDPs, SGs constitute a model
for MARL (Littman, 1994) and have been largely studied
in past years (Hu & Wellman, 2003; Greenwald et al., 2003;
Bowling & Veloso, 2001). In some sense, SGs are a generalization of both the game-theory and the MDP frameworks
where the agents may have different pay-offs (rewards in
the MDP vocabulary) they aim at maximizing.
This paper contributes to solving large scale games with
unknown dynamics. Especially, it addresses the problem of finding the Nash equilibrium for infinite horizon
γ-discounted two-player zero-sum SGs in an approximate
fashion, possibly from batch data. SGs are modeled as
extensions of MDPs where Dynamic Programming (DP)
commonly serves as a basis to a wide range of practical
solutions (Puterman, 1994). However, when the size of
the game is too large or when its dynamics is not perfectly known, exact solutions cannot be computed. In
that case, Approximate Dynamic Programming (ADP) approaches are preferred as for MDPs (Bertsekas, 1995). Because DP relies on an iterative schema, interleaving Value
Function Approximation and Greedy Operator Approximations, two types of errors (corresponding to each source
of approximation) are introduced and can accumula,te over
iterationsprint(”—
More specifically, this paper provides a theoretical error
propagation analysis in Lp -norm of well-known ADP algorithms applied to games such as Approximate Value Iteration (AVI), Approximate Policy Iteration (API) and Approximate Generalized Policy Iteration (AGPI) (described
later). It also proposes a novel algorithm, named Approximate Generalized Policy Iteration-Q (AGPI-Q) extending
Fitted-Q iteration (Ernst et al., 2005) which is further analyzed in terms of error and complexity. AGPI-Q is evaluated on a simultaneous two-player game, namely Alesia.

