The Benefits of Learning with Strongly Convex Approximate Inference

Ben London
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA
Bert Huang
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 USA
Lise Getoor
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Abstract
We explore the benefits of strongly convex free
energies in variational inference, providing both
theoretical motivation and a new meta-algorithm.
Using the duality between strong convexity and
stability, we prove a high-probability bound on
the error of learned marginals that is inversely
proportional to the modulus of convexity of the
free energy, thereby motivating free energies
whose moduli are constant with respect to the
size of the graph. We identify sufficient conditions for Ω(1)-strong convexity in two popular variational techniques: tree-reweighted and
counting number entropies. Our insights for the
latter suggest a novel counting number optimization framework, which guarantees strong convexity for any given modulus. Our experiments
demonstrate that learning with a strongly convex free energy, using our optimization framework to guarantee a given modulus, results in
substantially more accurate marginal probabilities, thereby validating our theoretical claims and
the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Though marginal inference in general graphical models is
an intractable problem, many approximations have been
proposed using the variational free energy. Much of this
research has focused on the convexity of the free energy.
When it is convex, convergence to a global minimum is
guaranteed. Less attention has been paid to when the free
energy is strongly convex (i.e., has curvature), and what
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

BLONDON @ CS . UMD . EDU

BHUANG @ VT. EDU

GETOOR @ SOE . UCSC . EDU

benefits this offers. In this work, we show that learning
with a strongly convex free energy results in more accurate marginal probabilities. Our contributions include: a
theoretical motivation for using strongly convex free energies, a framework for optimizing the strength of convexity
in many variational methods, and experimental evaluation.
We frame our theoretical analysis in stability, which measures the inference algorithm’s robustness to perturbation.
One way to characterize stability is the Lipschitz gradient condition (Hiriart-Urruty & Lemaréchal, 2001), which
is the dual of strong convexity. Using this duality and
the variational form of the log-partition function, we show
that strongly convex free energies result in more stable
marginals. Further, we argue that a simply convex free
energy cannot satisfy this stability guarantee. Using our
stability result, we prove an error bound for the marginals
of a model that is learned using strongly convex variational
inference. The error bound is inversely proportional to the
modulus of convexity (i.e., amount of curvature) of the free
energy, thereby highlighting an important consideration for
strongly convex free energies: the modulus should be constant with respect to the size of the graph, |G|.
Based on the above insights, we aim to identify free energies that are strongly convex, and when their respective
moduli of convexity are constant with respect to |G|. We
consider two popular variational methods: tree-reweighted
(Wainwright et al., 2005) and counting number (Heskes,
2006) entropies. Using the notion of contraction, we give
model-dependent conditions under which the negative treereweighted entropy is Ω(1)-strongly convex. We then propose new sufficient conditions to characterize the modulus of convexity for counting number entropies. We use
this to derive a novel counting number optimization that
yields κ-strongly convex free energies, for any κ > 0, independent of the model parameters. This optimization can
“strongly convexify” any entropy approximation that can
be expressed via counting numbers, which includes many

