Gated Feedback Recurrent Neural Networks
Junyoung Chung
Caglar Gulcehre
Kyunghyun Cho
Yoshua Bengio∗
Dept. IRO, Université de Montréal, ∗ CIFAR Senior Fellow

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture. The proposed
RNN, gated-feedback RNN (GF-RNN), extends
the existing approach of stacking multiple recurrent layers by allowing and controlling signals
flowing from upper recurrent layers to lower layers using a global gating unit for each pair of
layers. The recurrent signals exchanged between
layers are gated adaptively based on the previous
hidden states and the current input. We evaluated the proposed GF-RNN with different types
of recurrent units, such as tanh, long short-term
memory and gated recurrent units, on the tasks
of character-level language modeling and Python
program evaluation. Our empirical evaluation of
different RNN units, revealed that in both tasks,
the GF-RNN outperforms the conventional approaches to build deep stacked RNNs. We suggest that the improvement arises because the GFRNN can adaptively assign different layers to different timescales and layer-to-layer interactions
(including the top-down ones which are not usually present in a stacked RNN) by learning to gate
these interactions.

1. Introduction
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been widely studied and used for various machine learning tasks which involve sequence modeling, especially when the input and
output have variable lengths. Recent studies have revealed
that RNNs using gating units can achieve promising results in both classification and generation tasks (see, e.g.,
Graves, 2013; Bahdanau et al., 2014; Sutskever et al.,
2014).
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

JUNYOUNG . CHUNG @ UMONTREAL . CA
CAGLAR . GULCEHRE @ UMONTREAL . CA
KYUNGHYUN . CHO @ UMONTREAL . CA
FIND - ME @ THE . WEB

Although RNNs can theoretically capture any long-term
dependency in an input sequence, it is well-known to be
difficult to train an RNN to actually do so (Hochreiter,
1991; Bengio et al., 1994; Hochreiter, 1998). One of the
most successful and promising approaches to solve this issue is by modifying the RNN architecture e.g., by using a
gated activation function, instead of the usual state-to-state
transition function composing an affine transformation and
a point-wise nonlinearity. A gated activation function,
such as the long short-term memory (LSTM, Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) and the gated recurrent unit (GRU,
Cho et al., 2014), is designed to have more persistent memory so that it can capture long-term dependencies more easily.
Sequences modeled by an RNN can contain both fast
changing and slow changing components, and these underlying components are often structured in a hierarchical
manner, which, as first pointed out by El Hihi & Bengio
(1995) can help to extend the ability of the RNN to learn
to model longer-term dependencies. A conventional way to
encode this hierarchy in an RNN has been to stack multiple levels of recurrent layers (Schmidhuber, 1992; El Hihi
& Bengio, 1995; Graves, 2013; Hermans & Schrauwen,
2013). More recently, Koutnı́k et al. (2014) proposed a
more explicit approach to partition the hidden units in an
RNN into groups such that each group receives the signal from the input and the other groups at a separate, predefined rate, which allows feedback information between
these partitions to be propagated at multiple timescales.
Stollenga et al. (2014) recently showed the importance of
feedback information across multiple levels of feature hierarchy, however, with feedforward neural networks.
In this paper, we propose a novel design for RNNs, called a
gated-feedback RNN (GF-RNN), to deal with the issue of
learning multiple adaptive timescales. The proposed RNN
has multiple levels of recurrent layers like stacked RNNs
do. However, it uses gated-feedback connections from upper recurrent layers to the lower ones. This makes the hidden states across a pair of consecutive timesteps fully con-

