On the Relationship between Sum-Product Networks and Bayesian Networks

Han Zhao
HAN . ZHAO @ UWATERLOO . CA
Mazen Melibari
MMELIBAR @ UWATERLOO . CA
Pascal Poupart
PPOUPART @ UWATERLOO . CA
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada

Abstract
In this paper, we establish some theoretical connections between Sum-Product Networks (SPNs)
and Bayesian Networks (BNs). We prove that every SPN can be converted into a BN in linear time
and space in terms of the network size. The key
insight is to use Algebraic Decision Diagrams
(ADDs) to compactly represent the local conditional probability distributions at each node in the
resulting BN by exploiting context-specific independence (CSI). The generated BN has a simple
directed bipartite graphical structure. We show
that by applying the Variable Elimination algorithm (VE) to the generated BN with ADD representations, we can recover the original SPN
where the SPN can be viewed as a history record
or caching of the VE inference process. To help
state the proof clearly, we introduce the notion of
normal SPN and present a theoretical analysis of
the consistency and decomposability properties.
We conclude the paper with some discussion of
the implications of the proof and establish a connection between the depth of an SPN and a lower
bound of the tree-width of its corresponding BN.

1. Introduction
Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) have recently been proposed as tractable deep models (Poon & Domingos, 2011)
for probabilistic inference. They distinguish themselves
from other types of probabilistic graphical models (PGMs),
including Bayesian Networks (BNs) and Markov Networks
(MNs), by the fact that inference can be done exactly in linear time with respect to the size of the network. This has
generated a lot of interest since inference is often a core
task for parameter estimation and structure learning, and
it typically needs to be approximated to ensure tractabil-

ity since probabilistic inference in BNs and MNs is #Pcomplete (Roth, 1996).
The relationship between SPNs and BNs, and more broadly
with PGMs, is not clear. Since the introduction of SPNs in
the seminal paper of Poon & Domingos (2011), it is well
understood that SPNs and BNs are equally expressive in
the sense that they can represent any joint distribution over
discrete variables1 , but it is not clear how to convert SPNs
into BNs, nor whether a blow up may occur in the conversion process. The common belief is that there exists
a distribution such that the smallest BN that encodes this
distribution is exponentially larger than the smallest SPN
that encodes the same distribution. The key behind this
belief lies in SPNs’ ability to exploit context-specific independence (CSI) (Boutilier et al., 1996).
While the above belief is correct for classic BNs with tabular conditional probability distributions (CPDs) that ignore
CSI, and for BNs with tree-based CPDs due to the replication problem (Pagallo, 1989), it is not clear whether it is
correct for BNs with more compact representations of the
CPDs. The other direction is clear for classic BNs with tabular representation: given a BN with tabular representation
of its CPDs, we can build an SPN that represents the same
joint probability distribution in time and space complexity
that may be exponential in the tree-width of the BN. Briefly,
this is done by constructing a junction tree and translating
it into an SPN2 . However, to the best of our knowledge,
it is still unknown how to convert an SPN into a BN and
whether the conversion will lead to a blow up when more
compact representations than tables and trees are used for
the CPDs.
In this paper, we prove that by adopting Algebraic Decision Diagrams (ADDs) (Bahar et al., 1997) to represent the
CPDs at each node in a BN, every SPN can be converted
into a BN in linear time and space complexity in the size of
the SPN. The generated BN has a simple bipartite structure,
1

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Joint distributions over continuous variables are also possible, but we will restrict ourselves to discrete variables in this paper.
2
http://spn.cs.washington.edu/faq.shtml

