Learning Submodular Losses with the Lovász Hinge

Jiaqian Yu
JIAQIAN . YU @ CENTRALESUPELEC . FR
Matthew B. Blaschko
MATTHEW. BLASCHKO @ INRIA . FR
CentraleSupélec & Inria, Grande Voie des Vignes, 92295 Châtenay-Malabry, France

Abstract
Learning with non-modular losses is an important problem when sets of predictions are made
simultaneously. The main tools for constructing
convex surrogate loss functions for set prediction
are margin rescaling and slack rescaling. In this
work, we show that these strategies lead to tight
convex surrogates iff the underlying loss function
is increasing in the number of incorrect predictions. However, gradient or cutting-plane computation for these functions is NP-hard for nonsupermodular loss functions. We propose instead
a novel convex surrogate loss function for submodular losses, the Lovász hinge, which leads
to O(p log p) complexity with O(p) oracle accesses to the loss function to compute a gradient
or cutting-plane. As a result, we have developed
the first tractable convex surrogates in the literature for submodular losses. We demonstrate the
utility of this novel convex surrogate through a
real world image labeling task.

1. Introduction
Statistical learning has largely addressed problems in
which a loss function decomposes over individual training
samples. However, there are many circumstances in which
non-modular losses can lead to better end results. This is
the case when multiple outputs of a prediction system are
used as the basis of a decision making process that leads to
a single real-world outcome. These dependencies in the effect of the predictions (rather than a statistical dependency
between predictions themselves) are therefore properly incorporated into a learning system through a non-modular
loss function. In this paper, we aim to provide a theoretical and algorithmic foundation for a novel class of learning algorithms that make feasible learning with submodular
losses, an important subclass of non-modular losses that is
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

currently infeasible with existing algorithms.
Convex surrogate loss functions are central to the practical application of empirical risk minimization. Straightforward principles have been developed for the design
of convex surrogates for binary classification and regression (Bartlett et al., 2006), and in the structured output setting margin and slack rescaling are two principles
for defining convex surrogates for more general output
spaces (Tsochantaridis et al., 2005). Despite the apparent flexibility of margin and slack rescaling in their ability to bound arbitrary loss functions, there are fundamental
limitations to our ability to apply these methods in practice: (i) they provide only loose upper bounds to certain
loss functions, (ii) computing a gradient or cutting plane
is NP-hard for submodular loss functions, and (iii) consistency results are lacking in general (McAllester, 2007;
Tewari & Bartlett, 2007). In practice, modular losses, such
as Hamming loss, are often applied to maintain tractability,
although non-modular losses, such as the intersection over
union loss have been applied in the structured prediction
setting (Blaschko & Lampert, 2008; Nowozin, 2014).
Non-modular losses have been (implicitly) considered in
the context of multilabel classification problems. (Cheng
et al., 2010) uses the Hamming loss and subset 0-1 loss
which are modular, and a rank loss which is supermodular;
(Petterson & Caetano, 2011) introduces submodular pairwise potentials, not submodular loss functions, while using a non-submodular loss based on F-score. (Li & Lin,
2014) uses (weighted) Hamming loss which is modular,
but also proposes a new tree-based algorithm for training;
(Doppa et al., 2014) uses modular losses e.g. Hamming
loss and F1 loss which is non-submodular. However, nonsupermodular loss functions are substantially more rare in
the literature.
In this work, we introduce an alternate principle to construct convex surrogate loss functions for submodular
losses based on the Lovász extension of a set function. The
Lovász extension of a submodular function is its convex
closure, and has been used in other machine learning contexts e.g. (Bach, 2010; Iyer & Bilmes, 2013). We analyze
the settings in which margin and slack rescaling are tight

