Deep Generative Models for Relational Data with Side Information

Changwei Hu 1 Piyush Rai 2 Lawrence Carin 3

Abstract
We present a probabilistic framework for overlapping community discovery and link prediction for relational data, given as a graph. The
proposed framework has: (1) a deep architecture
which enables us to infer multiple layers of latent features/communities for each node, providing superior link prediction performance on more
complex networks and better interpretability of
the latent features; and (2) a regression model
which allows directly conditioning the node latent features on the side information available in
form of node attributes. Our framework handles
both (1) and (2) via a clean, unified model, which
enjoys full local conjugacy via data augmentation, and facilitates efficient inference via closed
form Gibbs sampling. Moreover, inference cost
scales in the number of edges which is attractive for massive but sparse networks. Our framework is also easily extendable to model weighted
networks with count-valued edges. We compare
with various state-of-the-art methods and report
results, both quantitative and qualitative, on several benchmark data sets.

1. Introduction
Statistical modeling of complex real-world networks is
an important problem, drawing attention from diverse domains, such as social network analysis, biology, political
science, etc. (Fortunato, 2010; Goldenberg et al.; Schmidt
& Morup, 2013). The goal in statistical modeling of networks is usually to discover the underlying groups or community structure in the network, and/or predicting the existence of potential links between nodes. A common way
1
Yahoo! Research, New York, NY, USA 2 CSE Department,
IIT Kanpur, Kanpur, UP, India 3 Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA. Correspondence to: Changwei Hu <changweih@yahooinc.com>, Piyush Rai <piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in>, Lawrence Carin
<lcarin@duke.edu>. This work was done when Changwei Hu
was a Ph.D. student at Duke University.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

of accomplishing this is by embedding the nodes in a latent space via latent space models (Hoff et al., 2002).
Extensions of the latent space model include stochastic
blockmodels (Nowicki & Snijders, 2001), and variants
thereof (Miller et al., 2009; Airoldi et al., 2008; Latouche
et al., 2011), which can learn node embeddings that are interpretable (e.g., sparse) and can therefore reflect the underlying structure of the network. An appealing class of models is the latent feature relational model (LFRM) (Miller
et al., 2009), often also called the overlapping stochastic
blockmodel (Latouche et al., 2011), which associates with
each node a latent binary vector that can be thought of as
the node’s overlapping memberships to one or more latent
clusters in the network.
The modeling flexibility offered by overlapping stochastic
blockmodels, however, comes at a price. Inference in these
models, typically performed by MCMC methods (Miller
et al., 2009; Latouche et al., 2011), can be particularly challenging and is not easy to scale to networks with very large
number of nodes. Moreover, many real-world networks exhibit considerably more complex interactions which may
not be explained by the flat embeddings learned via these
models. This problem can be further exacerbated due to the
extreme sparsity of the observed links, and although leveraging some side information that might be available for
each node can help alleviate this issue to some extent (Kim
et al., 2011), this can make inference even more complex
to scale to large networks (Kim et al., 2011). Besides,
communities in real-world networks often tend to have
inter-dependencies/hierarchical structures that are usually
ignored by these single layer models.
Motivated by these limitations, we present an overarching
framework that enables us to address these challenges via
a unified, fully Bayesian model. Specifically, we develop
a model that learns multiple layers of latent features of the
nodes in the network, effectively learning a more expressive representation of the nodes which can better explain
the interactions among the nodes in more complex networks, as compared to the existing methods. At the same
time, the hierarchy of multiple layers of latent features allows imposing/exploiting the correlations among the clusters, which is usually not possible with single layer models.
Another appealing aspect of our model is its ability to in-

