Strong NP-Hardness for Sparse Optimization with Concave Penalty Functions

Yichen Chen 1 Dongdong Ge 2 Mengdi Wang 1 Zizhuo Wang 3 Yinyu Ye 4 Hao Yin 4

Abstract
Consider the regularized sparse minimization
problem, which involves empirical sums of loss
functions for n data points (each of dimension
d) and a nonconvex sparsity penalty. We prove
that finding an O(nc1 dc2 )-optimal solution to
the regularized sparse optimization problem is
strongly NP-hard for any c1 , c2 ∈ [0, 1) such that
c1 + c2 < 1. The result applies to a broad class
of loss functions and sparse penalty functions.
It suggests that one cannot even approximately
solve the sparse optimization problem in polynomial time, unless P = NP.

Keywords: Nonconvex optimization · Computational
complexity · NP-hardness · Concave penalty · Sparsity

1

Introduction

We study the sparse minimization problem, where the objective is the sum of empirical losses over input data and a
sparse penalty function. Such problems commonly arise
from empirical risk minimization and variable selection.
The role of the penalty function is to induce sparsity in the
optimal solution, i.e., to minimize the empirical loss using
as few nonzero coefficients as possible.
Problem 1 Given the loss function ` : R × R 7→ R+ ,
penalty function p : R 7→ R+ , and regularization parameter
λ > 0, consider the problem
min

x∈Rd

n
X
i=1

` aTi x, bi + λ


d
X

p (|xj |) ,

j=1

where A = (a1 , . . . , an )T ∈ Rn×d , b = (b1 , . . . , bn )T
∈ Rn are input data.
1
Princeton University, NJ, USA 2 Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China 3 University of Minnesota,
MN, USA 4 Stanford University, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Mengdi Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

We are interested in the computational complexity of Problem 1 under general conditions of the loss function ` and
the sparse penalty p. In particular, we focus on the case
where ` is a convex loss function and p is a concave penalty
with a unique minimizer at 0. Optimization problems with
convex ` and concave p are common in sparse regression,
compressive sensing, and sparse approximation. A list of
applicable examples of ` and p is given in Section 3.
For certain special cases of Problem 1, it has been shown
that finding an exact solution is strongly NP-hard (Huo &
Chen, 2010; Chen et al., 2014). However, these results have
not excluded the possibility of the existence of polynomialtime algorithms with small approximation error. (Chen
& Wang, 2016) established the hardness of approximately
solving Problem 1 when p is the L0 norm.
In this paper, we prove that it is strongly NP-hard to approximately solve Problem 1 within certain optimality error. More precisely, we show that there exists a lower
bound on the suboptimality error of any polynomial-time
deterministic algorithm. Our results apply to a variety of
optimization problems in estimation and machine learning.
Examples include sparse classification, sparse logistic regression, and many more. The strong NP-hardness of approximation is one of the strongest forms of complexity
result for continuous optimization. To our best knowledge,
this paper gives the first and strongest set of hardness results for Problem 1 under very general assumptions regarding the loss and penalty functions.
Our main contributions are three-fold.
1. We prove the strong NP-hardness for Problem 1 with
general loss functions. This is the first results that
apply to the broad class of problems including but
not limited to: least squares regression, linear model
with Laplacian noise, robust regression, Poisson regression, logistic regression, inverse Gaussian models,
etc.
2. We present a general condition on the sparse penalty
function p such that Problem 1 is strongly NP-hard.
The condition is a slight weaker version of strict concavity. It is satisfied by typical penalty functions such
as the Lq norm (q ∈ [0, 1)), clipped L1 norm, SCAD,
etc. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most gen-

