Sequence to Better Sequence: Continuous Revision of Combinatorial Structures
Jonas Mueller 1 David Gifford 1 Tommi Jaakkola 1

Abstract
We present a model that, after learning on observations of (sequence, outcome) pairs, can be
efficiently used to revise a new sequence in order
to improve its associated outcome. Our framework requires neither example improvements,
nor additional evaluation of outcomes for proposed revisions. To avoid combinatorial-search
over sequence elements, we specify a generative
model with continuous latent factors, which is
learned via joint approximate inference using a
recurrent variational autoencoder (VAE) and an
outcome-predicting neural network module. Under this model, gradient methods can be used to
efficiently optimize the continuous latent factors
with respect to inferred outcomes. By appropriately constraining this optimization and using the
VAE decoder to generate a revised sequence, we
ensure the revision is fundamentally similar to
the original sequence, is associated with better
outcomes, and looks natural. These desiderata
are proven to hold with high probability under
our approach, which is empirically demonstrated
for revising natural language sentences.

Introduction
The success of recurrent neural network (RNN) models
in complex tasks like machine translation and audio synthesis has inspired immense interest in learning from sequence data (Eck & Schmidhuber, 2002; Graves, 2013;
Sutskever et al., 2014; Karpathy, 2015). Comprised of elements st P S, which are typically symbols from a discrete
vocabulary, a sequence x “ ps1 , . . . , sT q P X has length T
which can vary between different instances. Sentences are
a popular example of such data, where each sj is a word
from the language. In many domains, only a tiny fraction
of X (the set of possible sequences over a given vocabulary) represents sequences likely to be found in nature (ie.
1
MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Correspondence to: J. Mueller <jonasmueller@csail.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

those which appear realistic). For example: a random sequence of words will almost never form a coherent sentence
that reads naturally, and a random amino-acid sequence is
highly unlikely to specify a biologically active protein.
In this work, we consider applications where each sequence
x is associated with a corresponding outcome y P R.
For example: a news article title or Twitter post can be
associated with the number of shares it subsequently received online, or the amino-acid sequence of a synthetic
protein can be associated with its clinical efficacy. We operate under the standard supervised learning setting, assumiid
ing availability of a dataset Dn “ tpxi , yi quni“1 „ pXY
of sequence-outcome pairs. The marginal distribution
pX is assumed as a generative model of the natural sequences, and may be concentrated in a small subspace of
X . Throughout this paper, p denotes both density and distribution functions depending on the referenced variable.
After fitting models to Dn , we are presented a new sequence x0 P X (with unknown outcome), and our goal is to
quickly identify a revised version that is expected to have
superior outcome. Formally, we seek the revised sequence:
x˚ “ argmax ErY | X “ xs

(1)

xPCx0

Here, we want the set Cx0 of feasible revisions to ensure
that x˚ remains natural and is merely a minor revision of
x0 . Under a generative modeling perspective, these two
goals are formalized as the following desiderata: pX px˚ q is
not too small, and x˚ and x0 share similar underlying latent
characteristics. When revising a sentence for example, it is
imperative that the revision reads naturally (has reasonable
likelihood under the distribution of realistic sentences) and
retains the semantics of the original.
This optimization is difficult because the constraint-set and
objective may be highly complex and are both unknown
(must be learned from data). For many types of sequence
such as sentences, standard distance measures applied directly in the space of X or S (eg. Levenshtein distance or
TF-IDF similarity) are inadequate to capture meaningful
similarities, even though these can be faithfully reflected by
a simple metric over an appropriately learned space of continuous latent factors (Mueller & Thyagarajan, 2016). In
this work, we introduce a generative-modeling framework
which transforms (1) into a simpler differentiable optimiza-

