Evaluating the Variance of Likelihood-Ratio Gradient Estimators

Seiya Tokui 1 2 Issei Sato 3 2

Abstract
The likelihood-ratio method is often used to estimate gradients of stochastic computations, for
which baselines are required to reduce the estimation variance. Many types of baselines have
been proposed, although their degree of optimality is not well understood. In this study, we establish a novel framework of gradient estimation that includes most of the common gradient estimators as special cases. The framework
gives a natural derivation of the optimal estimator that can be interpreted as a special case of
the likelihood-ratio method so that we can evaluate the optimal degree of practical techniques
with it. It bridges the likelihood-ratio method
and the reparameterization trick while still supporting discrete variables. It is derived from the
exchange property of the differentiation and integration. To be more specific, it is derived by
the reparameterization trick and local marginalization analogous to the local expectation gradient. We evaluate various baselines and the optimal estimator for variational learning and show
that the performance of the modern estimators is
close to the optimal estimator.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning owes much to efficient gradient computation using backpropagation (Rumelhart et al.,
1986). When the model of interest includes internal
stochasticities, the objective function is often written as a
stochastic computational graph (Schulman et al., 2015). In
this case, the exact gradient computation is intractable in
general, and an approximate estimation is required. The
variance introduced by the approximation often degrades
the optimization performance for deep models, and there1
Preferred Networks, Tokyo, Japan 2 The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 3 RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence
to: Seiya Tokui <tokui@preferred.jp>, Issei Sato <sato@k.utokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

fore variance reduction is crucial for practical learning.
However, few things are known about its theoretical aspects, and we often struggle with model-specific heuristics
whose degree of optimality is difficult to know.
The likelihood-ratio method (Glynn, 1990; Williams, 1992)
and the reparameterization trick (Williams, 1992; Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Titsias & Lzarogredilla, 2014) are widely used for the gradient estimation. The likelihood-ratio method only requires the computation of density functions and their derivatives, and therefore it is applicable to a wide range of models including
those with discrete variables. It requires variance reduction
techniques in practice. The most common technique is the
use of a baseline value (Paisley et al., 2012; Bengio et al.,
2013; Ranganath et al., 2014; Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Gu
et al., 2016a) which is subtracted from a sampled objective
value. The optimal baseline is difficult to compute in general, and we often use alternatives that are efficiently computed, some of which are based on model-specific heuristics. The reparameterization trick, on the other hand, has a
small estimation variance in practice and is only applicable
to models with certain continuous variables. Various models with continuous variables have been proposed using it,
whereas less progress on the research of deep discrete variable models has been made because of the inapplicability
of this method.
In this paper, we give a novel framework to formulate gradient estimators. It is derived by the reparameterization
and the local marginalization analogous to the local expectation gradient (Titsias & Lázaro-Gredilla, 2015). The
likelihood-ratio method and the reparameterization trick
can be formalized under this framework, and therefore it
bridges these two families of estimators. We can derive the
optimal estimator, which gives a lower bound of the variance of all estimators covered by the framework. Since the
estimator is derived by applying local marginalization to
the reparameterized gradient, we named it the reparameterization and marginalization (RAM) estimator. This estimator is an instance of the likelihood-ratio estimator with
the optimal baseline, and therefore it can be used to evaluate the variance of existing baseline techniques.
When the variable of interest follows a Bernoulli distribution, we can derive a tighter connection of a wider range of

