Input Convex Neural Networks

Brandon Amos 1 Lei Xu 2 * J. Zico Kolter 1

Abstract
This paper presents the input convex neural network architecture. These are scalar-valued (potentially deep) neural networks with constraints
on the network parameters such that the output
of the network is a convex function of (some
of) the inputs. The networks allow for efficient
inference via optimization over some inputs to
the network given others, and can be applied to
settings including structured prediction, data imputation, reinforcement learning, and others. In
this paper we lay the basic groundwork for these
models, proposing methods for inference, optimization and learning, and analyze their representational power. We show that many existing
neural network architectures can be made inputconvex with a minor modification, and develop
specialized optimization algorithms tailored to
this setting. Finally, we highlight the performance of the methods on multi-label prediction,
image completion, and reinforcement learning
problems, where we show improvement over the
existing state of the art in many cases.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we propose a new neural network architecture
that we call the input convex neural network (ICNN).These
are scalar-valued neural networks f (x, y; θ) where x and
y denotes inputs to the function and θ denotes the parameters, built in such a way that the network is convex in (a
subset of) inputs y.3 The fundamental benefit to these ICNNs is that we can optimize over the convex inputs to the
network given some fixed value for other inputs. That is,
given some fixed x (and possibly some fixed elements of
*
Work done while author was at Carnegie Mellon University. 1 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and
Technology, Tsinghua University. Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Brandon Amos <bamos@cs.cmu.edu>, J. Zico Kolter
<zkolter@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

y) we can globally and efficiently (because the problem is
convex) solve the optimization problem
argmin f (x, y; θ).

(1)

y

Fundamentally, this formalism lets us perform inference
in the network via optimization. That is, instead of making predictions in a neural network via a purely feedforward process, we can make predictions by optimizing a
scalar function (which effectively plays the role of an energy function) over some inputs to the function given others. There are a number of potential use cases for these
networks.
Structured prediction As is perhaps apparent from our
notation above, a key application of this work is in structured prediction. Given (typically high-dimensional) structured input and output spaces X × Y, we can build a network over (x, y) pairs that encodes the energy function
for this pair, following typical energy-based learning formalisms (LeCun et al., 2006). Prediction involves finding
the y ∈ Y that minimizes the energy for a given x, which
is exactly the argmin problem in (1). In our setting, assuming that Y is a convex space (a common assumption in
structured prediction), this optimization problem is convex.
This is similar in nature to the structured prediction energy
networks (SPENs) (Belanger & McCallum, 2016), which
also use deep networks over the input and output spaces,
with the difference being that in our setting f is convex in
y, so the optimization can be performed globally.
Data imputation Similar to structured prediction but
slightly more generic, if we are given some space Y we
can learn a network f (y; θ) (removing the additional x inputs, though these can be added as well) that, given an example with some subset I missing, imputes the likely values of these variables by solving the optimization problem
as above ŷI = argminyI f (yI , yĪ ; θ) This could be used
3

We emphasize the term “input convex” since convexity in
machine learning typically refers to convexity (of the loss minimization learning problem) in the parameters, which is not the
case here. Note that in our notation, f needs only be a convex
function in y, and may still be non-convex in the remaining inputs
x. Training these neural networks remains a nonconvex problem,
and the convexity is only being exploited at inference time.

