Stochastic DCA for the Large-sum of Non-convex Functions Problem and its
Application to Group Variable Selection in Classification

Hoai An Le Thi 1 Hoai Minh Le 1 Duy Nhat Phan 1 Bach Tran 1

Abstract

Nowadays, the growth of technologies leads to exponential augmentation of large-scale data where the number of
both variables and samples are huge. Thus, optimization
methods for solving the problem (1) are faced with a great
challenge that is the number of samples n can be extremely
large. Among existing methods for this problem, stochastic
programming has been proved to be suitable thanks to its
ability to exploit the advantage of the sum structure of the
problem. In (Schmidt et al., 2015), the authors considered
a special case of the large-sum problem (1) where fi are
convex and smooth functions and p corresponds to the `2
regularization. Stochastic Average Gradient was developed
to solve the resulting problem. Reddi et al. (Reddi et al.,
2016) developed Proximal Stochastic Gradient method for
the case where fi are smooth (can be non-convex) and p
is convex, non-smooth function. Motivated by its success,
we will study stochastic programming for solving (1) in order to deal with data having an extremely large number of
samples.

In this paper, we present a stochastic version
of DCA (Difference of Convex functions Algorithm) to solve a class of optimization problems
whose objective function is a large sum of nonconvex functions and a regularization term. We
consider the `2,0 regularization to deal with the
group variables selection. By exploiting the special structure of the problem, we propose an efficient DC decomposition for which the corresponding stochastic DCA scheme is very inexpensive: it only requires the projection of points
onto balls that is explicitly computed. As an application, we applied our algorithm for the group
variables selection in multiclass logistic regression. Numerical experiments on several benchmark datasets and synthetic datasets illustrate the
efficiency of our algorithm and its superiority
over well-known methods, with respect to classification accuracy, sparsity of solution as well
as running time.

1. Introduction
We consider the following optimization problem
)
(
n
1X
fi (x) + λp(x) ,
min f (x) =
n i=1

(1)

whose objective function f is a large sum of non-convex
functions fi (x) and a regularization term p(x), where fi (x)
corresponds to a criteria to optimize and λ ≥ 0 is a tradeoff parameter between the two terms. This model covers
a very vast class of problems arising from several fields
such as machine learning, signal processing, etc. For instance, least-squares regression, logistic regression problem, etc can be expressed in the form of (1).
1

Laboratory of Theoretical and Applied Computer Science,
University of Lorraine, France. Correspondence to: Hoai Minh
Le <minh.le@univ-lorraine.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

On the other hand, in real-world applications such as image processing, microarray analysis, etc. datasets contain
a very large number of variables. In such of cases, we are
often to face with the problem of redundant and irrelevant
variables. Redundant variables contain information already
presented by other variables while irrelevant variables do
not contain useful information. Variables selection methods that consist of selecting important variables for a considered task, are a popular and efficient way to deal with
redundant and irrelevant variables. In this direction, a natural idea is to formulate the variables selection problem as
a minimization of the `0 -norm (or k.k0 ). The sparse optimization has been extensively studied on both theoretical
and practical aspects. The readers can refer to Le Thi et al.
(Le Thi et al., 2015) for an extensive overview of existing
approaches for the minimization of `0 -norm.
Nevertheless, when the data possesses certain group structures, we are naturally interested in selecting important
groups of variables rather than individual ones. For
instance, in multi-factor analysis of variance, a factor
with several levels may be expressed through a group of
dummy variables. In genomic data analysis, the correlations between genes sharing the biological pathway can

