Deep Latent Dirichlet Allocation with Topic-Layer-Adaptive
Stochastic Gradient Riemannian MCMC
Yulai Cong 1 Bo Chen 1 Hongwei Liu 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract
It is challenging to develop stochastic gradient
based scalable inference for deep discrete latent
variable models (LVMs), due to the difficulties
in not only computing the gradients, but also
adapting the step sizes to different latent factors
and hidden layers. For the Poisson gamma belief network (PGBN), a recently proposed deep
discrete LVM, we derive an alternative representation that is referred to as deep latent Dirichlet
allocation (DLDA). Exploiting data augmentation and marginalization techniques, we derive
a block-diagonal Fisher information matrix and
its inverse for the simplex-constrained global
model parameters of DLDA. Exploiting that
Fisher information matrix with stochastic gradient
MCMC, we present topic-layer-adaptive stochastic gradient Riemannian (TLASGR) MCMC that
jointly learns simplex-constrained global parameters across all layers and topics, with topic and
layer specific learning rates. State-of-the-art results are demonstrated on big data sets.

1. Introduction
The increasing amount and complexity of data call for largecapacity models, such as deep discrete latent variable models (LVMs) for unsupervised data analysis (Hinton et al.,
2006; Bengio et al., 2007; Srivastava et al., 2013; Ranganath
et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2016a), and scalable inference methods, such as stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo
(SG-MCMC) that provides posterior samples in a non-batch
learning setting (Welling & Teh, 2011; Patterson & Teh,
2013; Ma et al., 2015). Unfortunately, most deep LVMs,
1
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Collaborative Innovation Center of Information Sensing and Understanding,
Xidian University, Xi’an, China. 2 McCombs School of Business,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Chen <bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn>, Mingyuan
Zhou <mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

such as deep belief network (DBN) (Hinton et al., 2006)
and deep Boltzmann machines (DBM) (Salakhutdinov &
Hinton, 2009), use greedy layerwise training, without a principled way to jointly learn multilayers in an unsupervised
manner (Bengio et al., 2007). While SG-MCMC has recently been successfully applied to several “shallow” LVMs,
such as mixture models (Welling & Teh, 2011) and mixedmembership models (Patterson & Teh, 2013), it has been
rarely applied to “deep” ones, probably due to the lack of
understanding on how to jointly learn the latent variables
of different layers and adjust the layer and topic specific
learning rates in a non-batch learning setting.
To investigate scalable SG-MCMC inference for deep
LVMs, we focus our study on the recently proposed Poisson gamma belief network (PGBN), whose hidden layers
are parameterized with gamma distributed hidden units and
connected with Dirichlet distributed basis vectors (Zhou
et al., 2016a). The PGBN is capable of extracting topics
from a text corpus at multiple layers and outperforms a large
number of topic modeling algorithms. However, the PGBN
is currently trained with a batch Gibbs sampler that is not
scalable to big data. In this paper, we focus on developing
scalable multilayer joint inference for the PGBN.
We will show that scalable multilayer joint inference of the
PGBN could be facilitated by its Fisher information matrix (FIM) (Amari, 1998; Girolami & Calderhead, 2011;
Pascanu & Bengio, 2013), which, although seemingly impossible to derive and challenging to work with due to the
need to compute the expectations over trigamma functions,
is readily available under an alternative representation of
the PGBN, referred to as deep latent Dirichlet allocation
(DLDA). DLDA, derived by exploiting data augmentation
and marginalization techniques on the PGBN, can be considered as a multilayer generalization of latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003). Following a general
framework for SG-MCMC (Ma et al., 2015), the block diagonal structure of the FIM of DLDA makes it be easily
inverted to precondition the mini-batch based noisy gradients to exploit the second-order local curvature information,
leading to topic-layer-adaptive step sizes based on the Riemannian manifold and the same asymptotic performance as
a natural gradient based batch-learning algorithm (Amari,
1998; Pascanu & Bengio, 2013). To the best of our knowl-

