Analogical Inference for Multi-relational Embeddings

Hanxiao Liu 1 Yuexin Wu 1 Yiming Yang 1

Abstract

Multi-relational embedding, or knowledge graph embedding, is the task of finding the latent representations of
entities and relations for better inference over knowledge
graphs. This problem has become increasingly important
in recent machine learning due to the broad range of important applications of large-scale knowledge bases, such
as Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008), DBpedia (Auer et al.,
2007) and Google’s Knowledge Graph (Singhal, 2012), including question-answering (Ferrucci et al., 2010), information retrieval (Dalton et al., 2014) and natural language
processing (Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2009).
A knowledge base (KB) typically stores factual information as subject-relation-object triplets. The collection of
such triplets forms a directed graph whose nodes are entities and whose edges are the relations among entities. Real1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
Correspondence to: Hanxiao Liu <hanxiaol@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

sc
sun

le

w
do

n

w

att
r

a

surrounded by

att

r ac

t

act

e
al

do

n

sc

made of

1. Introduction

electrons

charge

planets

made of

Large-scale multi-relational embedding refers to
the task of learning the latent representations for
entities and relations in large knowledge graphs.
An effective and scalable solution for this problem is crucial for the true success of knowledgebased inference in a broad range of applications. This paper proposes a novel framework
for optimizing the latent representations with respect to the analogical properties of the embedded entities and relations. By formulating the
learning objective in a differentiable fashion, our
model enjoys both theoretical power and computational scalability, and significantly outperformed a large number of representative baseline
methods on benchmark datasets. Furthermore,
the model offers an elegant unification of several
well-known methods in multi-relational embedding, which can be proven to be special instantiations of our framework.

surrounded by
nucleus

w

le

do

n

a

sc

mass

Figure 1. Commutative diagram for the analogy between the Solar System (red) and the Rutherford-Bohr Model (blue) (atom
system). By viewing the atom system as a “miniature” of the
solar system (via the scale down relation), one is able to complete missing facts (triplets) about the latter by mirroring the facts
about the former. The analogy is built upon three basic analogical structures (parallelograms): “sun is to planets as nucleus
is to electrons”, “sun is to mass as nucleus is to charge” and
“planets are to mass as eletrons are to charge”.

world knowledge graph is both extremely large and highly
incomplete by nature (Min et al., 2013). How can we use
the observed triplets in an incomplete graph to induce the
unobserved triples in the graph presents a tough challenge
for machine learning research.
Various statistical relational learning methods (Getoor,
2007; Nickel et al., 2015) have been proposed for this task,
among which vector-space embedding models are most
particular due to their advantageous performance and scalability (Bordes et al., 2013). The key idea in those approaches is to find dimensionality reduced representations
for both the entities and the relations, and hence force the
models to generalize during the course of compression.
Representative models of this kind include tensor factorization (Singhal, 2012; Nickel et al., 2011), neural tensor networks (Socher et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2013), translationbased models (Bordes et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014; Lin
et al., 2015b), bilinear models and its variants (Yang et al.,
2014; Trouillon et al., 2016), pathwise methods (Guu et al.,
2015), embeddings based on holographic representations
(Nickel et al., 2016), and product graphs that utilizes additional site information for the predictions of unseen edges
in a semi-supervised manner (Liu & Yang, 2015; 2016).

