Globally Induced Forest: A Prepruning Compression Scheme

Jean-Michel Begon 1 Arnaud Joly 1 Pierre Geurts 1

Abstract
Tree-based ensemble models are heavy memorywise. An undesired state of affairs considering nowadays datasets, memory-constrained environment and fitting/prediction times. In this
paper, we propose the Globally Induced Forest
(GIF) to remedy this problem. GIF is a fast
prepruning approach to build lightweight ensembles by iteratively deepening the current forest. It
mixes local and global optimizations to produce
accurate predictions under memory constraints
in reasonable time. We show that the proposed
method is more than competitive with standard
tree-based ensembles under corresponding constraints, and can sometimes even surpass much
larger models.

1. Introduction
Decision forests, such as Random Forest (Breiman, 2001)
and Extremely Randomized Trees (Geurts et al., 2006),
are popular methods in the machine learning community.
This popularity is due to their overall good accuracy, relative ease-of-use, short learning/prediction time and interpretability. However, datasets have become bigger and
bigger over the past decade. The number of instances N
has increased and the community has turned to very highdimensional learning problems. The former has led to
bigger trees, as the number of nodes in a tree is O(N ).
The latter, on the other hand, tends to steer toward larger
forests. Indeed, the variance of individual trees tends to
increase with the dimensionality P of the problem (Joly
et al., 2012). Therefore, the adequate number of trees T
increases with the dimensionality. Overall, this change of
focus might render tree-based ensemble techniques impractical memory-wise, as the total footprint is O(N × T (P )).
1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. Correspondence
to: Jean-Michel Begon <jm.begon@ulg.ac.be>, Pierre Geurts
<p.geurts@ulg.ac.be>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Aside from big data, other areas of machine learning suffer
from the high memory demand of tree-based methods. For
instance, low-memory devices, such as mobile phones and
embedded systems, require lightweight models. Smaller
models also implies faster predictions, which is crucial for
real-time applications. All in all, tree-based models might
benefit from lighter memory footprint in many different
ways.
In this paper, we propose the Globally Induced Forest
(GIF), an algorithm which, under a node budget constraint,
iteratively and greedily deepens multiple trees by optimizing globally the sequence of nodes to develop and their associated weights, while still choosing locally, based on the
standard local score criterion, the splitting variables and cut
points at all tree nodes.
As a pre-pruning approach, GIFs circumvent the need to
build the whole forest first, thus discarding the need for
a large temporary storage. This, in addition to the mix
of global, local and greedy optimization, results in a fast
method, able to produce lightweight, yet accurate forests
learned on the whole training set.
After a discussion of the related work in Section 2, Section
3 introduces the GIF algorithm and how it can be applied
for both regression (Section 3.1) and classification (Section
3.2). In Section 4, we show that our proposed algorithm,
with its default setting, performs well on many datasets,
sometimes even surpassing much larger models. We then
conduct an extensive analysis of its hyper-parameters (Section 4.2). Since GIF shares some resemblance to Boosting, the two approaches are compared in Section 4.3, before concluding and outlining future works in Section 5.

2. Related work
Memory constraints of tree-based ensemble methods is not
a new topic and has been tackled from various perspectives, which can be partitioned into tree-agnostic and treeaware methods. The former set of techniques are general
purpose methods which can deal with any ensembles. We
can distinguish further between re-learning algorithms (e.g.
Domingos, 1997; Menke & Martinez, 2009), which try to
come up with a smaller, equivalent models, and ensemble pruning methods. These latter methods try to eliminate

