Learning Determinantal Point Processes with Moments and Cycles

John Urschel 1 Victor-Emmanuel Brunel 1 Ankur Moitra 1 Philippe Rigollet 1

Abstract
Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) are a family of probabilistic models that have a repulsive
behavior, and lend themselves naturally to many
tasks in machine learning where returning a diverse set of objects is important. While there are
fast algorithms for sampling, marginalization and
conditioning, much less is known about learning the parameters of a DPP. Our contribution
is twofold: (i) we establish the optimal sample complexity achievable in this problem and
show that it is governed by a natural parameter,
which we call the cycle sparsity; (ii) we propose
a provably fast combinatorial algorithm that implements the method of moments efficiently and
achieves optimal sample complexity. Finally, we
give experimental results that confirm our theoretical findings.

1. Introduction
Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) are a family of probabilistic models that arose from the study of quantum mechanics (Macchi, 1975) and random matrix theory (Dyson,
1962). Following the seminal work of Kulesza and Taskar
(Kulesza & Taskar, 2012), discrete DPPs have found numerous applications in machine learning, including in document and timeline summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2012;
Yao et al., 2016), image search (Kulesza & Taskar, 2011;
Affandi et al., 2014) and segmentation (Lee et al., 2016),
audio signal processing (Xu & Ou, 2016), bioinformatics (Batmanghelich et al., 2014) and neuroscience (Snoek
et al., 2013). What makes such models appealing is that
they exhibit repulsive behavior and lend themselves naturally to tasks where returning a diverse set of objects is
important.
One way to define a DPP is through an N × N symmetric positive semidefinite matrix K, called a kernel, whose
1
Department of Mathematics, MIT, USA. Correspondence to:
John Urschel <urschel@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

eigenvalues are bounded in the range [0, 1]. Then the DPP
associated with K, which we denote by DPP(K), is the
distribution on Y ⊆ [N ] = {1, . . . , N } that satisfies, for
any J ⊆ [N ],
P[J ⊆ Y ] = det(KJ ),
where KJ is the principal submatrix of K indexed by the
set J. The graph induced by K is the graph G = ([N ], E)
on the vertex set [N ] that connects i, j ∈ [N ] if and only if
Ki,j 6= 0.
There are fast algorithms for sampling (or approximately
sampling) from DPP(K) (Deshpande & Rademacher,
2010; Rebeschini & Karbasi, 2015; Li et al., 2016b;a).
Marginalizing the distribution on a subset I ⊆ [N ] and conditioning on the event that J ⊆ Y both result in new DPPs
and closed form expressions for their kernels are known
(Borodin & Rains, 2005).
There has been much less work on the problem of learning
the parameters of a DPP. A variety of heuristics have been
proposed, including Expectation-Maximization (Gillenwater et al., 2014), MCMC (Affandi et al., 2014), and fixed
point algorithms (Mariet & Sra, 2015). All of these attempt
to solve a nonconvex optimization problem, and no guarantees on their statistical performance are known. Recently,
Brunel et al. (Brunel et al., 2017) studied the rate of estimation achieved by the maximum likelihood estimator, but
the question of efficient computation remains open.
Apart from positive results on sampling, marginalization
and conditioning, most provable results about DPPs are actually negative. It is conjectured that the maximum likelihood estimator is NP-hard to compute (Kulesza, 2012).
Actually, approximating the mode of size k of a DPP to
within a ck factor is known to be NP-hard for some c > 1
(Çivril & Magdon-Ismail, 2009; Summa et al., 2015). The
best known algorithms currently obtain a ek +o(k) approximation factor (Nikolov, 2015; Nikolov & Singh, 2016).
In this work, we bypass the difficulties associated with
maximum likelihood estimation by using the method of moments to achieve optimal sample complexity. We introduce
a parameter `, which we call the cycle sparsity of the graph
induced by the kernel K, which governs the number of moments that need to be considered and, thus, the sample complexity. Moreover, we use a refined version of Horton’s al-

