Understanding the Representation and Computation of Multilayer
Perceptrons: A Case Study in Speech Recognition

Tasha Nagamine 1 Nima Mesgarani 1

Abstract
Despite the recent success of deep learning, the
nature of the transformations they apply to the
input features remains poorly understood. This
study provides an empirical framework to study
the encoding properties of node activations in
various layers of the network, and to construct
the exact function applied to each data point in
the form of a linear transform. These methods are
used to discern and quantify properties of feedforward neural networks trained to map acoustic
features to phoneme labels. We show a selective and nonlinear warping of the feature space,
achieved by forming prototypical functions to account for the possible variation of each class.
This study provides a joint framework where the
properties of node activations and the functions
implemented by the network can be linked together.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has achieved remarkable
performance on a variety of tasks in machine learning
(D. Andor & Collins, 2016; D. Silver & Hassabis, 2016;
K. He & Sun, 2016), including automatic speech recognition (G. E. Dahl & Acero, 2012; G. Hinton & Kingsbury, 2012; A.-R. Mohamed & Hinton, 2010; W. Xiong
& Zweig, 2016). Despite these successes, our understanding of deep neural networks (DNNs) and the nature of their
computation and representations lags far behind these performance gains. This has motivated a number of recent
studies aimed at better understanding the computational
principles of deep learning in the hope of gaining intuitions
that may lead to improved models.
It has been established that networks with at least one
1
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Nima Mesgarani <nima@ee.columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

hidden layer are universal approximators (Cybenko, 1989;
K. Hornik & White, 1989). Several recent theoretical studies have proven that deeper architectures are able to more
efficiently solve problems than shallow models, given a
limited number of parameters (Eldan & Shamir, 2015; Lin
& Tegmark, 2016). Other studies have focused on networks
with rectified linear units, and have shown that deeper networks are able to learn more complex functions by splitting
the input space into exponentially more linear response regions than equivalent shallow models (G. Montufar & Bengio, 2014; R. Pascanu & Bengio, 2013). Finally, recent successes using deep residual networks and subsequent analyses show the effectiveness of extremely deep representations in supervised learning tasks (K. He & Sun, 2016;
A. Veit & Belongie, 2016).
At the same time, there is a growing body of empirical studies that aim to understand the behavior of neural networks
by developing mathematical methods and techniques for
visualization (Zeiler & Fergus, 2013; J. Yosinski & Lipson,
2016), as well as studies of instability in the face of adversarial examples (C. Szegedy & Fergus, 2013; A. Nguyen &
Clune, 2015) and contraction and separation properties of
these models (Mallat, 2016). In the field of speech recognition, several studies explored the representations of speech
learned by feed-forward networks used in acoustic modeling (A.-R. Mohamed & Penn, 2012; T. Nagamine & Mesgarani, 2015; 2016). Finally, an architecture-independent
method was proposed to summarize the complexity of the
parameters learned in feed-forward networks (S. Wang &
Aslan, 2016).
In this study, we aim to bridge the gap between these theoretical and empirical studies by providing methods for analyzing both the properties of activations in each layer of
the network and estimating the exact linear function that is
applied to each data point. We discern and quantify properties of the network representation and computation to determine 1) what aspects of the feature space are encoded
in different layers (internal representation) and 2) how the
network transforms the feature space to achieve categorization (network function). Our method thus provides a
joint framework in which the properties of node activations
are directly linked to the properties of the function that is

