Resource-efficient Machine Learning in 2 KB RAM for the Internet of Things

Ashish Kumar 1 Saurabh Goyal 2 Manik Varma 1

Abstract
This paper develops a novel tree-based algorithm, called Bonsai, for efficient prediction on
IoT devices – such as those based on the Arduino Uno board having an 8 bit ATmega328P
microcontroller operating at 16 MHz with no native floating point support, 2 KB RAM and 32
KB read-only flash. Bonsai maintains prediction accuracy while minimizing model size and
prediction costs by: (a) developing a tree model
which learns a single, shallow, sparse tree with
powerful nodes; (b) sparsely projecting all data
into a low-dimensional space in which the tree is
learnt; and (c) jointly learning all tree and projection parameters. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that Bonsai can make predictions in milliseconds even on
slow microcontrollers, can fit in KB of memory,
has lower battery consumption than all other algorithms while achieving prediction accuracies
that can be as much as 30% higher than stateof-the-art methods for resource-efficient machine
learning. Bonsai is also shown to generalize to
other resource constrained settings beyond IoT
by generating significantly better search results
as compared to Bing’s L3 ranker when the model
size is restricted to 300 bytes. Bonsai’s code can
be downloaded from (BonsaiCode).

1. Introduction
Objective: This paper develops a novel tree-based algorithm, called Bonsai, which can be trained on a laptop, or
the cloud, and can then be shipped onto severely resource
constrained Internet of Things (IoT) devices.
Resource constrained devices: The Arduino Uno board
has an 8 bit ATmega328P microcontroller operating at 16
MHz with 2 KB SRAM and 32 KB read-only flash mem1
Microsoft Research, Bangalore, India 2 CSE Department, IIT
Delhi, India. Correspondence to: <manik@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ory. The BBC Micro:Bit has a 32 bit ARM Cortex M0 microcontroller operating at 16 MHz with 16 KB SRAM and
256 KB read-only flash. Neither provides hardware support for floating point operations. Billions of such tiny IoT
microcontrollers have been deployed in the world (Meunier
et al., 2014). Before deployment, the OS and all application
code and data are burnt onto flash, leaving only a few KB
for storing the trained ML model, prediction code, feature
extraction code and associated data and parameters. After deployment, the only writable memory available is the
2 KB (Uno) or 16 KB (Micro:Bit) of SRAM which might
not be sufficient to hold even a single feature vector.
The Internet of Things: A number of applications have
been developed for consumer, enterprise and societal IoT
including predictive maintenance, intelligent healthcare,
smart cities and housing, etc. The dominant paradigm for
these applications, given the severe resource constraints of
IoT devices, has been that the IoT device is dumb – it just
senses its environment and transmits the sensor readings to
the cloud where all the decision making happens.
Motivating scenarios: This paper proposes an alternative
paradigm where the IoT device can make predictions locally without necessarily connecting to the cloud. This enables many scenarios, beyond the pale of the traditional
paradigm, where it is not possible to transmit data to the
cloud due to latency, bandwidth, privacy and energy concerns. For instance, consider a microcontroller implanted
in the brain which warns patients about impending seizures
so that they can call for help, pull over if they are driving,
etc. Making predictions locally would allow the device to
work everywhere irrespective of cloud connectivity. Furthermore, alerts could be raised more quickly with local
predictions than if all the sensor readings had to be first
transmitted to the cloud. In addition, since the energy required for executing an instruction might be much lower
than the energy required to transmit a byte, making predictions locally would extend battery life significantly thereby
avoiding repeated brain surgery and might also prevent
brain tissue damage due to excess heat dissipation from the
communicating radio. Finally, people might not be willing
to transmit such sensitive data to the cloud. These characteristics are shared by many other scenarios including implants in the heart, precision agriculture on disconnected
farms, smart spectacles for the visually impaired, etc.

