Boosted Fitted Q-Iteration

Samuele Tosatto 1 2 Matteo Pirotta 3 Carlo D’Eramo 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
This paper is about the study of B-FQI, an Approximated Value Iteration (AVI) algorithm that
exploits a boosting procedure to estimate the
action-value function in reinforcement learning
problems. B-FQI is an iterative off-line algorithm that, given a dataset of transitions, builds an
approximation of the optimal action-value function by summing the approximations of the Bellman residuals across all iterations. The advantage of such approach w.r.t. to other AVI methods is twofold: (1) while keeping the same function space at each iteration, B-FQI can represent more complex functions by considering an
additive model; (2) since the Bellman residual
decreases as the optimal value function is approached, regression problems become easier as
iterations proceed. We study B-FQI both theoretically, providing also a finite-sample error upper
bound for it, and empirically, by comparing its
performance to the one of FQI in different domains and using different regression techniques.

1. Introduction
Among Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques, valuebased methods play an important role. Such methods use
function approximation techniques to represent the near
optimal value function in domains with large (continuous)
state spaces. Approximate Value Iteration (AVI) (Puterman, 1994) is the main class of algorithms able to deal
with this scenario and, by far, it is the most analyzed in
literature (e.g., Gordon, 1995; Ernst et al., 2005; Munos
& Szepesvári, 2008; Farahmand et al., 2009; 2010; Farahmand & Precup, 2012). AVI aims to recover the optimal
value function as fixed point of the optimal Bellman operator. Under this perspective, the solution to a RL problem
1
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, Milano, Italy, 2 IAS, Darmstadt, Germany, 3 SequeL Team, INRIA
Lille - Nord Europe. Correspondence to: Marcello Restelli <marcello.restelli@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

is obtained by solving a sequence of supervised learning
problems where, at each iteration, the application of the
empirical optimal Bellman operator to the current approximation of the value function is projected in a predefined
function space. This AVI strategy is called fitted value iteration in literature. The idea is that, if enough samples
are provided and the function space is sufficiently rich, the
fitted function will be a good approximation of the one obtained through the optimal Bellman operator, thus mimicking the behavior of Value Iteration (Puterman, 1994).
This means that the core of AVI approaches is to control
the approximation and estimation errors. While the estimation error can be regulated by varying the number of
samples, the control of the approximation error is critical.
The choice of the function approximator is the key point
and determines the success or the failure of these methods.
The critical design aspect in fitted approaches is that the
ability of “well” approximating the optimal value function
is not sufficient to ensure a good algorithm performance. In
fact, by translating the RL problem into a sequence of regression tasks, fitted methods require the function space to
be able to represent all the functions obtained over time by
the application of the empirical optimal Bellman operator.
Although parametric models have proved to be effective in
several applications (e.g., Moody & Saffell, 1998; Kober
et al., 2013; Mnih et al., 2015), the design of a suitable
class of function approximation is difficult unless one has
substantial knowledge of the underlying domain. RL literature has extensively focused on automatic features generation (e.g., Mahadevan & Maggioni, 2007; Parr et al., 2007;
Fard et al., 2013) to overcome this issue. Despite the strong
theoretical results, it is often difficult to exploit such approaches in real applications with continuous spaces.
Recent advances in compute hardware have allowed to exploit deeper neural networks to solve complex problem
with extremely high state space (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016). The increased richness of the functional space, coped with efficient algorithms for the training
of neural networks, has reduce (and eventually removed)
the importance of the feature design. However, these approaches scale unfavorably with the number of samples.
To be able to work on richer function spaces an increased
number of samples (often scaling non linearly with the parameters) is required along with dedicated hardware. Al-

