Tensor Belief Propagation

Andrew Wrigley 1 Wee Sun Lee 2 Nan Ye 3

Abstract
We propose a new approximate inference algorithm for graphical models, tensor belief propagation, based on approximating the messages
passed in the junction tree algorithm. Our algorithm represents the potential functions of the
graphical model and all messages on the junction
tree compactly as mixtures of rank-1 tensors. Using this representation, we show how to perform
the operations required for inference on the junction tree efficiently: marginalisation can be computed quickly due to the factored form of rank-1
tensors while multiplication can be approximated
using sampling. Our analysis gives sufficient
conditions for the algorithm to perform well, including for the case of high-treewidth graphs, for
which exact inference is intractable. We compare our algorithm experimentally with several
approximate inference algorithms and show that
it performs well.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models provide a general framework to conveniently build probabilistic models in a modular and compact way. They are commonly used in statistics,
computer vision, natural language processing, machine
learning and many related fields (Wainwright & Jordan,
2008). The success of graphical models depends largely
on the availability of efficient inference algorithms. Unfortunately, exact inference is intractable in general, making
approximate inference an important research topic.
Approximate inference algorithms generally adopt a variational approach or a sampling approach. The variational
approach formulates the inference problem as an optimi1

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore. 3 Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia. Correspondence
to: Andrew Wrigley <andrew.wrigley@anu.edu.au>, Wee Sun
Lee <leews@comp.nus.edu.sg>, Nan Ye <n.ye@qut.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

sation problem and constructs approximations by solving
relaxations of the optimisation problem. A number of wellknown inference algorithms can be seen as variational algorithms, such as loopy belief propagation, mean-field variational inference, and generalized belief propagation (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008). The sampling approach uses sampling to approximate either the underlying distribution or
key quantities of interest. Commonly used sampling methods include particle filters and Markov-chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithms (Andrieu et al., 2003).
Our proposed algorithm, tensor belief propagation (TBP),
can be seen as a sampling-based algorithm. Unlike particle filters or MCMC methods, which sample states (also
known as particles), TBP samples functions in the form of
rank-1 tensors. Specifically, we use a data structure commonly used in exact inference, the junction tree, and perform approximate message passing on the junction tree using messages represented as mixtures of rank-1 tensors.
We assume that each factor in the graphical model is originally represented as a tensor decomposition (mixture of
rank-1 tensors). Under this assumption, all messages and
intermediate factors also have the same representation. Our
key observation is that marginalisation can be performed
efficiently for mixtures of rank-1 tensors, and multiplication can be approximated by sampling. This leads to an approximate message passing algorithm where messages and
intermediate factors are approximated by low-rank tensors.
We provide analysis, giving conditions under which the
method performs well. We compare TBP experimentally
with several existing approximate inference methods using
Ising models, random MRFs and two real-world datasets,
demonstrating promising results.

2. Related Work
Exact inference on tree-structured graphical models can
be performed efficiently using belief propagation (Pearl,
1982), a dynamic programming algorithm that involves
passing messages between nodes containing the results of
intermediate computations. For arbitrary graphical models,
the well-known junction tree algorithm (Shafer & Shenoy,
1990; Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988; Jensen et al., 1990)
is commonly used. The model is first compiled into a junc-

