Differentially Private Ordinary Least Squares

Or Sheffet 1

Abstract
Linear regression is one of the most prevalent
techniques in machine learning; however, it is
also common to use linear regression for its explanatory capabilities rather than label prediction. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) is often used
in statistics to establish a correlation between
an attribute (e.g. gender) and a label (e.g. income) in the presence of other (potentially correlated) features. OLS assumes a particular model
that randomly generates the data, and derives tvalues — representing the likelihood of each real
value to be the true correlation. Using t-values,
OLS can release a confidence interval, which is
an interval on the reals that is likely to contain
the true correlation; and when this interval does
not intersect the origin, we can reject the null hypothesis as it is likely that the true correlation
is non-zero. Our work aims at achieving similar guarantees on data under differentially private estimators. First, we show that for wellspread data, the Gaussian Johnson-Lindenstrauss
Transform (JLT) gives a very good approximation of t-values; secondly, when JLT approximates Ridge regression (linear regression with
l2 -regularization) we derive, under certain conditions, confidence intervals using the projected
data; lastly, we derive, under different conditions,
confidence intervals for the “Analyze Gauss” algorithm (Dwork et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Since the early days of differential privacy, its main goal
was to design privacy preserving versions of existing techniques for data analysis. It is therefore no surprise that several of the first differentially private algorithms were machine learning algorithms, with a special emphasis on the
ubiquitous problem of linear regression (Kasiviswanathan
1
Computing Science Dept., University of Alberta, Edmonton
AB, Canada. This work was done when the author was at Harvard University, supported by NSF grant CNS-123723. Correspondence to: Or Sheffet <osheffet@ualberta.ca>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 2008; Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Kifer et al., 2012; Bassily et al., 2014). However, all existing body of work on
differentially private linear regression measures utility by
bounding the distance between the linear regressor found
by the standard non-private algorithm and the regressor
found by the privacy-preserving algorithm. This is motivated from a machine-learning perspective, since bounds
on the difference in the estimators translate to error bounds
on prediction (or on the loss function). Such bounds are
(highly) interesting and non-trivial, yet they are of little use
in situations where one uses linear regression to establish
correlations rather than predict labels.
In the statistics literature, Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
is a technique that uses linear regression in order to infer
the correlation between a variable and an outcome, especially in the presence of other factors. And so, in this paper, we draw a distinction between “linear regression,” by
which we refer to the machine learning technique of finding
a specific estimator for a specific loss function; and “Ordinary Least Squares,” by which we refer to the statistical inference done assuming a specific model for generating the
data and that uses linear regression. Many argue that OLS
is the most prevalent technique in social sciences (Agresti
& Finlay, 2009). Such works make no claim as to the labels of a new unlabeled batch of samples. Rather they aim
to establish the existence of a strong correlation between
the label and some feature. Needless to say, in such works,
the privacy of individuals’ data is a concern.
In order to determine that a certain variable xj is positively
(resp. negatively) correlated with an outcome y, OLS assumes a model where the outcome y is a noisy version of
a linear mapping of all variables: y = β · x + e (with e
denoting random Gaussian noise) for some predetermined
and unknown β . Then, given many samples (x i , yi ) OLS
establishes two things: (i) when fitting a linear function
to best predict y from x over the sample (via computing

P
P
T −1
β̂ =
( i yix i )) the coefficient β̂j is positive
i x ix i
(resp. negative); and (ii) inferring, based on βˆj , that the
true βj is likely to reside in R>0 (resp. R<0 ). In fact, the
crux in OLS is by describing βj using a probability distribution over the reals, indicating where βj is likely to fall,
derived by computing t-values. These values take into account both the variance in the data as well as the variance of
the noise e.1 Based on this probability distribution one can
1

For example, imagine we run linear regression on a certain

