Forest-type Regression with General Losses
and Robust Forest
Alexander Hanbo Li 1 Andrew Martin 2

Abstract
This paper introduces a new general framework
for forest-type regression which allows the development of robust forest regressors by selecting from a large family of robust loss functions.
In particular, when plugged in the squared error
and quantile losses, it will recover the classical
random forest (Breiman, 2001) and quantile random forest (Meinshausen, 2006). We then use robust loss functions to develop more robust foresttype regression algorithms. In the experiments,
we show by simulation and real data that our robust forests are indeed much more insensitive to
outliers, and choosing the right number of nearest
neighbors can quickly improve the generalization
performance of random forest.

1. Introduction
Since its development by Breiman (2001), random forest
has proven to be both accurate and efficient for classification and regression problems. In regression setting, random forest will predict the conditional mean of a response
variable by averaging predictions of a large number of regression trees. Later then, many other machine learning
algorithms were developed upon random forest. Among
them, robust versions of random forest have also been proposed using various methodologies. Besides the sampling
idea (Breiman, 2001) which adds extra randomness, the
other variations are mainly based on two ideas: (1) use
more robust criterion to construct regression trees (Galimberti et al., 2007; Brence & Brown, 2006; Roy & Larocque,
2012); (2) choose more robust aggregation method (Meinshausen, 2006; Roy & Larocque, 2012; Tsymbal et al.,
2006).
Meinshausen (2006) generalized random forest to pre1

University of California at San Diego, San Diego, California, USA 2 Zillow, Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence to:
Alexander Hanbo Li <alexanderhanboli@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

dict quantiles by discovering that besides calculating the
weighted mean of the observed response variables, one
could also get information for the weighted distribution of
observed response variables using the sets of local weights
generated by random forest. This method is strongly connected to the adaptive nearest neighbors procedure (Lin &
Jeon, 2006) which we will briefly review in section 1.2.
Different from classical k-NN methods that rely on predefined distance metrics, the dissimilarities generated by
random forest are data dependent and scale-invariant.
Another state-of-the-art algorithm AdaBoost (Freund &
Schapire, 1995; Freund et al., 1996) has been generalized
to be applicable to a large family of loss functions (Friedman, 2001; Mason et al., 1999; Li & Bradic, 2016). Recent
development of more flexible boosting algorithms such as
xgboost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) have become the go-to
forest estimators with tabular or matrix data. One way in
which recent boosting algorithms have an advantage over
the random forest is the ability to customize the loss function used to reduce the influence of outliers or optimize a
metric more suited to the specific problem other than the
mean squared error.
In this paper, we will propose a general framework for
forest-type regression which can also be applied to a broad
family of loss functions. It is claimed in (Meinshausen,
2006) that quantile random forest is another nonparametric approach which does not minimize an empirical loss.
However, we will show in fact both random forest and
quantile random forest estimators can be re-derived as regression methods using the squared error or quantile loss
respectively in our framework. Inspired by the adaptive
nearest neighbor viewpoint, we explore how random forest
makes predictions using the local weights generated by ensemble of trees, and connect that with locally weighted regression (Fan & Gijbels, 1996; Tibshirani & Hastie, 1987;
Staniswalis, 1989; Newey, 1994; Loader, 2006; Hastie &
Loader, 1993). The intuition is that when predicting the
target value (e.g. E[Y |X = x]) at point x, the observations
closer to x should receive larger weights. Different from
predefining a kernel, random forest assigns the weights
data dependently and adaptively. After we illustrate the relation between random forest and local regression, we will
use random forest weights to design other regression algo-

