Variational Dropout Sparsifies Deep Neural Networks

Dmitry Molchanov 1 2 * Arsenii Ashukha 3 4 * Dmitry Vetrov 3 1

Abstract
We explore a recently proposed Variational
Dropout technique that provided an elegant
Bayesian interpretation to Gaussian Dropout. We
extend Variational Dropout to the case when
dropout rates are unbounded, propose a way to
reduce the variance of the gradient estimator
and report first experimental results with individual dropout rates per weight. Interestingly, it
leads to extremely sparse solutions both in fullyconnected and convolutional layers. This effect
is similar to automatic relevance determination
effect in empirical Bayes but has a number of advantages. We reduce the number of parameters
up to 280 times on LeNet architectures and up to
68 times on VGG-like networks with a negligible
decrease of accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are a widely popular family
of models which is currently state-of-the-art in many important problems (Szegedy et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2016).
However, DNNs often have many more parameters than the
number of the training instances. This makes them prone
to overfitting (Hinton et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2016) and
necessitates using regularization. A commonly used regularizer is Binary Dropout (Hinton et al., 2012) that prevents
co-adaptation of neurons by randomly dropping them during training. An equally effective alternative is Gaussian
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) that multiplies the outputs
of the neurons by Gaussian random noise.
Dropout requires specifying the dropout rates which are the
*
1
Equal contribution
Yandex, Russia 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo Innovation Center, Moscow, Russia 3 National Research University Higher
School of Economics, Moscow, Russia 4 Moscow Institute of
Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russia. Correspondence
to: Dmitry Molchanov <dmitry.molchanov@skolkovotech.ru>,
Arsenii Ashukha <ars.ashuha@gmail.com>, Dmitry Vetrov
<vetrovd@yandex.ru>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

probabilities of dropping a neuron. The dropout rates are
typically optimized using grid search. To avoid the exponential complexity of optimizing multiple hyperparameters, the dropout rates are usually shared for all layers.
Recently it was shown that dropout can be seen as a special
case of Bayesian regularization (Gal & Ghahramani, 2015;
Kingma et al., 2015). It is an important theoretical result
that justifies dropout and at the same time allows us to tune
individual dropout rates for each weight, neuron or layer in
a Bayesian way.
Instead of injecting noise we can regularize a model by
reducing the number of its parameters. This technique is
especially attractive in the case of deep neural networks.
Modern neural networks contain hundreds of millions of
parameters (Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2015) and require a lot of computational and memory resources. It restricts us from using deep neural networks when those resources are limited. Inducing sparsity during training of
DNNs leads to regularization, compression, and acceleration of the resulting model (Han et al., 2015a; Scardapane
et al., 2016).
Sparse Bayesian Learning (Tipping, 2001) provides a principled framework for training of sparse models without the
manual tuning of hyperparameters. Unfortunately, this approach does not extend straightforwardly to DNNs. During past several years, a number of papers (Hoffman et al.,
2013; Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014) on
scalable variational inference have appeared. These techniques make it possible to train Bayesian Deep Neural
Networks using stochastic optimization and provide us an
opportunity to transfer Bayesian regularization techniques
from simple models to DNNs.
In this paper, we study Variational Dropout (Kingma et al.,
2015) in the case when each weight of a model has its
individual dropout rate. We propose Sparse Variational
Dropout that extends Variational Dropout to all possible
values of dropout rates and leads to a sparse solution. To
achieve this goal, we provide a new approximation of the
KL-divergence term in Variational Dropout objective that is
tight on the full domain. We also propose a way to greatly
reduce the variance of the stochastic gradient estimator and
show that it leads to a much faster convergence and a better
value of the objective function. We show theoretically that

