Meritocratic Fairness for Cross-Population Selection

Michael Kearns 1 Aaron Roth 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of selecting a pool of
individuals from several populations with incomparable skills (e.g. soccer players, mathematicians, and singers) in a fair manner. The quality
of an individual is defined to be their relative rank
(by cumulative distribution value) within their
own population, which permits cross-population
comparisons. We study algorithms which attempt to select the highest quality subset despite
the fact that true CDF values are not known, and
can only be estimated from the finite pool of
candidates. Specifically, we quantify the regret
in quality imposed by “meritocratic” notions of
fairness, which require that individuals are selected with probability that is monotonically increasing in their true quality. We give algorithms
with provable fairness and regret guarantees, as
well as lower bounds, and provide empirical results which suggest that our algorithms perform
better than the theory suggests.

1. Introduction
Consider the following common academic (or similar) hiring scenario: The dean has promised your department 3
faculty slots, in any areas. Your goal is to hire the best
candidates possible — but how should you identify them?
An immediate problem is that candidates are incomparable
across subfields, because, among other things, standards of
publication, citation counts, and letter-writing styles can
vary considerably across subfields. An attractive way to
rank candidates is according to how strong they are relative to others working in the same field, to whom they are
directly comparable. If we model each subfield as corresponding to a different distribution over metrics that are
monotonically increasing in candidate quality, this is the
value we get when we evaluate the CDF function of the
distribution on a candidate’s realized value. But because
1
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Zhiwei Steven Wu <steven7woo@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the number of candidates each year is small, simply comparing each candidate to their direct competitors this year
— i.e. taking their empirical CDF values as truth — would
lead to a noisy ranking: it could be that due to chance, the
best candidate this year in subfield A would be a mediocre
candidate in a typical year, and the top two candidates in
subfield B would each be the top candidate in a typical year.
We would prefer to evaluate our success by considering the
unknown true CDF value of each candidate.1 Similar situations, in which we must select a high quality set of candidates from multiple, mutually incomparable groups, arise
frequently. Some affirmative action policies are premised
on the assertion that SAT scores and other measures may
not be directly comparable across different groups (e.g. due
to only advantaged groups having the financial resources
for test preparation courses and multiple retakes).
For various reasons, in these settings we may also be concerned with the fairness of our choices.2 But what should
fairness mean? In this paper, we take inspiration from
(Dwork et al., 2012) who propose that fairness should mean
that “similar individuals are treated similarly”, where “similarity” is measured with respect to some task specific metric. In our setting, the natural task-specific metric is the true
within-group CDF value for each individual. On its own,
this is compatible with the goal of selecting the best candidates, but in our work, the main obstacle is that we do not
know the true CDF value of each individual, and can only
approximate this from data. We study the degree to which
fairness and optimality are compatible with one another in
this setting.
1.1. Our Results
We study a setting in which we wish to select k individuals out of a pool of n for some task. The individuals are
drawn from d populations, each represented by a different
1

Letters of recommendation often seek to communicate this
information, with statements like “This candidate is among the
top 5 students I have seen in my 16 years as a professor.”
2
With respect to men’s and women’s sports, equal opportunity
is legislated in Title IX. With respect to faculty hiring, fairness
concerns can arise because the proportion of women can vary substantially across subfields. For example, as reported in (Cohoon
et al., 2011), the percentage of female authors varies from 10%
to 44% across ACM conferences, when averaged over the 10 year
period from 1998-2008.

