Learning to Aggregate Ordinal Labels by Maximizing Separating Width

Guangyong Chen 1 Shengyu Zhang 1 Di Lin 2 Hui Huang 2 Pheng Ann Heng 1 3

Abstract
While crowdsourcing has been a cost and time
efficient method to label massive samples, one
critical issue is quality control, for which the key
challenge is to infer the ground truth from noisy
or even adversarial data by various users. A large
class of crowdsourcing problems, such as those
involving age, grade, level, or stage, have an ordinal structure in their labels. Based on a technique of sampling estimated label from the posterior distribution, we define a novel separating
width among the labeled observations to characterize the quality of sampled labels, and develop
an efficient algorithm to optimize it through solving multiple linear decision boundaries and adjusting prior distributions. Our algorithm is empirically evaluated on several real world datasets,
and demonstrates its supremacy over state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing has drawn increasing popularity in the field
of machine learning by annotating millions of items in a
short time with relatively low cost (Howe, 2006; Welinder & Perona; Deng et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2015). This
provides a great opportunity to build up large-scale training sets for complex models, such as deep neural networks
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), and to reach consensus among
non-experts, such as peer grading in today’s popular massive open online course (MOOC) systems. However, the
quality of the collected results is often unreliable and diverse, and there are spammers who give random labels to
make easy money, or even adversaries who deliberately
give wrong answers. To address this issue, most crowd1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Shenzhen University, China. 3 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Shengyu Zhang
<syzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

sourcing systems resort to distributing each item to a number of redundant workers. This raises a challenging question of how to aggregate such noisy and redundant labels.
An intuitive and baseline approach for crowdsourcing is
to identify each item following the majority voting (MV)
result of workers. Unfortunately, this approach is errorprone since it treats each worker equally, and the accuracy severely deteriorates with the fraction of less qualified
workers, spammers or adversaries. Weighted majority voting (WMV) (Karger et al., 2011) method tries to address
this issue by associating each worker with a weight to characterize his expertise. Specially, max-margin majority voting (M3 V) method (Tian & Zhu, 2015) optimizes the associated variables in WMV by maximizing the minimal difference between the aggregated score of the potential true
label and the aggregated scores of others.
In a different approach, Dawid-Skene (DS) model (Dawid
& Skene, 1979) represents each worker’s expertise by a
confusion matrix and uses a latent variable model to generate collected labels, which implicitly assumes a worker
to perform equally well across all items in a common
class. This model can be iteratively inferred by the famous
Expectation-Maximization (EM) method (Dempster et al.,
1977), and works well in practice. In particular, (Zhang
et al., 2016) employs the spectral method (Anandkumar
et al., 2012) to initialize the DS model, and obtains an optimal convergence rate up to a logarithmic factor by EM
method. Recently, (Zhou et al., 2012; Tian & Zhu, 2015)
proposed to improve the aggregating performance by integrating the merits of MV method with DS model. The performance of DS model and its variants often relies on the
specially conceived priors with some manually configured
hyperparameters.
All the above mentioned approaches are for aggregating
general multiclass labels. In many practical applications,
however, the labels have a natural ordinal structure. For
instance, in MOOCs, students are often required to grade
their own assignments on an ordinal scale of 5 (excellent),
4 (good), 3 (fair), 2 (pass) and 1 (failure). In medical imaging, doctors are often required to mark images on an ordinal
scale of stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, and stage 4. Ordinal label faces an issue of diverse standards. For example, given
four assignments whose true grades are 5, 4, 3 and 2, a

