Zonotope Hit-and-run for Efficient Sampling from Projection DPPs
Guillaume Gautier 1 2 Rémi Bardenet 1 Michal Valko 2

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are distributions over sets of items that model diversity using kernels. Their applications in machine learning include summary extraction and recommendation systems. Yet, the cost of sampling from
a DPP is prohibitive in large-scale applications,
which has triggered an effort towards efficient
approximate samplers. We build a novel MCMC
sampler that combines ideas from combinatorial
geometry, linear programming, and Monte Carlo
methods to sample from DPPs with a fixed sample cardinality, also called projection DPPs. Our
sampler leverages the ability of the hit-and-run
MCMC kernel to efficiently move across convex
bodies. Previous theoretical results yield a fast
mixing time of our chain when targeting a distribution that is close to a projection DPP, but not a
DPP in general. Our empirical results demonstrate that this extends to sampling projection
DPPs, i.e., our sampler is more sample-efficient
than previous approaches which in turn translates
to faster convergence when dealing with costlyto-evaluate functions, such as summary extraction in our experiments.

1. Introduction
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are distributions
over configurations of points that encode diversity through
a kernel function. DPPs were introduced by Macchi (1975)
and have then found applications in fields as diverse as
probability (Hough et al., 2006), number theory (Rudnick & Sarnak, 1996), statistical physics (Pathria & Beale,
2011), Monte Carlo methods (Bardenet & Hardy, 2016),
and spatial statistics (Lavancier et al., 2015). In machine
learning, DPPs over finite sets have been used as a model
of diverse sets of items, where the kernel function takes the
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 — CRIStAL
INRIA Lille — Nord Europe, SequeL team. Correspondence to:
Guillaume Gautier <g.gautier@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

form of a finite matrix, see Kulesza & Taskar (2012) for a
comprehensive survey. Applications of DPPs in machine
learning (ML) since this survey also include recommendation tasks (Kathuria et al., 2016; Gartrell et al., 2017), text
summarization (Dupuy & Bach, 2016), or models for neural signals (Snoek et al., 2013).
Sampling generic DPPs over finite sets is expensive.
Roughly speaking, it is cubic in the number r of items
in a DPP sample. Moreover, generic DPPs are sometimes
specified through an n ⇥ n kernel matrix that needs diagonalizing before sampling, where n is the number of items
to pick from. In text summarization, r would be the desired number of sentences for a summary, and n the number of sentences of the corpus to summarize. Thus, sampling quickly becomes intractable for large-scale applications (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012). This has motivated research on fast sampling algorithms. While fast exact algorithms exist for specific DPPs such as uniform spanning trees (Aldous, 1990; Broder, 1989; Propp & Wilson, 1998), generic DPPs have so far been addressed with
approximate sampling algorithms, using random projections (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012), low-rank approximations
(Kulesza & Taskar, 2011; Gillenwater et al., 2012; Affandi
et al., 2013), or using Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques (Kang, 2013; Li et al., 2016a; Rebeschini & Karbasi, 2015; Anari et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016b). In particular, there are polynomial bounds on the mixing rates of
natural MCMC chains with arbitrary DPPs as their limiting
measure; see Anari et al. (2016) for cardinality-constrained
DPPs, and Li et al. (2016b) for the general case.
In this paper, we contribute a non-obvious MCMC chain
to approximately sample from projection DPPs, which are
DPPs with a fixed sample cardinality. Leveraging a combinatorial geometry result by Dyer & Frieze (1994), we show
that sampling from a projection DPP over a finite set can be
relaxed into an easier continuous sampling problem with a
lot of structure. In particular, the target of this continuous sampling problem is supported on the volume spanned
by the columns of the feature matrix associated to the projection DPP, a convex body also called a zonotope. This
zonotope can be partitioned into tiles that uniquely correspond to DPP realizations, and the relaxed target distribution is flat on each tile. Previous MCMC approaches to
sampling projections DPPs can be viewed as attempting

