Lazifying Conditional Gradient Algorithms
Gábor Braun * 1 Sebastian Pokutta * 1 Daniel Zink * 1

Abstract
Conditional gradient algorithms (also often called
Frank-Wolfe algorithms) are popular due to their
simplicity of only requiring a linear optimization
oracle and more recently they also gained significant traction for online learning. While simple
in principle, in many cases the actual implementation of the linear optimization oracle is costly.
We show a general method to lazify various conditional gradient algorithms, which in actual computations leads to several orders of magnitude of
speedup in wall-clock time. This is achieved by
using a faster separation oracle instead of a linear
optimization oracle, relying only on few linear
optimization oracle calls.

1. Introduction
Convex optimization is an important technique both from
a theoretical and an applications perspective. Gradient descent based methods are widely used due to their simplicity
and easy applicability to many real-world problems. We are
interested in solving constraint convex optimization problems of the form
min f (x),
(1)
x2P

where f is a smooth convex function and P is a polytope,
with access to f being limited to first-order information,
i.e., we can obtain rf (v) and f (v) for a given v 2 P and
access to P via a linear minimization oracle which returns
x = argminv2P cx for a given linear objective c.
When solving Problem (1) using gradient descent approaches in order to maintain feasibility, typically a projection step is required. This projection back into the feasible
region P is potentially computationally expensive, especially for complex feasible regions in very large dimensions.
As such projection-free methods gained a lot of attention
recently, in particular the Frank-Wolfe algorithm (Frank
1
ISyE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA. Correspondence to: Daniel Zink <daniel.zink@gatech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Algorithm 1 Frank-Wolfe Algorithm (Frank & Wolfe,
1956)
Input: smooth convex f function with curvature C, x1 2
P start vertex, LPP linear minimization oracle
Output: xt points in P
1: for t = 1 to T
1 do
2:
vt
LPP (rf (xt ))
2
3:
xt+1
(1
t )xt + t vt with t := t+2
4: end for
& Wolfe, 1956) (also known as conditional gradient descent (Levitin & Polyak, 1966); see also (Jaggi, 2013) for
an overview) and its online version (Hazan & Kale, 2012)
due to their simplicity. We recall the basic Frank-Wolfe
algorithm in Algorithm 1. These methods eschew the projection step and rather use a linear optimization oracle to
stay within the feasible region. While convergence rates
and regret bounds are often suboptimal, in many cases the
gain due to only having to solve a single linear optimization
problem over the feasible region in every iteration still leads
to significant computational advantages (see e.g., (Hazan
& Kale, 2012, Section 5)). This led to conditional gradients algorithms being used for e.g., online optimization
and more generally machine learning and the property that
these algorithms naturally generate sparse distributions over
the extreme points of the feasible region (sometimes also
refereed to as atoms) is often helpful. Further increasing
the relevance of these methods, it was shown recently that
conditional gradient methods can also achieve linear convergence (see e.g., (Garber & Hazan, 2013; Lacoste-Julien
& Jaggi, 2015; Garber & Meshi, 2016)) as well as that the
number of total gradient evaluations can be reduced while
maintaining the optimal number of oracle calls as shown in
(Lan & Zhou, 2014).
Oracle 1 Weak Separation Oracle LPsepP (c, x, , K)
Input: c 2 Rn linear objective, x 2 P point, K
1
accuracy, > 0 objective value;
Output: Either (1) y 2 P vertex with c(x y) > /K, or
(2) false: c(x z)  for all z 2 P .
Unfortunately, for complex feasible regions even solving the
linear optimization problem might be time-consuming and
as such the cost of solving the LP might be non-negligible.

