Projection-free Distributed Online Learning in Networks

Wenpeng Zhang 1 Peilin Zhao 2 Wenwu Zhu 1 Steven C. H. Hoi 3 Tong Zhang 4

Abstract
The conditional gradient algorithm has regained
a surge of research interest in recent years due
to its high efficiency in handling large-scale machine learning problems. However, none of existing studies has explored it in the distributed
online learning setting, where locally light computation is assumed. In this paper, we fill this gap
by proposing the distributed online conditional
gradient algorithm, which eschews the expensive
projection operation needed in its counterpart algorithms by exploiting much simpler linear optimization steps. We give a regret bound for
the proposed algorithm as a function of the network size and topology, which will be smaller on
smaller graphs or ”well-connected” graphs. Experiments on two large-scale real-world datasets
for a multiclass classification task confirm the
computational benefit of the proposed algorithm
and also verify the theoretical regret bound.

1. Introduction
The conditional gradient algorithm (Frank & Wolfe,
1956) (also known as Frank-Wolfe) is historically the earliest algorithm for solving general constrained convex optimization problems. Due to its projection-free property
and ability to handle structural constraints, it has regained
a significant amount of interest in recent years. Different
properties concerning the algorithm, such as the sparsity
property (Clarkson, 2010) and the primal-dual convergence
rate (Jaggi, 2013), have been analyzed in details. Many
different algorithm variants, such as the composite variant (Harchaoui et al., 2015), the online and stochastic vari1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China 2 Artificial Intelligence Department,
Ant Financial Services Group, Hangzhou, China 3 School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
4
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Wenwu
Zhu <wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenpeng Zhang <zhangwenpeng0@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ants (Hazan & Kale, 2012) (Hazan, 2016) (Hazan & Luo,
2016), faster variants over special types of convex domains,
i.e. spectrahedron (Garber, 2016) and polytope (Garber &
Hazan, 2016), have also been proposed.
However, despite this great flourish of research on conditional gradient, its distributed online variant over networks
has rarely been investigated. In comparison to this situation
is the popularity of the variants of its gradient descent and
dual averaging counterparts—distributed online gradient
descent (D-OGD) (Ram et al., 2010) (Yan et al., 2013) and
distributed online dual averaging (D-ODA) (Duchi et al.,
2012) (Hosseini et al., 2013) (Lee et al., 2015), which have
been successfully applied in handling large-scale streaming data in decentralized computational architectures (e.g.,
sensor networks and smart phones). Despite the success of
these algorithms, the projection operation required in them
still limits their further applicability in many settings of
practical interests. For example, in matrix learning (Dudı́k
et al., 2012), multiclass classification (Hazan & Luo, 2016)
and many other related problems, where the convex domain
is the set of all matrices with bounded nuclear norm, the
projection operation amounts to computing the full singular value decomposition (SVD) of a matrix, too expensive
an operation that does not meet the need of locally light
computation in distributed online learning. To avoid this
kind of expensive operation, the distributed online variant
of conditional gradient is desired since it is expected to be
able to eschew the projection operation by using a linear
minimization step instead. In the aforementioned case, the
linear step amounts to finding the top singular vector of a
matrix, which is at least one order of magnitude simpler.
However, how to design and analyze this variant remains
an open problem.
To fill this gap, in this work, we present the distributed online conditional gradient (D-OCG) algorithm as the desired
variant. This algorithm is a novel extension of the previous
online variant (Hazan, 2016), in which each local learner
communicates its dual variables with its neighbors to cooperate with each other. We present highly non-trivial analysis of the regret bound for the proposed algorithm, which
can capture the intuition that the algorithm’s regret bound
should be larger on graphs with more nodes and should be
smaller on ”well-connected” graphs (e.g., complete graphs)
than on ”poorly connected” graphs (e.g., cycle graphs). We

