Device Placement Optimization with Reinforcement Learning

Azalia Mirhoseini * 1 2 Hieu Pham * 1 2 Quoc V. Le 1 Benoit Steiner 1 Rasmus Larsen 1 Yuefeng Zhou 1
Naveen Kumar 3 Mohammad Norouzi 1 Samy Bengio 1 Jeff Dean 1

Abstract
The past few years have witnessed a growth in
size and computational requirements for training
and inference with neural networks. Currently, a
common approach to address these requirements
is to use a heterogeneous distributed environment with a mixture of hardware devices such
as CPUs and GPUs. Importantly, the decision
of placing parts of the neural models on devices
is often made by human experts based on simple
heuristics and intuitions. In this paper, we propose a method which learns to optimize device
placement for TensorFlow computational graphs.
Key to our method is the use of a sequence-tosequence model to predict which subsets of operations in a TensorFlow graph should run on
which of the available devices. The execution
time of the predicted placements is then used as
the reward signal to optimize the parameters of
the sequence-to-sequence model. Our main result is that on Inception-V3 for ImageNet classification, and on RNN LSTM, for language modeling and neural machine translation, our model
finds non-trivial device placements that outperform hand-crafted heuristics and traditional algorithmic methods.

et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016) and speech synthesis (Oord
et al., 2016; Arik et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017). Together
with their success is the growth in size and computational
requirements of training and inference. Currently, a typical
approach to address these requirements is to use a heterogeneous distributed environment with a mixture of many
CPUs and GPUs. In this environment, it is a common practice for a machine learning practitioner to specify the device placement for certain operations in the neural network.
For example, in a neural translation network, each layer, including all LSTM layers, the attention layer, and the softmax layer, is computed by a GPU (Sutskever et al., 2014;
Wu et al., 2016).
Although such decisions can be made by machine learning practitioners, they can be challenging, especially when
the network has many branches (Szegedy et al., 2016),
or when the minibatches get larger. Existing algorithmic
solvers (Pellegrini, 2009; Karypis & Kumar, 1995b), on the
other hand, are not flexible enough to work with a dynamic
environment with many interferences.
Placement

Environment

Runtime

Update
Placement

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, neural networks have proven to
be a general and effective tool for many practical problems, such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012; Graves & Jaitly, 2014; Hannun et al., 2014; Chan et al., 2015), machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014; Bahdanau
*
1
Equal contribution
Google Brain 2 Members of the
Google Brain Residency Program (g.co/brainresidency)
3
Google.
Correspondence to: Azalia Mirhoseini <azalia@google.com>, Hieu Pham <hyhieu@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. An overview of the RL based device placement model.

In this paper, we propose a method which learns to optimize device placement for training and inference with neural networks. The method, illustrated in Figure 1, takes into
account information of the environment by performing series of experiments to understand which parts of the model
should be placed on which device, and how to arrange the
computations so that the communication is optimized. Key
to our method is the use of a sequence-to-sequence model
to read input information about the operations as well as
the dependencies between them, and then propose a placement for each operation. Each proposal is executed in the
hardware environment to measure the execution time. The
execution time is then used as a reward signal to train the

