Semi-Supervised Classification
Based on Classification from Positive and Unlabeled Data
Tomoya Sakai 1 2

Marthinus Christoffel du Plessis

Abstract
Most of the semi-supervised classification methods developed so far use unlabeled data for regularization purposes under particular distributional assumptions such as the cluster assumption. In contrast, recently developed methods of
classification from positive and unlabeled data
(PU classification) use unlabeled data for risk
evaluation, i.e., label information is directly extracted from unlabeled data. In this paper, we
extend PU classification to also incorporate negative data and propose a novel semi-supervised
classification approach. We establish generalization error bounds for our novel methods and
show that the bounds decrease with respect to
the number of unlabeled data without the distributional assumptions that are required in existing
semi-supervised classification methods. Through
experiments, we demonstrate the usefulness of
the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Collecting a large amount of labeled data is a critical bottleneck in real-world machine learning applications due to the
laborious manual annotation. In contrast, unlabeled data
can often be collected automatically and abundantly, e.g.,
by a web crawler. This has led to the development of various semi-supervised classification algorithms over the past
decades.
To leverage unlabeled data in training, most of the existing semi-supervised classification methods rely on particular assumptions on the data distribution (Chapelle et al.,
2006). For example, the manifold assumption supposes that
samples are distributed on a low-dimensional manifold in
the data space (Belkin et al., 2006). In the existing framework, such a distributional assumption is encoded as a reg1

The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN, Japan. Correspondence to: Tomoya Sakai <sakai@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Gang Niu 1

Masashi Sugiyama 2 1

ularizer for training a classifier and biases the classifier toward a better one under the assumption. However, if such a
distributional assumption contradicts the data distribution,
the bias behaves adversely, and the performance of the obtained classifier becomes worse than the one obtained with
supervised classification (Cozman et al., 2003; Sokolovska
et al., 2008; Li & Zhou, 2015; Krijthe & Loog, 2017).
Recently, classification from positive and unlabeled data
(PU classification) has been gathering growing attention
(Elkan & Noto, 2008; du Plessis et al., 2014; 2015; Jain
et al., 2016), which trains a classifier only from positive and
unlabeled data without negative data. In PU classification,
the unbiased risk estimators proposed in du Plessis et al.
(2014; 2015) utilize unlabeled data for risk evaluation, implying that label information is directly extracted from unlabeled data without restrictive distributional assumptions,
unlike existing semi-supervised classification methods that
utilize unlabeled data for regularization. Furthermore, theoretical analysis (Niu et al., 2016) showed that PU classification (or its counterpart, NU classification, classification
from negative and unlabeled data) is likely to outperform
classification from positive and negative data (PN classification, i.e., ordinary supervised classification) depending
on the number of positive, negative, and unlabeled samples. It is thus naturally expected that combining PN, PU,
and NU classification can be a promising approach to semisupervised classification without restrictive distributional
assumptions.
In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised classification approach by considering convex combinations of the
risk functions of PN, PU, and NU classification. Without
any distributional assumption, we theoretically show that
the confidence term of the generalization error bounds decreases at the optimal parametric rate with respect to the
number of positive, negative, and unlabeled samples, and
the variance of the proposed risk estimator is almost always
smaller than the plain PN risk function given an infinite
number of unlabeled samples. Through experiments, we
analyze the behavior of the proposed approach and demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed semi-supervised classification methods.

