Dueling Bandits with Weak Regret

Bangrui Chen 1 Peter I. Frazier 1

Abstract
We consider online content recommendation with
implicit feedback through pairwise comparisons,
formalized as the so-called dueling bandit problem. We study the dueling bandit problem in
the Condorcet winner setting, and consider two
notions of regret: the more well-studied strong
regret, which is 0 only when both arms pulled are
the Condorcet winner; and the less well-studied
weak regret, which is 0 if either arm pulled is the
Condorcet winner. We propose a new algorithm
for this problem, Winner Stays (WS), with variations for each kind of regret: WS for weak regret
(WS-W) has expected cumulative weak regret that
is O(N 2 ), and O(N log(N )) if arms have a total
order; WS for strong regret (WS-S) has expected
cumulative strong regret of O(N 2 + N log(T )),
and O(N log(N ) + N log(T )) if arms have a total order. WS-W is the first dueling bandit algorithm with weak regret that is constant in time.
WS is simple to compute, even for problems with
many arms, and we demonstrate through numerical experiments on simulated and real data that
WS has significantly smaller regret than existing
algorithms in both the weak- and strong-regret
settings.

1. Introduction
We consider bandit learning in personalized content recommendation with implicit pairwise comparisons. We offer
pairs of items to a user and record implicit feedback on
which offered item is preferred, seeking to learn the user’s
preferences over items quickly, while also ensuring that the
fraction of time we fail to offer a high-quality item is small.
Implicit pairwise comparisons avoid the inaccuracy of user
ratings (Joachims et al., 2007) and the difficulty of engaging
users in providing explicit feedback.
1
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Correspondence to: Peter I.
Frazier <pf98@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

We study a model for this setting called the dueling bandit
problem (Yue & Joachims, 2009). The items we may offer
to the user are called “arms”, and we learn about these arms
through a sequence of “duels”. In each duel, we “pull” two
arms and receive noisy feedback from the user telling us
which arm is preferred. When an arm is preferred within a
duel, we say that the arm has “won the duel".
We study this problem in the Condorcet winner setting, in
which we assume the existence of an arm (the Condorcet
winner) that wins with probability at least 12 when paired
with any of the other arms. In these settings, we consider
two notions of regret: “weak regret“, in which we avoid
regret by selecting the Condorcet winner as either arm in the
duel; and “strong-regret”, in which we can only avoid regret
by setting both arms in the duel to the Condorcet winner.
Weak regret was proposed by Yue et al. (2012) and arises
in content recommendation when arms correspond to items,
and the user incurs no regret whenever his most preferred
item is made available. Examples include in-app restaurant
recommendations provided by food delivery services like
Grubhub and UberEATS, in which implicit feedback may
be inferred from selections, and the user only incurs regret
if her most preferred restaurant is not recommended. Examples also include recommendation of online broadcasters on
platforms such as Twitch, in which implicit feedback may
again be inferred from selections, and the user is fully satisfied as long as her favored broadcaster is listed. Despite its
applicability, Yue et al. (2012) is the only paper of which we
are aware that studies weak regret, and it does not provide
algorithms specifically designed for this setting.
Strong regret has been more widely studied, as discussed
below, and has application to choosing ranking algorithms
for search (Hofmann et al., 2013). To perform a duel, query
results from two rankers are interleaved (Radlinski et al.,
2008), and the ranking algorithm that provided the first
result chosen by the user is declared the winner of the duel.
Strong regret is appropriate in this setting because the user’s
experience is enhanced by pulling the best arm twice, so
that all of that ranker’s results are shown.
Our contribution is a new algorithm, Winner Stays (WS),
with variants designed for the weak (WS-W) and strong
regret (WS-S) settings. We prove that WS-W has expected
cumulative weak regret that is constant in time, with de-

