Learning to Detect Sepsis with a Multitask Gaussian Process RNN Classifier

Joseph Futoma 1 Sanjay Hariharan 1 Katherine Heller 1

Abstract
We present a scalable end-to-end classifier that
uses streaming physiological and medication
data to accurately predict the onset of sepsis,
a life-threatening complication from infections
that has high mortality and morbidity. Our proposed framework models the multivariate trajectories of continuous-valued physiological time
series using multitask Gaussian processes, seamlessly accounting for the high uncertainty, frequent missingness, and irregular sampling rates
typically associated with real clinical data. The
Gaussian process is directly connected to a
black-box classifier that predicts whether a patient will become septic, chosen in our case to be
a recurrent neural network to account for the extreme variability in the length of patient encounters. We show how to scale the computations associated with the Gaussian process in a manner
so that the entire system can be discriminatively
trained end-to-end using backpropagation. In a
large cohort of heterogeneous inpatient encounters at our university health system we find that it
outperforms several baselines at predicting sepsis, and yields 19.4% and 55.5% improved areas under the Receiver Operating Characteristic
and Precision Recall curves as compared to the
NEWS score currently used by our hospital.

1. Introduction
Sepsis is a clinical condition involving a destructive host
response to the invasion of a microorganism and/or its
toxin, and is associated with high morbidity and mortality. Without early intervention, this inflammatory response
can progress to septic shock, organ failure and death (Bone
et al., 1989). Identifying sepsis early improves patient outcomes, as mortality from septic shock increases by 7.6%
1
Dept. of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham NC,
USA. Correspondence to: Joseph Futoma <jdf38@duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

for every hour that treatment is delayed after the onset of
hypotension (Kumar et al., 2006). It was also recently
shown that timely administration of a 3-hour bundle of
care for patients with sepsis (i.e. blood culture, broadspectrum antibiotics, and a lactate measurement) was associated with lower in-hospital mortality (Seymour et al.,
2017), further emphasizing the need for fast and aggressive
treatment. Unfortunately, early and accurate identification
of sepsis remains elusive even for experienced clinicians,
as the symptoms associated with sepsis may be caused by
many other clinical conditions (Jones et al., 2010).
Despite the difficulties associated with identifying sepsis,
data that could be used to inform such a prediction is
already being routinely captured in the electronic health
record (EHR). To this end, data-driven early warning scores
have great potential to identify early clinical deterioration using live data from the EHR. As one example, the
Royal College of Physicians developed, validated, and implemented the National Early Warning Score (NEWS) to
identify patients who are acutely decompensating (Smith
et al., 2013). Such early warning scores compare a small
number of physiological variables (NEWS uses six) to normal ranges of values to generate a single composite score.
NEWS is already implemented in our university health system’s EHR so that when the score reaches a defined trigger,
a patient’s care nurse is alerted to potential clinical deterioration. However, a major problem with NEWS and other
related early warning scores is that they are typically broad
in scope and were not developed to target a specific condition such as sepsis, since many unrelated disease states
(e.g. trauma, pancreatitis, alcohol withdrawal) can result
in high scores. Previous measurements revealed 63.4% of
the alerts triggered by the NEWS score at our hospital were
cancelled by the care nurse, suggesting breakdowns in the
training and education process, low specificity, and high
alarm fatigue. Despite the obvious limitation of using only
a small fraction of available information, these scores are
also overly simplistic in assigning independent scores to
each variable, ignoring both the complex relationships between different physiological variables and their evolution
in time.
The goal in this work is to develop a more flexible statistical model that leverages as much available data as possible from patient admissions in order to provide earlier

