A Semismooth Newton Method for Fast, Generic Convex Programming

Alnur Ali * 1 Eric Wong * 1 J. Zico Kolter 2
i.e., the space of m × m positive semidefinite matrices Sm
+,
yields a semidefinite program; and taking K as the secondorder (or Lorentz) cone {(x, y) ∈ Rm−1 × R : kxk2 ≤ y}
yields a second-order cone program (a quadratic program
is a special case).

Abstract
We introduce Newton-ADMM, a method for fast
conic optimization. The basic idea is to view
the residuals of consecutive iterates generated by
the alternating direction method of multipliers
(ADMM) as a set of fixed point equations, and
then use a nonsmooth Newton method to find a
solution; we apply the basic idea to the Splitting Cone Solver (SCS), a state-of-the-art method
for solving generic conic optimization problems.
We demonstrate theoretically, by extending the
theory of semismooth operators, that NewtonADMM converges rapidly (i.e., quadratically) to
a solution; empirically, Newton-ADMM is significantly faster than SCS on a number of problems. The method also has essentially no tuning parameters, generates certificates of primal
or dual infeasibility, when appropriate, and can
be specialized to solve specific convex problems.

1. Introduction and related work
Conic optimization problems (or cone programs) are convex optimization problems of the form
minimize
cT x
n
x∈R

subject to b − Ax ∈ K,

(1)

where c ∈ Rn , A ∈ Rm×n , b ∈ Rm , K are problem data,
specified by the user, and K is a proper cone (Nesterov &
Nemirovskii, 1994; Ben-Tal & Nemirovski, 2001; Boyd &
Vandenberghe, 2004); we give a formal treatment of proper
cones in Section 2, but a simple example of a proper cone,
for now, is the nonnegative orthant, i.e., the set of all points
in Rm with nonnegative components. These problems are
quite general, encapsulating a number of standard problem
classes: e.g., taking K as the nonnegative orthant yields a
linear program; taking K as the positive semidefinite cone,
*
Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie
Mellon University 2 Computer Science Department, Carnegie
Mellon University. Correspondence to: Alnur Ali <alnurali@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Due, in part, to their generality, cone programs have been
the focus of much recent work, and additionally form the
basis of many convex optimization modeling frameworks,
e.g., sdpsol (Wu & Boyd, 2000), YALMIP (Lofberg, 2005),
and the CVX family of frameworks (Grant, 2004; Diamond
& Boyd, 2016; Udell et al., 2014). These frameworks generally make it easy to quickly solve small and mediumsized convex optimization problems to high accuracy; they
work by allowing the user to specify a generic convex optimization problem in a way that resembles its mathematical
representation, then convert the problem into a form similar to (1), and finally solve the problem. Primal-dual interior point methods, e.g., SeDuMi (Sturm, 2002), SDPT3
(Toh et al., 2012), and CVXOPT (Andersen et al., 2011),
are common for solving these cone programs. These methods are useful, as they generally converge to high accuracy
in just tens of iterations, but they solve a Newton system
on each iteration, and so have difficulty scaling to highdimensional (i.e., large-n) problems.
In recent work, O’Donoghue et al. (2016) use the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) (Boyd
et al., 2011) to solve generic cone programs; operator splitting methods (e.g., ADMM, Peaceman-Rachford splitting
(Peaceman & Rachford, 1955), Douglas-Rachford splitting (Douglas & Rachford, 1956), and dual decomposition)
generally converge to modest accuracy in just a few iterations, so the approach (called the splitting conic solver, or
SCS) is scalable, and also has a number of other benefits,
e.g., provding certificates of primal or dual infeasibility.
In this paper, we introduce a new method (called “NewtonADMM”) for solving large-scale, generic cone programs
rapidly to high accuracy. The basic idea is to view the usual
ADMM recurrence relation as a fixed point iteration, and
then use a truncated, nonsmooth Newton method to find a
fixed point; to justify the approach, we extend the theory
of semismooth operators, coming out of the applied mathematics literature over the last two decades (Mifflin, 1977;
Qi & Sun, 1993; Martı́nez & Qi, 1995; Facchinei et al.,

