Coupling Distributed and Symbolic Execution for Natural Language Queries

Lili Mou 1 Zhengdong Lu 2 Hang Li 3 Zhi Jin 1

Abstract
Building neural networks to query a knowledge
base (a table) with natural language is an emerging research topic in deep learning. An executor for table querying typically requires multiple steps of execution because queries may have
complicated structures. In previous studies, researchers have developed either fully distributed
executors or symbolic executors for table querying. A distributed executor can be trained in
an end-to-end fashion, but is weak in terms of
execution efficiency and explicit interpretability.
A symbolic executor is efficient in execution,
but is very difficult to train especially at initial
stages. In this paper, we propose to couple distributed and symbolic execution for natural language queries, where the symbolic executor is
pretrained with the distributed executor’s intermediate execution results in a step-by-step fashion. Experiments show that our approach significantly outperforms both distributed and symbolic
executors, exhibiting high accuracy, high learning efficiency, high execution efficiency, and high
interpretability.

1. Introduction
Using natural language to query a knowledge base is an
important task in NLP and has wide applications in question answering (QA) (Yin et al., 2016a), human-computer
conversation (Wen et al., 2017), etc. Table 1 illustrates an
example of a knowledge base (a table) and a query “How
long is the game with the largest host country size?” To
answer the question, we should first find a row with the
1

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), MoE; Software Institute, Peking University, China 2 DeeplyCurious.ai 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Technologies. Work done when the first author was an
intern at Huawei.
Correspondence to: L.M. <double
power.mou@gmail.com>, Z.L. <luz@DeeplyCurious.ai>, H.L.
<HangLi.HL@huawei.com>, Z.J. <zhijin@sei.pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Query:
How long is the game with the largest host country size?
Knowledge base (table):
Year

City

2000
2004
2008
2012
2016

Sydney
Athens
Beijing
London
Rio de Janeiro

···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···

Area

···

Duration

200
250
350
300
200

···
···
···
···
···

30
20
25
35
40

Table 1. An example of a natural language query and a knowledge
base (table).

largest value in the column Area, and then select the value
of the chosen row with the column being Duration.
A typical approach to table querying is to convert a natural
language sentence to an “executable” logic form, known
as semantic parsing. Traditionally, building a semantic
parser requires extensive human engineering of explicit
features (Berant et al., 2013; Pasupat & Liang, 2015).
With the fast development of deep learning, an increasingly
number of studies use neural networks for semantic parsing. Dong & Lapata (2016) and Xiao et al. (2016) apply
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) neural models to generate a logic form conditioned on an input sentence, but
the training requires groundtruth logic forms, which are
costly to obtain and specific to a certain dataset. In realistic settings, we only assume groundtruth denotations1 are
available, and that we do not know execution sequences or
intermediate execution results. Liang et al. (2017) train a
seq2seq network by REINFORCE policy gradient. But it
is known that the REINFORCE algorithm is sensitive to the
initial policy; also, it could be very difficult to get started at
early stages.
Yin et al. (2016b) propose a fully distributed neural enquirer, comprising several neuralized execution layers of
field attention, row annotation, etc. The model can be
trained in an end-to-end fashion because all components
are differentiable. However, it lacks explicit interpretation and is not efficient in execution due to intensive matrix/vector operation during neural processing.
Neelakantan et al. (2016) propose a neural programmer
1

A denotation refers to an execution result.

