Joint Dimensionality Reduction and Metric Learning: A Geometric Take

Mehrtash Harandi 1 2 Mathieu Salzmann 3 Richard Hartley 2 1

Abstract
To be tractable and robust to data noise, existing metric learning algorithms commonly rely on
PCA as a pre-processing step. How can we know,
however, that PCA, or any other specific dimensionality reduction technique, is the method of
choice for the problem at hand? The answer is
simple: We cannot! To address this issue, in this
paper, we develop a Riemannian framework to
jointly learn a mapping performing dimensionality reduction and a metric in the induced space.
Our experiments evidence that, while we directly
work on high-dimensional features, our approach
yields competitive runtimes with and higher accuracy than state-of-the-art metric learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
“To make it tractable for the distance metric learning algorithms we perform dimensionality reduction by PCA to a
100 dimensional subspace” (Koestinger et al., 2012). “Like
most of the metric learning methods we first center the
dataset and reduce the dimensionality to a n-dimensional
space by PCA” (Bohné et al., 2014). “ITML and LDML are
intractable when using 600 PCA dimensions” (Guillaumin
et al., 2009).
These quotations, extracted from the metric learning literature, give rise to a simple question: Is PCA, or, more generally, dimensionality reduction, a must to make metric
learning work on high-dimensional data, such as that in
computer vision problems?
To quantify this, in the top portion of Table 1, we provide the area under the ROC curve of state-of-the-art metric
learning techniques applied to the ASLAN dataset (KliperGross et al., 2012) using various PCA dimensions (denoted
1
Data61, CSIRO, Canberra, Australia 2 Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 3 CVLab, EPFL,
Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
Mehrtash Harandi
<mehrtash.harandi@anu.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

by p). These results suggest that state-of-the-art methods
either scale poorly with the dimensionality of the input and
thus require PCA to remain tractable (e.g., LDML), or require PCA to achieve an accuracy comparable to the other
baselines (e.g., KISSME).
In essence, this observation indicates that dimensionality
reduction is beneficial to (i) reduce the computational burden of the algorithms; and (ii) extract the relevant information from the original noisy data. However, it also raises an
additional question: Is PCA, or any other specific dimensionality reduction technique, really the best method for
the problem at hand? In other words, Shouldn’t we rather
learn the low-dimensional representation and the metric
jointly?
Motivated by these questions, in this paper, we introduce a
unified formulation for dimensionality reduction and metric learning. As suggested by our results on the ASLAN
dataset in the bottom row of Table 1, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art metric learning techniques.
Furthermore, despite the fact that we directly use highdimensional features as input, our method has comparable
runtimes to that of the fastest algorithms working on PCAbased low-dimensional representations.
In the context of Mahalanobis metric learning, several
methods have proposed to allow the metric M to have low
rank, thus inherently performing dimensionality reduction.
Most methods, however, achieve this implicitly, by letting
M be positive semi-definite (Weinberger & Saul, 2009;
Davis et al., 2007), which, as opposed to explicit dimensionality reduction, does not reduce the computational cost
of these algorithms. As a consequence, they still need to
rely on PCA as a pre-processing step in practice. While (Lu
et al., 2014) explicitly decomposes M = LLT , it enforces
orthogonality constraints on L to disambiguate the solutions, thus effectively only performing dimensionality reduction, and not metric learning. By contrast, our approach
lets us learn a complete Mahalanobis metric jointly with a
low-dimensional projection.
At the heart of our joint dimensionality reduction and metric learning formulation lie notions of Riemannian geometry and quotient spaces. More specifically, we model the
projection to a low-dimensional space as a point on a Stiefel
manifold, and the metric in this space as a Symmetric Pos-

