Scaling Up Sparse Support Vector Machines
by Simultaneous Feature and Sample Reduction

Weizhong Zhang * 1 2 Bin Hong * 1 3 Wei Liu 2 Jieping Ye 3 Deng Cai 1 Xiaofei He 1 Jie Wang 3

Abstract
Sparse support vector machine (SVM) is a popular classification technique that can simultaneously learn a small set of the most interpretable
features and identify the support vectors. It has
achieved great successes in many real-world applications. However, for large-scale problems involving a huge number of samples and extremely
high-dimensional features, solving sparse SVMs remains challenging. By noting that sparse
SVMs induce sparsities in both feature and sample spaces, we propose a novel approach, which
is based on accurate estimations of the primal and
dual optima of sparse SVMs, to simultaneously
identify the features and samples that are guaranteed to be irrelevant to the outputs. Thus, we can
remove the identified inactive samples and features from the training phase, leading to substantial savings in both the memory usage and computational cost without sacrificing accuracy. To
the best of our knowledge, the proposed method
is the first static feature and sample reduction
method for sparse SVM. Experiments on both
synthetic and real datasets (e.g., the kddb dataset
with about 20 million samples and 30 million
features) demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods and
the speedup gained by our approach can be orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
Sparse support vector machine (SVM) (Bi et al., 2003;
Wang et al., 2006) is a powerful technique that can simultaneously perform classification by margin maximiza*

Equal contribution 1 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang
University, China 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 3 University
of Michigan, USA. Correspondence to: Jie Wang <jiewangustc@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tion and variable selection by `1 -norm penalty. The last
few years have witnessed many successful applications of sparse SVMs, such as text mining (Joachims, 1998;
Yoshikawa et al., 2014), bioinformatics (Narasimhan & Agarwal, 2013) and image processing (Mohr & Obermayer, 2004; Kotsia & Pitas, 2007). Many algorithms (Hastie
et al., 2004; Fan et al., 2008; Catanzaro et al., 2008; Hsieh
et al., 2008; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011) have been proposed to efficiently solve sparse SVM problems. However, the applications of sparse SVMs to large-scale learning
problems, which involve a huge number of samples and extremely high-dimensional features, remain challenging.
An emerging technique, called screening (El Ghaoui et al.,
2012), has been shown to be promising in accelerating
large-scale sparse learning. The essential idea of screening
is to quickly identify the zero coefficients in the sparse solutions without solving any optimization problems such that
the corresponding features or samples—that are called inactive features or samples—can be removed from the training phase. Then, we only need to perform optimization on
the reduced datasets instead of the full datasets, leading to
substantial savings in the computational cost and memory
usage. Here, we need to emphasize that screening differs
greatly from feature selection methods, although they look
similar at the first glance. To be precise, screening is devoted to accelerating the training of many sparse models
including Lasso, Sparse SVM, etc., while feature selection
is the goal of these models. In the past few years, many
screening methods are proposed for a large set of sparse
learning techniques, such as Lasso (Tibshirani et al., 2012;
Xiang & Ramadge, 2012; Wang et al., 2013), group Lasso (Ndiaye et al., 2016), `1 -regularized logistic regression
(Wang et al., 2014), and SVM (Ogawa et al., 2013). Empirical studies indicate that screening methods can lead to
orders of magnitude of speedup in computation time.
However, most existing screening methods study either feature screening or sample screening individually (Shibagaki
et al., 2016) and their applications have very different scenarios. Specifically, to achieve better performance (say,
in terms of speedup), we favor feature screening methods when the number of features p is much larger than the
number of samples n, while sample screening methods are

