Learning Gradient Descent: Better Generalization and Longer Horizons

Kaifeng Lv * 1 Shunhua Jiang * 1 Jian Li 1

Abstract
Training deep neural networks is a highly nontrivial task, involving carefully selecting appropriate training algorithms, scheduling step sizes
and tuning other hyperparameters. Trying different combinations can be quite labor-intensive
and time consuming. Recently, researchers have
tried to use deep learning algorithms to exploit
the landscape of the loss function of the training
problem of interest, and learn how to optimize
over it in an automatic way. In this paper, we
propose a new learning-to-learn model and some
useful and practical tricks. Our optimizer outperforms generic, hand-crafted optimization algorithms and state-of-the-art learning-to-learn optimizers by DeepMind in many tasks. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms on a
number of tasks, including deep MLPs, CNNs,
and simple LSTMs.

1. Introduction
Training a neural network can be viewed as solving an optimization problem for a highly non-convex loss function.
Gradient-based algorithms are by far the most widely used
algorithms for training neural networks, such as basic SGD,
Adagrad, RMSprop, Adam, etc. For a particular neural
network, it is unclear a priori which one is the best optimization algorithm, and how to set up the hyperparameters (such as learning rates). It usually takes a lot of time
and experienced hands to identify the best optimization algorithm together with best hyperparameters, and possibly
some other tricks are necessary to make the network work.
*
Equal contribution † The research is supported in part
by the National Basic Research Program of China grants
2015CB358700, 2011CBA00300, 2011CBA00301, and the
1
National NSFC grants 61632016.
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Kaifeng Lv <vfleaking@163.com>, Shunhua Jiang <linda6582@163.com>, Jian Li
<lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

1.1. Existing Work
To address the above issue, a promising approach is to
use machine learning algorithms to replace the hard-coded
optimization algorithms, and hopefully, the learning algorithm is capable of learning a good strategy, from experience, to explore the landscape of the loss function and
adaptively choose good descent steps. In a high level, the
idea can be categorized under the umbrella of learning-tolearn (or meta-learning), a broad area known to learning
community for more than two decades.
Using deep learning for training deep neural networks was
initiated in a recent paper (Andrychowicz et al., 2016). The
authors proposed an optimizer using coordinatewise Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997) that takes the gradients of the optimizee as input and
outputs the updates for each optimizee parameters. We
call this optimizer DMoptimizer throughout this paper, and
we use the term optimizee to refer to the loss function of
the neural network being optimized. The authors showed
that DMoptimizer outperforms traditional optimization algorithms in solving the task on which it is trained, and it
also generalizes well to the same type of tasks. In one
of their experiments, they trained DMoptimizer to minimize the average loss of a 100-step training process of a
1-hidden-layer Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) with sigmoid
as the activation function, and the optimizer was shown to
have generalization ability to some extent: it also performs
well on such MLP with one more hidden layer or double
hidden neurons. However, there are still some limitations:
1. If the activation function of the MLP is changed from
sigmoid to ReLU in the test phase, DMoptimizer performs poorly to train such MLP. In other words, their
algorithms fail to generalize to different activations.
2. Even though the authors showed that DMoptimizer
performs well to train the optimizee for 200 descent
steps, the loss increases dramatically for much longer
horizons. In other words, their algorithms fail to handle a relatively large number of descent steps.
1.2. Our Contributions

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In this paper, we propose two new training tricks and a new
model to improve the results of training a recurrent neural

