Maximum Selection and Ranking under Noisy Comparisons
Moein Falahatgar 1 Alon Orlitsky 1 Venkatadheeraj Pichapati 1 Ananda Theertha Suresh 2

Abstract
We consider (✏, )-PAC maximum-selection and
ranking using pairwise comparisons for general
probabilistic models whose comparison probabilities satisfy strong stochastic transitivity and
stochastic triangle inequality. Modifying the
popular knockout tournament, we propose a
simple maximum-selection algorithm that uses
O ✏n2 1 + log 1 comparisons, optimal up to a
constant factor. We then derive a general framework that uses noisy binary search to speed up
many ranking algorithms, and combine it with
merge sort to obtain a ranking algorithm that uses
O ✏n2 log n(log log n)3 comparisons for = n1 ,
optimal up to a (log log n)3 factor.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Maximum selection and sorting using pairwise comparisons are computer-science staples taught in most introductory classes and used in many applications. In fact, sorting,
also known as ranking, was once claimed to utilize 25% of
all computer cycles, e.g., (Mukherjee, 2011).
In many applications, the pairwise comparisons produce
only random outcomes. In sports, tournaments rank teams
based on pairwise matches whose outcomes are probabilistic in nature. For example, Microsoft’s TrueSkill (Herbrich
et al., 2006) software matches and ranks thousands of Xbox
gamers based on individual game results. And in online advertising, out of a myriad of possible ads, each web page
may display only a few, and a user will typically select at
most one. Based on these random comparisons, ad companies such as Google, Microsoft, or Yahoo, rank the ads’ appeal (Radlinski & Joachims, 2007; Radlinski et al., 2008).
These and related applications have brought about a resur1

University of California, San Diego 2 Google Research.
Correspondence to:
Venkatadheeraj Pichapati <dheerajpv7@ucsd.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

gence of interest in maximum selection and ranking using noisy comparisons. Several probabilistic models
were considered, including the popular Bradley-TerryLuce (Bradley & Terry, 1952) and its Plackett-Luce (PL)
generalization (Plackett, 1975; Luce, 2005). Yet even for
such specific models, the number of pairwise comparisons
needed, or sample complexity, of maximum selection and
ranking was known only to within a log n factor. We consider a significantly broader class of models and yet propose algorithms that are optimal up to a constant factor for
maximum selection and up to (log log n)3 for ranking.
1.2. Notation
Noiseless comparison assumes an unknown underlying
ranking r(1), . . . ,r(n) of the elements in {1, . . . ,n} such
that if two elements are compared, the higher-ranked one
is selected. Similarly for noisy comparisons, we assume
an unknown ranking of the elements, but now if two elements i and j are compared, i is chosen with some unknown probability p(i, j) and j is chosen with probability p(j, i) = 1 p(i, j), where if i is higher-ranked, then
1
p(i, j)
2 . Repeated comparisons are independent of
each other.
Let p̃(i, j) = p(i, j) 12 reflect the additional probability
by which i is preferable to j. Note that p̃(j, i) = p̃(i, j)
and p̃(i, j) 0 if r(i) > r(j). |p̃(i, j)| can also be seen as
a measure of dissimilarity between i and j. Following (Yue
& Joachims, 2011), we assume that two natural properties, satisfied for example by the PL model, hold whenever
r(i) > r(j) > r(k): Strong Stochastic Transitivity (SST),
p̃(i, k) max(p̃(i, j), p̃(j, k)), and Stochastic Triangle Inequality (STI), p̃(i, k)  p̃(i, j) + p̃(j, k).
Two types of algorithms have been proposed for maximum selection and ranking under noisy comparisons: nonadaptive or offline (Rajkumar & Agarwal, 2014; Negahban
et al., 2012; 2016; Jang et al., 2016) where the comparison pairs are chosen in advance, and adaptive or online
where the comparison pairs are selected sequentially based
on previous comparison results. We focus on the latter.

We specify the desired output via the (✏, )-PAC
paradigm (Yue & Joachims, 2011; Szörényi et al., 2015)
that requires the output to likely closely approximate the
intended outcome. Specifically, given ✏, > 0, with prob-

