Asymmetric Tri-training for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Kuniaki Saito 1 Yoshitaka Ushiku 1 Tatsuya Harada 1 2

Abstract
It is important to apply models trained on a large
number of labeled samples to different domains
because collecting many labeled samples in various domains is expensive. To learn discriminative representations for the target domain, we
assume that artificially labeling the target samples can result in a good representation. Tritraining leverages three classifiers equally to provide pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples; however, the method does not assume labeling samples generated from a different domain. In this
paper, we propose the use of an asymmetric tritraining method for unsupervised domain adaptation, where we assign pseudo-labels to unlabeled samples and train the neural networks as
if they are true labels. In our work, we use
three networks asymmetrically, and by asymmetric, we mean that two networks are used to label unlabeled target samples, and one network
is trained by the pseudo-labeled samples to obtain target-discriminative representations. Our
proposed method was shown to achieve a stateof-the-art performance on the benchmark digit
recognition datasets for domain adaptation.

1. Inroduction
With the development of deep neural networks, including deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the ability to recognize images
and languages has improved dramatically. Training deeplayered networks using a large number of labeled samples
enables us to correctly categorize samples in diverse domains. In addition, the transfer learning of a CNN has been
utilized in many studies. For object detection or segmentation, we can transfer the knowledge of a CNN trained using
a large-scale dataset by fine-tuning it on a relatively small
1
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN,
Japan. Correspondence to: Kuniaki Saito <k-saito@mi.t.utokyo.ac.jp>, Yoshitaka Ushiku <ushiku@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>,
Tatsuya Harada <harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

dataset (Girshick et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015a).
One of the problems inherent to neural networks is that, although such networks perform well on samples generated
from the same distribution as the training samples, they
may find it difficult to correctly recognize samples from
different distributions at the test time. An example of this
is images collected from the Internet, which may come in
abundance and are fully labeled. Such images have a distribution that differs from images taken from a camera. Thus,
a classifier that performs well on various domains is important for practical use. To realize such a classifier, it is
necessary to learn domain-invariantly discriminative representations. However, acquiring such representations is not
easy because it is often difficult to collect a large number
of labeled samples, and because samples from different domains have domain-specific characteristics.
In unsupervised domain adaptation, we try to train a classifier that works well on a target domain under the condition that we are provided labeled source samples and unlabeled target samples during training. Most of the previously developed deep domain adaptation methods operate mainly under the assumption that the adaptation can be
realized by matching the distribution of features from different domains. These methods have been aimed at obtaining domain-invariant features by minimizing the divergence between domains, as well as a category loss on
the source domain (Ganin & Lempitsky, 2014; Long et al.,
2015b; 2016). However, as shown in (Ben-David et al.,
2010), if a classifier that works well on both the source and
the target domains does not exist, we theoretically cannot
expect a discriminative classifier to be applicable to the target domain. That is, even if the distributions are matched
with the non-discriminative representations, the classifier
may not work well on the target domain. Because the direct learning discriminative representations for the target
domain, in the absence of target labels, is considered very
difficult, we propose assigning pseudo-labels to the target
samples and training the target-specific networks as if they
were true labels.
Co-training and tri-training (Zhou & Li, 2005) leverage
multiple classifiers to artificially label unlabeled samples
and retrain the classifiers. However, such methods do not
assume labeling samples from different domains. Because

