Identification and Model Testing in Linear Structural Equation Models using
Auxiliary Variables

Bryant Chen 1 Daniel Kumor 2 Elias Bareinboim 2

Abstract
We developed a novel approach to identification and model testing in linear structural equation models (SEMs) based on auxiliary variables
(AVs), which generalizes a widely-used family
of methods known as instrumental variables. The
identification problem is concerned with the conditions under which causal parameters can be
uniquely estimated from an observational, noncausal covariance matrix. In this paper, we provide an algorithm for the identification of causal
parameters in linear structural models that subsumes previous state-of-the-art methods. In other
words, our algorithm identifies strictly more coefficients and models than methods previously
known in the literature. Our algorithm builds
on a graph-theoretic characterization of conditional independence relations between auxiliary
and model variables, which is developed in this
paper. Further, we leverage this new characterization for allowing identification when limited
experimental data or new substantive knowledge
about the domain is available. Lastly, we develop
a new procedure for model testing using AVs.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating causal effects is one of the fundamental problems in the data-driven sciences. In order to
estimate a causal effect, the desired effect must be identified
or uniquely expressible in terms of the probability distribution over the available data. Causal effects are identified
by design in randomized control trials, but in many applications, such experiments are not possible. When only observational data is available, determining whether a causal
1
IBM Research, San Jose, California, USA 2 Purdue University, West Lafeyette, Indiana, USA. Correspondence to:
Bryant Chen <bryant.chen@ibm.com>, Daniel Kumor <dkumor@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

effect is identified requires modeling the underlying causal
structure, which is generally done using structural equation models (SEMs) (also called structural causal models)
(Pearl, 2009; Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016).
A structural equation model consists of a set of equations
that describe the underlying data-generating process for a
set of variables. While SEMs, in their most general, nonparametric form do not require any assumptions about the
form of these functions, in many fields, including machine
learning, psychology, and the social sciences, linear SEMs
are used. A linear SEM consists of a set of equations of
the form, X = ΛX + U , where X = [x1 , ..., xn ]t is a
vector containing the model variables, Λ is a matrix containing the coefficients of the model, and Λij represents the
direct effect of xi on xj , and U = [u1 , ..., un ]t is a vector
of normally distributed error terms, which represents omitted or latent variables.1 The matrix Λ contains zeroes on
the diagonal, and Λij = 0 whenever xi is not a cause of
xj . The covariance matrix of X will be denoted by Σ and
the covariance matrix over the error terms, U, by Ω. In
this paper, we will restrict our attention to semi-Markovian
models (Pearl, 2009), models where the rows of Λ can be
arranged so that it is lower triangular, and the corresponding graph is acyclic.
When modeling using SEMs, researchers typically specify
the model by setting certain entries of Λ and Ω to zero (i.e.
exclusion and independence restrictions), while leaving the
rest of the entries as free parameters to be estimated from
data2 . Restricting a particular entry Λij to zero reflects the
assumption that Yi has no direct effect on Yj . Similarly,
restricting Ωij to zero reflects the assumption that there are
no unobserved common causes of both Yi and Yj . Once the
1
Instrumental and auxiliary variables can also be used when
normality is not assumed, but to simplify the proofs in the paper,
we will, as is commonly done by empirical researchers, assume
normality.
2
There are a number of algorithms for discovering the model
structure from data(Spirtes et al., 2000; Shimizu et al., 2006;
Pearl, 2009; Zhang and Hyvärinen, 2009; Mooij et al., 2016).
However, it is only in very rare instances that these methods are
able to uniquely determine the model structure. As a result, model
specification generally utilizes knowledge about the domain under
study.

