Approximate Newton Methods and Their Local Convergence

Haishan Ye 1 Luo Luo 1 Zhihua Zhang 2

Abstract

where ηt > 0 is the step length. If Qt is the identity matrix
and g(x(t) ) = ∇F (x(t) ), the resulting procedure is called
Gradient Descent (GD) which achieves sublinear convergence for a general smooth convex objective function and
linear convergence for a smooth-strongly convex objective
function. When n is large, the full gradient method is inefficient due to its iteration cost scaling linearly in n. Consequently, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been a typical alternative (Robbins & Monro, 1951; Li et al., 2014;
Cotter et al., 2011). In order to achieve cheaper cost in each
iteration, such a method constructs an approximate gradient
on a small mini-batch of data. However, the convergence
rate can be significantly slower than that of the full gradient methods (Nemirovski et al., 2009). Thus, a great deal
of efforts have been made to devise modification to achieve
the convergence rate of the full gradient while keeping low
iteration cost (Johnson & Zhang, 2013; Roux et al., 2012;
Schmidt et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013).

Many machine learning models are reformulated
as optimization problems. Thus, it is important
to solve a large-scale optimization problem in
big data applications. Recently, stochastic second order methods have emerged to attract much
attention for optimization due to their efficiency
at each iteration, rectified a weakness in the ordinary Newton method of suffering a high cost in
each iteration while commanding a high convergence rate. However, the convergence properties
of these methods are still not well understood.
There are also several important gaps between
the current convergence theory and the performance in real applications. In this paper, we aim
to fill these gaps. We propose a unifying framework to analyze local convergence properties of
second order methods. Based on this framework,
our theoretical analysis matches the performance
in real applications.

1. Introduction
Mathematical optimization is an importance pillar of machine learning. We consider the following optimization
problem
n

min F (x) ,

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where the fi (x) are smooth functions. Many machine
learning models can be expressed as (1) where each fi
is the loss with respect to (w.r.t.) the i-th training sample. There are many examples such as logistic regressions,
smoothed support vector machines, neural networks, and
graphical models.
Many optimization algorithms to solve the problem in (1)
are based on the following iteration:
x(t+1) = x(t) − ηt Qt g(x(t) ), t = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 2 Peking University & Beijing Institute of Big Data Research, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Zhihua Zhang <zhzhang@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

If Qt is a d×d positive definite matrix containing the curvature information, this formulation leads us to second-order
methods. It is well known that second order methods enjoy superior convergence rate in both theory and practice
in contrast to first-order methods which only make use of
the gradient information. The standard Newton method,
where Qt = [∇2 F (x(t) )]−1 , g(x(t) ) = ∇F (x(t) ) and
ηt = 1, achieves a quadratic convergence rate for smoothstrongly convex objective functions. However, the Newton method takes O(nd2 + d3 ) cost per iteration, so it
becomes extremely expensive when n or d is very large.
As a result, one tries to construct an approximation of the
Hessian in which way the update is computationally feasible, and while keeping sufficient second order information. One class of such methods are quasi-Newton methods, which are generalizations of the secant methods to find
the root of the first derivative for multidimensional problems. The celebrated Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno
(BFGS) and its limited memory version (L-BFGS) are the
most popular and widely used (Nocedal & Wright, 2006).
They take O(nd + d2 ) cost per iteration.
Recently, when n  d, so-called subsampled Newton
methods have been proposed, which define an approximate
Hessian matrix with a small subset of samples. The most
naive approach is to sample a subset of functions fi randomly (Roosta-Khorasani & Mahoney, 2016; Byrd et al.,

