Distributed Batch Gaussian Process Optimization

Erik A. Daxberger 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 2

Abstract
This paper presents a novel distributed batch
Gaussian process upper confidence bound
(DB-GP-UCB) algorithm for performing batch
Bayesian optimization (BO) of highly complex,
costly-to-evaluate black-box objective functions.
In contrast to existing batch BO algorithms, DBGP-UCB can jointly optimize a batch of inputs
(as opposed to selecting the inputs of a batch
one at a time) while still preserving scalability
in the batch size. To realize this, we generalize
GP-UCB to a new batch variant amenable to a
Markov approximation, which can then be naturally formulated as a multi-agent distributed constraint optimization problem in order to fully exploit the efficiency of its state-of-the-art solvers
for achieving linear time in the batch size. Our
DB-GP-UCB algorithm offers practitioners the
flexibility to trade off between the approximation quality and time efficiency by varying the
Markov order. We provide a theoretical guarantee for the convergence rate of DB-GP-UCB
via bounds on its cumulative regret. Empirical evaluation on synthetic benchmark objective
functions and a real-world optimization problem
shows that DB-GP-UCB outperforms the stateof-the-art batch BO algorithms.

1. Introduction
Bayesian optimization (BO) has recently gained considerable traction due to its capability of finding the global maximum of a highly complex (e.g., non-convex, no closedform expression nor derivative), noisy black-box objective
1

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany. A substantial part of this research was performed during his student exchange program at the National University of Singapore under
the supervision of Bryan Kian Hsiang Low and culminated in his
Bachelor’s thesis. 2 Department of Computer Science, National
University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore. Correspondence
to: Bryan Kian Hsiang Low <lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

function with a limited budget of (often costly) function
evaluations, consequently witnessing its use in an increasing diversity of application domains such as robotics, environmental sensing/monitoring, automatic machine learning, among others (Brochu et al., 2010; Shahriari et al.,
2016). A number of acquisition functions (e.g., probability of improvement or expected improvement (EI) over the
currently found maximum (Brochu et al., 2010), entropybased (Villemonteix et al., 2009; Hennig & Schuler, 2012;
Hernández-Lobato et al., 2014), and upper confidence
bound (UCB) (Srinivas et al., 2010)) have been devised
to perform BO: They repeatedly select an input for evaluating/querying the black-box function (i.e., until the budget is depleted) that intuitively trades off between sampling
where the maximum is likely to be given the current, possibly imprecise belief of the function modeled by a Gaussian process (GP) (i.e., exploitation) vs. improving the GP
belief of the function over the entire input domain (i.e., exploration) to guarantee finding the global maximum.
The rapidly growing affordability and availability of hardware resources (e.g., computer clusters, sensor networks,
robot teams/swarms) have motivated the recent development of BO algorithms that can repeatedly select a batch
of inputs for querying the black-box function in parallel instead. Such batch/parallel BO algorithms can be classified
into two types: On one extreme, batch BO algorithms like
multi-points EI (q-EI) (Chevalier & Ginsbourger, 2013),
parallel predictive entropy search (PPES) (Shah & Ghahramani, 2015), and the parallel knowledge gradient method
(q-KG) (Wu & Frazier, 2016) jointly optimize the batch of
inputs and hence scale poorly in the batch size. On the
other extreme, greedy batch BO algorithms (Azimi et al.,
2010; Contal et al., 2013; Desautels et al., 2014; González
et al., 2016) boost the scalability by selecting the inputs of
the batch one at a time. We argue that such a highly suboptimal approach to gain scalability is an overkill: In practice, each function evaluation is often much more computationally and/or economically costly (e.g., hyperparameter
tuning for deep learning, drug testing on human subjects),
which justifies dedicating more time to obtain better BO
performance. In this paper, we show that it is in fact possible to jointly optimize the batch of inputs and still preserve
scalability in the batch size by giving practitioners the flexibility to trade off BO performance for time efficiency.

