Robust Probabilistic Modeling with Bayesian Data Reweighting
Yixin Wang 1 Alp Kucukelbir 1 David M. Blei 1

Probabilistic models analyze data by relying on
a set of assumptions. Data that exhibit deviations from these assumptions can undermine inference and prediction quality. Robust models offer
protection against mismatch between a model’s
assumptions and reality. We propose a way to
systematically detect and mitigate mismatch of a
large class of probabilistic models. The idea is
to raise the likelihood of each observation to a
weight and then to infer both the latent variables
and the weights from data. Inferring the weights
allows a model to identify observations that match
its assumptions and down-weight others. This enables robust inference and improves predictive
accuracy. We study four different forms of mismatch with reality, ranging from missing latent
groups to structure misspecification. A Poisson
factorization analysis of the Movielens 1M dataset
shows the benefits of this approach in a practical
scenario.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic modeling is a powerful approach to discovering hidden patterns in data. We begin by expressing assumptions about the class of patterns we expect to discover;
this is how we design a probability model. We follow by
inferring the posterior of the model; this is how we discover
the specific patterns manifest in an observed data set. Advances in automated inference (Hoffman & Gelman, 2014;
Mansinghka et al., 2014; Kucukelbir et al., 2017) enable
easy development of new models for machine learning and
artificial intelligence (Ghahramani, 2015).
In this paper, we present a recipe to robustify probabilistic
models. What do we mean by “robustify”? Departure from
a model’s assumptions can undermine its inference and
prediction performance. This can arise due to corrupted
1 Columbia University, New York City, USA. Correspondence
to: Yixin Wang <yixin.wang@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

observations, or in general, measurements that do not belong
to the process we are modeling. Robust models should
perform well in spite of such mismatch with reality.
Consider a movie recommendation system. We gather data
of people watching movies via the account they use to log in.
Imagine a situation where a few observations are corrupted
For example, a child logs in to her account and regularly
watches popular animated films. One day, her parents use
the same account to watch a horror movie. Recommendation models, like Poisson factorization (PF), struggle with
this kind of corrupted data (see Section 4): it begins to
recommend horror movies.
What can be done to detect and mitigate this effect? One
strategy is to design new models that are less sensitive to
corrupted data, such as by replacing a Gaussian likelihood
with a heavier-tailed t distribution (Huber, 2011; Insua &
Ruggeri, 2012). Most probabilistic models we use have
more sophisticated structures; these template solutions for
specific distributions are not readily applicable. Other classical robust techniques act mostly on distances between
observations (Huber, 1973); these approaches struggle with
high-dimensional data. How can we still make use of our favorite probabilistic models while making them less sensitive
to the messy nature of reality?
Main idea. We propose reweighted probabilistic models
(RPM). The idea is simple. First, posit a probabilistic model.
Then adjust the contribution of each observation by raising
each likelihood term to its own (latent) weight. Finally, infer
these weights along with the latent variables of the original
probability model. The posterior of this adjusted model
identifies observations that match its assumptions; it downweights observations that disagree with its assumptions.
Uncorrupted
Corrupted
Original Model
Reweighted Model

Density

Abstract

0

1

2

Figure 1. Fitting a unimodal distribution to a dataset with corrupted
measurements. The RPM downweights the corrupted observations.

Figure 1 depicts this tradeoff. The dataset includes cor-

