Stochastic Adaptive Quasi-Newton Methods for Minimizing Expected Values

Chaoxu Zhou ∗ 1 Wenbo Gao ∗ 1 Donald Goldfarb 1

Abstract

infeasible to analytically compute Ef (x, ξ). This can be
resolved by replacing the expectation Ef (x, ξ) by the estimate (2). The strong law of large numbers implies that
the sample mean L(x) converges almost surely to F (x) as
the number of samples m increases, provided that the samples yi are drawn independently from the distribution of ξ.
However, even the concrete problem (2) is not a good target
for classical optimization algorithms, as the amount of data
m is frequently extremely large. A better strategy when optimizing (2) is to consider subsamples of the data to reduce
the computational cost. This leads to stochastic algorithms
where the objective function changes at each iteration by
randomly selecting subsamples.

We propose a novel class of stochastic, adaptive
methods for minimizing self-concordant functions which can be expressed as an expected
value. These methods generate an estimate of
the true objective function by taking the empirical mean over a sample drawn at each step,
making the problem tractable. The use of adaptive step sizes eliminates the need for the user
to supply a step size. Methods in this class include extensions of gradient descent (GD) and
BFGS. We show that, given a suitable amount of
sampling, the stochastic adaptive GD attains linear convergence in expectation, and with further
sampling, the stochastic adaptive BFGS attains
R-superlinear convergence. We present experiments showing that these methods compare favorably to SGD.

1. Introduction
We are concerned with minimizing functions of the form
min F (x) = Eξ f (x, ξ)

x∈Rn

(1)

Many common problems in statistics and machine learning
can be put into this form. For instance, in the empirical
risk minimization framework, a model is learned from a set
{y1 , . . . , ym } of training data by minimizing an empirical
loss function of the form
m

min L(x) =
x

1 X
f (x, yi )
m i=1

(2)

It is easy to see that this formulation is equivalent to taking
ξ to be the uniform distribution on the points {y1 , . . . , ym }.
An objective function of the form (1) is often impractical,
as the distribution of ξ is generally unavailable, making it
*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University. Correspondence to:
Chaoxu Zhou <cz2364@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Many stochastic algorithms have been proposed which use
this approach for solving (2), notably stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou, 2010), and variance-reduced
extensions of SGD, such as SVRG (Johnson & Zhang,
2013), SAG (Schmidt et al., 2013), and SAGA (Defazio
et al., 2014). These methods are first-order methods, extending gradient descent to the stochastic setting, and the
latter three (variance-reduced) methods can be shown to
converge linearly for strongly convex objectives. Linearly convergent stochastic Limited Memory BFGS algorithms (Byrd et al., 2016)(Moritz et al., 2016)(Gower et al.,
2016) have also been proposed. It is then natural to consider stochastic extensions of quasi-Newton and secondorder methods. One such method, the Newton Incremental Method (NIM) (Rodomanov & Kropotov, 2016), combines cyclic updating of a fixed collection of functions
f (x, y1 ), . . . , f (x, ym ) with Newton’s method, and attains
local superlinear convergence.
One of the key obstacles to developing stochastic extensions of quasi-Newton methods is the necessity of selecting appropriate step sizes. The analysis of the global convergence of the BFGS method (Powell, 1976) and other
members of Broyden’s convex class (Byrd et al., 1987)
assumes that Armijo-Wolfe inexact line search is used.
This is rather undesirable for a stochastic algorithm, as
line search is both computationally expensive and difficult to analyze in a probabilistic setting. However, there
is a special class of functions, the self-concordant functions, whose properties allow us to compute an adaptive
step size and thereby avoid performing line searches. In
(Gao & Goldfarb, 2016), it is shown that the BFGS method

