A Richer Theory of Convex Constrained Optimization
with Reduced Projections and Improved Rates

Tianbao Yang 1 Qihang Lin 1 Lijun Zhang 2

Abstract
This paper focuses on convex constrained optimization problems, where the solution is subject
to a convex inequality constraint. In particular,
we aim at challenging problems for which both
projection into the constrained domain and a linear optimization under the inequality constraint
are time-consuming, which render both projected
gradient methods and conditional gradient methods (a.k.a. the Frank-Wolfe algorithm) expensive. In this paper, we develop projection reduced
optimization algorithms for both smooth and
non-smooth optimization with improved convergence rates under a certain regularity condition
of the constraint function. We first present a general theory of optimization with only one projection. Its application to smooth optimization
with only one projection yields O(1/) iteration
complexity, which improves over the O(1/2 )
iteration complexity established before for nonsmooth optimization and can be further reduced
under strong convexity. Then we introduce a local error bound condition and develop faster algorithms for non-strongly convex optimization at
the price of a logarithmic number of projections.
In particular, we achieve an iteration complex2(1−θ)
e
ity of O(1/
) for non-smooth optimization
1−θ
and e
O(1/ ) for smooth optimization, where
θ ∈ (0, 1] appearing the local error bound condition characterizes the functional local growth
rate around the optimal solutions. Novel applications in solving the constrained `1 minimization
problem and a positive semi-definite constrained
distance metric learning problem demonstrate
that the proposed algorithms achieve significant
speed-up compared with previous algorithms.
1
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA 2 National
Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang
<tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu>.

This is the long version of our paper appearing in the Proceedings
of the 34 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we aim at solving the following convex constrained optimization problem:
min

x∈Rd

f (x),

s.t. c(x) ≤ 0,

(1)

where f (x) is a smooth or non-smooth convex function and
c(x) is a lower-semicontinuous and convex function. The
problem can find applications in machine learning, signal
processing, statistics, marketing optimization, and etc. For
example, in distance metric learning one needs to learn a
positive semi-definite (PSD) matrix such that similar examples are close to each other and dissimilar examples are
far from each other (Weinberger et al., 2006; Xing et al.,
2003), where the positive semi-definite constraint can be
cast into a convex inequality constraint. Another example
arising in compressive sensing is to minimize the `1 norm
of high-dimensional vector subject to a measurement constraint (Candès & Wakin, 2008). Although general interiorpoint methods can be applied to solve the problem with linear convergence, they suffer from exceedingly high computational cost per-iteration. Another solution is to employ the projected gradient (PG) method (Nesterov, 2004)
or the conditional gradient (CG) method (Frank & Wolfe,
1956), where the PG method needs to compute the projection into the constrained domain at each iteration and
CG needs to solve a linear optimization problem under
the constraint. However, for many constraints (e.g., PSD,
quadratic constraints) both projection into the constrained
domain and the linear optimization under the constraint are
time-consuming, which restrict their capabilities to solving
these problems.
Recently, there emerges a new direction towards addressing the challenge of expensive projection that is to reduce
the number of projections. In the seminal paper (Mahdavi
et al., 2012), the authors have proposed two algorithms with
only one projection at the end of iterations for non-smooth
convex and strongly convex optimization, respectively. The
idea of both algorithms is to move the constraint function
into the objective function and to control the violation of
constraint for intermediate solutions. While their developed algorithms enjoy an optimal convergence rate for nonsmooth optimization (i.e., O(1/2 ) iteration complexity)

