Multi-fidelity Bayesian Optimisation with Continuous Approximations

Kirthevasan Kandasamy 1 Gautam Dasarathy 2 Jeff Schneider 1 Barnabás Póczos 1

Abstract
Bandit methods for black-box optimisation, such
as Bayesian optimisation, are used in a variety
of applications including hyper-parameter tuning and experiment design. Recently, multifidelity methods have garnered considerable attention since function evaluations have become increasingly expensive in such applications. Multifidelity methods use cheap approximations to the
function of interest to speed up the overall optimisation process. However, most multi-fidelity
methods assume only a finite number of approximations. On the other hand, in many practical
applications, a continuous spectrum of approximations might be available. For instance, when
tuning an expensive neural network, one might
choose to approximate the cross validation performance using less data N and/or few training
iterations T . Here, the approximations are best
viewed as arising out of a continuous two dimensional space (N, T ). In this work, we develop a
Bayesian optimisation method, BOCA, for this
setting. We characterise its theoretical properties and show that it achieves better regret than
than strategies which ignore the approximations.
BOCA outperforms several other baselines in synthetic and real experiments.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in scientific and engineering applications can be
framed as bandit optimisation problems, where we need to
sequentially evaluate a noisy black-box function f : X → R
with the goal of finding its optimum. Some applications
include hyper-parameter tuning in machine learning (Hutter
et al., 2011; Snoek et al., 2012), optimal policy search (Lizotte et al., 2007; Martinez-Cantin et al., 2007) and scientific
experiments (Gonzalez et al., 2014; Parkinson et al., 2006).
*

Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh
PA, USA 2 Rice University, Houston TX, USA. Correspondence to:
Kirthevasan Kandasamy <kandasamy@cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Typically, in such applications, each function evaluation is
expensive, and conventionally, the bandit literature has focused on developing methods for finding the optimum while
keeping the number of evaluations to f at a minimum.
However, with increasingly expensive function evaluations,
conventional methods have become infeasible as a significant cost needs to be expended before we can learn anything
about f . As a result, multi-fidelity optimisation methods
have recently gained attention (Cutler et al., 2014; Kandasamy et al., 2016a; Li et al., 2016). As the name suggests,
these methods assume that we have access to lower fidelity
approximations to f which can be evaluated instead of f .
The lower the fidelity, the cheaper the evaluation, but it provides less accurate information about f . For example, when
optimising the configuration of an expensive real world
robot, its performance can be approximated using cheaper
computer simulations. The goal is to use the cheap approximations to guide search for the optimum of f , and reduce the
overall cost of optimisation. However, most multi-fidelity
work assume only a finite number of approximations. In
this paper, we study multi-fidelity optimisation when there
is access to a continuous spectrum of approximations.
To motivate this set up, consider tuning a classification algorithm over a space of hyper-parameters X by maximising
a validation set accuracy. The algorithm is to be trained
using N• data points via an iterative algorithm for T• iterations. However, we wish to use fewer training points
N < N• and/or fewer iterations T < T• to approximate
the validation accuracy. We can view validation accuracy
as a function g : [1, N• ] × [1, T• ] × X → R where evaluating g(N, T, x) requires training the algorithm with N
points for T iterations with the hyper-parameters x. If the
training complexity of the algorithm is quadratic in data
size and linear in the number of iterations, then the cost of
this evaluation is λ(N, T ) = O(N 2 T ). Our goal is to find
the optimum when N = N• , and T = T• , i.e. we wish to
maximise f (x) = g(N• , T• , x).
In this setting, while N, T are technically discrete choices,
they are more naturally viewed as coming from a continuous 2 dimensional fidelity space, [1, N• ] × [1, T• ]. One
might hope that cheaper queries to g(N, T, ·) with N, T
less than N• , T• can be used to learn about g(N• , T• , ·) and
consequently optimise it using less overall cost. Indeed, this

