Graph-based Isometry Invariant Representation Learning

Learning transformation invariant representations of visual data is an important problem in
computer vision. Deep convolutional networks
have demonstrated remarkable results for image
and video classification tasks. However, they
have achieved only limited success in the classification of images that undergo geometric transformations. In this work we present a novel
Transformation Invariant Graph-based Network
(TIGraNet), which learns graph-based features
that are inherently invariant to isometric transformations such as rotation and translation of input
images. In particular, images are represented as
signals on graphs, which permits to replace classical convolution and pooling layers in deep networks with graph spectral convolution and dynamic graph pooling layers that together contribute to invariance to isometric transformation.
Our experiments show high performance on rotated and translated images from the test set compared to classical architectures that are very sensitive to transformations in the data. The inherent
invariance properties of our framework provide
key advantages, such as increased resiliency to
data variability and sustained performance with
limited training sets.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) have achieved
impressive results for various computer vision tasks, such
as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and segmentation (Ronneberger et al., 2015). However, they still
suffer from the potentially high variability of data in highdimensional image spaces. In particular, ConvNets that are
trained to recognize an object from a given perspective or
1
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Renata Khasanova
<renata.khasanova@epfl.ch>,
Pascal
Frossard
<pascal.frossard@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

TIGraNet STN

Abstract

Conv

Renata Khasanova 1 Pascal Frossard 1

Figure 1. Illustrative transformation-invariant handwritten digit
classification task. Rotated test images, along with their classification label obtained from ConvNets (Conv) (Boureau et al.,
2010), Spatial-Transformer Network (STN) (Jaderberg et al.,
2015), and our method. (best seen in color)

camera viewpoint, will likely fail when the viewpoint is
changed or the image of the object is simply rotated. In
order to overcome this issue the most natural step is to
extend the training dataset with images of the same objects but seen from different perspectives. This however
increases the complexity of data collection and more importantly leads to the growth of the training dataset when
the variability of the data is high.
Instead of simply augmenting the training set, which may
not always be feasible, one can try to solve the aforementioned problem by making the classification architecture invariant to transformations of the input signal as illustrated
in Fig. 1. In that perspective, we propose to represent input
images as signals on the grid graph instead of simple matrices of pixel intensities. The benefits of this representation
is that graph signals do not carry a strict notion of orientation, while at the same time, signals on a grid graph stay invariant to translation. We exploit these properties to create
features that are invariant to isometric transformations and
we design new graph-based convolutional and pooling layers, which replace their counterparts used in the classical
deep learning settings. This permits preserving the transformation equivariance of each intermediate feature representation under both translation and rotation of the input
signals. Specifically, our convolutional layer relies on filters that are polynomials of the graph Laplacian for effective signal representation without computing eigendecompositions of the graph signals. We further introduce a new

