Simultaneous Learning of Trees and Representations for Extreme Classification
and Density Estimation

Yacine Jernite 1 Anna Choromanska 1 David Sontag 2

Abstract
We consider multi-class classification where the
predictor has a hierarchical structure that allows
for a very large number of labels both at train and
test time. The predictive power of such models
can heavily depend on the structure of the tree,
and although past work showed how to learn the
tree structure, it expected that the feature vectors
remained static. We provide a novel algorithm to
simultaneously perform representation learning
for the input data and learning of the hierarchical predictor. Our approach optimizes an objective function which favors balanced and easilyseparable multi-way node partitions. We theoretically analyze this objective, showing that it gives
rise to a boosting style property and a bound on
classification error. We next show how to extend
the algorithm to conditional density estimation.
We empirically validate both variants of the algorithm on text classification and language modeling, respectively, and show that they compare
favorably to common baselines in terms of accuracy and running time.

1. Introduction
Several machine learning settings are concerned with performing predictions in a very large discrete label space.
From extreme multi-class classification to language modeling, one commonly used approach to this problem reduces
it to a series of choices in a tree-structured model, where
the leaves typically correspond to labels. While this allows for faster prediction, and is in many cases necessary
to make the models tractable, the performance of the system can depend significantly on the structure of the tree
used, e.g. (Mnih & Hinton, 2009).

Hinton, 2009), extrinsic hierarchies (Morin & Bengio,
2005) which can badly generalize across different data
sets, or purely random trees, we provide an efficient datadependent algorithm for tree construction and training. Inspired by the LOM tree algorithm (Choromanska & Langford, 2015) for binary trees, we present an objective function which favors high-quality node splits, i.e. balanced
and easily separable. In contrast to previous work, our objective applies to trees of arbitrary width and leads to guarantees on model accuracy. Furthermore, we show how to
successfully optimize it in the setting when the data representation needs to be learned simultaneously with the classification tree.
Finally, the multi-class classification problem is closely
related to that of conditional density estimation (Ram &
Gray, 2011; Bishop, 2006) since both need to consider all
labels (at least implicitly) during learning and at prediction
time. Both problems present similar difficulties when dealing with very large label spaces, and the techniques that
we present in this work can be applied indiscriminately to
either. Indeed, we show how to adapt our algorithm to efficiently solve the conditional density estimation problem
of learning a language model which uses a tree structured
objective.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related work, Section 3 outlines the necessary background
and defines the flat and tree-structured objectives for
multi-class classification and density estimation, Section 4
presents the objective and the optimization algorithm, Section ?? contains theoretical results, Section 5 adapts the algorithm to the problem of language modeling, Section 6 reports empirical results on the Flickr tag prediction dataset
and Gutenberg text corpus, and finally Section 7 concludes
the paper. Supplementary material contains additional material and proofs of theoretical statements of the paper. We
also release the C++ implementation of our algorithm1 .

Instead of relying on possibly costly heuristics (Mnih &
1

New York University, New York, New York, USA
Massachussets Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachussets, USA. Correspondence to: Yacine Jernite <jernite@cs.nyu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2. Related Work
The multi-class classification problem has been addressed
in the literature in a variety of ways. Some examples include i) clustering methods (Bengio et al., 2010; Madzarov
et al., 2009; Weston et al., 2013) ((Bengio et al., 2010)
1

https://github.com/yjernite/fastTextLearnTree

