Forward and Reverse Gradient-Based Hyperparameter Optimization

Luca Franceschi 1 2 Michele Donini 1 Paolo Frasconi 3 Massimiliano Pontil 1 2

Abstract
We study two procedures (reverse-mode and
forward-mode) for computing the gradient of the
validation error with respect to the hyperparameters of any iterative learning algorithm such as
stochastic gradient descent. These procedures
mirror two methods of computing gradients for
recurrent neural networks and have different
trade-offs in terms of running time and space requirements. Our formulation of the reverse-mode
procedure is linked to previous work by Maclaurin et al. (2015) but does not require reversible
dynamics. The forward-mode procedure is suitable for real-time hyperparameter updates, which
may significantly speed up hyperparameter optimization on large datasets. We present experiments on data cleaning and on learning task interactions. We also present one large-scale experiment where the use of previous gradient-based
methods would be prohibitive.

1. Introduction
The increasing complexity of machine learning algorithms
has driven a large amount of research in the area of hyperparameter optimization (HO) — see, e.g., (Hutter et al.,
2015) for a review. The core idea is relatively simple: given
a measure of interest (e.g. the misclassification error) HO
methods use a validation set to construct a response function of the hyperparameters (such as the average loss on
the validation set) and explore the hyperparameter space to
seek an optimum.
Early approaches based on grid search quickly become impractical as the number of hyperparameters grows and are
even outperformed by random search (Bergstra & Bengio,
2012). Given the high computational cost of evaluating the
1

Computational Statistics and Machine Learning, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy 2 Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK 3 Department of Information Engineering, Università degli Studi di Firenze, Italy. Correspondence to: Luca Franceschi <luca.franceschi@iit.it>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

response function, Bayesian optimization approaches provide a natural framework and have been extensively studied
in this context (Snoek et al., 2012; Swersky et al., 2013;
Snoek et al., 2015). Related and faster sequential modelbased optimization methods have been proposed using random forests (Hutter et al., 2011) and tree Parzen estimators (Bergstra et al., 2011), scaling up to a few hundreds of
hyperparameters (Bergstra et al., 2013).
In this paper, we follow an alternative direction, where
gradient-based algorithms are used to optimize the performance on a validation set with respect to the hyperparameters (Bengio, 2000; Larsen et al., 1996). In this setting, the
validation error should be evaluated at a minimizer of the
training objective. However, in many current learning systems such as deep learning, the minimizer is only approximate. Domke (2012) specifically considered running an iterative algorithm, like gradient descent or momentum, for
a given number of steps, and subsequently computing the
gradient of the validation error by a back-optimization algorithm. Maclaurin et al. (2015) considered reverse-mode
differentiation of the response function. They suggested the
idea of reversing parameter updates to achieve space efficiency, proposing an approximation capable of addressing
the associated loss of information due to finite precision
arithmetics. Pedregosa (2016) proposed the use of inexact gradients, allowing hyperparameters to be updated before reaching the minimizer of the training objective. Both
(Maclaurin et al., 2015) and (Pedregosa, 2016) managed to
optimize a number of hyperparameters in the order of one
thousand.
In this paper, we illustrate two alternative approaches to
compute the hypergradient (i.e., the gradient of the response function), which have different trade-offs in terms
of running time and space requirements. One approach
is based on a Lagrangian formulation associated with
the parameter optimization dynamics. It encompasses
the reverse-mode differentiation (RMD) approach used by
Maclaurin et al. (2015), where the dynamics corresponds
to stochastic gradient descent with momentum. We do
not assume reversible parameter optimization dynamics. A
well-known drawback of RMD is its space complexity: we
need to store the whole trajectory of training iterates in order to compute the hypergradient. An alternative approach
that we consider overcomes this problem by computing

