Multi-task Learning with Labeled and Unlabeled Tasks

Anastasia Pentina 1 Christoph H. Lampert 1

Abstract
In multi-task learning, a learner is given a collection of prediction tasks and needs to solve all
of them. In contrast to previous work, which required that annotated training data is available for
all tasks, we consider a new setting, in which for
some tasks, potentially most of them, only unlabeled training data is provided. Consequently,
to solve all tasks, information must be transferred between tasks with labels and tasks without labels. Focusing on an instance-based transfer method we analyze two variants of this setting: when the set of labeled tasks is fixed, and
when it can be actively selected by the learner.
We state and prove a generalization bound that
covers both scenarios and derive from it an algorithm for making the choice of labeled tasks
(in the active case) and for transferring information between the tasks in a principled way. We
also illustrate the effectiveness of the algorithm
by experiments on synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
In the multi-task learning setting (Caruana, 1997) a learner
is given a collection of prediction tasks that all need to be
solved. The hope is that the overall prediction quality can
be improved by processing the tasks jointly and sharing information between them. Indeed, theoretical as well as experimental studies have shown that information transfer can
reduce the amount of annotated examples per task needed
to achieve good performance under various assumptions on
how the learning tasks are related.
All existing multi-task learning approaches have in common, however, that they need at least some labeled training
data for every task of interest. In this paper, we study a
new and more challenging setting, in which for a subset of
the tasks (typically the large majority) only unlabeled data
1
IST Austria.
Correspondence to:
<apentina@ist.ac.at>.

Anastasia Pentina

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

is available. In practice, it is highly desirable to be able to
handle this situation for problems with a very large number
of tasks, such as sentiment analysis for market studies: for
different products different attributes matter and, thus, each
product should be have its own predictor and forms its own
learning task. At the same time annotating data for each
such task is prohibitive, especially when new products are
constantly added to the market. Another example are prediction problems, for which the fixed cost of obtaining any
labels for a task can be high, even when the variable cost
per label are reasonable. This is a well-known issue when
using crowd sourcing for data annotation: recruiting and
training annotators first imposes a large overhead, and only
afterwards many labels can be obtained within a short time
and at a low cost.
A distinctive feature of the setting we study is that it requires two types of information transfer: between the labeled tasks and from labeled to unlabeled ones. While the
first type is common in multi-task learning, none of the existing multi-task methods is able to handle the second type.
In contrast, information transfer from labeled to unlabeled
tasks is commonly studied in domain adaptation research,
where, however, transfer of the first type is typically not
considered. Thus, the setting of multi-task learning with
labeled and unlabeled tasks can be seen as a blend of traditional multi-task learning and domain adaptation.
In this work we focus on a transfer method that learns a
predictor for every task of interest by minimizing a taskspecific convex combination of training errors on the labeled tasks (Ben-David et al., 2007; Mansour et al., 2009).
We choose this method because it allows us to capture both
types of information transfer – between the labeled tasks
and from labeled to unlabeled ones – in a unified fashion.
Clearly, the success of this approach depends on the choice
of the weights in the convex combinations. Moreover, one
can expect it also to depend on the subset of labeled tasks
as well, because some subsets of tasks might be more informative and representative than the others. This suggests
that it will be beneficial if the labeled subset is not arbitrary
but if it can be chosen in a data-dependent way. We refer
to this learning scenario, where initially every task is represented only by a set of unlabeled examples and the learner
can choose for which tasks to request some labels, as active
task selection.

