Active Learning for Accurate Estimation of Linear Models
Carlos Riquelme 1 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 2 Alessandro Lazaric 3

Abstract
We explore the sequential decision-making problem where the goal is to estimate a number of linear models uniformly well, given a shared budget
of random contexts independently sampled from
a known distribution. For each incoming context,
the decision-maker selects one of the linear models and receives an observation that is corrupted
by the unknown noise level of that model. We
present Trace-UCB, an adaptive allocation algorithm that learns the models’ noise levels while
balancing contexts accordingly across them, and
prove bounds for its simple regret in both expectation and high-probability. We extend the algorithm and its bounds to the high dimensional setting, where the number of linear models times
the dimension of the contexts is more than the
total budget of samples. Simulations with real
data suggest that Trace-UCB is remarkably robust, outperforming a number of baselines even
when its assumptions are violated.

1. Introduction
We study the problem faced by a decision-maker whose
goal is to estimate a number of regression problems equally
well (i.e., with a small prediction error for each of them),
and has to adaptively allocate a limited budget of samples
to the problems in order to gather information and improve
its estimates. Two aspects of the problem formulation are
key and drive the algorithm design: 1) The observations
Y collected from each regression problem depend on side
information (i.e., contexts X 2 Rd ) and we model the relationship between X and Y in each problem i as a linear
function with unknown parameters i 2 Rd , and 2) The
“hardness” of learning each parameter i is unknown in advance and may vary across the problems. In particular, we
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 2 DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA (The work was done when the author was
with Adobe Research). 3 Inria Lille, France. Correspondence to:
Carlos Riquelme <rikel@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

assume that the observations are corrupted by noise levels
that are problem-dependent and must be learned as well.
This scenario may arise in a number of different domains
where a fixed experimentation budget (number of samples)
should be allocated to different problems. Imagine a drug
company that has developed several treatments for a particular form of disease. Now it is interested in having an accurate estimate of the performance of each of these treatments
for a specific population of patients (e.g., at a particular
geographical location). Given the budget allocated to this
experiment, a number of patients n can participate in the
clinical trial. Volunteered patients arrive sequentially over
time and they are represented by a context X 2 Rd summarizing their profile. We model the health status of patient X
after being assigned to treatment i by scalar Yi 2 R, which
depends on the specific drug through a linear function with
parameter i (i.e., Yi ⇡ X T i ). The goal is to assign each
incoming patient to a treatment in such a way that at the end
of the trial, we have an accurate estimate for all i ’s. This
will allow us to reliably predict the expected health status
of each new patient X for any treatment i. Since the parameters i and the noise levels are initially unknown, achieving this goal requires an adaptive allocation strategy for the
n patients. Note that while n may be relatively small, as
the ethical and financial costs of treating a patient are high,
the distribution of the contexts X (e.g., the biomarkers of
cancer patients) can be precisely estimated in advance.
This setting is clearly related to the problem of pure exploration and active learning in multi-armed bandits (Antos et al., 2008), where the learner wants to estimate the
mean of a finite set of arms by allocating a finite budget
of n pulls. Antos et al. (2008) first introduced this setting
where the objective is to minimize the largest mean square
error (MSE) in estimating the value of each arm. While
the optimal solution is trivially to allocate the pulls proportionally to the variance of the arms, when the variances
are unknown an exploration-exploitation dilemma arises,
where variance and value of the arms must be estimated at
the same time in order to allocate pulls where they are more
needed (i.e., arms with high variance). Antos et al. (2008)
proposed
p a forcing algorithm where all arms are pulled at
least n times before allocating pulls proportionally to the
estimated variances. They derived bounds on the regret,
measuring the difference between the MSEs of the learn-

