Logarithmic Time One-Against-Some

Hal Daumé III * 1 Nikos Karampatziakis * 2 John Langford * 2 Paul Mineiro * 2

Abstract
We create a new online reduction of multiclass
classification to binary classification for which
training and prediction time scale logarithmically
with the number of classes. We show that several simple techniques give rise to an algorithm
which is superior to previous logarithmic time
classification approaches while competing with
one-against-all in space. The core construction
is based on using a tree to select a small subset
of labels with high recall, which are then scored
using a one-against-some structure with high precision.

1. Introduction
Can we efficiently predict which face is in the picture
amongst multiple billions of people? In a translation,
can we effectively predict which word should come next
amongst 105 possibilities? More generally can we predict
one of K classes in polylogarithmic time in K? This question gives rise to the area of extreme multiclass classification (Bengio et al., 2010; Beygelzimer et al., 2009; Bhatia et al., 2015; Choromanska & Langford, 2015; Morin &
Bengio, 2005; Prabhu & Varma, 2014; Weston et al., 2013),
in which K is very large. If efficiency is not a concern,
the most common and generally effective representation for
multiclass prediction is a one-against-all (OAA) structure.
Here, inference consists of computing a score for each class
and returning the class with the maximum score. If efficiency is a concern, an attractive strategy for picking one
of K items is to use a tree; unfortunately, this often comes
at the cost of increased error.
A general replacement for the one-against-all approach
must satisfy a difficult set of desiderata.
• High accuracy: The approach should provide accuracy competitive with OAA, a remarkably strong base*
Equal contribution 1 University of Maryland 2 Microsoft. Correspondence to: Paul Mineiro <pmineiro@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

L
{2, 4, 12, . . .}
R
L
f001 (x) L {1, 15, 20, . . .}
L f00 (x)
R
f0 (x)
R
{1, 4, 10, . . .}
R f01 (x)
x

f000 (x)

Figure 1. An example is routed through the tree to a leaf node
associated with a set of eligible classes {1, 15, 20, . . . }, which
will then be subsequently scored to pick a final label. The root
classifier choses child L and classifier f00 chooses child R, etc.

line (Rifkin & Klautau, 2004) which is the standard
“output layer” of many learning systems such as winners of the ImageNet contest (He et al., 2015; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014).
• High speed at training time and test time: A multiclass
classifier must spend at least Ω(log K) time (Choromanska & Langford, 2015)) so this is a natural benchmark to optimize against.
• Online operation: Many learning algorithms use either online updates or mini-batch updates. Approaches satisfying this constraint can be easily composed into an end-to-end learning system for solving
complex problems like image recognition. For algorithms which operate in batch fashion, online components can be easily used.
• Linear space: In order to have a drop-in replacement
for OAA, an approach must not take much more space
than OAA. Memory is at a premium when K is very
large, especially for models trained on GPUs, or deployed to small devices.
We use an OAA-like structure to make a final prediction,
but instead of scoring every class, we only score a small
subset of O(log K) classes. We call this “one-againstsome” (OAS). How can you efficiently determine what
classes should be scored? We use a dynamically built tree
to efficiently whittle down the set of candidate classes. The
goal of the tree is to maximize the recall of the candidate
set so we call this approach “The Recall Tree.” In a traditional tree-based classifier, a traversal of the tree leads to
a leaf, and a leaf corresponds to a single label, In the Recall Tree, we loosen the latter requirement and allow a leaf
to corresponds to a set of labels of size O(log K). At test
time, when a leaf is reached, scores are computed for this
small subset (see Figure 1).

