Probabilistic Submodular Maximization in Sub-Linear Time
Serban Stan 1 Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2 Andreas Krause 3 Amin Karbasi 1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider optimizing submodular functions that are drawn from some unknown
distribution. This setting arises, e.g., in recommender systems, where the utility of a subset of
items may depend on a user-specific submodular utility function. In modern applications, the
ground set of items is often so large that even
the widely used (lazy) greedy algorithm is not
efficient enough. As a remedy, we introduce the
problem of sublinear time probabilistic submodular maximization: Given training examples of
functions (e.g., via user feature vectors), we seek
to reduce the ground set so that optimizing new
functions drawn from the same distribution will
provide almost as much value when restricted to
the reduced ground set as when using the full
set. We cast this problem as a two-stage submodular maximization and develop a novel efficient algorithm for this problem which offers a
1
1
2 (1 − e2 ) approximation ratio for general monotone submodular functions and general matroid
constraints. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on several real-world applications
where running the maximization problem on the
reduced ground set leads to two orders of magnitude speed-up while incurring almost no loss.

utility functions for valuating sets of items, and a prototypical problem is to find sets of say k items with nearmaximal value (Krause & Golovin, 2012; Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2016b). Even though efficient greedy algorithms exist for submodular maximization, those become infeasible
when serving many users and optimizing over large item
collections. To this end, given training examples of (users
and their utility) functions drawn from some unknown distribution, we seek to reduce the ground set to a small (ideally sublinear) size. The hope is that optimizing new functions drawn from the same distribution will incur little loss
when optimized on the reduced set compared to optimizing
over the full set.

1. Introduction

Optimizing the empirical objective is an instance of twostage submodular maximization, a problem recently considered by Balkanski et al. (2016) who provide a 0.316
approximation guarantee for the case of coverage functions (more about it in the related work). One of our
key technical contributions is a computationally efficient
novel local-search based algorithm, called ReplacementGreedy, for two-stage submodular maximization, that provides a constant-factor 0.432 approximation guarantee for
the general case of monotone submodular functions. Our
approach also generalizes to arbitrary matroid constraints,
and empirically compares favorably to prior work. We further analyze conditions under which our approach provably enables approximate submodular optimization based
on substantially reduced ground sets, resulting the first viable approach towards sublinear-time submodular maximization.

Motivated by applications in data summarization (Lin &
Bilmes, 2011; Wei et al., 2013; Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2016d) and recommender systems (El-Arini et al., 2009;
Yue & Guestrin, 2011; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2016a), we
tackle the challenge of efficiently solving many statistically
related submodular maximization problems. In these applications, submodularity arises in the form of user-specific

Lastly, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
on recommender systems for which we compare the utility
value and running time of maximizing a submodular function over the full data set and its reduced version returned
by our algorithm. We consistently observe that the loss we
incur is negligible (around 1%) while the speed up is enormous (about two orders of magnitude).

1
Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA 2 Google
Research, New York, NY 10011, USA 3 ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Amin Karbasi
<amin.karbasi@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Related work Submodular maximization has found
many applications in machine learning, ranging from feature/variable selection (Krause & Guestrin, 2005) to dictionary learning (Das & Kempe, 2011) to data summarization (Wei et al., 2014b; Lin & Bilmes, 2011; Tschiatschek
et al., 2014) to recommender systems (Yue & Guestrin,

