Interactive Learning from Policy-Dependent Human Feedback

James MacGlashan 1 Mark K Ho 2 Robert Loftin 3 Bei Peng 4 Guan Wang 2 David L. Roberts 3
Matthew E. Taylor 4 Michael L. Littman 2

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of interactively learning behaviors communicated by a human teacher using positive and negative feedback. Much previous work on this problem has
made the assumption that people provide feedback for decisions that is dependent on the behavior they are teaching and is independent from
the learner’s current policy. We present empirical
results that show this assumption to be false—
whether human trainers give a positive or negative feedback for a decision is influenced by
the learner’s current policy. Based on this insight, we introduce Convergent Actor-Critic by
Humans (COACH), an algorithm for learning
from policy-dependent feedback that converges
to a local optimum. Finally, we demonstrate that
COACH can successfully learn multiple behaviors on a physical robot.

1. Introduction
Programming robots is very difficult, in part because
the real world is inherently rich and—to some degree—
unpredictable. In addition, our expectations for physical
agents are quite high and often difficult to articulate. Nevertheless, for robots to have a significant impact on the lives
of individuals, even non-programmers need to be able to
specify and customize behavior. Because of these complexities, relying on end-users to provide instructions to robots
programmatically seems destined to fail.
Reinforcement learning (RL) from human trainer feedback
provides a compelling alternative to programming because
agents can learn complex behavior from very simple positive and negative signals. Furthermore, real-world animal
training is an existence proof that people can train complex
*

Equal contribution 1 Cogitai 2 Brown University 3 North Carolina State University 4 Washington State University. Correspondence to: James MacGlashan <james@cogitai.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

behavior using these simple signals. Indeed, animals have
been successfully trained to guide the blind, locate mines
in the ocean, detect cancer or explosives, and even solve
complex, multi-stage puzzles.
Despite success when learning from environmental reward,
traditional reinforcement-learning algorithms have yielded
limited success when the reward signal is provided by humans. This failure underscores the importance that algorithms for learning from humans are based on appropriate
models of human-feedback. Indeed, much human-centered
RL work has investigated and employed different models of human-feedback (Knox & Stone, 2009b; Thomaz &
Breazeal, 2006; 2007; 2008; Griffith et al., 2013; Loftin
et al., 2015). Many of these algorithms leverage the observation that people tend to give feedback that is best interpreted as guidance on the policy the agent should be following, rather than as a numeric value to be maximized
by the agent. However, these approaches assume models
of feedback that are independent of the policy the agent
is currently following. We present empirical results that
demonstrate that this assumption is incorrect and further
demonstrate cases in which policy-independent learning algorithms suffer from this assumption. Following this result,
we present Convergent Actor-Critic by Humans (COACH),
an algorithm for learning from policy-dependent human
feedback. COACH is based on the insight that the advantage function (a value roughly corresponding to how
much better or worse an action is compared to the current
policy) provides a better model of human feedback, capturing human-feedback properties like diminishing returns,
rewarding improvement, and giving 0-valued feedback a
semantic meaning that combats forgetting. We compare
COACH to other approaches in a simple domain with simulated feedback. Then, to validate that COACH scales to
complex problems, we train five different behaviors on a
TurtleBot robot.

2. Background
For modeling the underlying decision-making problem of
an agent being taught by a human, we adopt the Markov
Decision Process (MDP) formalism. An MDP is a 5-tuple:
hS, A, T, R, γi, where S is the set of possible states of the

