Adaptive Sampling Probabilities for Non-Smooth Optimization
Hongseok Namkoong 1 Aman Sinha 2 Steve Yadlowsky 2 John C. Duchi 2 3

Abstract
Standard forms of coordinate and stochastic gradient methods do not adapt to structure in data;
their good behavior under random sampling is
predicated on uniformity in data. When gradients in certain blocks of features (for coordinate
descent) or examples (for SGD) are larger than
others, there is a natural structure that can be exploited for quicker convergence. Yet adaptive
variants often suffer nontrivial computational
overhead. We present a framework that discovers and leverages such structural properties at a
low computational cost. We employ a bandit optimization procedure that “learns” probabilities
for sampling coordinates or examples in (nonsmooth) optimization problems, allowing us to
guarantee performance close to that of the optimal stationary sampling distribution. When such
structures exist, our algorithms achieve tighter
convergence guarantees than their non-adaptive
counterparts, and we complement our analysis
with experiments on several datasets.

1. Introduction
Identifying and adapting to structural aspects of problem
data can often improve performance of optimization algorithms. In this paper, we study two forms of such structure:
variance in the relative importance of different features and
observations (as well as blocks thereof). As a motivating
concrete example, consider the `p regression problem
minimize
x

(

f (x) := kAx

bkpp =

n
X
i=1

|aTi x

bi |p

)

, (1)

where ai denote the rows of A 2 Rn⇥d . When the columns
(features) of A have highly varying norms—say because
1

Management Science & Engineering, Stanford University, USA 2 Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, USA
3
Statistics, Stanford University, USA. Correspondence to:
Hongseok Namkoong <hnamk@stanford.edu>, Aman Sinha
<amans@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

certain features are infrequent—we wish to leverage this
during optimization. Likewise, when rows ai have disparate norms, “heavy” rows of A influence the objective
more than others. We develop optimization algorithms that
automatically adapt to such irregularities for general nonsmooth convex optimization problems.
Standard (stochastic) subgradient methods (Nemirovski
et al., 2009), as well as more recent accelerated variants for
smooth, strongly convex incremental optimization problems (e.g. Johnson and Zhang, 2013; Defazio et al., 2014),
follow deterministic or random procedures that choose data
to use to compute updates in ways that are oblivious to conditioning and structure. As our experiments demonstrate,
choosing blocks of features or observations—for instance,
all examples belonging to a particular class in classification problems—can be advantageous. Adapting to such
structure can lead to substantial gains, and we propose
a method that adaptively updates the sampling probabilities from which it draws blocks of features/observations
(columns/rows in problem (1)) as it performs subgradient
updates. Our method applies to both coordinate descent
(feature/column sampling) and mirror descent (observation/row sampling). Heuristically, our algorithm learns to
sample informative features/observations using their gradient values and requires overhead only logarithmic in the
number of blocks over which it samples. We show that
our method optimizes a particular bound on convergence,
roughly sampling from the optimal stationary probability
distribution in hindsight, and leading to substantial improvements when the data has pronounced irregularity.
When the objective f (·) is smooth and the desired solution accuracy is reasonably low, (block) coordinate descent
methods are attractive because of their tractability (Nesterov, 2012; Necoara et al., 2011; Beck and Tetruashvili,
2013; Lee and Sidford, 2013; Richtárik and Takáč, 2014;
Lu and Xiao, 2015). In this paper, we consider potentially
non-smooth functions and present an adaptive block coordinate descent method, which iterates over b blocks of
coordinates, reminiscent of AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011).
Choosing a good sampling distribution for coordinates
in coordinate descent procedures is nontrivial (Lee and
Sidford, 2013; Necoara et al., 2011; Shalev-Shwartz and
Zhang, 2012; Richtárik and Takáč, 2015; Csiba et al., 2015;
Allen-Zhu and Yuan, 2015). Most work focuses on choos-

