Asynchronous Distributed Variational Gaussian Process for Regression

Hao Peng 1 Shandian Zhe 1 Xiao Zhang 1 Yuan Qi 2

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are powerful nonparametric function estimators. However, their
applications are largely limited by the expensive
computational cost of the inference procedures.
Existing stochastic or distributed synchronous
variational inferences, although have alleviated
this issue by scaling up GPs to millions of samples, are still far from satisfactory for real-world
large applications, where the data sizes are often orders of magnitudes larger, say, billions. To
solve this problem, we propose ADVGP, the first
Asynchronous Distributed Variational Gaussian
Process inference for regression, on the recent
large-scale machine learning platform, PARAM ETER S ERVER. ADVGP uses a novel, flexible
variational framework based on a weight space
augmentation, and implements the highly efficient, asynchronous proximal gradient optimization. While maintaining comparable or better predictive performance, ADVGP greatly improves upon the efficiency of the existing variational methods. With ADVGP, we effortlessly
scale up GP regression to a real-world application with billions of samples and demonstrate
an excellent, superior prediction accuracy to the
popular linear models.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
are powerful non-parametric Bayesian models for function estimation. Without imposing any explicit parametric
form, GPs merely induce a smoothness assumption via the
definition of covariance function, and hence can flexibly infer various, complicated functions from data. In addition,
GPs are robust to noise, resist overfitting and produce uncertainty estimations. However, a crucial bottleneck of GP
1

Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA 2 Ant Financial Service Group.
Correspondence to: Hao Peng
<pengh@alumni.purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

models is their expensive computational cost: exact GP inference requires O(n3 ) time complexity and O(n2 ) space
complexity (n is the number of training samples), which
limits GPs to very small applications, say, a few hundreds
of samples.
To mitigate this limitation, many approximate inference algorithms have been developed (Williams & Seeger, 2001;
Seeger et al., 2003; Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen,
2005; Snelson & Ghahramani, 2005; Deisenroth & Ng,
2015). Most methods use sparse approximations. Basically, we first introduce a small set of inducing points; and
then we develop an approximation that transfers the expensive computations from the entire large training data, such
as the covariance and inverse covariance matrix calculations, to the small set of the inducing points. To this end,
a typical strategy is to impose some simplified modeling
assumption. For example, FITC (Snelson & Ghahramani,
2005) makes a fully conditionally independent assumption.
Recently, Titsias (2009) proposed a more principled, variational sparse approximation framework, where the inducing points are also treated as variational parameters. The
variational framework is less prone to overfitting and often
yields a better inference quality (Titsias, 2009; Bauer et al.,
2016). Based on the variational approximation, Hensman
et al. (2013) developed a stochastic variational inference
(SVI) algorithm, and Gal et al. (2014) used a tight variational lower bound to develop a distributed inference algorithm with the M AP R EDUCE framework.
While SVI and the distributed variational inference have
successfully scaled up GP models to millions of samples
(O(106 )), they are still insufficient for real-world largescale applications, in which the data sizes are often orders
of magnitude larger, say, over billions of samples (O(109 )).
Specifically, SVI (Hensman et al., 2013) sequentially processes data samples and requires too much time to complete
even one epoch of training. The distributed variational algorithm in (Gal et al., 2014) uses the M AP R EDUCE framework and requires massive synchronizations during training, where a large amount of time is squandered when the
M APPERS or R EDUCERS are waiting for each other, or the
failed nodes are restarted.
To tackle this problem, we propose Asynchronous
Distributed Variational Gaussian Process inference (AD-

