Learning Stable Stochastic Nonlinear Dynamical Systems

Jonas Umlauft 1 Sandra Hirche 1

Abstract
A data-driven identification of dynamical systems requiring only minimal prior knowledge
is promising whenever no analytically derived
model structure is available, e.g., from first principles in physics. However, meta-knowledge on
the system’s behavior is often given and should
be exploited: Stability as fundamental property
is essential when the model is used for controller
design or movement generation. Therefore, this
paper proposes a framework for learning stable stochastic systems from data. We focus on
identifying a state-dependent coefficient form of
the nonlinear stochastic model which is globally
asymptotically stable according to probabilistic
Lyapunov methods. We compare our approach
to other state of the art methods on real-world
datasets in terms of flexibility and stability.

1. Introduction
An accurate identification of the system dynamics is the
first and very crucial step to many modern control methods.
Although reinforcement learning also allows model-free
search for optimal policies, it is known to be less efficient
and difficult to analyze. Therefore, classical control engineers employ system identification techniques to obtain
parametric model descriptions of dynamical systems from
observation data, e.g., in the linear case ARX and ARMAX
models. The identification focuses on model selection, i.e.,
finding the model structure and the corresponding set of parameters. But often this set of model candidates is difficult
to find, especially for complex, possibly non-deterministic,
systems (Ljung, 1998). Therefore, the need for data-driven
models has emerged recently as control engineering is increasingly applied in areas without analytic description of
the dynamical system. We consider the following two application scenarios: First, assume a set of trajectories for a
1

Chair of Information-oriented Control, Technical University
of Munich, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Jonas Umlauft <jonas.umlauft@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

robotic task is given through human demonstrations, e.g.,
object grasping. The goal is to represent the motion with a
dynamical system. To ensure the reproduction terminates
at the desired final point (object to grasp), we introduce the
stability constraint. Second, consider a dynamical system
which is known to be stable, e.g., a pendulum which rests
in hanging position. The goal is to identify the dynamics
precisely without further physical insights.
Bayesian non-parametric methods, more particularly Gaussian Processes (GPs) where successfully employed by Kocijan et al. (2005) and Wang et al. (2005) for system identification. Other approaches focus on learning switching
linear systems (Fox et al., 2009) or employ an EM algorithm (Ghahramani & Roweis, 1999) for nonlinear systems.
However, these approaches neglect the prior assumption
that the dynamical system is stable, which becomes crucial when the learned model is used as a generative process such as in movement generation for robotics (Ijspeert
et al., 2002). If stability is not considered during learning,
the identified model suffers from spurious attractors which
are not part of the true dynamics or instability.
Only little work has merged the extensive knowledge on
stability theory from control engineering with the powerful
data-driven approaches for system identification: For example Boots et al. (2008) and Chiuso & Pillonetto (2010)
take stability constraints for learning dynamical systems
into account but are limited to linear systems. The work
by Khansari-Zadeh & Billard (2011) ensures stability of
the system by constraining the optimization of a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to stability conditions derived
from Lyapunov methods. The work by Paraschos et al.
(2013) relies on a phase variable to ensure stability, which
makes the approach time-dependent and therefore less robust. Control Lyapunov functions are used by KhansariZadeh & Billard (2014) to ensure global stability for the
learned system. These approaches partially employ probabilistic models (GP, GMM), but limit the analysis to the
deterministic part by only considering the mean regression.
By discarding the true underlying probability distribution,
information regarding reliability of the model provided by
the data is lost. This leads to overconfident conclusions
regarding performance or safety on the real system.
Therefore, this work proposes a framework for learning

