An Infinite Hidden Markov Model With Similarity-Biased Transitions

Colin Reimer Dawson 1 Chaofan Huang 1 Clayton T. Morrison 2

Abstract
We describe a generalization of the Hierarchical
Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Model (HDPHMM) which is able to encode prior information that state transitions are more likely between “nearby” states. This is accomplished
by defining a similarity function on the state
space and scaling transition probabilities by pairwise similarities, thereby inducing correlations
among the transition distributions. We present
an augmented data representation of the model
as a Markov Jump Process in which: (1) some
jump attempts fail, and (2) the probability of success is proportional to the similarity between the
source and destination states. This augmentation restores conditional conjugacy and admits a
simple Gibbs sampler. We evaluate the model
and inference method on a speaker diarization
task and a “harmonic parsing” task using fourpart chorale data, as well as on several synthetic
datasets, achieving favorable comparisons to existing models.

ing a “stick” off of the remaining weight according to a
Beta (1, γ) distribution. The parameter γ > 0 is known
as the concentration parameter and governs how quickly
the weights tend to decay, with large γ corresponding to
slow decay, and hence more weights needed before a given
cumulative weight is reached. This stick-breaking process
is denoted by GEM (Ewens, 1990; Sethuraman, 1994) for
Griffiths, Engen and McCloskey. We thus have a discrete
probability measure, G0 , with weights βj at locations θj ,
j = 1, 2, . . . , defined by
i.i.d.

θj ∼ H

β ∼ GEM(γ).

G0 drawn in this way is a Dirichlet Process (DP) random
measure with concentration γ and base measure H.
The actual transition distribution, π j , from state j, is drawn
from another DP with concentration α and base measure
G0 :
i.i.d.
π j ∼ DP(αG0 )
j = 0, 1, 2, . . .
(2)
where π 0 represents the initial distribution. The hidden
state sequence, z1 , z2 , . . . zT is then generated according to
z1 | π 0 ∼ Cat(π 0 ), and
zt | zt−1 , π zt−1 ∼ Cat(π zt−1 )

1. Introduction and Background
The hierarchical Dirichlet process hidden Markov model
(HDP-HMM) (Beal et al., 2001; Teh et al., 2006) is a
Bayesian model for time series data that generalizes the
conventional hidden Markov Model to allow a countably
infinite state space. The hierarchical structure ensures that,
despite the infinite state space, a common set of destination
states will be reachable with positive probability from each
source state. The HDP-HMM can be characterized by the
following generative process.
Each state, indexed by j, has parameters, θj , drawn
from a base measure, H. A top-level sequence of state
weights, β = (β1 , β2 , . . . ), is drawn by iteratively break1

Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH, USA 2 The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Correspondence to: Colin Reimer Dawson <cdawson@oberlin.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

(1)

t = 1, 2, . . . , T

(3)

Finally, the emission distribution for state j is a function of
θj , so that observation yt is drawn according to
yt | zt , θzt ∼ F (θzt )

(4)

A shortcoming of the HDP prior on the transition matrix is
that it does not use the fact that the source and destination
states are the same set: that is, each π j has a special element which corresponds to a self-transition. In the HDPHMM, however, self-transitions are no more likely a priori
than transitions to any other state. The Sticky HDP-HMM
(Fox et al., 2008) addresses this issue by adding an extra
mass κ at location j to the base measure of the DP that
generates π j . That is, (2) is replaced by
π j ∼ DP(αG0 + κδθj ).

(5)

An alternative approach that treats self-transitions as special is the HDP Hidden Semi-Markov Model (HDPHSMM; Johnson & Willsky (2013)), wherein state duration distributions are modeled separately, and ordinary selftransitions are ruled out. However, while both of these

