A Simple Multi-Class Boosting Framework
with Theoretical Guarantees and Empirical Proficiency

Ron Appel 1 Pietro Perona 1

Abstract
There is a need for simple yet accurate white-box
learning systems that train quickly and with little data. To this end, we showcase REBEL, a
multi-class boosting method, and present a novel
family of weak learners called localized similarities. Our framework provably minimizes the
training error of any dataset at an exponential
rate. We carry out experiments on a variety of
synthetic and real datasets, demonstrating a consistent tendency to avoid overfitting. We evaluate our method on MNIST and standard UCI
datasets against other state-of-the-art methods,
showing the empirical proficiency of our method.

1. Motivation
The past couple of years have seen vast improvements in
the performance of machine learning algorithms. Deep
Nets of varying architectures reach almost (if not better
than) human performance in many domains (LeCun et al.,
2015). A key strength of these systems is their ability to
transform the data using complex feature representations
to facilitate classification. However, there are several considerable drawbacks to employing such networks.
A first drawback is that validating through many architectures, each of which may have millions of parameters, requires a lot of data and time. In many fields (e.g. pathology
of not-so-common diseases, expert curation of esoteric subjects, etc.), gathering large amounts of data is expensive
or even impossible (Yu et al., 2015). Autonomous robots
that need to learn on the fly may not be able to afford the
large amount of processing power or time required to properly train more complex networks simply due to their hardware constraints. Moreover, most potential users (e.g. nonmachine-learning scientists, small business owners, hobby1

Caltech, Pasadena, USA. Correspondence to: Ron
Appel <appel@vision.caltech.edu>, Pietro Perona <perona@vision.caltech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

(a) Old: Decision Stumps

(b) New: Localized Similarities

Figure 1. (a) The typical decision stumps commonly used in
boosting lead to classification boundaries that are axis aligned
and not representative of the data. Although these methods can
achieve perfect training accuracy, it is apparent that they heavily
overfit. (b) Our method uses localized similarities, a novel family
of simple weak learners (see Sec. 5.1). Paired with a procedure
that provably guarantees exponential loss minimization, our classifiers focus on smooth, well-generalizing boundaries.

ists, etc.) may not have the expertise or artistry required to
hypothesize a set of appropriate models.
A second drawback is that the complex representations
achieved by these networks are difficult to interpret and to
analyze. For many riskier applications (e.g. self-driving
cars, robotic surgeries, military drones, etc.), a machine
should only run autonomously if it is able to explain its every decision and action. Further, when used towards the scientific analysis of phenomena (e.g. understanding animal
behavior, weather patterns, financial market trends, etc.),
the goal is to extract a causal interpretation of the system in
question; hence, to be useful, a machine should be able to
provide a clear explanation of its internal logic.
For these reasons, it is desirable to have a simple white-box
machine learning system that is able to train quickly and
with little data. With these constraints in mind, we showcase a multi-class boosting algorithm called REBEL and
a novel family of weak learners called similarity stumps,
leading to much better generalization than decision stumps,
as shown in Fig. 1. Our proposed framework is simple, efficient, and is able to perfectly train on any dataset (i.e. fully
minimize the training error in a finite number of iterations).

