Deep Decentralized Multi-task Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
under Partial Observability

Shayegan Omidshafiei 1 Jason Pazis 1 Christopher Amato 2 Jonathan P. How 1 John Vian 3

Abstract
Many real-world tasks involve multiple agents
with partial observability and limited communication. Learning is challenging in these settings
due to local viewpoints of agents, which perceive
the world as non-stationary due to concurrentlyexploring teammates. Approaches that learn specialized policies for individual tasks face problems when applied to the real world: not only
do agents have to learn and store distinct policies for each task, but in practice identities of
tasks are often non-observable, making these approaches inapplicable. This paper formalizes and
addresses the problem of multi-task multi-agent
reinforcement learning under partial observability. We introduce a decentralized single-task
learning approach that is robust to concurrent interactions of teammates, and present an approach
for distilling single-task policies into a unified
policy that performs well across multiple related
tasks, without explicit provision of task identity.

1. Introduction
In multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) agents are
presented several related target tasks (Taylor & Stone,
2009; Caruana, 1998) with shared characteristics. Rather
than specialize on a single task, the objective is to generalize performance across all tasks. For example, a team of
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) learning to detect
and repair faults in deep-sea equipment must be able to do
so in many settings (varying water currents, lighting, etc.),
not just under the circumstances observed during training.
Many real-world problems involve multiple agents with
1

Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems (LIDS),
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 College of Computer and Information Science (CCIS), Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
3
Boeing Research & Technology, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Shayegan Omidshafiei <shayegan@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

partial observability and limited communication (e.g., the
AUV example) (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016), but generating accurate models for these domains is difficult due to
complex interactions between agents and the environment.
Learning is difficult in these settings due to partial observability and local viewpoints of agents, which perceive the
environment as non-stationary due to teammates’ actions.
Efficient learners must extract knowledge from past tasks
to accelerate learning and improve generalization to new
tasks. Learning specialized policies for individual tasks
can be problematic, as not only do agents have to store a
distinct policy for each task, but in practice face scenarios
where the identity of the task is often non-observable.
Existing MTRL methods focus on single-agent and/or fully
observable settings (Taylor & Stone, 2009). By contrast,
this work considers cooperative, independent learners operating in partially-observable, stochastic environments, receiving feedback in the form of local noisy observations
and joint rewards. This setting is general and realistic
for many multi-agent domains. We introduce the multitask multi-agent reinforcement learning (MT-MARL) under partial observability problem, where the goal is to maximize execution-time performance on a set of related tasks,
without explicit knowledge of the task identity. Each MTMARL task is formalized as a Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Bernstein et al., 2002), a general formulation for cooperative
decision-making under uncertainty. MT-MARL poses significant challenges, as each agent must learn to coordinate
with teammates to achieve good performance, ensure policy generalization across all tasks, and conduct (implicit)
execution-time inference of the underlying task ID to make
sound decisions using local noisy observations. As typical in existing MTRL approaches, this work focuses on
average asymptotic performance across all tasks (Caruana,
1998; Taylor & Stone, 2009) and sample-efficient learning.
We propose a two-phase MT-MARL approach that
first uses cautiously-optimistic learners in combination with Deep Recurrent Q-Networks (DRQNs)
(Hausknecht & Stone, 2015) for action-value approximation. We introduce Concurrent Experience Replay
Trajectories (CERTs), a decentralized extension of ex-

