Batched High-dimensional Bayesian Optimization
via Structural Kernel Learning

Zi Wang * 1 Chengtao Li * 1 Stefanie Jegelka 1 Pushmeet Kohli 2

Abstract
Optimization of high-dimensional black-box
functions is an extremely challenging problem.
While Bayesian optimization has emerged as
a popular approach for optimizing black-box
functions, its applicability has been limited to
low-dimensional problems due to its computational and statistical challenges arising from
high-dimensional settings. In this paper, we propose to tackle these challenges by (1) assuming
a latent additive structure in the function and inferring it properly for more efficient and effective BO, and (2) performing multiple evaluations
in parallel to reduce the number of iterations required by the method. Our novel approach learns
the latent structure with Gibbs sampling and constructs batched queries using determinantal point
processes. Experimental validations on both synthetic and real-world functions demonstrate that
the proposed method outperforms the existing
state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Optimization is one of the fundamental pillars of modern
machine learning. Considering that most modern machine
learning methods involve the solution of some optimization
problem, it is not surprising that many recent breakthroughs
in this area have been on the back of more effective techniques for optimization. A case in point is deep learning,
whose rise has been mirrored by the development of numerous techniques like batch normalization.
While modern algorithms have been shown to be very
*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, USA 2 DeepMind, London, UK. Correspondence to: Zi Wang <ziw@csail.mit.edu>, Chengtao
Li <ctli@mit.edu>, Stefanie Jegelka <stefje@csail.mit.edu>,
Pushmeet Kohli <pushmeet@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

effective for convex optimization problems defined over
continuous domains, the same cannot be stated for nonconvex optimization, which has generally been dominated
by stochastic techniques. During the last decade, Bayesian
optimization has emerged as a popular approach for optimizing black-box functions. However, its applicability is
limited to low-dimensional problems because of computational and statistical challenges that arise from optimization
in high-dimensional settings.
In the past, these two problems have been addressed by
assuming a simpler underlying structure of the black-box
function. For instance, Djolonga et al. (2013) assume that
the function being optimized has a low-dimensional effective subspace, and learn this subspace via low-rank matrix
recovery. Similarly, Kandasamy et al. (2015) assume additive structure of the function where different constituent
functions operate on disjoint low-dimensional subspaces.
The subspace decomposition can be partially optimized by
searching possible decompositions and choosing the one
with the highest GP marginal likelihood (treating the decomposition as a hyper-parameter of the GP). Fully optimizing the decomposition is, however, intractable. Li et al.
(2016) extended (Kandasamy et al., 2015) to functions with
a projected-additive structure, and approximate the projective matrix via projection pursuit with the assumption that
the projected subspaces have the same and known dimensions. The aforementioned approaches share the computational challenge of learning the groups of decomposed subspaces without assuming the dimensions of the subspaces
are known. Both (Kandasamy et al., 2015) and subsequently (Li et al., 2016) adapt the decomposition by maximizing the GP marginal likelihood every certain number of
iterations. However, such maximization is computationally
intractable due to the combinatorial nature of the partitions
of the feature space, which forces prior work to adopt randomized search heuristics.
In this paper, we develop a new formulation of Bayesian
optimization specialized for high dimensions. One of the
key contributions of this work is a new formulation that
interprets prior work on high-dimensional Bayesian optimization (HDBO) through the lens of structured kernels,
and places a prior on the kernel structure. Thereby, our

