Efficient Orthogonal Parametrisation of Recurrent Neural Networks
Using Householder Reflections

Zakaria Mhammedi 1 2 Andrew Hellicar 2 Ashfaqur Rahman 2 James Bailey 1

Abstract
The problem of learning long-term dependencies
in sequences using Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) is still a major challenge. Recent methods have been suggested to solve this problem
by constraining the transition matrix to be unitary during training which ensures that its norm
is equal to one and prevents exploding gradients.
These methods either have limited expressiveness or scale poorly with the size of the network
when compared with the simple RNN case, especially when using stochastic gradient descent
with a small mini-batch size. Our contributions
are as follows; we first show that constraining the
transition matrix to be unitary is a special case of
an orthogonal constraint. Then we present a new
parametrisation of the transition matrix which allows efficient training of an RNN while ensuring
that the matrix is always orthogonal. Our results
show that the orthogonal constraint on the transition matrix applied through our parametrisation
gives similar benefits to the unitary constraint,
without the time complexity limitations.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been successfully
used in many applications involving time series. This is because RNNs are well suited for sequential data as they process inputs one element at a time and store relevant information in their hidden state. In practice, however, training
simple RNNs (sRNN) can be challenging due to the problem of exploding and vanishing gradients (Hochreiter et al.,
2001). It has been shown that exploding gradients can occur when the transition matrix of an RNN has a spectral
norm larger than one (Glorot & Bengio, 2010). This results
1

The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia 2 Data61,
CSIRO, Australia. Correspondence to: Zakaria Mhammedi
<zak.mhammedi@data61.csiro.au>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

in an error surface, associated with some objective function, having very steep walls (Pascanu et al., 2013). On the
other hand, when the spectral norm of the transition matrix
is less than one, the information at one time step tend to
vanish quickly after a few time steps. This makes it challenging to learn long-term dependencies in sequential data.
Different methods have been suggested to solve either the
vanishing or exploding gradient problem. The LSTM has
been specifically designed to help with the vanishing gradient (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). This is achieved
by using gate vectors which allow a linear flow of information through the hidden state. However, the LSTM
does not directly address the exploding gradient problem.
One approach to solving this issue is to clip the gradients
(Mikolov, 2012) when their norm exceeds some threshold value. However, this adds an extra hyperparameter to
the model. Furthermore, if exploding gradients can occur
within some parameter search space, the associated error
surface will still have steep walls. This can make training
challenging even with gradient clipping.
Another way to approach this problem is to improve the
shape of the error surface directly by making it smoother,
which can be achieved by constraining the spectral norm of
the transition matrix to be less than or equal to one. However, a value of exactly one is best for the vanishing gradient problem. A good choice of the activation function
between hidden states is also crucial in this case. These
ideas have been investigated in recent works. In particular, the unitary RNN (Arjovsky et al., 2016) uses a special parametrisation to constrain the transition matrix to be
unitary, and hence, of norm one. This parametrisation and
other similar ones (Hyland & Rätsch, 2017; Wisdom et al.,
2016) have some advantages and drawbacks which we will
discuss in more details in the next section.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We first show that constraining the search space of the
transition matrix of an RNN to the set of unitary matrices U(n) is equivalent to limiting the search space
to a subset of O(2n) (O(2n) is the set of 2n × 2n orthogonal matrices) of a new RNN with twice the hidden size. This suggests that it may not be necessary to

