Learning Texture Manifolds with the Periodic Spatial GAN

Urs Bergmann * 1 Nikolay Jetchev * 1 Roland Vollgraf 1

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach to texture synthesis based on generative adversarial
networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), and
call this technique Periodic Spatial GAN (PSGAN). The PSGAN has several novel abilities
which surpass the current state of the art in texture synthesis. First, we can learn multiple textures, periodic or non-periodic, from datasets of
one or more complex large images. Second,
we show that the image generation with PSGANs has properties of a texture manifold: we
can smoothly interpolate between samples in the
structured noise space and generate novel samples, which lie perceptually between the textures
of the original dataset. We make multiple experiments which show that PSGANs can flexibly
handle diverse texture and image data sources,
and the method is highly scalable and can generate output images of arbitrary large size.

1. Introduction
1.1. Textures and Texture Synthesis
Textures are important perceptual elements, both in the
real world and in the visual arts. Many textures have random noise characteristics, formally defined as stationary,
ergodic, stochastic processes (Georgiadis et al., 2013).
There are many natural image examples with such properties, e.g. rice randomly spread on the ground. However,
more complex textures also exist in nature, e.g. those that
exhibit periodicity like a honeycomb or fish scales.
The goal of texture synthesis is to learn from a given example image a generating process, which allows to create
many images with similar properties. Classical texture synthesis methods include instance based approaches (Efros
*
Equal contribution 1 Zalando Research, Berlin. Correspondence to: Urs Bergmann <urs.bergmann@zalando.de>, Nikolay Jetchev <nikolay.jetchev@zalando.de>, Roland Vollgraf
<roland.vollgraf@zalando.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

& Leung, 1999; Efros & Freeman, 2001), where pixels or
patches of the source image are resampled and copied next
to similar image regions, so that a seamless bigger texture
image is obtained. Such methods have good visual quality
and can deal with periodic images, but have a high runtime complexity when generating big images. In addition,
since they do not learn an explicit model of images but just
copy patches from the original pixels, they cannot be used
to generate novel textures from multiple examples.
Parametric methods define an explicit model of a “good”
texture by specifying some statistical properties; new texture images that are optimal w.r.t. the specified criteria are
synthesized by optimization. The method of (Portilla &
Simoncelli, 2000) yields good results in creating various
textures, including periodic ones (the parametric statistics
include phase variables of pre-specified periodicity). However, the run-time complexity is high, even for small output
images. The authors also tried blending of textures, but
the results were not satisfactory: patch-wise mixtures were
obtained, rather than a new homogeneous texture that perceptually interpolates the originals.
More recently, deep learning methods were shown to be
a powerful, fast and data-driven, parametric approach to
texture synthesis. The work of (Gatys et al., 2015a) is
a milestone: they showed that filters from a discriminatively trained deep neural network can be used as effective
parametric image descriptors. Texture synthesis is modeled as an optimization problem. (Gatys et al., 2015b) also
showed the interesting application of painting a target content photo in the style of a given input image: “neural
art style transfer”. Related works speed-up texture synthesis and style transfer by approximating the optimization
process by feed-forward convolutional networks (Ulyanov
et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2016).
However, the choice of descriptor in all of these related
works – the Gram matrix of learned filters – is a specific
prior on the learnable textures for the method. It generalizes to many, but not all textures – e.g. periodic textures are
reproduced inaccurately. Another limitation is that texture
synthesis is performed from a single example image only,
lacking the ability to represent and morph textures defined
by several different images. In a related work, (Dumoulin
et al., 2016) explored the blending of multiple styles by

