Re-revisiting Learning on Hypergraphs:
Confidence Interval and Subgradient Method

Chenzi Zhang * 1 Shuguang Hu * 1 Zhihao Gavin Tang 1 T-H. Hubert Chan 1 2

Abstract
We revisit semi-supervised learning on hypergraphs. Same as previous approaches, our
method uses a convex program whose objective
function is not everywhere differentiable. We
exploit the non-uniqueness of the optimal solutions, and consider confidence intervals which
give the exact ranges that unlabeled vertices take
in any optimal solution. Moreover, we give
a much simpler approach for solving the convex program based on the subgradient method.
Our experiments on real-world datasets confirm
that our confidence interval approach on hypergraphs outperforms existing methods, and our
sub-gradient method gives faster running times
when the number of vertices is much larger than
the number of edges.

1. Introduction
Given a dataset, similarity relationship between examples
can be represented by a graph in which each example is
represented by a vertex. While pairwise relationship between two vertices can be represented by an edge in a normal graph, a higher order relationship involving multiple
vertices can be captured by a hyperedge, which means that
all the corresponding examples are similar to one another.
Hypergraphs have been used in several learning applications such as clustering of categorical data (Gibson et al.,
1998), multi-label classification (Sun et al., 2008), Laplacian sparse coding (Gao et al., 2013), image classification (Yu et al., 2012), image retrieval (Huang et al., 2010),
mapping users across different social networks (Tan et al.,
2014) and predicting edge labels in hypernode graphs (Ricatte et al., 2014).

In this paper, we consider semi-supervised learning on
an edge-weighted hypergraph H = (V, E, w), with a set
L of labeled vertices, whose labels are given by fL∗ ∈
{−1, +1}L . The task is to predict the labels of the unlabeled vertices N , with the working principle that vertices
contained in a hyperedge e ∈ E are more similar to one
another if the edge weight we is larger. This problem is
also known as transductive inference and has been studied
in (Zhou et al., 2006) and (Hein et al., 2013).
However, the methods in (Zhou et al., 2006) have been
criticized by (Agarwal et al., 2006), because essentially
a hypergraph is converted into a normal graph. For instance, given a hyperedge e containing vertices S, either
(i) a clique is added between the vertices in S, or (ii) a star
is formed by adding a new vertex ve connecting every vertex in S to ve . Then, a standard convex program using a
regularization potential function for normal graphs can be
applied (Zhu et al., 2003). By choosing appropriate edge
weights, it was shown in (Agarwal et al., 2006) that the two
approaches are equivalent to the following convex program
relaxation:
X
1X
we
(fu − fv )2
min Φold (f ) :=
2
e∈E
{u,v}∈(2e)
subject to fu ∈ [−1, 1],
fu = fu∗ ,

∀u ∈ V

∀u ∈ L.

On the other hand, it was proposed in (Hein et al., 2013)
that the following regularization function is more suitable
to capture hyperedge expansion:
1X
Φnew (f ) :=
we · (max fu − min fv )2 .
u∈e
v∈e
2
e∈E

2

Indeed, it was shown in (Hein et al., 2013) that their approach outperforms (Zhou et al., 2006) on several datasets
from the UCI Machine Learning Repository (Lichman,
2013).

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Loss Function. In (Hein et al., 2013), a squared loss function was added by considering the convex program with ob2
jective function Φnew (f ) + µ kf − f ∗ k2 on f ∈ [−1, 1]V ,
where µ > 0 is a parameter to be tuned, fL∗ is given by the
∗
labeled vertices L, and for the unlabeled vertices fN
= 0.

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
This research was partially supported by the Hong Kong RGC
under the grant 17200214. Correspondence to: T-H. Hubert Chan
<hubert@cs.hku.hk>.

