Online Partial Least Square Optimization:
Dropping Convexity for Better Efficiency and Scalability
Zhehui Chen 1 Lin F. Yang 2 Chris J. Li 3 Tuo Zhao 1

Abstract
Multiview representation learning is popular for
latent factor analysis. Many existing approaches
formulate the multiview representation learning
as convex optimization problems, where global
optima can be obtained by certain algorithms
in polynomial time. However, many evidences
have corroborated that heuristic nonconvex approaches also have good empirical computational
performance and convergence to the global optima, although there is a lack of theoretical justification. Such a gap between theory and practice
motivates us to study a nonconvex formulation
for multiview representation learning, which can
be efficiently solved by a simple stochastic gradient descent method. By analyzing the dynamics of the algorithm based on diffusion processes,
we establish a global rate of convergence to the
global optima. Numerical experiments are provided to support our theory.

1. Introduction
Multiview data have become increasingly available in
many popular real-world data analysis and machine learning problems. These data are collected from diverse domains or different feature extractors, which share latent factors. Existing literature has demonstrated different scenarios. For instance, the pixels and captions of images can
be considered as two-view data, since they are two different features describing the same contents. More motivating examples involving two or more data sets simultaneously can be found in computer vision, natural language processing, and acoustic recognition. See (Hardoon
et al., 2004; Socher and Fei-Fei, 2010; Kidron et al., 2005;
Chaudhuri et al., 2009; Arora and Livescu, 2012; Bharadwaj et al., 2012; Vinokourov et al., 2002; Dhillon et al.,
1

Georgia Institute of Technology; 2 Johns Hopkins University; 3 Princeton University. Correspondence to: Tuo Zhao
<tourzhao@gatech.edu.>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

2011). Although these data are usually unlabeled, there exist underlying association and dependency between different views, which allows us to learn useful representations
in a unsupervised manner. Here we are interested in finding a representation that reveals intrinsic low-dimensional
structures and decomposes underlying confounding factors. One ubiquitous approach is partial least square (PLS)
for multiview representation learning. Specifically, given
a data set of n samples of two sets of random variables
(views), X 2 Rm and Y 2 Rd , PLS aims to find an
r-dimensional subspace (r ⌧ min(m, d)) that preserves
most of the covariance between two views. Existing literature has shown that such a subspace is spanned by the
leading r components of the singular
⇥
⇤value decomposition
(SVD) of ⌃XY = E(X,Y )⇠D XY > (Arora et al., 2012),
where we sample (X, Y ) from some unknown distribution
D. Throughout the rest of the paper, if not clear specified,
we denote E(X,Y )⇠D by E for notational simplicity.
A straightforward approach for PLS is “Sample Average
Approximation” (SAA, (Abdi, 2003; Ando and Zhang,
2005)), where we run an offline (batch) SVD algorithm
on the empirical covariance matrix after seeing sufficient
data samples. However, in the “big data” regime, this approach requires unfeasible amount of storage and computation time. Therefore, it is much more practical to consider
the multiview learning problem in a “data laden” setting,
where we draw independent samples from an underlying
distribution D over Rm ⇥ Rd , one at a time. This further
enables us to formulate PLS as a stochastic (online) optimization problem. Here we only consider the rank-1 case
(r = 1) for simplicity, and solve
(b
u, vb) = argmax E v > Y X > u
u2Rm ,v2Rd

subject to u> u = 1, v > v = 1.

(1.1)

Several nonconvex stochastic approximation (SA) algorithms have been proposed in (Arora et al., 2012). These
algorithms work great in practice, but are lack of theoretic
justifications, since the nonconvex nature of (1.1) makes
the theoretical analysis very challenging. To overcome
this obstacle, (Arora et al., 2016) propose a convex relaxation of (1.1) by lifting (Lasserre, 2001). Specifically, by a
reparametrization M = uv > (Recall that we are interested

