Hierarchy Through Composition with Multitask LMDPs
Andrew M. Saxe 1 Adam C. Earle 2 Benjamin Rosman 2 3

Abstract
Hierarchical architectures are critical to the
scalability of reinforcement learning methods.
Most current hierarchical frameworks execute actions serially, with macro-actions comprising sequences of primitive actions. We propose a novel
alternative to these control hierarchies based on
concurrent execution of many actions in parallel.
Our scheme exploits the guaranteed concurrent
compositionality provided by the linearly solvable
Markov decision process (LMDP) framework,
which naturally enables a learning agent to draw
on several macro-actions simultaneously to solve
new tasks. We introduce the Multitask LMDP
module, which maintains a parallel distributed
representation of tasks and may be stacked to form
deep hierarchies abstracted in space and time.

1. Introduction
Real world tasks unfold at a range of spatial and temporal
scales, such that learning solely at the finest scale is likely to
be slow. Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) (Barto
& Madadevan, 2003; Parr & Russell, 1998; Dietterich, 2000)
attempts to remedy this by learning a nested sequence of
ever more detailed plans. Hierarchical schemes have a number of desirable properties. Firstly, they are intuitive, as
humans seldom plan at the level of raw actions, typically preferring to reason at a higher level of abstraction (Botvinick
et al., 2009; Ribas-Fernandes et al., 2011; Solway et al.,
2014). Secondly, they constitute one approach to tackling
the curse of dimensionality (Bellman, 1957; Howard, 1960).
In real world MDPs, the number of states typically grows
dramatically in the size of a domain. A similar curse of dimensionality afflicts actions, such that a robot with multiple
joints, for instance, must operate in the product space of
1

Center for Brain Science, Harvard University 2 School of
Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, University of
the Witwatersrand 3 Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, South Africa. Correspondence to: Andrew M. Saxe
<asaxe@fas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

actions for each joint individually (Mausam & Weld, 2008).
Finally, the ‘tasks’ performed by an agent may come in
great variety, and can also suffer from a curse of dimensionality: a robot that learns policies to navigate to each of ten
rooms would need to learn 10 choose 2 policies to navigate
to the closer of each pair of rooms. Transferring learning
across tasks is therefore vital (Taylor & Stone, 2009; Foster
& Dayan, 2002; Drummond, 1998; Fernández & Veloso,
2006; Bonarini et al., 2006; Barreto et al., 2016).
Many HRL schemes rely on a serial call/return procedure,
in which temporally extended macro-actions or ‘options’
can call other (macro-)actions. In this sense, these schemes
draw on a computer metaphor, in which a serial processor
chooses sequential primitive actions, occasionally pushing
or popping new macro-actions onto a stack. The influential
options framework (Sutton et al., 1999), MAXQ method
(Dietterich, 2000; Jonsson & Gómez, 2016) and the hierarchy of abstract machines (Parr & Russell, 1998; Burridge
et al., 1999) all share this sequential-execution structure.
Concurrent MDPs (Mausam & Weld, 2008) relax the assumption of serial execution to allow multiple actions to be
executed simultaneously at each time step, at the cost of a
combinatorial increase in the size of the action space. In
this paper, we develop a novel hierarchical scheme with a
parallel and distributed execution structure that overcomes
the combinatorial increase in action space by exploiting the
guaranteed optimal compositionality afforded by the linearly solvable Markov decision process (LMDP) framework
(Todorov, 2006; Kappen, 2005).
We present a Multitask LMDP module that executes concurrent blends of previously learned tasks. Here we use
the term ‘concurrent’ or ‘parallel’ to refer to ‘parallel distributed processing’ or neural network-like methods that
form weighted blends of many simple elements to achieve
their aim. In standard schemes, if a robot arm has acquired
policies to individually reach two points in some space, this
knowledge typically does not aid it in optimally reaching to
either point. However in our scheme, such behaviours can
be expressed as different weighted task blends, such that
an agent can simultaneously draw on several sub-policies
to achieve goals not explicitly represented by any of the
individual behaviours, including tasks the agent has never
performed before.

