Collect at Once, Use Effectively:
Making Non-interactive Locally Private Learning Possible

Kai Zheng * 1 Wenlong Mou * 1 Liwei Wang 1

Abstract
Non-interactive Local Differential Privacy (LDP)
requires data analysts to collect data from users
through noisy channel at once. In this paper,
we extend the frontiers of Non-interactive LDP
learning and estimation from several aspects. For
learning with smooth generalized linear losses,
we propose an approximate stochastic gradient
oracle estimated from non-interactive LDP channel using Chebyshev expansion, which is combined with inexact gradient methods to obtain an
efficient algorithm with quasi-polynomial sample complexity bound. For the high-dimensional
world, we discover that under `2 -norm assumption on data points, high-dimensional sparse
linear regression and mean estimation can be
achieved with logarithmic dependence on dimension, using random projection and approximate
recovery. We also extend our methods to Kernel Ridge Regression. Our work is the first
one that makes learning and estimation possible
for a broad range of learning tasks under noninteractive LDP model.

1. Introduction
Data privacy has become an increasingly important issue
in the age of data science. Differential Privacy (DP), proposed in 2006 by Dwork et al.,(Dwork et al., 2006), provide
a solid foundation and rigorous standard for private data
analysis. Since then, there has been extensive literature
studying the fundamental trade-offs between differential
privacy and accuracy for query answering (Hardt & Rothblum, 2010; Hardt et al., 2012; Thaler et al., 2012; Wang
*

Equal contribution 1 Key Laboratory of Machine Perception,
MOE, School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Kai Zheng <zhengk92@pku.edu.cn>, Wenlong Mou <mouwenlong@pku.edu.cn>, Liwei Wang <wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 2016), machine learning (Chaudhuri & Monteleoni,
2008; Chaudhuri et al., 2011; Rubinstein et al., 2012; Wang
et al., 2015), and statistical inference (Lei, 2011; Smith,
2011). For more details on DP results, please refer to the
excellent monograph written by Dwork and Roth (Dwork
& Roth, 2014). Intuitively, a DP algorithm uses randomized response to defend against adversary, so that change
of one of data points could not be detected.
Despite the prevailing success of this notion in academia,
its applicability in data science practice could be limited.
For example, if data analysts just promise to follow the
differential privacy constraints, user will not feel their privacy are preserved. The promise could not be validated;
the mechanisms are complicated; and even worse: users do
not trust the data collector at all. Unfortunately, most of
differential privacy algorithms are based on adding noise
calibrated to stability of loss function, which essentially requires access to original data.
Borrowing ideas from classical wisdom on collecting sensitive survey data (Warner, 1965), Local Differential Privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2008; Duchi et al.,
2013b) was proposed as a stronger notion of privacy to resolve this problem. LDP requires each of data points to
be passed through a noisy channel during collection. This
channel will ensure one can hardly tell anything about the
user based on what he have sent. The practical advantage of LDP is obvious: users will be comfortable sending
their sensitive information through noisy channels, which
are transparent and reliable; additionally, users can choose
their own privacy parameters, making it possible to associate with economic value. Therefore, this line of research has attracted lots of attention (Duchi et al., 2013a;b;
Kairouz et al., 2014; Bassily & Smith, 2015; Kairouz et al.,
2016).
Despite the analogy in definition, the way in which LDP
achieves accurate results are fundamentally different from
classical DP. Essentially, the information collected from
each user is almost completely noisy, from which one needs
to obtain accurate results. The only way to do that is to
make the independently distributed noise cancel out with
each other in some sense. With sand being washed away
by waves, golds begin to appear.

