Source-Target Similarity Modelings for Multi-Source Transfer Gaussian
Process Regression

Pengfei Wei 1 2 Ramon Sagarna 1 2 Yiping Ke 1 2 Yew-Soon Ong 1 2 Chi-Keong Goh 3 2

Abstract
A key challenge in multi-source transfer learning is to capture the diverse inter-domain similarities. In this paper, we study different approaches based on Gaussian process models to
solve the multi-source transfer regression problem. Precisely, we first investigate the feasibility
and performance of a family of transfer covariance functions that represent the pairwise similarity of each source and the target domain. We
theoretically show that using such a transfer covariance function for general Gaussian process
modelling can only capture the same similarity
coefficient for all the sources, and thus may result in unsatisfactory transfer performance. This
leads us to propose TCM S Stack, an integrated
strategy incorporating the benefits of the transfer covariance function and stacking. Extensive experiments on one synthetic and two realworld datasets, with learning settings of up to 11
sources for the latter, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed TCM S Stack.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning (TL) methods show specially appealing
for real-world applications where the data from the target
domain is scarce but a good amount of data from another
source domain is available. With research efforts largely
confined to the single-source setting (Pan et al., 2011; Wei
et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2016), an increasing amount of
studies are contributing to a realistic applicability of TL by
addressing the multi-source scenario, mainly for classifica1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 2 Rolls-Royce@Nanyang
Technological University Corporate Lab 3 Rolls-Royce Advanced Technology Centre, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Pengfei Wei <Pwei001@e.ntu.edu.sg>, Ramon Sagarna <saramon@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tion (Tommasi et al., 2014; Fang et al., 2015; Bhatt et al.,
2016). The problem of regression, however, has been much
less studied, despite of the variety of real-world domains
in which it arises; for instance wifi or indoor signal location (Pan et al., 2008), biological data analysis (Lam et al.,
2016), or mechanical system design (Ghosh et al., 2015).
In this work, we concentrate on multi-source transfer regression (MSTR) based on Gaussian process (GP) models.
All the way through, the TL community has been paying
attention to modeling the similarity between different domains so that only the source knowledge that is helpful
for the target domain is transferred. This is because designing a TL method based on the assumption that domains
are mutually relevant may lead to negative transfer (Pan &
Yang, 2010). Similarity capture is particularly crucial in
multi-source TL as the transfer capacity to the target task
may differ considerably across the diverse source domains.
Thus, TL methods that are capable of tuning the strength of
the knowledge transfer to the similarity of the domains are
attracting increasing interest (Luo et al., 2008; Wang et al.,
2014; Al-Stouhi & Reddy, 2011).
As regards to MSTR, a key issue is to capture the diverse
Source-Target (S-T) similarities. The relatively few efforts
to date have focused on ensemble methods. Particularly, an
amount of works rely on the boosting strategy due to its capability to capture fine-grained S-T similarities be weighting the contribution of train instances individually (Dai
et al., 2007; Pardoe & Stone, 2010; Yao & Doretto, 2010).
However, as outlined in (Al-Stouhi & Reddy, 2011), such
an instance-based similarity strategy in boosting has shown
issues with slow/premature weights convergence that have
seriously penalized the computational cost or the transfer
performance. Another type of ensemble strategy for multisource transfer is stacking (Wolpert, 1992). Pardoe and
Stone propose a meta-model that aggregates the predictions
of several base models previously learned with each source
in isolation (Pardoe & Stone, 2010) . The aggregation is
done by assigning each base model a model importance. In
this case, the S-T similarities can be captured through the
model importance. However, in such stacking-based methods, the base models suffer from a lack of consideration of
the dependencies between the different source domains.

