Uncertainty Assessment and False Discovery Rate Control
in High-Dimensional Granger Causal Inference
Aditya Chaudhry 1 Pan Xu 2 Quanquan Gu 2

Abstract
Causal inference among high-dimensional time
series data proves an important research problem
in many fields. While in the classical regime one
often establishes causality among time series via
a concept known as “Granger causality,” existing approaches for Granger causal inference in
high-dimensional data lack the means to characterize the uncertainty associated with Granger
causality estimates (e.g., p-values and confidence
intervals). We make two contributions in this
work. First, we introduce a novel asymptotically
unbiased Granger causality estimator with corresponding test statistics and confidence intervals to
allow, for the first time, uncertainty characterization in high-dimensional Granger causal inference.
Second, we introduce a novel method for false discovery rate control that achieves higher power in
multiple testing than existing techniques and that
can cope with dependent test statistics and dependent observations. We corroborate our theoretical
results with experiments on both synthetic data
and real-world climatological data.

In statistics, causality is often established by means of a controlled, randomized experiment. Nevertheless, controlled,
randomized experiments are often infeasible, leaving researchers with only access to observational data. This situation arises routinely when working with time series data.
Areas that must cope with this obstacle frequently include
genetics (Shojaie & Michailidis, 2010) and neuroscience
(Seth et al., 2015). The natural question that arises is: how
can one determine which factors cause changes in a certain response variable using only data in which all variables
change simultaneously? Causal inference seeks to address
this problem.
The classic method for causal inference among time series is a concept from econometrics known as Granger
causality, named after Nobel Prize winning econometrician
Clive Granger (Granger, 1969). Granger causality formalizes the intuitive notion that in a causal system, the cause
must precede the effect, and the cause must hold some
unique information that helps predict the effect. For example, let X1 , . . . , XT and Y1 , . . . , YT be two stationary
one-dimensional time series. We can model time series Y
using the following auto-regressive model (Stock & Watson,
2011):
Yt =

1 Introduction
The advent of “big data” in recent years has generated countless opportunities for the prediction of real world phenomena with unprecedented accuracy and at unprecedented scale.
Statistical methods for prediction exploit associations in existing data to predict some response variable. However, the
task at hand is often not to predict the response variable from
pre-existing data, but rather to determine how a change in
one or more of the explanatory variables will cause changes
in the response variable.
1

Department of Mathematics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA 2 Department of Computer Science,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <qg5w@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

p
X

ai Yt i + ✏ t ,

(1.1)

i=1

where a1 , . . . , ap are the coefficient parameters for the regression, p < T is the maximal lag of the model, and ✏t is
the error term. To determine whether or not X is a Granger
cause of Y , we also form a second auto-regressive model:
Yt =

p
X
i=1

bi Y t i +

p
X

c i Xt i + !t ,

(1.2)

i=1

with coefficient parameters b1 , . . . , bp , c1 , . . . , cp , and error
term !t . In this classical regime, where the number of
observations exceeds the number of variables (T p > 2p),
one can fit both of these models with ordinary least squares
(OLS). We can conduct an F-test between models (1.1) and
(1.2) as well as hypothesis tests on coefficients ci , 1  i 
p, to determine if the extra information encompassed by
previous values of X significantly aides in the prediction of

