Online and Linear-Time Attention by Enforcing Monotonic Alignments
Colin Raffel 1 Minh-Thang Luong 1 Peter J. Liu 1 Ron J. Weiss 1 Douglas Eck 1

Abstract
Recurrent neural network models with an attention mechanism have proven to be extremely
effective on a wide variety of sequence-tosequence problems. However, the fact that soft
attention mechanisms perform a pass over the
entire input sequence when producing each element in the output sequence precludes their use
in online settings and results in a quadratic time
complexity. Based on the insight that the alignment between input and output sequence elements is monotonic in many problems of interest,
we propose an end-to-end differentiable method
for learning monotonic alignments which, at test
time, enables computing attention online and in
linear time. We validate our approach on sentence summarization, machine translation, and
online speech recognition problems and achieve
results competitive with existing sequence-tosequence models.

1. Introduction
Recently,
the “sequence-to-sequence” framework
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014) has facilitated
the use of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) on sequence
transduction problems such as machine translation and
speech recognition. In this framework, an input sequence
is processed with an RNN to produce an “encoding”; this
encoding is then used by a second RNN to produce the
target sequence. As originally proposed, the encoding is
a single fixed-length vector representation of the input
sequence. This requires the model to effectively compress
all important information about the input sequence into a
single vector. In practice, this often results in the model
having difficulty generalizing to longer sequences than
those seen during training (Bahdanau et al., 2015).
An effective solution to these shortcomings are attention
1
Google Brain, Mountain View, California, USA. Correspondence to: Colin Raffel <craffel@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

mechanisms (Bahdanau et al., 2015). In a sequence-tosequence model with attention, the encoder produces a sequence of hidden states (instead of a single fixed-length
vector) which correspond to entries in the input sequence.
The decoder is then allowed to refer back to any of the encoder states as it produces its output. Similar mechanisms
have been used as soft addressing schemes in memoryaugmented neural network architectures (Graves et al.,
2014; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015) and RNNs used for sequence
generation (Graves, 2013). Attention-based sequence-tosequence models have proven to be extremely effective on
a wide variety of problems, including machine translation
(Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015), image captioning (Xu et al., 2015), speech recognition (Chorowski
et al., 2015; Chan et al., 2016), and sentence summarization (Rush et al., 2015). In addition, attention creates an
implicit soft alignment between entries in the output sequence and entries in the input sequence, which can give
useful insight into the model’s behavior.
A common criticism of soft attention is that the model must
perform a pass over the entire input sequence when producing each element of the output sequence. This results
in the decoding process having complexity O(T U ), where
T and U are the input and output sequence lengths respectively. Furthermore, because the entire sequence must be
processed prior to outputting any symbols, soft attention
cannot be used in “online” settings where output sequence
elements are produced when the input has only been partially observed.
The focus of this paper is to propose an alternative attention mechanism which has linear-time complexity and
can be used in online settings. To achieve this, we first
note that in many problems, the input-output alignment is
roughly monotonic. For example, when transcribing an
audio recording of someone saying “good morning”, the
region of the speech utterance corresponding to “good”
will always precede the region corresponding to “morning”. Even when the alignment is not strictly monotonic,
it often only contains local input-output reorderings. Separately, despite the fact that soft attention allows for assignment of focus to multiple disparate entries of the input
sequence, in many cases the attention is assigned mostly to
a single entry. For examples of alignments with these characteristics, we refer to e.g. (Chorowski et al. 2015 Figure

