Recovery Guarantees for One-hidden-layer Neural Networks∗

Kai Zhong 1 Zhao Song 2 Prateek Jain 3 Peter L. Bartlett 4 Inderjit S. Dhillon 5

Abstract
In this paper, we consider regression problems
with one-hidden-layer neural networks (1NNs).
We distill some properties of activation functions that lead to local strong convexity in the
neighborhood of the ground-truth parameters for
the 1NN squared-loss objective and most popular nonlinear activation functions satisfy the distilled properties, including rectified linear units
(ReLUs), leaky ReLUs, squared ReLUs and sigmoids. For activation functions that are also
smooth, we show local linear convergence guarantees of gradient descent under a resampling
rule. For homogeneous activations, we show tensor methods are able to initialize the parameters
to fall into the local strong convexity region. As
a result, tensor initialization followed by gradient
descent is guaranteed to recover the ground truth
with sample complexity d · log(1/) · poly(k, λ)
and computational complexity n · d · poly(k, λ)
for smooth homogeneous activations with high
probability, where d is the dimension of the input, k (k ≤ d) is the number of hidden nodes,
λ is a conditioning property of the ground-truth
parameter matrix between the input layer and the
hidden layer,  is the targeted precision and n is
the number of samples. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that provides recovery guarantees for 1NNs with both sample complexity and computational complexity linear in
the input dimension and logarithmic in the precision.
1
The University of Texas at Austin, zhongkai@ices.utexas.edu
The University of Texas at Austin, zhaos@utexas.edu
3
Microsoft Research, India, prajain@microsoft.com
4
University of California, Berkeley, bartlett@cs.berkeley.edu
5
The University of Texas at Austin, inderjit@cs.utexas.edu
∗
Full version is available at https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1706.03175.
Correspondence to:
Kai Zhong
<zhongkai@ices.utexas.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Neural Networks (NNs) have achieved great practical success recently. Many theoretical contributions have been
made very recently to understand the extraordinary performance of NNs. The remarkable results of NNs on complex tasks in computer vision and natural language processing inspired works on the expressive power of NNs (Cohen et al., 2016; Cohen & Shashua, 2016; Raghu et al.,
2016; Daniely et al., 2016; Poole et al., 2016; Montufar
et al., 2014; Telgarsky, 2016). Indeed, several works found
NNs are very powerful and the deeper the more powerful.
However, due to the high non-convexity of NNs, knowing
the expressivity of NNs doesn’t guarantee that the targeted
functions will be learned. Therefore, several other works
focused on the achievability of global optima. Many of
them considered the over-parameterized setting, where the
global optima or local minima close to the global optima
will be achieved when the number of parameters is large
enough, including (Freeman & Bruna, 2016; Haeffele &
Vidal, 2015; Livni et al., 2014; Dauphin et al., 2014; Safran
& Shamir, 2016; Hardt & Ma, 2017). This, however, leads
to overfitting easily and can’t provide any generalization
guarantees, which are actually the essential goal in most
tasks.
A few works have considered generalization performance.
For example, (Xie et al., 2017) provide generalization bound under the Rademacher generalization analysis
framework. Recently (Zhang et al., 2017a) describe some
experiments showing that NNs are complex enough that
they actually memorize the training data but still generalize well. As they claim, this cannot be explained by applying generalization analysis techniques, like VC dimension and Rademacher complexity, to classification loss (although it does not rule out a margins analysis—see, for example, (Bartlett, 1998); their experiments involve the unbounded cross-entropy loss).
In this paper, we don’t develop a new generalization analysis. Instead we focus on parameter recovery setting, where
we assume there are underlying ground-truth parameters
and we provide recovery guarantees for the ground-truth
parameters up to equivalent permutations. Since the parameters are exactly recovered, the generalization performance
will also be guaranteed.

