Pain-Free Random Differential Privacy with Sensitivity Sampling

Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein 1 Francesco Aldà 2

Abstract
Popular approaches to differential privacy, such
as the Laplace and exponential mechanisms, calibrate randomised smoothing through global sensitivity of the target non-private function. Bounding such sensitivity is often a prohibitively complex analytic calculation. As an alternative, we
propose a straightforward sampler for estimating sensitivity of non-private mechanisms. Since
our sensitivity estimates hold with high probability, any mechanism that would be (, δ)differentially private under bounded global sensitivity automatically achieves (, δ, γ)-random
differential privacy (Hall et al., 2012), without
any target-specific calculations required. We
demonstrate on worked example learners how
our usable approach adopts a naturally-relaxed
privacy guarantee, while achieving more accurate releases even for non-private functions that
are black-box computer programs.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) has emerged as
the dominant framework for protected privacy of sensitive
training data when releasing learned models to untrusted
third parties. This paradigm owes its popularity in part
to the strong privacy model provided, and in part to the
availability of general building block mechanisms such as
the Laplace (Dwork et al., 2006) & exponential (McSherry
& Talwar, 2007), and to composition lemmas for building
up more complex mechanisms. These generic mechanisms
come endowed with privacy and utility bounds that hold
for any appropriate application. Such tools almost alleviate the burden of performing theoretical analysis in developing privacy-preserving learners. However a persis1

School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Australia 2 Horst Görtz Institute for IT Security and Faculty of Mathematics, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany. Correspondence to: BR <brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au>,
FA <francesco.alda@rub.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tent requirement is the need to bound global sensitivity—a
Lipschitz constant of the target, non-private function. For
simple scalar statistics of the private database, sensitivity
can be easily bounded (Dwork et al., 2006). However in
many applications—from collaborative filtering (McSherry
& Mironov, 2009) to Bayesian inference (Dimitrakakis
et al., 2014; 2017; Wang et al., 2015)—the principal challenge in privatisation is completing this calculation.
In this work we develop a simple approach to approximating global sensitivity with high probability, assuming
only oracle access to target function evaluations. Combined with generic mechanisms like Laplace, exponential,
Gaussian or Bernstein, our sampler enables systematising
of privatisation: arbitrary computer programs can be made
differentially private with no additional mathematical analysis nor dynamic/static analysis, whatsoever. Our approach
does not make any assumptions about the function under
evaluation or underlying sampling distribution.
Contributions. This paper contributes: i) S ENSITIVI TY S AMPLER for easily-implemented empirical estimation
of global sensitivity of (potentially black-box) non-private
mechanisms; ii) Empirical process theory for guaranteeing
random differential privacy for any mechanism that preserves (stronger) differential privacy under bounded global
sensitivity; iii) Experiments demonstrating our sampler on
learners for which analytical sensitivity bounds are highly
involved; and iv) Examples where sensitivity estimates beat
(pessimistic) bounds, delivering pain-free random differential privacy at higher levels of accuracy, when used in concert with generic privacy-preserving mechanisms.
Related Work. This paper builds on the large body of
work in differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006; Dwork
& Roth, 2014), which has gained broad interest in part
due the framework’s strong guarantees of data privacy
when releasing aggregate statistics or models, and due to
availability of many generic privatising mechanisms e.g.,:
Laplace (Dwork et al., 2006), exponential (McSherry &
Talwar, 2007), Gaussian (Dwork & Roth, 2014), Bernstein (Aldà & Rubinstein, 2017) and many more. While
these mechanisms present a path to privatisation without
need for reproving differential privacy or utility, they do
have in common a need to analytically bound sensitivity—
a Lipschitz-type condition on the target non-private func-

