Analytical Guarantees on Numerical Precision of Deep Neural Networks

Charbel Sakr Yongjune Kim Naresh Shanbhag

Abstract
The acclaimed successes of neural networks often overshadow their tremendous complexity.
We focus on numerical precision - a key parameter defining the complexity of neural networks.
First, we present theoretical bounds on the accuracy in presence of limited precision. Interestingly, these bounds can be computed via the
back-propagation algorithm. Hence, by combining our theoretical analysis and the backpropagation algorithm, we are able to readily determine the minimum precision needed to preserve accuracy without having to resort to timeconsuming fixed-point simulations. We provide
numerical evidence showing how our approach
allows us to maintain high accuracy but with
lower complexity than state-of-the-art binary networks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art accuracy on
many machine learning tasks. AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) had a deep impact a few years ago in the ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) and
triggered intensive research efforts on deep neural networks. Recently, ResNet (He et al., 2016) has outperformed humans in recognition tasks.
These networks have very high computational complexity.
For instance, AlexNet has 60 million parameters and 650,000 neurons (Krizhevsky et al., 2012).
Its convolutional layers alone require 666 million
multiply-accumulates (MACs) per 227 × 227 image (13k
MACs/pixel) and 2.3 million weights (Chen et al., 2016).
Deepface’s network involves more than 120 million parameters (Taigman et al., 2014). ResNet is a 152-layer
The authors are with the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 1308 W Main St., Urabna, IL 61801 USA.
Correspondence to:
Charbel Sakr <sakr2@illinois.edu>,
Yongjune Kim <yongjune@illinois.edu>, Naresh Shanbhag
<shanbhag@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

deep residual network. This high complexity of deep
neural networks prevents its deployment on energy and
resource-constrained platforms such as mobile devices and
autonomous platforms.
1.1. Related Work
One of the most effective approaches for reducing resource
utilization is to implement fixed-point neural networks. As
mentioned in (Lin et al., 2016a), there are two approaches
for designing fixed-point neural networks: (1) directly train
a fixed-point neural network, and (2) quantize a pre-trained
floating-point neural network to obtain a fixed-point network.
As an example of fixed-point training, Gupta et al. (2015)
showed that 16-bit fixed-point representation incurs little
accuracy degradation by using stochastic rounding. A more
aggressive approach is to design binary networks such as
Kim & Smaragdis (2016) which used bitwise operations to
replace the arithmetic operations and Rastegari et al. (2016)
which explored optimal binarization schemes. BinaryConnect (Courbariaux et al., 2015) trained networks using
binary weights while BinaryNet (Hubara et al., 2016b)
trained networks with binary weights and activations.
Although these fixed-point training approaches make it
possible to design fixed-point neural networks achieving
excellent accuracy, training based on fixed-point arithmetic
is generally harder than floating-point training since the optimization is done in a discrete space.
Hence, in this paper, we focus on the second approach
that quantizes a pre-trained floating-pointing network to a
fixed-point network. This approach leverages the extensive work in training state-of-the-art floating-point neural
networks such as dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), maxout
(Goodfellow et al., 2013), network-in-network (Lin et al.,
2013), and residual learning (He et al., 2016) to name a
few. In this approach, proper precision needs to be determined after training to reduce complexity while minimizing the accuracy loss. In (Hwang & Sung, 2014), exhaustive search is performed to determine a suitable precision
allocation. Recently, Lin et al. (2016a) offered an analytical
solution for non-uniform bit precision based on the signalto-quantization-noise ratio (SQNR). However, the use of
non-uniform quantization step sizes at each layer is diffi-

