Variational Inference for Sparse and Undirected Models

John Ingraham 1 Debora Marks 1

Abstract
Undirected graphical models are applied in genomics, protein structure prediction, and neuroscience to identify sparse interactions that underlie discrete data. Although Bayesian methods for
inference would be favorable in these contexts,
they are rarely used because they require doubly intractable Monte Carlo sampling. Here, we
develop a framework for scalable Bayesian inference of discrete undirected models based on
two new methods. The first is Persistent VI,
an algorithm for variational inference of discrete
undirected models that avoids doubly intractable
MCMC and approximations of the partition function. The second is Fadeout, a reparameterization approach for variational inference under
sparsity-inducing priors that captures a posteriori correlations between parameters and hyperparameters with noncentered parameterizations.
We find that, together, these methods for variational inference substantially improve learning of
sparse undirected graphical models in simulated
and real problems from physics and biology.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical priors that favor sparsity have been a central
development in modern statistics and machine learning,
and find widespread use for variable selection in biology,
engineering, and economics. Among the most widely used
and successful approaches for inference of sparse models
has been L1 regularization, which, after introduction in
the context of linear models with the LASSO (Tibshirani,
1996), has become the standard tool for both directed and
undirected models alike (Murphy, 2012).
Despite its success, however, L1 is a pragmatic compromise. As the closest convex approximation of the idealized
1

Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Correspondence to: John Ingraham <ingraham@fas.harvard.edu>, Debora
Marks <debbie@hms.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

L0 norm, L1 regularization cannot model the hypothesis
of sparsity as well as some Bayesian alternatives (Tipping,
2001). Two Bayesian approaches stand out as more accurate models of sparsity than L1 . The first, the spike and
slab (Mitchell & Beauchamp, 1988), introduces discrete latent variables that directly model the presence or absence
of each parameter. This discrete approach is the most direct and accurate representation of a sparsity hypothesis
(Mohamed et al., 2012), but the discrete latent space that
it imposes is often computationally intractable for models
where Bayesian inference is difficult.
The second approach to Bayesian sparsity uses the scale
mixtures of normals (Andrews & Mallows, 1974), a family of distributions that arise from integrating a zero meanGaussian over an unknown variance as


Z ∞
θ2
1
√
exp − 2 p(σ)dσ.
(1)
p(θ) =
2σ
2πσ
0
Scale-mixtures of normals can approximate the discrete
spike and slab prior by mixing both large and small values of the variance σ 2 . The implicit prior of L1 regularization, the Laplacian, is a member of the scale mixture family
that results from an exponentially distributed variance σ 2 .
Thus, mixing densities p(σ 2 ) with subexponential tails and
more mass near the origin more accurately model sparsity
than L1 and are the basis for approaches often referred to
as “Sparse Bayesian Learning” (Tipping, 2001). Both the
Student-t of Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD)
(MacKay et al., 1994) and the Horseshoe prior (Carvalho
et al., 2010) incorporate these properties.
Applying these favorable, Bayesian approaches to sparsity
has been particularly challenging for discrete, undirected
models like Boltzmann Machines. Undirected models possess a representational advantage of capturing ‘collective
phenomena’ with no directions of causality, but their likelihoods require an intractable normalizing constant (Murray & Ghahramani, 2004). For a fully observed Boltzmann
Machine with x ∈ {0, 1}D the distribution1 is




X
1
exp
Jij xi xj ,
(2)
p(x|J) =


Z(J)
i<j

1

We exclude biases for simplicity.

