The Statistical Recurrent Unit
Junier B. Oliva 1 Barnabás Póczos 1 Jeff Schneider 1

Abstract
Sophisticated gated recurrent neural network architectures like LSTMs and GRUs have been
shown to be highly effective in a myriad of applications. We develop an un-gated unit, the statistical recurrent unit (SRU), that is able to learn long
term dependencies in data by only keeping moving averages of statistics. The SRU’s architecture is simple, un-gated, and contains a comparable number of parameters to LSTMs; yet, SRUs
perform favorably to more sophisticated LSTM
and GRU alternatives, often outperforming one
or both in various tasks. We show the efficacy
of SRUs as compared to LSTMs and GRUs in an
unbiased manner by optimizing respective architectures’ hyperparameters for both synthetic and
real-world tasks.

1. Introduction
The analysis of sequential data has long been a staple in
machine learning. Domain areas like natural language
(Zaremba et al., 2014; Vinyals et al., 2015), speech (Graves
et al., 2013; Graves & Jaitly, 2014), music (Chung et al.,
2014), and video (Donahue et al., 2015) processing have
recently garnered much attention. While the study of sequences itself is broad and may be extended to general
functional analysis (Ramsay & Silverman, 2002), most recent success has been from neural network based models,
especially from recurrent architectures.
Recurrent networks are dynamical systems that represent
time recursively. For example, the simple recurrent unit
(Elman, 1990) contains a hidden state that itself depends on
the previous hidden state. However, training such networks
has been observed to be difficult in practice due to exploding and vanishing gradients when propagating error gradients through time (Hochreiter et al., 2001). While explod1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Junier B. Oliva <joliva@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ing gradients can be mitigated with techniques like gradient
clipping and normalization (Pascanu et al., 2013), vanishing gradients may be harder to deal with. As a result, sophisticated gated architectures like Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) networks (Cho et al.,
2014) have been developed. These gated architectures contain “memory cells” along with gates to control how much
they decay through time thereby aiding the networks’ ability to learn long term dependencies in sequences.
Notwithstanding, there are still challenges in capturing
long term dependencies in gated architectures (Le et al.,
2015). In this paper we present a simple un-gated architecture, the Statistical Recurrent Unit, that often outperforms these more complicated alternatives. Although
the SRU keeps only simple moving averages of summary
statistics, its novel architecture makes it more adept than
previous gated units for capturing long term information in
sequences and comparing them across different windows
of time. For instance, the SRU, unlike traditional recurrent units, can obtain a multitude of viewpoints of the past
by simple linear combinations of only a few averages. We
shall illustrate the efficacy of the SRU below using both
real-world and synthetic sequential data tasks.
The structure of the paper is as follows: first we detail the
architecture of the SRU as well as provide several key intuitions and insights for its design; after, we describe our
experiments comparing the SRU to popular gated alternatives, and we perform a “dissective” study of the SRU,
gaining further understanding of the unit by exploring how
various hyper-parameters affect performance; finally, we
discuss conclusions from our study.

2. Model
The SRU maintains long term sequential dependencies in a
rather intuitive fashion–through summary statistics. As the
name implies, statisticians often employ summary statistics
when trying to represent a dataset. Quite naturally then, we
look to an algorithm that itself learns to represent data seen
previously in much the same vein as a neural statistician
(Edwards & Storkey, 2016).
Of course, unlike with unordered i.i.d. samples, simply
averaging statistics of sequential points will lose valuable

