Contextual Decision Processes with low Bellman rank are PAC-Learnable
Nan Jiang 1 Akshay Krishnamurthy 2 Alekh Agarwal 3 John Langford 3 Robert E. Schapire 3

Abstract
This paper studies systematic exploration for reinforcement learning (RL) with rich observations
and function approximation. We introduce contextual decision processes (CDPs), that unify
most prior RL settings. Our first contribution is
a complexity measure, the Bellman rank, that we
show enables tractable learning of near-optimal
behavior in CDPs and is naturally small for many
well-studied RL models. Our second contribution is a new RL algorithm that does systematic exploration to learn near-optimal behavior in
CDPs with low Bellman rank. The algorithm requires a number of samples that is polynomial
in all relevant parameters but independent of the
number of unique contexts. Our approach uses
Bellman error minimization with optimistic exploration and provides new insights into efficient
exploration for RL with function approximation.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we study reinforcement learning (RL) problems where the agent receives rich sensory observations
from the environment, forms complex contexts from sensorimotor streams, uses function approximation to generalize to unseen contexts, and must perform systematic exploration to learn efficiently. Such problems are at the core
of empirical RL research (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; Bellemare et al., 2016), yet no existing theory provides rigorous
and satisfactory guarantees in a general setting. This situation motivates an important question: how can we solve
RL problems where exploration is critical and the agent receives rich observations, in a sample-efficient manner?
To answer the question, we propose a new formulation,
Contextual Decision Processes (CDPs), to capture a large
class of sequential decision-making problems: CDPs gen1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 2 University of Massachusetts, Amherst 3 Microsoft Research, New York. Correspondence to: Nan Jiang <nanjiang@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

eralize MDPs where the state forms the context (Ex. 1) and
POMDPs where the history forms the context (Ex. 2), and
can be much more concise than alternative formulations
based on sufficient statistics (e.g., Hutter, 2005). We define
CDPs in Section 2, and the learning goal is to find a nearoptimal policy for a CDP with the help of a value-function
approximator in a sample-efficient manner.1
A structural assumption: When the context space is very
large or infinite, as is common in practice, lower bounds
that are exponential in the problem horizon preclude efficient learning in CDPs, even when simple function approximators are used. However, RL problems arising in applications are often far more benign than the pathological lower
bound instances, and we identify a structural assumption
capturing this intuition. As our first major contribution, we
define a notion of Bellman factorization (Definition 5) in
Section 3, and focus on problems with low Bellman rank.
At a high level, Bellman rank is an algebraic dimension
capturing the interplay between the CDP and the valuefunction approximator that we show is small for many
previously-studied settings. For example, every MDP with
a tabular value-function has Bellman rank bounded by the
rank of its transition matrix, which is at most the number
of states but can be considerably smaller. For a POMDP
with reactive value-functions, the Bellman rank is at most
the number of hidden states and has no dependence on the
observation space. We provide other instances of low Bellman rank including Linear Quadratic Regulators and Predictive State Representations. Overall, CDPs with a small
Bellman rank yield a unified framework for a large class of
sequential decision making problems.
A new algorithm: Our second contribution is a new algorithm for episodic RL called O LIVE (Optimism Led Iterative Value-function Elimination), detailed in Section 4.1.
O LIVE iteratively refines a space of candidate Q-value
functions F. At each iteration, it chooses a value function f using an optimistic criterion and collects trajectories
from the corresponding greedy policy πf . If πf attains a
high-value, the algorithm terminates and outputs f . Other1
Throughout the paper, by sample-efficient we mean a number
of trajectories that is polynomial in the problem horizon, number
of actions, Bellman rank (to be introduced), and polylogarithmic
in the number of candidate value-functions.

