Multiplicative Normalizing Flows for Variational Bayesian Neural Networks

Christos Louizos 1 2 Max Welling 1 3

Abstract
We reinterpret multiplicative noise in neural networks as auxiliary random variables that augment the approximate posterior in a variational
setting for Bayesian neural networks. We show
that through this interpretation it is both efficient
and straightforward to improve the approximation by employing normalizing flows (Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015) while still allowing for local reparametrizations (Kingma et al., 2015) and
a tractable lower bound (Ranganath et al., 2015;
Maaløe et al., 2016). In experiments we show
that with this new approximation we can significantly improve upon classical mean field for
Bayesian neural networks on both predictive accuracy as well as predictive uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have been the driving force behind the
success of deep learning applications. Given enough training data they are able to robustly model input-output relationships and as a result provide high predictive accuracy.
However, they do have some drawbacks. In the absence of
enough data they tend to overfit considerably; this restricts
them from being applied in scenarios were labeled data are
scarce, e.g. in medical applications such as MRI classification. Even more importantly, deep neural networks trained
with maximum likelihood or MAP procedures tend to be
overconfident and as a result do not provide accurate confidence intervals, particularly for inputs that are far from the
training data distribution. A simple example can be seen at
Figure 1a; the predictive distribution becomes overly overconfident, i.e. assigns a high softmax probability, towards
the wrong class for things it hasn’t seen before (e.g. an
MNIST 3 rotated by 90 degrees). This in effect makes them
unsuitable for applications where decisions are made, e.g.
1
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands 2 TNO Intelligent Imaging, Netherlands 3 Canadian Institute For Advanced
Research (CIFAR). Correspondence to: Christos Louizos
<c.louizos@uva.nl>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

when a doctor determines the disease of a patient based on
the output of such a network.
A principled approach to address both of the aforementioned shortcomings is through a Bayesian inference procedure. Under this framework instead of doing a point estimate for the network parameters we infer a posterior distribution. These distributions capture the parameter uncertainty of the network, and by subsequently integrating over
them we can obtain better uncertainties about the predictions of the model. We can see that this is indeed the case
at Figure 1b; the confidence of the network for the unseen
digits is drastically reduced when we are using a Bayesian
model, thus resulting into more realistic predictive distributions. Obtaining the posterior distributions is however
no easy task, as the nonlinear nature of neural networks
makes the problem intractable. For this reason approximations have to be made.
Many works have considered the task of approximate
Bayesian inference for neural networks using either
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) with Hamiltonian
Dynamics (Neal, 1995), distilling SGD with Langevin
Dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011; Korattikara et al.,
2015) or deterministic techniques such as the Laplace
Approximation (MacKay, 1992), Expectation Propagation (Hernández-Lobato & Adams, 2015; HernándezLobato et al., 2015) and variational inference (Graves,
2011; Blundell et al., 2015; Kingma et al., 2015; Gal &
Ghahramani, 2015b; Louizos & Welling, 2016).
In this paper we will also tackle the problem of Bayesian
inference in neural networks. We will adopt a stochastic
gradient variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) procedure in order to estimate the
posterior distribution over the weight matrices of the network. Arguably one of the most important ingredients of
variational inference is the flexibility of the approximate
posterior distribution; it determines how well we are able
to capture the true posterior distribution and thus the true
uncertainty of our models. In Section 2 we will show how
we can produce very flexible distributions in an efficient
way by employing auxiliary random variables (Agakov &
Barber, 2004; Salimans et al., 2013; Ranganath et al., 2015;
Maaløe et al., 2016) and normalizing flows (Rezende &
Mohamed, 2015). In Section 3 we will discuss related

