Deep Spectral Clustering Learning
Marc T. Law 1 Raquel Urtasun 1 Richard S. Zemel 1 2

Abstract
Clustering is the task of grouping a set of examples so that similar examples are grouped into
the same cluster while dissimilar examples are
in different clusters. The quality of a clustering depends on two problem-dependent factors
which are i) the chosen similarity metric and
ii) the data representation. Supervised clustering approaches, which exploit labeled partitioned
datasets have thus been proposed, for instance to
learn a metric optimized to perform clustering.
However, most of these approaches assume that
the representation of the data is fixed and then
learn an appropriate linear transformation. Some
deep supervised clustering learning approaches
have also been proposed. However, they rely on
iterative methods to compute gradients resulting
in high algorithmic complexity. In this paper,
we propose a deep supervised clustering metric learning method that formulates a novel loss
function. We derive a closed-form expression
for the gradient that is efficient to compute: the
complexity to compute the gradient is linear in
the size of the training mini-batch and quadratic
in the representation dimensionality. We further
reveal how our approach can be seen as learning spectral clustering. Experiments on standard
real-world datasets confirm state-of-the-art Recall@K performance.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a widely used technique with applications in
machine learning, statistics, speech processing, computer
vision. It consists in grouping a set of examples so that
“similar” examples are in the same cluster while “dissimilar” examples are in different clusters. In most applications,
the vector representation of examples is given as input and
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada 2 CIFAR Senior Fellow. Correspondence to:
Marc T. Law <law@cs.toronto.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Initial
Representation
of Examples Representation
Learning

Learned Representation

cluster center

neighborhood of center

Figure 1. Our approach learns a nonlinear embedding function in
a supervised way so that elements in the same category (here with
the same color) are organized into the same cluster.

a key step is then to determine an appropriate similarity
metric so that similar and dissimilar objects can be easily
identified. In some cases, experts with domain knowledge
may help determine an appropriate distance metric. However, in high-dimensional problems, determining an effective metric becomes increasingly difficult even for an expert, and standard metrics such as the Euclidean distance
can lead to very poor results.
Many approaches that learn an appropriate similarity metric (Xing et al., 2002; Lajugie et al., 2014; Law et al.,
2016) or a nonlinear embedding function (Schroff et al.,
2015; Sohn, 2016; Song et al., 2017) in a supervised way
have thus been proposed. They assume the availability
of a training dataset that “shares the same metric” as the
test dataset that they want to partition (e.g. the datasets
represent the same concepts such as birds species or car
models). As both datasets share the same metric, the
model learned from training examples is expected to correctly compare test examples. The approaches can roughly
be divided into four groups based on two criteria: semisupervised/supervised setting and shallow/deep architecture. In the semi-supervised setting (Xing et al., 2002;
Chopra et al., 2005), the training data is given as a small set
of example pairs that are expected to be in the same or different clusters. On the other hand, supervised approaches
(Lajugie et al., 2014; Law et al., 2016) assume the availability of labeled datasets for which the ground truth partitions are provided during training. A model is then learned
so that some clustering algorithm will produce a partition
similar to the ground truth partition on the training dataset.
The supervised clustering setting can be seen as the spe-

