Tensor Decomposition via Simultaneous Power Iteration

Po-An Wang 1 Chi-Jen Lu 1

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is an important problem
with many applications across several disciplines, and a popular approach for this problem
is the tensor power method. However, previous
works with theoretical guarantee based on this
approach can only find the top eigenvectors one
after one, unlike the case for matrices. In this
paper, we show how to find the eigenvectors simultaneously with the help of a new initialization
procedure. This allows us to achieve a better running time in the batch setting, as well as a lower
sample complexity in the streaming setting.

1. Introduction
Tensors have long been successfully used in several disciplines, including neuroscience, phylogenetics, statistics,
signal processing, computer vision, and data mining. They
are used to model multi-relational or multi-modal data, and
their decompositions often reveal some underlying structures behind the observed data. See (Kolda & Bader, 2009)
for a survey of such results. Recently, they have found
applications in machine learning, particularly for learning
various latent variable models (Anandkumar et al., 2012;
Chaganty & Liang, 2014; Anandkumar et al., 2014a).
One popular decomposition method in such applications
is the CP (Candecomp/Parafac) decomposition, which decomposes the given tensor as a sum of rank-one components. This is similar to the singular value decomposition
(SVD) of matrices, and a popular approach for SVD is the
power method, which is well-understood and has nice theoretical guarantee. As tensors can be seen as generalization
of matrices to higher orders, one would hope that a natural generalization of the power method to tensors could
inherit the success from the matrix case. However, the situation turns out to be much more complicated for tensors
(see e.g. the discussion in (Anandkumar et al., 2014a)),
1
Academia Sinica, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Po-An Wang
<poanwang@iis.sinica.edu.tw>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

and in fact several problems related to tensor decomposition are known to be NP-hard (Hillar & Lim, 2013). Nevertheless, when the given tensor has some additional structure, the tensor decomposition problem becomes tractable
again. In particular, for tensors having orthogonal decomposition, Anandkumar et al. (2014a) provided an efficient
algorithm based on the tensor power method with theoretical guarantee. Still, as we will discuss later in Section 2, the
seemingly subtle change of going from matrices to tensors
makes some significant differences for the power method.
The first is that while the matrix power method can guarantee that a randomly selected initial vector will almost surely
converge to the top singular vector, we have much less control of where the convergence goes in the tensor case. Consequently, most previous works based on the tensor power
method with theoretical guarantee, such as (Anandkumar
et al., 2014a;b; Wang & Anandkumar, 2016), require much
more complicated procedures. In particular, they can only
find the top k eigenvectors one by one, each time with the
power method applied to a modified tensor, deflated from
the original tensor according to the previously found vectors. Moreover, to find each vector, they need to sample
several initial vectors and apply the power method on all
of them, before selecting just one from them. In contrast,
algorithms for matrices such as (Mitliagkas et al., 2013;
Hardt & Price, 2014) are much simpler, as they can find
the k vectors simultaneously by applying the power method
only on k random initial vectors. The second difference, on
the other hand, has a beneficial effect, which allows the tensor power method to converge exponentially faster than the
matrix one when starting from good initial vectors. Then a
natural question is: can we inherit the best of both worlds?
Namely, is it possible to have a simple algorithm which can
find the k eigenvectors of a tensor simultaneously and converge faster than that for matrices?
Our Results. As in previous works, we consider the
slightly harder scenario in which we only have access to
a noisy version of the tensor we want to decompose. This
arises in applications such as learning latent variable models, in which the tensor we have access to is obtained from
some empirical average of the observed data. Our main
contribution is to answer the above question affirmatively.
First, we consider the batch setting in which we assume

