When can Multi-Site Datasets be Pooled for Regression?
Hypothesis Tests, `2 -consistency and Neuroscience Applications

Hao Henry Zhou 1 Yilin Zhang 1 Vamsi K. Ithapu 1 Sterling C. Johnson 1 2 Grace Wahba 1 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract
Many studies in biomedical and health sciences
involve small sample sizes due to logistic or financial constraints. Often, identifying weak (but
scientifically interesting) associations between
a set of predictors and a response necessitates
pooling datasets from multiple diverse labs or
groups. While there is a rich literature in statistical machine learning to address distributional
shifts and inference in multi-site datasets, it is
less clear when such pooling is guaranteed to
help (and when it does not) – independent of the
inference algorithms we use. In this paper, we
present a hypothesis test to answer this question,
both for classical and high dimensional linear regression. We precisely identify regimes where
pooling datasets across multiple sites is sensible, and how such policy decisions can be made
via simple checks executable on each site before
any data transfer ever happens. With a focus on
Alzheimer’s disease studies, we present empirical results showing that in regimes suggested by
our analysis, pooling a local dataset with data
from an international study improves power.

1. Introduction
In the last two decades, statistical machine learning algorithms for processing massive datasets have been intensively studied for a wide-range of applications in computer
vision, biology, chemistry and healthcare (Murdoch & Detsky, 2013; Tarca et al., 2007). While the challenges posed
by large scale datasets are compelling, one is often faced
with a fairly distinct set of technical issues for studies in biological and health sciences. For instance, a sizable portion
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 William S. Middleton Memorial Veteran’s Affairs Hospital.
Correspondence
to: Hao Zhou <hzhou@stat.wisc.edu>, Vikas Singh <vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

of scientific research is carried out by small or mediumsized groups (Fortin & Currie, 2013) supported by modest
budgets (Lauer, 2016). Hence, there are logistic/financial
constraints on the number of experiments and/or number
of participants within a trial, leading to small size datasets.
While the analysis may be sufficiently powered to evaluate the primary hypothesis of the study/experiment, interesting follow-up scientific questions (often more nuanced),
come up during the course of the project. These tasks may
be underpowered for the sample sizes available. This necessitates efforts to identify similar datasets elsewhere so
that the combined sample size of the “pooled” dataset is
enough to determine significant associations between a response and a set of predictors, e.g., within linear regression.
Motivating Application. In genomics, funding agencies
have invested effort into standardizing/curating data collection across large international projects (ENCODE Project
Consortium, 2004). In other disciplines, such as in the
study of neurological disorders, heterogeneity in disease
etiology, variations in scanners and/or acquisition tools
make standardization more difficult. For Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a motivation of this work, efforts such as ADNI
(Weiner et al., 2015) provide a variety of clinical, imaging
and cognitive tests data for 800+ older adults. However,
the research focus has now moved to the early stages of
disease – as early as late middle age – where treatments are
expected to be more effective. But (a) the statistical signal at this stage is weak and difficult to demonstrate without large sample sizes and (b) such “preclinical” participants are not well represented, even in large ADNI sized
studies. Hence, there is a concerted effort in general for
smaller standalone projects (focused on a specific disease
stage), that can be retrospectively pooled for analysis towards addressing a challenging scientific hypothesis (Jahanshad et al., 2013). Unfortunately, acquisition protocols
for various measures across sites are usually different and
data are heterogeneous. These issues raise a fundamental
technical question. When is it meaningful to pool datasets
for estimating a simple statistical model (e.g., linear regression)? When can we guarantee improvements in statistical
power, and when are such pooling efforts not worth it? Can
we give a hypothesis test and obtain p-values to inform our
policies/decisions? While related problems have been stud-

