DARLA: Improving Zero-Shot Transfer in Reinforcement Learning
Irina Higgins * 1 Arka Pal * 1 Andrei Rusu 1 Loic Matthey 1 Christopher Burgess 1 Alexander Pritzel 1
Matthew Botvinick 1 Charles Blundell 1 Alexander Lerchner 1

Abstract
Domain adaptation is an important open problem in deep reinforcement learning (RL). In
many scenarios of interest data is hard to obtain, so agents may learn a source policy in a
setting where data is readily available, with the
hope that it generalises well to the target domain. We propose a new multi-stage RL agent,
DARLA (DisentAngled Representation Learning
Agent), which learns to see before learning to act.
DARLA’s vision is based on learning a disentangled representation of the observed environment. Once DARLA can see, it is able to acquire
source policies that are robust to many domain
shifts - even with no access to the target domain.
DARLA significantly outperforms conventional
baselines in zero-shot domain adaptation scenarios, an effect that holds across a variety of RL environments (Jaco arm, DeepMind Lab) and base
RL algorithms (DQN, A3C and EC).

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents can learn how to maximise future
expected rewards by choosing how to act based on incoming sensory observations via reinforcement learning
(RL). Early RL approaches did not scale well to environments with large state spaces and high-dimensional
raw observations (Sutton & Barto, 1998). A commonly
used workaround was to embed the observations in a
lower-dimensional space, typically via hand-crafted and/or
privileged-information features. Recently, the advent of
deep learning and its successful combination with RL has
enabled end-to-end learning of such embeddings directly
from raw inputs, sparking success in a wide variety of previously challenging RL domains (Mnih et al., 2015; 2016;
Jaderberg et al., 2017). Despite the seemingly universal
*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind, 6 Pancras Square, Kings
Cross, London, N1C 4AG, UK. Correspondence to: Irina Higgins
<irinah@google.com>, Arka Pal <arkap@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

efficacy of deep RL, however, fundamental issues remain.
These include data inefficiency, the reactive nature and general brittleness of learnt policies to changes in input data
distribution, and lack of model interpretability (Garnelo
et al., 2016; Lake et al., 2016). This paper focuses on one
of these outstanding issues: the ability of RL agents to deal
with changes to the input distribution, a form of transfer
learning known as domain adaptation (Bengio et al., 2013).
In domain adaptation scenarios, an agent trained on a particular input distribution with a specified reward structure
(termed the source domain) is placed in a setting where the
input distribution is modified but the reward structure remains largely intact (the target domain). We aim to develop
an agent that can learn a robust policy using observations
and rewards obtained exclusively within the source domain.
Here, a policy is considered as robust if it generalises with
minimal drop in performance to the target domain without
extra fine-tuning.
Past attempts to build RL agents with strong domain adaptation performance highlighted the importance of learning good internal representations of raw observations (Finn
et al., 2015; Raffin et al., 2017; Pan & Yang, 2009; Barreto et al., 2016; Littman et al., 2001). Typically, these approaches tried to align the source and target domain representations by utilising observation and reward signals
from both domains (Tzeng et al., 2016; Daftry et al., 2016;
Parisotto et al., 2015; Guez et al., 2012; Talvitie & Singh,
2007; Niekum et al., 2013; Gupta et al., 2017; Finn et al.,
2017; Rajendran et al., 2017). In many scenarios, such as
robotics, this reliance on target domain information can be
problematic, as the data may be expensive or difficult to
obtain (Finn et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2016). Furthermore,
the target domain may simply not be known in advance.
On the other hand, policies learnt exclusively on the source
domain using existing deep RL approaches that have few
constraints on the nature of the learnt representations often overfit to the source input distribution, resulting in poor
domain adaptation performance (Lake et al., 2016; Rusu
et al., 2016).
We propose tackling both of these issues by focusing instead on learning representations which capture an underlying low-dimensional factorised representation of the world
and are therefore not task or domain specific. Many nat-

