Learning to Generate Long-term Future via Hierarchical Prediction

Ruben Villegas 1 * Jimei Yang 2 Yuliang Zou 1 Sungryull Sohn 1 Xunyu Lin 3 Honglak Lee 1 4

Abstract
We propose a hierarchical approach for making
long-term predictions of future frames. To avoid
inherent compounding errors in recursive pixellevel prediction, we propose to first estimate highlevel structure in the input frames, then predict
how that structure evolves in the future, and finally by observing a single frame from the past
and the predicted high-level structure, we construct the future frames without having to observe
any of the pixel-level predictions. Long-term
video prediction is difficult to perform by recurrently observing the predicted frames because the
small errors in pixel space exponentially amplify
as predictions are made deeper into the future.
Our approach prevents pixel-level error propagation from happening by removing the need to
observe the predicted frames. Our model is built
with a combination of LSTM and analogy-based
encoder-decoder convolutional neural networks,
which independently predict the video structure
and generate the future frames, respectively. In
experiments, our model is evaluated on the Human3.6M and Penn Action datasets on the task of
long-term pixel-level video prediction of humans
performing actions and demonstrate significantly
better results than the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Learning to predict the future has emerged as an important research problem in machine learning and artificial
intelligence. Given the great progress in recognition (e.g.,
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015)), prediction becomes an essential module for intelligent agents to
plan actions or to make decisions in real-world application
scenarios (Jayaraman & Grauman, 2015; 2016; Finn et al.,
*

Work completed while at Google Brain. 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2 Adobe Research, San Jose, CA. 3 Beihang
University, Beijing, China. 4 Google Brain, Mountain View, CA.
Correspondence to: Ruben Villegas <rubville@umich.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

2016). For example, robots can quickly learn manipulation
skills when predicting the consequences of physical interactions. Also, an autonomous car can brake or slow down
when predicting a person walking across the driving lane. In
this paper, we investigate long-term future frame prediction
that provides full descriptions of the visual world.
Recent recursive approaches to pixel-wise video prediction
highly depend on observing the generated frames in the
past to make predictions further into the future (Oh et al.,
2015; Mathieu et al., 2016; Goroshin et al., 2015; Srivastava et al., 2015; Ranzato et al., 2014; Finn et al., 2016;
Villegas et al., 2017; Lotter et al., 2017). In order to make
reasonable long-term frame predictions in natural videos,
these approaches need to be highly robust to pixel-level
noise. However, the noise amplifies quickly through time
until it overwhelms the signal. It is common that the first
few prediction steps are of decent quality, but then the prediction degrades dramatically until all the video context is
lost. Other existing works focus on predicting high-level semantics, such as motion trajectories or action labels (Walker
et al., 2014; Yuen & Torralba, 2010; Lee, 2015), driven by
immediate applications (e.g., video surveillance). We note
that such high-level representations are the major factors for
explaining the pixel variations into the future. In this work
we assume that the high-dimensional video data is generated from low-dimensional high-level structures, which we
hypothesize will be critical for making long-term visual predictions. Our main contribution is the hierarchical approach
for video prediction that involves generative modeling of
video using high-level structures. Concretely, our algorithm
first estimates high-level structures of observed frames, and
then predicts their future states, and finally generates future
frames conditioned on predicted high-level structures.
The prediction of future structure is performed by an LSTM
that observes a sequence of structures estimated by a CNN,
encodes the observed dynamics, and predicts the future sequence of such structures. We note that Fragkiadaki et al.
(2015) developed an LSTM architecture that can straightforwardly be adapted to our method. However, our main
contribution is the hierarchical approach for video prediction, so we choose a simpler LSTM architecture to convey our idea. Our approach then observes a single frame
from the past and predicts the entire future described by
the predicted structure sequence using an analogy-making

