Consistent On-Line Off-Policy Evaluation

Assaf Hallak 1 Shie Mannor 1

Abstract
The problem of on-line off-policy evaluation
(OPE) has been actively studied in the last decade
due to its importance both as a stand-alone problem and as a module in a policy improvement
scheme. However, most Temporal Difference
(TD) based solutions ignore the discrepancy between the stationary distribution of the behavior
and target policies and its effect on the convergence limit when function approximation is applied. In this paper we propose the Consistent
Off-Policy Temporal Difference (COP-TD(λ, β))
algorithm that addresses this issue and reduces
this bias at some computational expense. We
show that COP-TD(λ, β) can be designed to converge to the same value that would have been obtained by using on-policy TD(λ) with the target
policy. Subsequently, the proposed scheme leads
to a related and promising heuristic we call logCOP-TD(λ, β). Both algorithms have favorable
empirical results to the current state of the art online OPE algorithms. Finally, our formulation
sheds some new light on the recently proposed
Emphatic TD learning.

the testing population, and sub-optimal policies can have
life threatening effects (Hochberg et al., 2016). OPE can
also be useful as a module for policy optimization in a policy improvement scheme (Thomas et al., 2015a).
In this paper, we consider the OPE problem in an on-line
setup where each new sample is immediately used to update our current value estimate of some previously unseen
policy. We propose and analyze a new algorithm called
COP-TD(λ,β) for estimating the value of the target policy;
COP-TD(λ,β) has the following properties:
1. Easy to understand and implement on-line.
2. Allows closing the gap to consistency such that the
limit point is the same that would have been obtained
by on-policy learning with the target policy.
3. Empirically comparable to state-of-the art algorithms.
Our algorithm resembles (Sutton et al., 2015)’s Emphatic
TD that was extended by (Hallak et al., 2015) to the general parametric form ETD(λ,β). We clarify the connection between the algorithms and compare them empirically.
Finally, we introduce an additional related heuristic called
Log-COP-TD(λ,β) and motivate it.

1. Introduction

2. Notations and Background

Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques were successfully applied in fields such as robotics, games, marketing
and more (Kober et al., 2013; Al-Rawi et al., 2015; Barrett et al., 2013). We consider the problem of off-policy
evaluation (OPE) – assessing the performance of a complex strategy without applying it. An OPE formulation is
often considered in domains with limited sampling capability. For example, marketing and recommender systems
(Theocharous and Hallak, 2013; Theocharous et al., 2015)
directly relate policies to revenue. A more extreme example is drug administration, as there are only few patients in

We consider the standard discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996)
with a single long trajectory. Let M = (S, A, P, R, ζ, γ)
be an MDP where S is the finite state space and A is the
finite action space. The parameter P sets the transition
probabilities Pr(s0 |s, a) given the previous state s ∈ S and
action a ∈ A, where the first state is determined by the
distribution ζ. The parameter R sets the reward distribution r(s, a) obtained by taking action a in state s and γ is
the discount factor specifying the exponential reduction in
reward with time. The process advances as follows:

1

The Technion, Haifa, Israel.
Correspondence
to:
Assaf Hallak <ifogph@gmail.com>, Shie Mannor
<shie@ee.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

A state s0 is sampled according to the distribution ζ(s).
Then, at each time step t starting from t = 0 the agent
draws an action at according to the stochastic behavior pol.
icy µ(a|st ), a reward rt = r(st , at ) is accumulated by the
agent, and the next state st+1 is sampled using the transition probability Pr(s0 |st , at ).

