Learning Latent Space Models with Angular Constraints

Pengtao Xie 1 2 Yuntian Deng 3 Yi Zhou 4 Abhimanu Kumar 5 Yaoliang Yu 6 James Zou 7 Eric P. Xing 2

Abstract
The large model capacity of latent space models (LSMs) enables them to achieve great performance on various applications, but meanwhile
renders LSMs to be prone to overfitting. Several
recent studies investigate a new type of regularization approach, which encourages components
in LSMs to be diverse, for the sake of alleviating
overfitting. While they have shown promising
empirical effectiveness, in theory why larger “diversity” results in less overfitting is still unclear.
To bridge this gap, we propose a new diversitypromoting approach that is both theoretically analyzable and empirically effective. Specifically,
we use near-orthogonality to characterize “diversity” and impose angular constraints (ACs)
on the components of LSMs to promote diversity. A generalization error analysis shows that
larger diversity results in smaller estimation error and larger approximation error. An efficient
ADMM algorithm is developed to solve the constrained LSM problems. Experiments demonstrate that ACs improve generalization performance of LSMs and outperform other diversitypromoting approaches.

1. Introduction
Latent space models (LSMs), such as sparse coding (Olshausen & Field, 1997), topic models (Blei et al., 2003)
and neural networks, are widely used in machine learning
to extract hidden patterns and learn latent representations
of data. An LSM consists of a set of components. Each
component aims at capturing one latent pattern and is pa1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
Petuum Inc. 3 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University 4 College of Engineering and Computer Science,
Syracuse University 5 Groupon Inc. 6 School of Computer Science,
University of Waterloo 7 Department of Biomedical Data Science,
Stanford University. Correspondence to: Pengtao Xie <pengtaox@cs.cmu.edu>, Eric P. Xing <eric.xing@petuum.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

rameterized by a weight vector. For instance, in a topic
model (Blei et al., 2003), the components are referred to
as topics, aiming at discovering the semantics underlying
documents. Each topic is associated with a weight vector.
The modeling power of LSMs can be very large when the
number of components is large and the dimension of weight
vectors is high. For instance, in the LightLDA (Yuan et al.,
2015) topic model, the number of topics is 1 million and
the dimension of topic vector is 50000, resulting in a topic
matrix with 50 billion parameters. The vast model capacity of LSMs enables them to flexibly adapt to the complex
patterns underlying data and achieve great predictive performance therefrom.
While highly expressive, LSMs are prone to overfitting,
because of their large amount of model parameters. A
key ingredient to successfully train LSMs is regularization,
which imposes certain control over the model parameters
to reduce model complexity and improve the generalization performance on unseen data. Many regularizers have
been proposed, including `2 regularization, `1 regularization (Tibshirani, 1996), nuclear norm (Recht et al., 2010),
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) and so on.
Recently, a new type of regularization approaches (Yu
et al., 2011; Zou & Adams, 2012a; Xie et al., 2015; 2016a;
Rodrı́guez et al., 2016), which aim at encouraging the
weight vectors of components in LSMs to be “diverse”,
are emerging. Zou & Adams (2012b) apply Determinantal
Point Process (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012) to encourage the
topic vectors in LDA to be “diverse”. Bao et al. (2013) develop a softmax regularizer to promote incoherence among
hidden units in neural network. Xie et al. (2015) propose
an angle-based regularizer to “diversify” the weight vectors in Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM). While these
approaches have demonstrated promising effectiveness on
a wide range of empirical studies, in theory how they reduce overfitting is still unclear. One intuitive explanation
could be: promoting diversity imposes a structural constraint on model parameters, which reduces the model capacity of LSMs and therefore alleviates overfitting. However, how to make this formal is challenging. In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap, by proposing a diversitypromoting approach that is both empirically effective and
theoretically analyzable. We use near-orthogonality to represent “diversity” and propose to learn LSMs with angular

