Sliced Wasserstein Kernel for Persistence Diagrams

Mathieu Carrière 1 Marco Cuturi 2 Steve Oudot 1

Abstract
Persistence diagrams (PDs) play a key role in
topological data analysis (TDA), in which they
are routinely used to describe topological properties of complicated shapes. PDs enjoy strong
stability properties and have proven their utility
in various learning contexts. They do not, however, live in a space naturally endowed with a
Hilbert structure and are usually compared with
non-Hilbertian distances, such as the bottleneck
distance. To incorporate PDs in a convex learning pipeline, several kernels have been proposed
with a strong emphasis on the stability of the resulting RKHS distance w.r.t. perturbations of the
PDs. In this article, we use the Sliced Wasserstein approximation of the Wasserstein distance
to define a new kernel for PDs, which is not only
provably stable but also discriminative (with a
bound depending on the number of points in the
PDs) w.r.t. the first diagram distance between
PDs. We also demonstrate its practicality, by developing an approximation technique to reduce
kernel computation time, and show that our proposal compares favorably to existing kernels for
PDs on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) is an emerging trend in
data science, grounded on topological methods to design
descriptors for complex data—see e.g. (Carlsson, 2009) for
an introduction to the subject. The descriptors of TDA can
be used in various contexts, in particular statistical learning and geometric inference, where they provide useful insight into the structure of data. Applications of TDA can
be found in a number of scientific areas, including computer vision (Li et al., 2014), materials science (Hiraoka
et al., 2016), and brain science (Singh et al., 2008), to name
1

INRIA Saclay 2 CREST, ENSAE, Université Paris
Saclay.
Correspondence to: Mathieu Carrière <mathieu.carriere@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a few. The tools developed in TDA are built upon persistent homology theory (Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010; Oudot,
2015), and their main output is a descriptor called persistence diagram (PD), which encodes the topology of a space
at all scales in the form of a point cloud with multiplicities
in the plane R2 —see Section 2.1 for more details.
PDs as features. The main strength of PDs is their stability with respect to perturbations of the data (Chazal et al.,
2009b; 2013). On the downside, their use in learning tasks
is not straightforward. Indeed, a large class of learning
methods, such as SVM or PCA, requires a Hilbert structure on the descriptors space, which is not the case for the
space of PDs. Actually, many simple operators of Rn , such
as addition, average or scalar product, have no analogues
in that space. Mapping PDs to vectors in Rn or in some
infinite-dimensional Hilbert space is one possible approach
to facilitate their use in discriminative settings.
Related work. A series of recent contributions have proposed kernels for PDs, falling into two classes. The first
class of methods builds explicit feature maps: One can,
for instance, compute and sample functions extracted from
PDs (Bubenik, 2015; Adams et al., 2017; Robins & Turner,
2016); sort the entries of the distance matrices of the
PDs (Carrière et al., 2015); treat the PD points as roots
of a complex polynomial, whose coefficients are concatenated (Fabio & Ferri, 2015). The second class of methods, which is more relevant to our work, defines implicitly
feature maps by focusing instead on building kernels for
PDs. For instance, Reininghaus et al. (2015) use solutions
of the heat differential equation in the plane and compare
them with the usual L2 (R2 ) dot product. Kusano et al.
(2016) handle a PD as a discrete measure on the plane, and
follow by using kernel mean embeddings with Gaussian
kernels—see Section 4 for precise definitions. Both kernels are provably stable, in the sense that the metric they
induce in their respective reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) is bounded above by the distance between PDs.
Although these kernels are injective, there is no evidence
that their induced RKHS distances are discriminative and
therefore follow the geometry of the bottleneck distances,
which are more widely accepted distances to compare PDs.
Contributions. In this article, we use the sliced Wasserstein (SW) distance (Rabin et al., 2011) to define a new ker-

