Tunable Efficient Unitary Neural Networks (EUNN) and their application to
RNNs
Li Jing * 1 Yichen Shen * 1 Tena Dubcek 1 John Peurifoy 1 Scott Skirlo 1 Yann LeCun 2 Max Tegmark 1
Marin Soljačić 1

Abstract
Using unitary (instead of general) matrices in
artificial neural networks (ANNs) is a promising way to solve the gradient explosion/vanishing
problem, as well as to enable ANNs to learn
long-term correlations in the data. This approach appears particularly promising for Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). In this work, we
present a new architecture for implementing an
Efficient Unitary Neural Network (EUNNs); its
main advantages can be summarized as follows.
Firstly, the representation capacity of the unitary space in an EUNN is fully tunable, ranging from a subspace of SU(N) to the entire unitary space. Secondly, the computational complexity for training an EUNN is merely O(1) per
parameter. Finally, we test the performance of
EUNNs on the standard copying task, the pixelpermuted MNIST digit recognition benchmark
as well as the Speech Prediction Test (TIMIT).
We find that our architecture significantly outperforms both other state-of-the-art unitary RNNs
and the LSTM architecture, in terms of the final performance and/or the wall-clock training
speed. EUNNs are thus promising alternatives
to RNNs and LSTMs for a wide variety of applications.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (LeCun et al., 2015) have been successful on numerous difficult machine learning tasks, including image recognition(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Donahue et al., 2015), speech recognition(Hinton et al., 2012)
and natural language processing(Collobert et al., 2011;
*

Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
New York University, Facebook AI Research. Correspondence
to: Li Jing <ljing@mit.edu>, Yichen Shen <ycshen@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Bahdanau et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014). However,
deep neural networks can suffer from vanishing and exploding gradient problems(Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al.,
1994), which are known to be caused by matrix eigenvalues far from unity being raised to large powers. Because
the severity of these problems grows with the the depth of
a neural network, they are particularly grave for Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs), whose recurrence can be equivalent to thousands or millions of equivalent hidden layers.
Several solutions have been proposed to solve these problems for RNNs. Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), which help
RNNs contain information inside hidden layers with gates,
remains one of the the most popular RNN implementations.
Other recently proposed methods such as GRUs(Cho et al.,
2014) and Bidirectional RNNs (Berglund et al., 2015) also
perform well in numerous applications. However, none of
these approaches has fundamentally solved the vanishing
and exploding gradient problems, and gradient clipping is
often required to keep gradients in a reasonable range.
A recently proposed solution strategy is using orthogonal hidden weight matrices or their complex generalization
(unitary matrices) (Saxe et al., 2013; Le et al., 2015; Arjovsky et al., 2015; Henaff et al., 2016), because all their
eigenvalues will then have absolute values of unity, and can
safely be raised to large powers. This has been shown to
help both when weight matrices are initialized to be unitary (Saxe et al., 2013; Le et al., 2015) and when they are
kept unitary during training, either by restricting them to a
more tractable matrix subspace (Arjovsky et al., 2015) or
by alternating gradient-descent steps with projections onto
the unitary subspace (Wisdom et al., 2016).
In this paper, we will first present an Efficient Unitary Neural Network (EUNN) architecture that parametrizes the entire space of unitary matrices in a complete and computationally efficient way, thereby eliminating the need for
time-consuming unitary subspace-projections. Our architecture has a wide range of capacity-tunability to represent
subspace unitary models by fixing some of our parameters;
the above-mentioned unitary subspace models correspond
to special cases of our architecture. We also implemented

