How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently

Chi Jin 1 Rong Ge 2 Praneeth Netrapalli 3 Sham M. Kakade 4 Michael I. Jordan 1

Abstract
This paper shows that a perturbed form of gradient descent converges to a second-order stationary point in a number iterations which depends
only poly-logarithmically on dimension (i.e., it is
almost “dimension-free”). The convergence rate
of this procedure matches the well-known convergence rate of gradient descent to first-order
stationary points, up to log factors. When all saddle points are non-degenerate, all second-order
stationary points are local minima, and our result
thus shows that perturbed gradient descent can
escape saddle points almost for free. Our results
can be directly applied to many machine learning
applications, including deep learning. As a particular concrete example of such an application,
we show that our results can be used directly to
establish sharp global convergence rates for matrix factorization. Our results rely on a novel
characterization of the geometry around saddle
points, which may be of independent interest to
the non-convex optimization community.

1. Introduction
Given a function f : Rd → R, a gradient descent aims to
minimize the function via the following iteration:
xt+1 = xt − η∇f (xt ),
where η > 0 is a step size. Gradient descent and its variants (e.g., stochastic gradient) are widely used in machine
learning applications due to their favorable computational
properties. This is notably true in the deep learning setting, where gradients can be computed efficiently via backpropagation (Rumelhart et al., 1988).
Gradient descent is especially useful in high-dimensional
settings because the number of iterations required to reach
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Duke University
Microsoft Research India 4 University of Washington. Correspondence to: Chi Jin <chijin@berkeley.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a point with small gradient is independent of the dimension
(“dimension-free”). More precisely, for a function that is `gradient Lipschitz (see Definition 1), it is well known that
gradient descent finds an -first-order stationary point (i.e.,
a point x with k∇f (x)k ≤ ) within `(f (x0 ) − f ? )/2 iterations (Nesterov, 1998), where x0 is the initial point and
f ? is the optimal value of f . This bound does not depend
on the dimension of x. In convex optimization, finding an
-first-order stationary point is equivalent to finding an approximate global optimum.
In non-convex settings, however, convergence to first-order
stationary points is not satisfactory. For non-convex functions, first-order stationary points can be global minima,
local minima, saddle points or even local maxima. Finding a global minimum can be hard, but fortunately, for
many non-convex problems, it is sufficient to find a local
minimum. Indeed, a line of recent results show that, in
many problems of interest, all local minima are global minima (e.g., in tensor decomposition (Ge et al., 2015), dictionary learning (Sun et al., 2016a), phase retrieval (Sun
et al., 2016b), matrix sensing (Bhojanapalli et al., 2016;
Park et al., 2016), matrix completion (Ge et al., 2016),
and certain classes of deep neural networks (Kawaguchi,
2016)). Moreover, there are suggestions that in more general deep networks most of the local minima are as good as
global minima (Choromanska et al., 2014).
On the other hand, saddle points (and local maxima) can
correspond to highly suboptimal solutions in many problems (see, e.g., Jain et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2016b). Furthermore, Dauphin et al. (2014) argue that saddle points
are ubiquitous in high-dimensional, non-convex optimization problems, and are thus the main bottleneck in training neural networks. Standard analysis of gradient descent
cannot distinguish between saddle points and local minima,
leaving open the possibility that gradient descent may get
stuck at saddle points, either asymptotically or for a sufficiently long time so as to make training times for arriving at
a local minimum infeasible. Ge et al. (2015) showed that
by adding noise at each step, gradient descent can escape
all saddle points in a polynomial number of iterations, provided that the objective function satisfies the strict saddle
property (see Assumption A2). Lee et al. (2016) proved
that under similar conditions, gradient descent with random initialization avoids saddle points even without adding

