Differentiable Programs with Neural Libraries

Alexander L. Gaunt 1 Marc Brockschmidt 1 Nate Kushman 1 Daniel Tarlow 2

Abstract
We develop a framework for combining differentiable programming languages with neural networks. Using this framework we create end-toend trainable systems that learn to write interpretable algorithms with perceptual components.
We explore the benefits of inductive biases for
strong generalization and modularity that come
from the program-like structure of our models. In
particular, modularity allows us to learn a library
of (neural) functions which grows and improves
as more tasks are solved. Empirically, we show
that this leads to lifelong learning systems that
transfer knowledge to new tasks more effectively
than baselines.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been much work on learning algorithms
using neural networks. Following the idea of the Neural Turing Machine (Graves et al., 2014), this work has focused on
extending neural networks with interpretable components
that are differentiable versions of traditional computer components, such as external memories, stacks, and discrete
functional units. However, trained models are not easily
interpreted as the learned algorithms are embedded in the
weights of a monolithic neural network. In this work we flip
the roles of the neural network and differentiable computer
architecture. We consider interpretable controller architectures which express algorithms using differentiable programming languages (Gaunt et al., 2016; Riedel et al., 2016;
Bunel et al., 2016). In our framework, these controllers can
execute discrete functional units (such as those considered
by past work), but also have access to a library of trainable,
uninterpretable neural network functional units. The system is end-to-end differentiable such that the source code
representation of the algorithm is jointly induced with the
parameters of the neural function library. In this paper we
1

Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK 2 Google Brain, Montréal,
Canada (work done while at Microsoft). Correspondence to:
Alexander L. Gaunt <algaunt@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

explore potential advantages of this class of hybrid model
over purely neural systems, with a particular emphasis on
lifelong learning systems that learn from weak supervision.
We concentrate on perceptual programming by example
(PPBE) tasks that have both algorithmic and perceptual elements to exercise the traditional strengths of program-like
and neural components. Examples of this class of task include navigation tasks guided by images or natural language
(see Fig. 1) or handwritten symbol manipulation (see Sec. 3).
Using an illustrative set of PPBE tasks we aim to emphasize
two specific benefits of our hybrid models:
First, the source code representation in the controller allows
modularity: the neural components are small functions that
specialize to different tasks within the larger program structure. It is easy to separate and share these functional units to
transfer knowledge between tasks. In contrast, the absence
of well-defined functions in purely neural solutions makes
effective knowledge transfer more difficult, leading to problems such as catastrophic forgetting in multitask and lifelong learning (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990).
In our experiments, we consider a lifelong learning setting
in which we train the system on a sequence of PPBE tasks
that share perceptual subtasks.
Second, the source code representation enforces an inductive bias that favors learning solutions that exhibit strong
generalization. For example, once a suitable control flow
structures (e.g., a for loop) for a list manipulation problem was learned on short examples, it trivially generalizes
to lists of arbitrary length. In contrast, although some neural architectures demonstrate a surprising ability to generalize, the reasons for this generalization are not fully understood (Zhang et al., 2017) and generalization performance
invariably degrades as inputs become increasingly distinct
from the training data.
This paper is structured as follows. We first present a language, called N EURAL T ERPRE T (NTPT), for specifying
hybrid source code/neural network models (Sec. 2), and
then introduce a sequence of PPBE tasks (Sec. 3). Our
NTPT models and purely neural baselines are described
in Sec. 4 and 5 respectively. The experimental results are
presented in Sec. 6.

