Continual Learning Through Synaptic Intelligence

Friedemann Zenke * 1 Ben Poole * 1 Surya Ganguli 1

Abstract
While deep learning has led to remarkable advances across diverse applications, it struggles
in domains where the data distribution changes
over the course of learning. In stark contrast,
biological neural networks continually adapt to
changing domains, possibly by leveraging complex molecular machinery to solve many tasks
simultaneously. In this study, we introduce intelligent synapses that bring some of this biological complexity into artificial neural networks.
Each synapse accumulates task relevant information over time, and exploits this information to
rapidly store new memories without forgetting
old ones. We evaluate our approach on continual
learning of classification tasks, and show that it
dramatically reduces forgetting while maintaining computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) have become an indispensable asset for applied machine learning, rivaling human performance in a variety of domain-specific tasks (LeCun et al., 2015). Although originally inspired by biology
(Rosenblatt, 1958; Fukushima & Miyake, 1982), the underlying design principles and learning methods differ substantially from biological neural networks. For instance,
parameters of ANNs are learned on a dataset in the training
phase, and then frozen and used statically on new data in
the deployment or recall phase. To accommodate changes
in the data distribution, ANNs typically have to be retrained on the entire dataset to avoid overfitting and catastrophic forgetting (Choy et al., 2006; Goodfellow et al.,
2013).
On the other hand, biological neural networks exhibit continual learning in which they acquire new knowledge over
*

Equal contribution 1 Stanford University. Correspondence
to: Friedemann Zenke <fzenke@stanford.edu>, Ben Poole
<poole@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a lifetime. It is therefore difficult to draw a clear line between a learning and recall phase. Somehow, our brains
have evolved to learn from non-stationary data and to update internal memories or beliefs on-the-fly. While it is unknown how this feat is accomplished in the brain, it seems
possible that the unparalleled biological performance in
continual learning could rely on specific features implemented by the underlying biological wetware that are not
currently implemented in ANNs.
Perhaps one of the greatest gaps in the design of modern ANNs versus biological neural networks lies in the
complexity of synapses. In ANNs, individual synapses
(weights) are typically described by a single scalar quantity.
On the other hand, individual biological synapses make use
of complex molecular machinery that can affect plasticity
at different spatial and temporal scales (Redondo & Morris,
2011). While this complexity has been surmised to serve
memory consolidation (Fusi et al., 2005; Lahiri & Ganguli,
2013; Zenke et al., 2015; Ziegler et al., 2015; Benna & Fusi,
2016), few studies have illustrated how it benefits learning
in ANNs.
Here we study the role of internal synaptic dynamics to enable ANNs to learn sequences of classification tasks. While
simple, scalar one-dimensional synapses suffer from catastrophic forgetting, in which the network forgets previously
learned tasks when trained on a novel task, this problem
can be largely alleviated by synapses with a more complex
three-dimensional state space. In our model, the synaptic state tracks the past and current parameter value, and
maintains an online estimate of the synapse’s “importance”
toward solving problems encountered in the past. Our importance measure can be computed efficiently and locally
at each synapse during training, and represents the local
contribution of each synapse to the change in the global
loss. When the task changes, we consolidate the important synapses by preventing them from changing in future
tasks. Thus learning in future tasks is mediated primarily
by synapses that were unimportant for past tasks, thereby
avoiding catastrophic forgetting of these past tasks.

2. Prior work
The problem of alleviating catastrophic forgetting has been
addressed in many previous studies. These studies can be

