Know-Evolve: Deep Temporal Reasoning for Dynamic Knowledge Graphs

Rakshit Trivedi 1 Hanjun Dai 1 Yichen Wang 1 Le Song 1

Abstract
The availability of large scale event data with time
stamps has given rise to dynamically evolving
knowledge graphs that contain temporal information for each edge. Reasoning over time in such
dynamic knowledge graphs is not yet well understood. To this end, we present Know-Evolve, a
novel deep evolutionary knowledge network that
learns non-linearly evolving entity representations
over time. The occurrence of a fact (edge) is modeled as a multivariate point process whose intensity function is modulated by the score for that
fact computed based on the learned entity embeddings. We demonstrate significantly improved
performance over various relational learning approaches on two large scale real-world datasets.
Further, our method effectively predicts occurrence or recurrence time of a fact which is novel
compared to prior reasoning approaches in multirelational setting.

1. Introduction
Reasoning is a key concept in artificial intelligence. A host
of applications such as search engines, question-answering
systems, conversational dialogue systems, and social networks require reasoning over underlying structured knowledge. Effective representation and learning over such knowledge has come to the fore as a very important task. In particular, Knowledge Graphs have gained much attention as
an important model for studying complex multi-relational
settings. Traditionally, knowledge graphs are considered
to be static snapshot of multi-relational data. However,
recent availability of large amount of event based interaction data that exhibits complex temporal dynamics in addition to its multi-relational nature has created the need for
approaches that can characterize and reason over tempo1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Rakshit Trivedi <rstrivedi@gatech.edu>, Le Song
<lsong@cc.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Figure 1. Sample temporal knowledge subgraph between persons,
organizations and countries.

rally evolving systems. For instance, GDELT (Leetaru &
Schrodt, 2013) and ICEWS (Boschee et al., 2017) are two
popular event based data repository that contains evolving
knowledge about entity interactions across the globe.
Thus traditional knowledge graphs need to be augmented
into Temporal Knowledge Graphs, where facts occur, recur or evolve over time in these graphs, and each edge
in the graphs have temporal information associated with
it. Figure 1 shows a subgraph snapshot of such temporal
knowledge graph. Static knowledge graphs suffer from
incompleteness resulting in their limited reasoning ability.
Most work on static graphs have therefore focussed on advancing entity-relationship representation learning to infer
missing facts based on available knowledge. But these methods lack ability to use rich temporal dynamics available in
underlying data represented by temporal knowledge graphs.
Effectively capturing temporal dependencies across facts
in addition to the relational (structural) dependencies can
help improve the understanding on behavior of entities and
how they contribute to generation of facts over time. For
example, one can precisely answer questions like:
• Object prediction. (Who) will Donald Trump mention
next?
• Subject prediction.
(Which country)
provide material support to US next month?

will

• Time prediction. (When) will Bob visit Burger King?

