Nyström Method with Kernel K-means++ Samples as Landmarks

Dino Oglic 1 2 Thomas Gärtner 2

Abstract
We investigate, theoretically and empirically, the
effectiveness of kernel K-means++ samples as
landmarks in the Nyström method for low-rank
approximation of kernel matrices. Previous empirical studies (Zhang et al., 2008; Kumar et al.,
2012) observe that the landmarks obtained using
(kernel) K-means clustering define a good lowrank approximation of kernel matrices. However,
the existing work does not provide a theoretical
guarantee on the approximation error for this approach to landmark selection. We close this gap
and provide the first bound on the approximation error of the Nyström method with kernel Kmeans++ samples as landmarks. Moreover, for
the frequently used Gaussian kernel we provide
a theoretically sound motivation for performing
Lloyd refinements of kernel K-means++ landmarks in the instance space. We substantiate our
theoretical results empirically by comparing the
approach to several state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of finding a good low-rank approximation for a given symmetric and positive definite matrix.
Such matrices arise in kernel methods (Schölkopf & Smola,
2001) where the data is often first transformed to a symmetric and positive definite matrix and then an off-the-shelf
matrix-based algorithm is used for solving classification
and regression problems, clustering, anomaly detection, and
dimensionality reduction (Bach & Jordan, 2005). These
learning problems can often be posed as convex optimization problems for which the representer theorem (Wahba,
1990) guarantees that the optimal solution can be found in
the subspace of the kernel feature space spanned by the
instances. To find the optimal solution in a problem with n
instances, it is often required to perform a matrix inversion
1

Institut für Informatik III, Universität Bonn, Germany 2 School
of Computer Science, The University of Nottingham, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Dino Oglic <dino.oglic@uni-bonn.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).


or eigendecomposition which scale as O n3 . To overcome
this computational shortcoming and scale kernel methods
to large scale datasets, Williams & Seeger (2001) have proposed to use a variant of the Nyström method (Nyström,
1930) for low-rank approximation of kernel matrices. The
approach is motivated by the fact that frequently used kernels have a fast decaying spectrum and that small eigenvalues can be removed without a significant effect on the
precision (Schölkopf & Smola, 2001). For a given sub-set
of l landmarks, the Nyström method
finds a low-rank ap
proximation in time O l2 n + l3 and kernel methods with
the low-rank approximation
in place of the kernel matrix

scale as O l3 . In practice, l  n and the approach can
scale kernel methods to millions of instances.
The crucial step in the Nyström approximation of a symmetric and positive definite matrix is the choice of landmarks
and an optimal choice is a difficult discrete/combinatorial
problem directly influencing the goodness of the approximation (Section 2). A large part of the existing work has,
therefore, focused on providing approximation guarantees
for different landmark selection strategies. Following this
line of research, we propose to select landmarks using the
kernel K-means++ sampling scheme (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2007) and provide the first bound on the relative
approximation error in the Frobenius norm for this strategy
(Section 3). An important part of our theoretical contribution is the first complete proof of a claim by Ding & He
(2004) on the relation between the subspace spanned by
optimal K-means centroids and left singular vectors of the
feature space (Proposition 1). While our proof covers the
general case, that of Ding & He (2004) is restricted to data
matrices with piecewise constant right singular vectors.
Having given a bound on the approximation error for the
proposed landmark selection strategy, we provide a brief
overview of the existing landmark selection algorithms and
discuss our work in relation to approaches directly comparable to ours (Section 4). For the frequently used Gaussian
kernel, we also theoretically motivate the instance space
Lloyd refinements (Lloyd, 1982) of kernel K-means++
landmarks. The results of our empirical study are presented
in Section 5 and indicate a superior performance of the
proposed approach over competing methods. This is in
agreement with the previous studies on K-means centroids
as landmarks by Zhang et al. (2008) and Kumar et al. (2012).

