Scalable Bayesian Rule Lists

Hongyu Yang 1 Cynthia Rudin 2 Margo Seltzer 3

Abstract
We present an algorithm for building probabilistic rule lists that is two orders of magnitude faster
than previous work. Rule list algorithms are
competitors for decision tree algorithms. They
are associative classifiers, in that they are built
from pre-mined association rules. They have a
logical structure that is a sequence of IF-THEN
rules, identical to a decision list or one-sided
decision tree. Instead of using greedy splitting and pruning like decision tree algorithms,
we aim to fully optimize over rule lists, striking a practical balance between accuracy, interpretability, and computational speed. The algorithm presented here uses a mixture of theoretical bounds (tight enough to have practical
implications as a screening or bounding procedure), computational reuse, and highly tuned
language libraries to achieve computational efficiency. Currently, for many practical problems,
this method achieves better accuracy and sparsity
than decision trees, with practical running times.
The predictions in each leaf are probabilistic.

1. Introduction
Our goal is to build a competitor for decision tree and rule
learning algorithms in terms of accuracy, interpretability,
and computational speed. Decision trees are widely used,
particularly in industry, because of their interpretability.
Their logical IF-THEN structure allows predictions to be
explained to users. However, decision tree algorithms have
the serious flaw that they are constructed using greedy splitting from the top down. They also use greedy pruning of
nodes. They do not globally optimize any function, instead
they are composed entirely of local optimization heuristics.
If the algorithm makes a mistake in the splitting near the
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 2 Duke University, Durham, North Carolina,
USA 3 Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Hongyu Yang <hongyuy@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

top of the tree, it is difficult to undo it, and consequently
the trees become long and uninterpretable, unless they are
heavily pruned, in which case accuracy suffers. In general,
decision tree algorithms are computationally tractable, not
particularly accurate, and less sparse and interpretable than
they could be. This leaves users with no good alternative if
they desire an accurate yet sparse logical classifier.
Several important ingredients provide the underpinning for
our method including:
(i) A principled objective, which is the posterior distribution for the Bayesian Rule List (BRL) model (see
Letham et al., 2015). We optimize this objective over
rule lists. Our algorithm is called Scalable Bayesian
Rule Lists (SBRL).
(ii) A useful statistical approximation that narrows the
search space. We assume that each rule in the rule list
contains (“captures”) a number of observations that is
bounded below. Because of this approximation, the
set of conditions defining each leaf is a frequent pattern. This means the antecedents within the rule list
are all frequent patterns. All of the possible frequent
patterns can be pre-mined from the dataset using one
of the standard frequent pattern mining methods. This
leaves us with a much smaller optimization problem:
we optimize over the set of possible pre-mined antecedents and their order to create the rule list.
(iii) High performance language libraries to achieve
computational efficiency. Optimization over rule lists
is done through repeated low level computations. At
every iteration, we make a change to the rule list
and need to evaluate the new rule list on the data.
High performance calculations (novel to this problem)
speed up this evaluation.
(iv) Computational reuse. When we evaluate a rule list
on the data that has been modified from a previous rule
list, we need only to change the evaluation of points
below the change in the rule list. Thus we can reuse
the computation above the change.
(v) Analytical bounds on BRL’s posterior that are tight
enough to be used in practice for screening association

