Zero-Inflated Exponential Family Embeddings

Li-Ping Liu 1 2 David M. Blei 1

Abstract
Word embeddings are a widely-used tool to analyze language, and exponential family embeddings (Rudolph et al., 2016) generalize the technique to other types of data. One challenge to
fitting embedding methods is sparse data, such
as a document/term matrix that contains many
zeros. To address this issue, practitioners typically downweight or subsample the zeros, thus
focusing learning on the non-zero entries. In this
paper, we develop zero-inflated embeddings, a
new embedding method that is designed to learn
from sparse observations. In a zero-inflated embedding (ZIE), a zero in the data can come from
an interaction to other data (i.e., an embedding)
or from a separate process by which many observations are equal to zero (i.e. a probability
mass at zero). Fitting a ZIE naturally downweights the zeros and dampens their influence
on the model. Across many types of data—
language, movie ratings, shopping histories, and
bird watching logs—we found that zero-inflated
embeddings provide improved predictive performance over standard approaches and find better
vector representation of items.

1. Introduction
Word embeddings use distributed representations to capture usage patterns in language data (Harris, 1954; Rumelhart et al., 1988; Bengio et al., 2003; Mikolov et al.,
2013a;b; Pennington et al., 2014). The main idea is to fit
the conditional distribution of words by using vector representations, called embeddings. The learned parameters—
the embedding vectors—are useful as features about the
meanings of words. Word embeddings have become a
widely used method for unsupervised analysis of text.
1
Columbia University, 500 W 120th St., New York, NY 10027
Tufts University, 161 College Ave., Medford, MA 02155. Correspondence to: Li-Ping Liu <ll3105@columbia.edu>, David M.
Blei <david.blei@columbia.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

In a recent paper, Rudolph et al. (2016) developed exponential family embeddings. Their work casts embeddings
in a probabilistic framework and generalizes them to model
various types of high-dimensional data.
Exponential family embeddings give a recipe for creating
new types of embeddings. There are three ingredients. First
is a notion of a context, e.g., a neighborhood of surrounding words around a word in a document. Second is a conditional distribution of data given its context, e.g., a categorical distribution for a word. Third is an “embedding structure” that captures parameter sharing, e.g., that the embedding vector for PHILOSOPHY is the same wherever it appears in the data. Rudolph et al. (2016) show that exponential family embeddings embody many existing methods for
word embeddings. Further, they easily extend to other scenarios, such as movie ratings, shopping basket purchases,
and neuroscience data.
Many applications of embeddings—both the classical application to language and the others types of data—involve
sparse observations, data that contain many zero entries.
As examples, shoppers do not purchase most of the items in
the store, authors do not use most of the words in a vocabulary, and movie-watchers do not view most of the movies
in an online collection. Sparse observations are challenging for many machine learning methods because the zeros
dominate the data. Most methods will focus on capturing
and predicting them, and embeddings are no exception.
Folk wisdom says that zeros in sparse data contain less information than the non-zeros. Consequently, practitioners
use various methods to downweight them (Hu et al., 2008)
or downsample them, as is often the case in word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Rudolph et al., 2016). Empirically, methods that downweight and downsample the zeros
far outperform their counterparts.
What this folk wisdom suggests is that zeros often occur
for one of two reasons—either they are part of the underlying process that we are trying to model, such as capturing
the meanings of words, or they part of a different process,
such as that only a particular part of speech belongs in a
particular location in a sentence. As other examples, a film
enthusiast might not watch a movie either because she does
not think she will like it or because she has never heard of
it; a shopper might not buy a brand of cookies either be-

