State-Frequency Memory Recurrent Neural Networks

Hao Hu 1 Guo-Jun Qi 1

Abstract
Modeling temporal sequences plays a fundamental role in various modern applications and has
drawn more and more attentions in the machine
learning community. Among those efforts on
improving the capability to represent temporal
data, the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) has
achieved great success in many areas. Although
the LSTM can capture long-range dependency
in the time domain, it does not explicitly model
the pattern occurrences in the frequency domain
that plays an important role in tracking and predicting data points over various time cycles. We
propose the State-Frequency Memory (SFM), a
novel recurrent architecture that allows to separate dynamic patterns across different frequency
components and their impacts on modeling the
temporal contexts of input sequences. By jointly
decomposing memorized dynamics into statefrequency components, the SFM is able to offer
a fine-grained analysis of temporal sequences by
capturing the dependency of uncovered patterns
in both time and frequency domains. Evaluations
on several temporal modeling tasks demonstrate
the SFM can yield competitive performances, in
particular as compared with the state-of-the-art
LSTM models.

1. Introduction
Research in modeling dynamics of time series has a long
history and is still highly active due to its crucial role in
many real world applications (Lipton et al., 2015). In recent years, the advancement of this area has been dramatically pushed forward by the success of recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) as more training data and computing resources are available (Mikolov et al., 2010; Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Graves et al., 2013). Although some sophisticated
1
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA. Correspondence to: Guo-Jun Qi <Guojun.Qi@ucf.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

RNN models such as Long Short-term Memory (LSTM)
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) have been proven as
powerful tools for modeling the sequences, there are some
cases that are hard to handle by RNNs. For instance, (Mittelman, 2015) demonstrates that RNN models either perform poorly on predicting the optimal short-term investment strategy for the high frequency trading or diverge,
making them less preferred than other simpler algorithms.
One of the possible reasons for such situations is that RNN
models like LSTM only consider the pattern dependency
in the time domain, which is insufficient if we want to predict and track the temporal sequences over time at various frequencies. For example, in phonemes classification,
some phonemes like ‘p’, ‘t’ are produced by short, highfrequency signals, while others like ‘iy’, ‘ey’ are related
to longer, low-frequency signals. Thus modeling such frequency patterns is quite helpful for correctly identifying
phonemes in a sentence. Similarly, music clips are often
composed of note sequences across a rich bands of frequencies. Automatically generating music clips often requires
us to model both short and long-lasting notes by properly
mixing them in a harmonic fashion. These examples show
the existence of rich frequency components in many natural
temporal sequences, and discovering them plays an important role in many prediction and generation tasks.
Thus, we strive to seamlessly combine the capacity of
multi-frequency analysis with the modeling of long-range
dependency to capture the temporal context of input sequences. For this purpose, we propose the State-frequency
Memory (SFM), a novel RNN architecture that jointly decomposes the memory states of an input sequence into a
set of frequency components. In this fashion, the temporal context can be internally represented by a combination
of different state-frequency basis. Then, for a prediction
and generation task, a suitable set of state-frequency components can be selected by memory gates deciding which
components should be chosen to predict and generate the
target outputs. For example, the high-frequency patterns
will be chosen to make very short-term prediction of asset
prices, while the low-frequency patterns of price fluctuations will be selected to predict returns in deciding lowterm investment. Even more, we also allow the model to
automatically adapt its frequency bands over time, resulting in an Adaptive SFM that can change its Fourier bases

