Unimodal Probability Distributions for Deep Ordinal Classification

Christopher Beckham 1 Christopher Pal 1

Abstract
Probability distributions produced by the crossentropy loss for ordinal classification problems
can possess undesired properties. We propose
a straightforward technique to constrain discrete
ordinal probability distributions to be unimodal
via the use of the Poisson and binomial probability distributions. We evaluate this approach in
the context of deep learning on two large ordinal
image datasets, obtaining promising results.

1. Introduction
Ordinal classification (sometimes called ordinal regression)
is a prediction task in which the classes to be predicted are
discrete and ordered in some fashion. This is different from
discrete classification in which the classes are not ordered,
and different from regression in that we typically do not
know the distances between the classes (unlike regression,
in which we know the distances because the predictions lie
on the real number line). Some examples of ordinal classification tasks include predicting the stages of disease for
a cancer (Gentry et al., 2015), predicting what star rating
a user gave to a movie (Koren & Sill, 2011), or predicting
the age of a person (Eidinger et al., 2014).
Two of the easiest techniques used to deal with ordinal
problems include either treating the problem as a discrete
classification and minimising the cross-entropy loss, or
treating the problem as a regression and using the squared
error loss. The former ignores the inherent ordering between the classes, while the latter takes into account the
distances between them (due to the square in the error term)
but assumes that the labels are actually real-valued – that
is, adjacent classes are equally distant. Furthermore, the
cross-entropy loss – under a one-hot target encoding – is
formulated such that it only ‘cares’ about the ground truth
class, and that probability estimates corresponding to the
1

Montréal Institute of Learning Algorithms, Québec,
Canada. Correspondence to: Christopher Beckham <christopher.beckham@polymtl.ca>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

other classes may not necessarily make sense in context.
We present an example of this in Figure 1, showing three
probability distributions: A, B, and C, all conditioned on
some input image. Highlighted in orange is the ground
truth (i.e. the image is of an adult), and all probability
distributions have identical cross-entropy: this is because
the loss only takes into account the ground truth class,
− log(p(y|x)c ), where c = adult, and all three distributions have the same probability mass for the adult class.
Despite all distributions having the same cross-entropy
loss, some distributions are ‘better’ than others. For example, between A and B, A is preferred, since B puts an
unusually high mass on the baby class. However, A and
B are both unusual, because the probability mass does not
gradually decrease to the left and right of the ground truth.
In other words, it seems unusual to place more confidence
on ‘schooler’ than ‘teen’ (distribution A) considering that
a teenager looks more like an adult than a schooler, and
it seems unusual to place more confidence on ’baby’ than
’teen’ considering that again, a teenager looks more like an
adult than a baby. Distribution C makes the most sense because the probability mass gradually decreases as we move
further away from the most confident class. In this paper,
we propose a simple method to enforce this constraint, utilising the probability mass function of either the Poisson or
binomial distribution.
For the remainder of this paper, we will refer to distributions like C as ‘unimodal’ distributions; that is, distributions where the probability mass gradually decreases on
both sides of the class that has the majority of the mass.
1.1. Related work
Our work is inspired by the recent work of Hou et al.
(2016), who shed light on the issues associated with different probability distributions having the same cross-entropy
loss for ordinal problems. In their work, they alleviate this
issue by minimising the ‘Earth mover’s distance’, which is
defined as the minimum cost needed to transform one probability distribution to another. Because this metric takes
into account the distances between classes – moving probability mass to a far-away class incurs a large cost – the
metric is appropriate to minimise for an ordinal problem. It
turns out that in the case of an ordinal problem, the Earth

