Consistency Analysis for Binary Classification Revisited

Krzysztof Dembczyński 1 Wojciech Kotłowski 1 Oluwasanmi Koyejo 2 Nagarajan Natarajan 3

Abstract
Statistical learning theory is at an inflection point
enabled by recent advances in understanding and
optimizing a wide range of metrics. Of particular interest are non-decomposable metrics such
as the F-measure and the Jaccard measure which
cannot be represented as a simple average over
examples. Non-decomposability is the primary
source of difficulty in theoretical analysis, and
interestingly has led to two distinct settings and
notions of consistency. In this manuscript we
analyze both settings, from statistical and algorithmic points of view, to explore the connections and to highlight differences between them
for a wide range of metrics. The analysis complements previous results on this topic, clarifies
common confusions around both settings, and
provides guidance to the theory and practice of
binary classification with complex metrics.

1. Introduction
Real-world applications of binary classification to complex
decision problems have led to the design of a wide range of
evaluation metrics (Choi & Cha, 2010). Prominent examples include area under the ROC curve (AUC) for imbalanced labels (Menon et al., 2013), F-measure for information retrieval (Lewis, 1995), and precision at the top (Kar
et al., 2014; 2015; Jasinska et al., 2016). To this end, several algorithms have been proposed for optimizing many of
these metrics, primarily focusing on large-scale learning,
without a conscious emphasis on statistical consequences
of choosing models and their asymptotic behavior (Kar
et al., 2015; Joachims, 2005). Wide use of such complex
metrics has also re-invigorated research into their theoretical properties, which can then serve as a guide to pracAuthors listed in the alphabetical order 1 Institute of Computing
Science, Poznan University of Technology, Poland 2 Department
of Computer Science, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, USA 3 Microsoft Research, India. Correspondence
to: Wojciech Kotłowski <wkotlowski@cs.put.poznan.pl>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tice (Koyejo et al., 2014a; Narasimhan et al., 2014a; Dembczyński et al., 2012; Waegeman et al., 2014; Natarajan
et al., 2016).
Complex evaluation metrics for binary classification are
best described as set metrics, or non-decomposable metrics – as, in general, the evaluation for a set of predictions
cannot be decomposed into the average of individual instance evaluations. This is in contrast to decomposable
metrics such as accuracy which are defined as the empirical average of the instance evaluations. This property is
the primary source of difficulty in theoretical analysis, and
interestingly has led to two distinct settings and notions of
consistency. On one hand, Population Utility (PU) focuses
on estimation – so a consistent PU classifier is one which
correctly estimates the population optimal utility as the size
of the training set (equiv. test set) increases. The PU approach has strongest roots in classical statistical analysis
which often deals with asymptotically optimal estimation.
On the other hand, Expected Test Utility (ETU) focuses on
generalization. Thus, the consistent ETU classifier is one
which optimizes the expected prediction error over test sets
of a pre-defined size. The ETU approach has strongest
roots in statistical machine learning which prizes generalization as the primary goal. Importantly, these distinctions
are irrelevant when the metric is a linear function of the
confusion matrix e.g. (weighted) accuracy and other linear
metrics. To the best of our knowledge, this dichotomy was
first explicitly noted by Ye et al. (2012) in the context of
F-measure.1 Like in Ye et al. (2012), our goal is not to adjudicate the correctness of either approach, but instead to
explore deep connections, and highlight significant differences between both approaches for a wide range of metrics.
Contributions: We present a variety of results comparing and contrasting the PU and ETU approaches for consistent classification:
• We show that for a wide range of metrics, PU and
ETU are asymptotically equivalent with respect to the
size of the test set, subject to a certain p-Lipschitzness
1

Note that Ye et al. (2012) termed the two approaches Empirical Utility Maximization (EUM) and Decision Theoretic Approach (DTA), respectively. We have instead chosen the more descriptive names Population Utility (PU) and Expected Test Utility
(ETU).

