Improving Gibbs Sampler Scan Quality with DoGS
Ioannis Mitliagkas 1 Lester Mackey 2

Abstract
The pairwise influence matrix of Dobrushin has
long been used as an analytical tool to bound the
rate of convergence of Gibbs sampling. In this
work, we use Dobrushin influence as the basis
of a practical tool to certify and efficiently improve the quality of a discrete Gibbs sampler. Our
Dobrushin-optimized Gibbs samplers (DoGS) offer customized variable selection orders for a
given sampling budget and variable subset of interest, explicit bounds on total variation distance
to stationarity, and certifiable improvements over
the standard systematic and uniform random scan
Gibbs samplers. In our experiments with joint image segmentation and object recognition, Markov
chain Monte Carlo maximum likelihood estimation, and Ising model inference, DoGS consistently deliver higher-quality inferences with significantly smaller sampling budgets than standard
Gibbs samplers.

1. Introduction
The Gibbs sampler of Geman & Geman (1984), also known
as the Glauber dynamics or the heat-bath algorithm, is a
leading Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method for approximating expectations unavailable in closed form. First
detailed as a technique for restoring degraded images (Geman & Geman, 1984), Gibbs sampling has since found
diverse applications in statistical physics (Janke, 2008),
stochastic optimization and parameter estimation (Geyer,
1991), and Bayesian inference (Lunn et al., 2000).
The hallmark of any Gibbs sampler is conditional simulation: individual variables are successively simulated from
the univariate conditionals of a multivariate target distribu1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA 2 Microsoft Research New England, One
Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02142 USA. Correspondence
to: Ioannis Mitliagkas <imit@stanford.edu>, Lester Mackey
<lmackey@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

tion. The principal degree of freedom is the scan, the order
in which variables are sampled (He et al., 2016). While it
is common to employ a systematic scan, sweeping through
each variable in turn, or a uniform random scan, sampling
each variable with equal frequency, it is known that nonuniform scans can lead to more accurate inferences both in
theory and in practice (Liu et al., 1995; Levine & Casella,
2006). This effect is particularly pronounced when certain
variables are of greater inferential interest. Past approaches
to optimizing Gibbs sampler scans were based on asymptotic quality measures approximated with the output of a
Markov chain (Levine et al., 2005; Levine & Casella, 2006).
In this work, we propose a computable non-asymptotic scan
quality measure for discrete target distributions based on Dobrushin’s notion of variable influence (Dobrushin & Shlosman, 1985). We show that for a given subset of variables,
this Dobrushin variation (DV) bounds the marginal total
variation between a target distribution and T steps of Gibbs
sampling with a specified scan. More generally, Dobrushin
variation bounds a weighted total variation based on userinputted importance weights for each variable. We couple
this quality measure with an efficient procedure for optimizing scan quality by minimizing Dobrushin variation.
Our Dobrushin-optimized Gibbs samplers (DoGS) come
equipped with a guaranteed bound on scan quality, are never
worse than the standard uniform random and systematic
scans, and can be tailored to a target number of sampling
steps and a subset of target variables. Moreover, Dobrushin
variation can be used to evaluate and compare the quality of any user-specified set of scans prior to running any
expensive simulations.
The improvements achieved by DoGS are driven by an inputted matrix, C̄, of pairwise variable influence bounds
discussed in more detail in Section 3. While DoGS can
be used with any discrete distribution, it was designed for
targets with total influence kC̄k < 1, measured in any matrix norm. This criterion is known to hold for a variety of
distributions, including Ising models with sufficiently high
temperatures, hard-core lattice gas models, random graph
colorings (Hayes, 2006), and classes of weighted constraint
satisfaction problems (Feng et al., 2017). Moreover, as we
will see in Section 4.1, suitable variable influence bounds
are readily available for pairwise and binary Markov random fields. These user-friendly bounds give rise to total

