StingyCD: Safely Avoiding Wasteful Updates in Coordinate Descent

Tyler B. Johnson 1 Carlos Guestrin 1

Abstract
Coordinate descent (CD) is a scalable and simple
algorithm for solving many optimization problems in machine learning. Despite this fact,
CD can also be very computationally wasteful. Due to sparsity in sparse regression problems, for example, often the majority of CD
updates result in no progress toward the solution. To address this inefficiency, we propose a
modified CD algorithm named “StingyCD.” By
skipping over many updates that are guaranteed
to not decrease the objective value, StingyCD
significantly reduces convergence times. Since
StingyCD only skips updates with this guarantee, however, StingyCD does not fully exploit the problem’s sparsity.
For this reason, we also propose StingyCD+, an algorithm
that achieves further speed-ups by skipping updates more aggressively. Since StingyCD and
StingyCD+ rely on simple modifications to CD,
it is also straightforward to use these algorithms with other approaches to scaling optimization. In empirical comparisons, StingyCD and
StingyCD+ improve convergence times considerably for `1 -regularized optimization problems.

1. Introduction
Known to be simple and fast, coordinate descent is a highly
popular algorithm for training machine learning models.
For `1 -regularized loss minimization problems, such as the
Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996), CD iteratively updates just one
weight variable at a time. As it turns out, these small yet
inexpensive updates efficiently lead to the desired solution.
Another attractive property of CD is its lack of parameters
that require tuning, such as a learning rate.
Due to its appeal, CD has been researched extensively in
1

University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Correspondence
to: Tyler Johnson <tbjohns@washington.edu>, Carlos Guestrin
<guestrin@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

recent years. This includes theoretical (Nesterov, 2012;
Shalev-Shwartz & Tewari, 2011) and more applied (Fan
et al., 2008; Friedman et al., 2010) contributions. Many
works also consider scaling CD using parallelism (Bradley
et al., 2011; Richtárik & Takáč, 2016). For surveys of research on CD, see (Wright, 2015) or (Shi et al., 2016).
Despite its popularity, CD has a significant drawback: in
many applications, the majority of coordinate updates yield
no progress toward convergence. In sparse regression, most
entries of the optimal weight vector equal zero. When CD
updates these weights during optimization, the weights often equal zero both before and after they are updated. This
is immensely wasteful! Computing these “zero updates”
requires time yet leaves the iterate unchanged.
In this work, we propose StingyCD, an improved CD algorithm for sparse optimization and linear SVM problems. With minimal added overhead, StingyCD identifies
many coordinate updates that are guaranteed to result in no
change to the current iterate. By skipping over these zero
updates, StingyCD obtains much faster convergence times.
StingyCD is related to safe screening tests (El Ghaoui et al.,
2012), which for Lasso problems, guarantee some weights
equal zero at the solution. The algorithm can subsequently
ignore screened weights for the remainder of optimization.
Unfortunately, for screening to be effective, a good approximate solution must already be available. For this reason,
screening often has little impact until convergence is near
(Johnson & Guestrin, 2016).
By identifying zero updates rather than zero-valued
weights at the solution, StingyCD drastically improves
convergence times compared to safe screening. At the same
time, we find that skipping only updates that are guaranteed to be zero is limiting. For this reason, we also propose
StingyCD+, an algorithm that estimates a probability that
each update is zero. By also skipping updates that are likely
zero, StingyCD+ achieves even greater speed-ups.
StingyCD and StingyCD+ require only simple changes to
CD. Thus, we can combine these algorithms with other
improvements to CD. In this work, we apply StingyCD+
to proximal Newton and working set algorithms. In both
cases, incorporating StingyCD+ leads to efficiency improvements, demonstrating that “stingy updates” are a ver-

