Enumerating Distinct Decision Trees

Salvatore Ruggieri 1

Abstract
The search space for the feature selection problem in decision tree learning is the lattice of subsets of the available features. We provide an
exact enumeration procedure of the subsets that
lead to all and only the distinct decision trees.
The procedure can be adopted to prune the search
space of complete and heuristics search methods
in wrapper models for feature selection. Based
on this, we design a computational optimization
of the sequential backward elimination heuristics
with a performance improvement of up to 100×.

1. Introduction
Feature selection in machine learning classification is an
extremely relevant and widely studied topic. Wrapper
models for feature selection have shown superior performance in many contexts (Doak, 1992). They explore the
lattice of feature subsets. For a given subset, a classifier
is built over the features in the subset and an optimality
condition is tested. However, complete search of the lattice of feature subsets is know to be NP hard (Amaldi &
Kann, 1998). For this reason, heuristics searches are typically adopted in practice. Nevertheless, complete strategies
have not to be exhaustive in order to find an optimal subset.
In particular, feature subsets that lead to duplicate decision
trees can be pruned from the search space. Such a pruning
would be useful not only for complete searches, but also
in the case of heuristics searches. A naı̈ve approach that
stores all distinct trees found during the search is, however,
unfeasible, since there may be an exponential number of
such trees. Our contribution is a non-trivial enumeration
algorithm of all distinct decision trees built using subsets
of the available features. The procedure requires the storage of a linear number of decision trees in the worst case.
The starting point is a recursive procedure for the visit of
the lattice of all subsets of features. The key idea is that
1
University of Pisa and ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy. Correspondence to: Salvatore Ruggieri <ruggieri@di.unipi.it>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

a subset of features is denoted by the union R ∪ S of two
sets, where elements in R must necessarily be used as split
attributes, and elements in S may be used or not. Pruning
of the search space is driven by the observation that if a feature a ∈ S is not used as split attribute by a decision tree
built on R ∪ S, then the feature subset R ∪ S \ {a} leads
to the same decision tree. Duplicate decision trees that still
pass such a (necessary but not sufficient) pruning condition can be identified through a test on whether they use
all attributes in R. Coupled with the tremendous computational optimization of decision tree induction algorithms,
our approach makes it possible to increase the limit of practical applicability of theoretically hard complete searches.
It also allows to optimize the sequential backward elimination (SBE) search heuristics when specifically designed for
decision tree learning, with a speedup of up to 100× compared to a black-box approach. This paper is organized as
follows. First, we recall related work in Section 2. The
visit of the lattice of feature subsets is based on a generalization of binary counting enumeration devised in Sect. 3.
Next, Sect. 4 introduces a procedure for the enumeration
of distinct decision trees as a pruning of the feature subset
lattice. A white-box optimization of SBE is described in
Sect. 5. Experimental results are shown in Sect. 5. Finally,
we summarize the contribution of the paper.

2. Related Work
(Blum & Langley, 1997; Dash & Liu, 1997; Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003; Liu & Yu, 2005; Bolón-Canedo et al., 2013)
provide a categorization of approaches of feature subset
selection along the orthogonal axes of the evaluation criteria, the search strategies, and the machine learning tasks.
Common evaluation criteria include filter models, embedded and wrappers approaches. Filters are pre-processing
algorithms that select a subset of features by looking at the
data distribution, independently from the induction algorithm (Cover, 1977). Embedded approaches perform feature selection in the process of training and are specific to
the learning algorithm. Wrappers approaches optimize induction algorithm performances as part of feature selection
(Kohavi & John, 1997). In particular, training data is split
into a building set and a search set, and the space of feature
subsets is explored. For each feature subset considered,
the building set is used to train a classifier, which is then

