Clustering High Dimensional Dynamic Data Streams

Vladimir Braverman 1 Gereon Frahling 2 Harry Lang 1 Christian Sohler 3 Lin F. Yang 1

Abstract
We present data streaming algorithms for the kmedian problem in high-dimensional dynamic
geometric data streams, i.e. streams allowing
both insertions and deletions of points from a
discrete Euclidean space {1, 2, . . . ∆}d . Our algorithms use k−2 poly(d log ∆) space/time and
maintain with high probability a small weighted
set of points (a coreset) such that for every set
of k centers the cost of the coreset (1 + )approximates the cost of the streamed point set.
We also provide algorithms that guarantee only
positive weights in the coreset with additional
logarithmic factors in the space and time complexities. We can use this positively-weighted
coreset to compute a (1 + )-approximation for
the k-median problem by any efficient offline kmedian algorithm. All previous algorithms for
computing a (1 + )-approximation for the kmedian problem over dynamic data streams required space and time exponential in d. Our algorithms can be generalized to metric spaces of
bounded doubling dimension.

1

Introduction

The analysis of very large data sets is still a big challenge. Particularly, when we would like to obtain information from data sets that occur in the form of a data stream
like, for example, streams of updates to a data base system,
internet traffic and measurements of scientific experiments
in astro- or particle physics (e.g. (Liu et al., 2015)). In
such scenarios it is difficult and sometimes even impossible
to store the data. Therefore, we need algorithms that process the data sequentially and maintain a summary of the
data using space much smaller than the size of the stream.
Such algorithms are often called streaming algorithms (for
more introduction on streaming algorithms, please refer to
(Muthukrishnan, 2005)).
One fundamental technique in data analysis is clustering.
The idea is to group data into clusters such that data inside
1

Johns Hopkins University, USA 2 Linguee GmbH 3 TU Dortmund. Correspondence to: Lin F. Yang <lyang@jhu.edu>,
Christian Sohler <christian.sohler@tu-dortmund.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

the same cluster is similar and data in different clusters is
different. Center based clustering algorithms also provide
for each cluster a cluster center, which may act as a representative of the cluster. Often data is represented as vectors
in Rd and similarity between data points is often measured
by the Euclidean distance. Clustering has many applications ranging from data compression to unsupervised learning.
In this paper we are interested in clustering problems over
dynamic data streams, i.e. data streams that consist of updates, for example, to a database. Our stream consists of
insert and delete operations of points from {1, . . . , ∆}d .
We assume that the stream is consistent, i.e. there are no
deletions of points that are not in the point set and no insertions of points that are already in the point set. We consider
the k-median clustering problem, which for a given a set of
points P ⊆ Rd asks to compute a set C of k points that
minimizes the sum of distances of the input points to their
nearest points in C.
1.1 Our Results
We develop the first (1 + )-approximation algorithm for
the k-median clustering problem in dynamic data streams
that uses space polynomial in the dimension of the data. To
our best knowledge, all previous algorithms required space
exponentially in the dimension. Formally, our main theorem states,
Theorem 1.1 (Main Theorem). Fix  ∈ (0, 1/2), positive
integers k and ∆, Algorithm 1 makes a single pass over the
dynamic streaming point set P ⊂ [∆]d , outputs a weighted
set S, such that with probability at least 
0.99, S is an coreset for k-median of size O kd4 L4 /2 , where L =

log ∆. The algorithm uses Õ kd7 L7 /2 bits in the worst
case, processes each update in time Õ(dL2 ) and outputs
the coreset in time poly(d, k, L, 1/) after one pass of the
stream.
The theorem is restated in Theorem 3.6 and the proof is
presented in Section 3.3. The coreset we constructed may
contain negatively weighted points. Thus naı̈ve offline algorithms do not apply directly to finding k-clustering solutions on the coreset. We also provide an alternative approach that output only non-negatively weighted coreset.
The new algorithm is slightly more complicated. The space
complexity and coreset size is slightly worse than the one
with negative weights but still polynomial in d, 1/ and
log ∆ and optimal in k up to polylogk factor.
Theorem 1.2 (Alternative Results). Fix  ∈ (0, 1/2), posi-

