Scalable Generative Models for Multi-label Learning with Missing Labels

Vikas Jain 1 * Nirbhay Modhe 1 * Piyush Rai 1

Abstract
We present a scalable, generative framework for
multi-label learning with missing labels. Our
framework consists of a latent factor model for
the binary label matrix, which is coupled with
an exposure model to account for label missingness (i.e., whether a zero in the label matrix is
indeed a zero or denotes a missing observation).
The underlying latent factor model also assumes
that the low-dimensional embeddings of each label vector are directly conditioned on the respective feature vector of that example. Our generative framework admits a simple inference procedure, such that the parameter estimation reduces to a sequence of simple weighted leastsquare regression problems, each of which can be
solved easily, efficiently, and in parallel. Moreover, inference can also be performed in an online fashion using mini-batches of training examples, which makes our framework scalable for
large data sets, even when using moderate computational resources. We report both quantitative and qualitative results for our framework on
several benchmark data sets, comparing it with a
number of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-label learning (Gibaja & Ventura, 2015; 2014) is the
problem of assigning to an object a subset of labels from a
potentially very large label vocabulary (Prabhu & Varma,
2014; Jain et al., 2016; Babbar & Schölkopf, 2017). In
contrast to binary or multi-class classification, in multilabel learning, each example is associated with a binary
label vector (potentially very large), denoting the presence/absence (relevance/irrelevance) of each label. Multilabel learning has applications in several domains such as
computer vision (Wang et al., 2016), computational adver*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Enginerring, IIT Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, UP, India. Correspondence to: Vikas Jain <vikasj@iitk.ac.in>, Nirbhay Modhe
<nirbhaym@iitk.ac.in>, Piyush Rai <piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in>
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tising and recommender systems (Prabhu & Varma, 2014;
Jain et al., 2016), etc.
Several state-of-the-art methods for multi-label learning are
based on certain structural assumptions on the binary label matrix. Some of the key structural assumptions that
have been used in prior work include low-rank assumption (Yu et al., 2014), locally low-rank assumption (Bhatia et al., 2015), and low-rank plus sparse assumption (Xu
et al., 2016), and clusters/topics of labels assumption (Cissé
et al., 2016; Rai et al., 2015). Models based on these assumptions are broadly dubbed as embedding based methods for multi-label learning and offer two key advantages:
(1) The relatedness/correlation among labels can be easily
modeled/captured, and (2) the label vector for each example can be represented as a low-dimensional embedding,
which faciliates developing computationally scalable models for multi-label learning. A more detailed discussion of
prior work is provided in the Related Work section.
Despite the considerable recent interest and progress on
the problem of multi-label learning (Yu et al., 2014; Bhatia
et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Cissé et al., 2016), a number
of important issues still remain. One of such issues, especially for the embdding based methods, is the ambiguity
regarding the zeros vs unobserved (missing) entries in the
binary label vector of each example. Since, in practice, the
true value (0/1) for only a small subset of all the labels can
be obtained, the zeros in the label vector do not necessarily
represent negative labels. A typical heuristic employed by
multi-label learning algorithms is to simply treat all such
the zeros in the label vector as are true negatives (Yu et al.,
2014). Another heuristic is to assign different weights to
the zeros and ones in the binary label matrix (Yu et al.,
2017), which is inspired by matrix factorization based collaborative filtering models that learn from implicit (binary)
feedback data (Hu et al., 2008). However, a more principled strategy to address this issue is highly desirable.
Another important desideratum is scalability, especially in
the case of extreme multi-label learning problems (Prabhu
& Varma, 2014; Jain et al., 2016; Babbar & Schölkopf,
2017), which are characterized by a massive number of labels, features, and examples. Although a number of recent
multi-label learning models have been proposed that can
scale to large-scale problems, these models usually require

