Exact Inference for Integer Latent-Variable Models
Kevin Winner 1 Debora Sujono 1 Dan Sheldon 1 2

Abstract
Graphical models with latent count variables
arise in a number of areas. However, standard
inference algorithms do not apply to these models due to the infinite support of the latent variables. Winner & Sheldon (2016) recently developed a new technique using probability generating functions (PGFs) to perform efficient, exact
inference for certain Poisson latent variable models. However, the method relies on symbolic manipulation of PGFs, and it is unclear whether this
can be extended to more general models. In this
paper we introduce a new approach for inference
with PGFs: instead of manipulating PGFs symbolically, we adapt techniques from the autodiff
literature to compute the higher-order derivatives
necessary for inference. This substantially generalizes the class of models for which efficient,
exact inference algorithms are available. Specifically, our results apply to a class of models that
includes branching processes, which are widely
used in applied mathematics and population ecology, and autoregressive models for integer data.
Experiments show that our techniques are more
scalable than existing approximate methods and
enable new applications.

1. Introduction
A key to the success of probabilistic modeling is the pairing of rich probability models with fast and accurate inference algorithms. Probabilistic graphical models enable
this by providing a flexible class of probability distributions together with algorithms that exploit the graph structure for efficient inference. However, exact inference algorithms are only available when both the distributions involved and the graph structure are simple enough. How1
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University
of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Department of Computer Science,
Mount Holyoke College. Correspondence to: Kevin Winner
<kwinner@cs.umass.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ever, this situation is rare and consequently, much research
today is devoted to general-purpose approximate inference
techniques (e.g. Ranganath et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling,
2014; Carpenter et al., 2016).
Despite many advances in probabilistic inference, there remain relatively simple (and useful) models for which exact
inference algorithms are not available. This paper considers the case of graphical models with a simple structure but
with (unbounded) latent count random variables. These are
a natural modeling choice for many real world problems in
ecology (Zonneveld, 1991; Royle, 2004; Dail & Madsen,
2011) and epidemiology (Farrington et al., 2003; Panaretos, 2007; Kvitkovicova & Panaretos, 2011). However,
they pose a unique challenge for inference: even though
algorithms like belief propagation (Pearl, 1986) or variable
elimination (Zhang & Poole, 1994) are well defined mathematically, they cannot be implemented in an obvious way
because factors have a countably infinite number of entries.
As a result, approximations like truncating the support of
the random variables or MCMC are applied (Royle, 2004;
Gross et al., 2007; Chandler et al., 2011; Dail & Madsen,
2011; Zipkin et al., 2014; Winner et al., 2015).
Recently, Winner & Sheldon (2016) introduced a new technique for exact inference in models with latent count variables. Their approach executes the same operations as
variable elimination, but with factors, which are infinite
sequences of values, represented in a compact way using
probability generating functions (PGFs). They developed
an efficient exact inference algorithm for a specific class
of Poisson hidden Markov models (HMMs) that represent
a population undergoing mortality and immigration, and
noisy observations of the population over time.
A key open question is the extent to which PGF-based inference generalizes to a broader class of models. There are
two primary considerations. First, for what types of factors can the required operations (multiplication, marginalization, and conditioning) be “lifted” to PGF-based representations? Here, there is significant room for generalization: the mathematical PGF operations developed in (Winner & Sheldon, 2016) already apply to a broad class of nonPoisson immigration models, and we will generalize the
models further to allow richer models of population survival and growth. Second, and more significantly, for what

