Fast k-Nearest Neighbour Search via Prioritized DCI
Ke Li 1 Jitendra Malik 1

Abstract
Most exact methods for k-nearest neighbour
search suffer from the curse of dimensionality;
that is, their query times exhibit exponential dependence on either the ambient or the intrinsic
dimensionality. Dynamic Continuous Indexing
(DCI) (Li & Malik, 2016) offers a promising way
of circumventing the curse and successfully reduces the dependence of query time on intrinsic
dimensionality from exponential to sublinear. In
this paper, we propose a variant of DCI, which
we call Prioritized DCI, and show a remarkable
improvement in the dependence of query time on
intrinsic dimensionality. In particular, a linear
increase in intrinsic dimensionality, or equivalently, an exponential increase in the number of
points near a query, can be mostly counteracted
with just a linear increase in space. We also
demonstrate empirically that Prioritized DCI significantly outperforms prior methods. In particular, relative to Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH),
Prioritized DCI reduces the number of distance
evaluations by a factor of 14 to 116 and the memory consumption by a factor of 21.

1. Introduction
The method of k-nearest neighbours is a fundamental
building block of many machine learning algorithms and
also has broad applications beyond artificial intelligence,
including in statistics, bioinformatics and database systems, e.g. (Biau et al., 2011; Behnam et al., 2013; Eldawy & Mokbel, 2015). Consequently, since the problem
of nearest neighbour search was first posed by Minsky &
Papert (1969), it has for decades intrigued the artificial intelligence and theoretical computer science communities
alike. Unfortunately, the myriad efforts at devising efficient algorithms have encountered a recurring obstacle: the
1
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, United States.
Correspondence to: Ke Li <ke.li@eecs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

curse of dimensionality, which describes the phenomenon
of query time complexity depending exponentially on dimensionality. As a result, even on datasets with moderately
high dimensionality, practitioners often have resort to naı̈ve
exhaustive search.
Two notions of dimensionality are commonly considered.
The more familiar notion, ambient dimensionality, refers to
the dimensionality of the space data points are embedded
in. On the other hand, intrinsic dimensionality1 characterizes the intrinsic properties of the data and measures the
rate at which the number of points inside a ball grows as
a function of its radius. More precisely, for a dataset with
intrinsic dimension d0 , any ball of radius r contains at most
0
O(rd ) points. Intuitively, if the data points are uniformly
distributed on a manifold, then the intrinsic dimensionality
is roughly the dimensionality of the manifold.
Most existing methods suffer from some form of curse
of dimensionality. Early methods like k-d trees (Bentley,
1975) and R-trees (Guttman, 1984) have query times that
grow exponentially in ambient dimensionality. Later methods (Krauthgamer & Lee, 2004; Beygelzimer et al., 2006;
Dasgupta & Freund, 2008) overcame the exponential dependence on ambient dimensionality, but have not been
able to escape from an exponential dependence on intrinsic dimensionality. Indeed, since a linear increase in the
intrinsic dimensionality results in an exponential increase
in the number of points near a query, the problem seems
fundamentally hard when intrinsic dimensionality is high.
Recently, Li & Malik (2016) proposed an approach known
as Dynamic Continuous Indexing (DCI) that successfully
reduces the dependence on intrinsic dimensionality from
exponential to sublinear, thereby making high-dimensional
nearest neighbour search more practical. The key observation is that the difficulties encountered by many existing
methods, including k-d trees and Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) (Indyk & Motwani, 1998), may arise from their
reliance on space partitioning, which is a popular divideand-conquer strategy. It works by partitioning the vector
space into discrete cells and maintaining a data structure
1

The measure of intrinsic dimensionality used throughout
this paper is the expansion dimension, also known as the KRdimension, which is defined as log2 c, where c is the expansion
rate introduced in (Karger & Ruhl, 2002).

