Bayesian Models of Data Streams with Hierarchical Power Priors

Andrés Masegosa 1 2 Thomas D. Nielsen 3 Helge Langseth 2 Darı́o Ramos-López 1 Antonio Salmerón 1
Anders L. Madsen 3 4

Abstract
Making inferences from data streams is a pervasive problem in many modern data analysis applications. But it requires to address the problem of continuous model updating, and adapt to
changes or drifts in the underlying data generating distribution. In this paper, we approach
these problems from a Bayesian perspective covering general conjugate exponential models. Our
proposal makes use of non-conjugate hierarchical priors to explicitly model temporal changes
of the model parameters. We also derive a novel
variational inference scheme which overcomes
the use of non-conjugate priors while maintaining the computational efficiency of variational
methods over conjugate models. The approach is
validated on three real data sets over three latent
variable models.

1. Introduction
Flexible and computationally efficient models for streaming data are required in many machine learning applications, and in this paper we propose a new class of models
for these situations. Specifically, we are interested in models suitable for domains that exhibit changes in the underlying generative process (Gama et al., 2014). We envision
a situation, where one receives batches of data at discrete
points in time. As each new batch arrives, we want to glean
information from the new data, while also retaining relevant information from the historical observations.
Our modelling is inspired by previous works on Bayesian
recursive estimation (Özkan et al., 2013; Kárnỳ, 2014),
power priors (Ibrahim & Chen, 2000) and exponential for1

Department of Mathematics, Unversity of Almerı́a, Almerı́a,
Spain 2 Department of Computer and Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway 3 Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark 4 Hugin Expert A/S, Aalborg, Denmark. Correspondence to: Andrés Masegosa <andresmasegosa@ual.es>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

getting approaches (Honkela & Valpola, 2003). However,
all of these methods were developed for slowly changing processes, where the rate of change anticipated by the
model is controlled by a quantity that must be set manually. Our solution, on the other hand, can accommodate
both gradual and abrupt concept drift by continuously assessing the similarity between new and historic data using
a fully Bayesian paradigm.
Building Bayesian models for data streams raises computational problems, as data may arrive with high velocity
and is unbounded in size. We therefore develop an approximate variational inference technique based on a novel
lower-bound of the data likelihood function. The appropriateness of the approach is investigated through experiments
using both synthetic and real-life data, giving encouraging results. The proposed methods are released as part
of an open-source toolbox for scalable probabilistic machine learning (http://www.amidsttoolbox.com)
(Masegosa et al., 2017; 2016b; Cabañas et al., 2016).

2. Preliminaries
In this paper we focus on conjugate exponential Bayesian
network models for performing Bayesian learning on
streaming data. To simplify the presentation, we shall initially focus on the model structure shown in Figure 1 (a).
This model includes the observed data x = xi=1:N , global
hidden variables (or parameters) β = β 1:M , a set of local
hidden variables z = z 1:N , and a vector of fixed (hyper)
parameters denoted by α. Notice how the dynamics of the
process is not included in the model of Figure 1 (a); the
model will be set in the context of data streams in Section 4, where we extend it to incorporate explicit dynamics
over the (global) parameters to capture concept drift.
With the conditional distributions in the model belonging
to the exponential family, we have that all distributions are
of the following form
ln p(Y |pa(Y )) =
ln hY + η Y (pa(Y ))T tY (Y ) − aY (η Y (pa(Y ))),
where pa(Y ) denotes the parents of Y in the directed
acyclic graph of the induced Bayesian network model. The
scalar functions hY and aY (·) are the base measure and

