Deletion-Robust Submodular Maximization:
Data Summarization with “the Right to be Forgotten”

Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1 Amin Karbasi 2 Andreas Krause 1

Abstract
How can we summarize a dynamic data stream
when elements selected for the summary can be
deleted at any time? This is an important challenge in online services, where the users generating the data may decide to exercise their right
to restrict the service provider from using (part
of) their data due to privacy concerns. Motivated by this challenge, we introduce the dynamic deletion-robust submodular maximization
problem. We develop the first resilient streaming
algorithm, called ROBUST-S TREAMING, with a
constant factor approximation guarantee to the
optimum solution. We evaluate the effectiveness
of our approach on several real-world applications, including summarizing (1) streams of geocoordinates (2); streams of images; and (3) clickstream log data, consisting of 45 million feature
vectors from a news recommendation task.

1. Introduction
Streams of data of massive and increasing volume are generated every second, and demand fast analysis and efficient
storage, including massive clickstreams, stock market data,
image and video streams, sensor data for environmental or
health monitoring, to name a few. To make efficient and reliable decisions we usually need to react in real-time to the
data. However, big and fast data makes it difficult to store,
analyze, or make predictions. Therefore, data summarization – mining and extracting useful information from large
data sets – has become a central topic in machine learning
and information retrieval.
A recent body of research on data summarization relies on
utility/scoring functions that are submodular. Intuitively,
submodularity (Krause & Golovin, 2013) states that select1

ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 Yale University, New Haven,
USA. Correspondence to: Baharan Mirzasoleiman <baharanm@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ing any given data point earlier helps more than selecting it
later. Hence, submodular functions can score both diversity
and representativeness of a subset w.r.t. the entire dataset.
Thus, many problems in data summarization require maximizing submodular set functions subject to cardinality
(or more complicated hereditary constraints). Numerous examples include exemplar-based clustering (Dueck &
Frey, 2007), document (Lin & Bilmes, 2011) and corpus
summarization (Sipos et al., 2012), recommender systems
(El-Arini & Guestrin, 2011), search result diversification
(Rakesh Agrawal, 2009), data subset selection (Wei et al.,
2015), and social networks analysis (Kempe et al., 2003).
Classical methods, such as the celebrated greedy algorithm
(Nemhauser et al., 1978) or its accelerated versions (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015; Badanidiyuru & Vondrák, 2014)
require random access to the entire data, make multiple
passes, and select elements sequentially in order to produce near optimal solutions. Naturally, such solutions cannot scale to large instances. The limitations of centralized methods inspired the design of streaming algorithms
that are able to gain insights from data as it is being collected (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014; Chakrabarti & Kale,
2014; Chekuri et al., 2015; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2017).
While extracting useful information from big data in realtime promises many benefits, the development of more
sophisticated methods for extracting, analyzing and using
personal information has made privacy a major public issue. Various web services rely on the collection and combination of data about individuals from a wide variety of
sources. At the same time, the ability to control the information an individual can reveal about herself in online
applications has become a growing concern.
The “right to be forgotten” (with a specific mandate for
protection in the European Data Protection Regulation
(2012), and concrete guidelines released in 2014) allows
individuals to claim the ownership of their personal information and gives them the authority to their online activities (videos, photos, tweets, etc). As an example, consider a road traffic information system that monitors traffic
speeds, travel times and incidents in real time. It combines
the massive amount of control messages available at the
cellular network with their geo-coordinates in order to gen-

