Consistent k-Clustering

Silvio Lattanzi 1 Sergei Vassilvitskii 2

Abstract
The study of online algorithms and competitive
analysis provides a solid foundation for studying
the quality of irrevocable decision making when
the data arrives in an online manner. While in
some scenarios the decisions are indeed irrevocable, there are many practical situations when
changing a previous decision is not impossible,
but simply expensive.
In this work we formalize this notion and introduce the consistent
k-clustering problem. With points arriving online, the goal is to maintain a constant approximate solution, while minimizing the number of
reclusterings necessary. We prove a lower bound,
showing that Ω(k log n) changes are necessary in
the worst case for a wide range of objective functions. On the positive side, we give an algorithm
that needs only O(k 2 log4 n) changes to maintain
a constant competitive solution, an exponential
improvement on the naive solution of reclustering at every time step. Finally, we show experimentally that our approach performs much better
than the theoretical bound, with the number of
changes growing approximately as O(log n).

1. Introduction
Competitive analysis of online algorithms has been an area
of spirited research with beautiful results over the past two
decades. At its heart, this area is about decision making
under uncertainty about the future—the input is revealed in
an online manner, and at every point in time the algorithm
must make an irrevocable choice. A standard example is
that of caching algorithms—at every time step the algorithm must make a choice about which elements to keep in
the cache, and which elements to evict (Fiat et al., 1991).
The generalization of caching to metric spaces is encapsuEqual contribution 1 Google, Zurich, Switzerland 2 Google,
New York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Silvio Lattanzi <silviol@google.com>, Sergei Vassilvitskii
<sergeiv@google.com>.

lated in the k-server problem, which has been the subject
of intense study (Bansal et al., 2015; Manasse et al., 1990).
The key metric in online algorithms is the competitive ratio. It measures the quality of the solution obtained by an
online algorithm versus an offline optimum, which has the
luxury of seeing the whole input before making any decisions. In situations where the competitive ratio is relatively small, for example, the list update problem (Sleator
& Tarjan, 1985), this is a great measure by which we can
compare different algorithms. However, in some scenarios
strong lower bounds on the competitive ratio imply that any
algorithm that makes irrevocable choices will necessarily
perform poorly when compared to an offline optimum.
Online clustering is one such example. In this setting points
x1 , x2 , . . . arrive one at a time, and must be instantly given
one of k cluster labels. As is typical, the goal is to have the
highest quality clustering (under some pre-specified objective function, like k-C ENTER or k-M EDIAN) at every point
in time. As Liberty et al. (2016) showed, not only do online clustering algorithms have an unbounded competitive
ratio, but one must use bi-criteria approximations to have
any hope of a constant approximate solution.
Another approach to evade strong lower bounds is to make
additional assumptions about the input to the problem. For
example, one may assume that the input comes in a random (or partially random) order. This assumption has been
a fruitful avenue when studying online problems in different contexts, as the classic secretary problem (Ferguson,
1989; Kesselheim et al., 2015; Kleinberg, 2005) or matching (Karp et al., 1990; Mahdian & Yan, 2011). Another
alternative is to assume some additional structure on the
distribution that points are coming from (Feldman et al.,
2009). A big downside of both of these assumptions is that
they are hard to test and validate in practice, which is why
we take a different approach in this work.
1.1. Consistency

*

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

While the irrevocability of past choices makes sense from
a theoretical standpoint, for some practical problems this
requirement is unrealistically draconian. For example, consider a load balancer, which, when faced with requests arriving online, assigns them to different machines. Better
cache performance dictates that similar requests should be

