Provably Optimal Algorithms for Generalized Linear Contextual Bandits

Lihong Li 1 Yu Lu 2 Dengyong Zhou 1

Abstract
Contextual bandits are widely used in Internet
services from news recommendation to advertising, and to Web search. Generalized linear
models (logistical regression in particular) have
demonstrated stronger performance than linear
models in many applications where rewards are
binary. However, most theoretical analyses on
contextual bandits so far are on linear bandits. In
this work, we propose an upper confidence bound
based algorithm for generalized linear
√ contextual bandits, which achieves an Õ( dT ) regret
over T rounds with d dimensional feature vectors. This regret matches the minimax lower
bound, up to logarithmic terms,
√and improves on
the best previous result by a d factor, assuming the number of arms is fixed. A key component in our analysis is to establish a new, sharp
finite-sample confidence bound for maximumlikelihood estimates in generalized linear models, which may be of independent interest. We
also analyze a simpler upper confidence bound
algorithm, which is useful in practice, and prove
it to have optimal regret for certain cases.

1. Introduction
Contextual bandit problems are originally motivated by applications in clinical trials (Woodroofe, 1979). When a
standard treatment and a new treatment are available for
a certain disease, the doctor needs to decide, in a sequetial
manner, which of them to use based on the patient’s profiles
such as age, general physical status or medicine history.
With the development of modern technologies, contextual
bandit problems have more applications, especially in webbased recommendation, advertising and search (Agarwal
1

Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052 2 Department
of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence to:
Lihong Li <lihongli@microsoft.com>,
Yu Lu <yu.lu@yale.edu>,
Dengyong Zhou <denzho@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 2009; Li et al., 2010; 2012). In the problem of personalized news recommendation, the website must recommend news articles that are most interesting to users that
visit the website. The problem is especially challenging
for breaking news, as little data are available to make good
prediction about user interest. A trade-off naturally occurs
in this kind of sequential decision making problems. One
needs to balance exploitation—choosing actions that performed well in the past—and exploration—choosing actions that may potentially give better outcomes.
In this paper, we study the following stochastic, K-armed
contextual bandit problem. Suppose at each of the T
rounds, an agent is presented with a set of K actions, each
of which is associated with a context (a d-dimensional feature vector). By choosing an action based on the rewards
obtained from previous rounds and on the contexts, the
agent will receive a stochastic reward generated from some
unknown distribution conditioned on the context and the
chosen action. The goal of the agent is to maximize the
expected cumulative rewards over T rounds. The most
studied model in contextual bandits literature is the linear
model (Auer, 2002; Dani et al., 2008; Rusmevichientong
& Tsitsiklis, 2010; Chu et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2011), in which the expected rewards at each round is a linear combination of features in the context vector. The linear model is theoretically convenient to work with. However, in practice, we usually have binary rewards (click or
not, treatment working or not). Logistic regression model
based algorithms have been shown to have substantial improvements over linear models (Li et al., 2012). We therefore consider generalized linear models (GLM) in the contextual bandit setting, in which linear, logistic and probit
regression serve as three important special cases.
The celebrated work of Lai & Robbins (1985) first introduces the upper confidence bound (UCB) approach to efficient exploration. Later, the idea of confidence bound has
been successfully applied to many stochastic bandits problems, from K-arm bandits problems (Auer et al., 2002a;
Bubeck & Cesa-Bianchi, 2012) to linear bandits (Auer,
2002; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011). UCB-type algorithms
are both efficient and provable optimal in K-arm bandits
and K-armed linear bandits. However, most study are limited to the linear case. While some UCB-type algorithms
using GLMs perform well empirically (Li et al., 2012),

