Follow the Moving Leader in Deep Learning

Shuai Zheng 1 James T. Kwok 1

Abstract
Deep networks are highly nonlinear and difficult
to optimize. During training, the parameter iterate may move from one local basin to another,
or the data distribution may even change. Inspired by the close connection between stochastic optimization and online learning, we propose a variant of the follow the regularized
leader (FTRL) algorithm called follow the moving leader (FTML). Unlike the FTRL family
of algorithms, the recent samples are weighted
more heavily in each iteration and so FTML can
adapt more quickly to changes. We show that
FTML enjoys the nice properties of RMSprop
and Adam, while avoiding their pitfalls. Experimental results on a number of deep learning
models and tasks demonstrate that FTML converges quickly, and outperforms other state-ofthe-art optimizers.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning has emerged as a powerful and
popular class of machine learning algorithms. Well-known
examples include the convolutional neural network (LeCun et al., 1998), long short term memory (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997), memory network (Weston et al.,
2014), and deep Q-network (Mnih et al., 2015). These
models have achieved remarkable performance on various
difficult tasks such as image classification (He et al., 2016),
speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013), natural language
understanding (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Sukhbaatar et al.,
2015), and game playing (Silver et al., 2016).
Deep network is a highly nonlinear model with typically
millions of parameters (Hinton et al., 2006). Thus, it is
imperative to design scalable and effective solvers. How1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water
Bay, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Shuai Zheng <szhengac@cse.ust.hk>, James T. Kwok <jamesk@cse.ust.hk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ever, training deep networks is difficult as the optimization can suffer from pathological curvature and get stuck
in local minima (Martens, 2010). Moreover, every critical point that is not a global minimum is a saddle point
(Kawaguchi, 2016), which can significantly slow down
training. Second-order information is useful in that it reflects local curvature of the error surface. However, a direct computation of the Hessian is computationally infeasible. Martens (2010) introduced Hessian-free optimization,
a variant of truncated-Newton methods that relies on using the linear conjugate gradient to avoid computing the
Hessian. Dauphin et al. (2014) proposed to use the absolute Hessian to escape from saddle points. However, these
methods still require higher computational costs.
Recent advances in deep learning optimization focus
mainly on stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou,
1998) and its variants (Sutskever et al., 2013). However,
SGD requires careful stepsize tuning, which is difficult as
different weights have vastly different gradients (in terms
of both magnitude and direction). On the other hand, online learning (Zinkevich, 2003), which is closely related
to stochastic optimization, has been extensively studied in
the past decade. Well-known algorithms include follow the
regularized leader (FTRL) (Kalai & Vempala, 2005), follow the proximally-regularized leader (FTPRL) (McMahan
& Streeter, 2010) and their variants (Duchi & Singer, 2009;
Duchi et al., 2011; Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Xiao, 2010).
In particular, adaptive gradient descent (Adagrad) (Duchi
et al., 2011) uses an adaptive per-coordinate stepsize. On
convex problems, it has been shown both theoretically and
empirically that Adagrad is especially efficient on highdimensional data (Duchi et al., 2011; McMahan et al.,
2013). When used on deep networks, Adagrad also demonstrates significantly better performance than SGD (Dean
et al., 2012). However, in Adagrad, the variance estimate
underlying the adaptive stepsize is based on accumulating
all past (squared) gradients. This becomes infinitesimally
small as training proceeds. In more recent algorithms,
such as RMSprop (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) and Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015), the variance is estimated by an exponentially decaying average of the squared gradients.
Another problem with the FTRL family of algorithms is
that in each round, the learner has to solve an optimization
problem that considers the sum of all previous gradients.

