Dissipativity Theory for Nesterov’s Accelerated Method

Bin Hu 1 Laurent Lessard 1

Abstract
In this paper, we adapt the control theoretic concept of dissipativity theory to provide a natural
understanding of Nesterov’s accelerated method.
Our theory ties rigorous convergence rate analysis to the physically intuitive notion of energy
dissipation. Moreover, dissipativity allows one to
efficiently construct Lyapunov functions (either
numerically or analytically) by solving a small
semidefinite program. Using novel supply rate
functions, we show how to recover known rate
bounds for Nesterov’s method and we generalize
the approach to certify both linear and sublinear
rates in a variety of settings. Finally, we link the
continuous-time version of dissipativity to recent
works on algorithm analysis that use discretizations of ordinary differential equations.

1. Introduction
Nesterov’s accelerated method (Nesterov, 2003) has garnered attention and interest in the machine learning community because of its fast global convergence rate guarantees. The original convergence rate proofs of Nesterov’s
accelerated method are derived using the method of estimate sequences, which has proven difficult to interpret.
This observation motivated a sequence of recent works
on new analysis and interpretations of Nesterov’s accelerated method (Bubeck et al., 2015; Lessard et al., 2016; Su
et al., 2016; Drusvyatskiy et al., 2016; Flammarion & Bach,
2015; Wibisono et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2016).
Many of these recent papers rely on Lyapunov-based stability arguments. Lyapunov theory is an analogue to the
principle of minimum energy and brings a physical intuition to convergence behaviors. When applying such proof
techniques, one must construct a Lyapunov function, which
is a nonnegative function of the algorithm’s state (an “internal energy”) that decreases along all admissible trajec1
University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA. Correspondence to: Bin Hu <bhu38@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tories. Once a Lyapunov function is found, one can relate
the rate of decrease of this internal energy to the rate of
convergence of the algorithm. The main challenge in applying Lyapunov’s method is finding a suitable Lyapunov
function.
There are two main approaches for Lyapunov function constructions. The first approach adopts the integral quadratic
constraint (IQC) framework (Megretski & Rantzer, 1997)
from control theory and formulates a linear matrix equality (LMI) whose feasibility implies the linear convergence
of the algorithm (Lessard et al., 2016). Despite the generality of the IQC approach and the small size of the associated LMI, one must typically resort to numerical simulations to solve the LMI. The second approach seeks an
ordinary differential equation (ODE) that can be appropriately discretized to yield the algorithm of interest. One can
then gain intuition about the trajectories of the algorithm
by examining trajectories of the continuous-time ODE (Su
et al., 2016; Wibisono et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2016).
The work of Wilson et al. (2016) also establishes a general equivalence between Lyapunov functions and estimate
sequence proofs.
In this paper, we bridge the IQC approach (Lessard et al.,
2016) and the discretization approach (Wilson et al., 2016)
by using dissipativity theory (Willems, 1972a;b). The term
“dissipativity” is borrowed from the notion of energy dissipation in physics and the theory provides a general approach for the intuitive understanding and construction
of Lyapunov functions. Dissipativity for quadratic Lyapunov functions in particular (Willems, 1972b) has seen
widespread use in controls. In the sequel, we tailor dissipativity theory to the automated construction of Lyapunov
functions, which are not necessarily quadratic, for the analysis of optimization algorithms. Our dissipation inequality
leads to an LMI condition that is simpler than the one in
Lessard et al. (2016) and hence more amenable to being
solved analytically. When specialized to Nesterov’s accelerated method, our LMI recovers the Lyapunov function
proposed in Wilson et al. (2016). Finally, we extend our
LMI-based approach to the sublinear convergence analysis of Nesterov’s accelerated method in both discrete and
continuous time domains. This complements the original
LMI-based approach in Lessard et al. (2016), which mainly
handles linear convergence rate analyses.

