Learning from Clinical Judgments: Semi-Markov-Modulated Marked
Hawkes Processes for Risk Prognosis

Ahmed M. Alaa, 1 Scott Hu, 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 1 2 3

Abstract
Critically ill patients in regular wards are vulnerable to unanticipated adverse events which require prompt transfer to the intensive care unit
(ICU). To allow for accurate prognosis of deteriorating patients, we develop a novel continuoustime probabilistic model for a monitored patient’s temporal sequence of physiological data.
Our model captures “informatively sampled” patient episodes: the clinicians’ decisions on when
to observe a hospitalized patient’s vital signs and
lab tests over time are represented by a marked
Hawkes process, with intensity parameters that
are modulated by the patient’s latent clinical
states, and with observable physiological data
(mark process) modeled as a switching multi-task
Gaussian process. In addition, our model captures “informatively censored” patient episodes
by representing the patient’s latent clinical states
as an absorbing semi-Markov jump process. The
model parameters are learned from offline patient
episodes in the electronic health records via an
EM-based algorithm. Experiments conducted on
a cohort of patients admitted to a major medical
center over a 3-year period show that risk prognosis based on our model significantly outperforms the currently deployed medical risk scores
and other baseline machine learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Hospitalized patients are vulnerable to a wide range of
adverse events, including cardiopulmonary arrests (Kause
et al., 2004; Hogan et al., 2012; Yoon et al., 2016), acute
respiratory failures (Mokart, 2013), septic shocks (Henry
et al., 2015), and post-operative complications (Clifton
*

Equal contribution 1 University of California, Los Angeles,
US. 2 University of Oxford, UK. 3 Alan Turing Institute, UK.. Correspondence to: Ahmed M. Alaa <ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

et al., 2012). For a patient in a regular ward, the occurrence of any such event entails an unplanned transfer to an
intensive care unit (ICU), the timing of which is a major
determinant of the eventual outcome. Indeed, recent medical studies have confirmed that delayed transfer to the ICU
is strongly correlated with morbidity and mortality (Mardini L, 2012; Mokart, 2013). The problem of delayed ICU
transfer is enormous and acute: over 750,000 septic shocks
and 200,000 cardiac arrests occur in the U.S. each year with
mortality rates of 28.6% and 75% respectively (Merchant
et al., 2011; Kumar et al., 2011). Fortunately, experts believe that much of these events could be prevented with accurate prognosis and early warning (Nguyen et al., 2007).
Motivated by the proliferation of electronic health records
(EHRs) (currently available in more than 75% of hospitals in the U.S. (Charles et al., 2016)) we develop a datadriven real-time risk score that can promptly assess a hospitalized patient’s risk of clinical deterioration. Our risk
score hinges on a novel continuous-time semi-Markovmodulated marked Hawkes process model for a monitored
patient’s episode, i.e. the patient’s evolving (latent) clinical states and her corresponding (observed) physiological
data. With the guidance of critical care experts, we conducted experiments on a dataset for a cohort of criticallyill patients admitted to a major academic medical center.
Results show that our risk score offers significant gains in
the accuracy (and timeliness) of predicting clinical deterioration; our risk score attains a 23% improvement in the
Area Under Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC)
as compared to the technology currently deployed in our
medical center. Since it confers a significant prognostic
value in subacute care in wards, the proposed risk score is
currently being installed in our medical center as a replacement for the current technology.
The proposed probabilistic model (based on which our risk
score is computed) captures a hospitalized patient’s entire
episode as recorded in the EHR. A typical (critical care)
patient episode comprises the time of her admission to the
ward, the time of her admission to the ICU or discharge
from the ward, and a temporal sequence of irregularly sampled physiological data that are collected during her stay in
the ward (Johnson, 2016; Ghassemi et al., 2015). We model

