Learning Deep Architectures via Generalized Whitened Neural Networks

Ping Luo 1 2

Abstract
Whitened Neural Network (WNN) is a recent
advanced deep architecture, which improves convergence and generalization of canonical neural
networks by whitening their internal hidden representation. However, the whitening transformation increases computation time. Unlike WNN
that reduced runtime by performing whitening
every thousand iterations, which degenerates
convergence due to the ill conditioning, we
present generalized WNN (GWNN), which has
three appealing properties. First, GWNN is
able to learn compact representation to reduce
computations. Second, it enables whitening
transformation to be performed in a short period,
preserving good conditioning. Third, we propose
a data-independent estimation of the covariance
matrix to further improve computational efficiency. Extensive experiments on various datasets
demonstrate the benefits of GWNN.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have improved performances of many applications, as the non-linearity of DNNs
provides expressive modeling capacity, but it also makes
DNNs difficult to train and easy to overfit the training data.
Whitened neural network (WNN) (Desjardins et al., 2015),
a recent advanced deep architecture, is ideally to solve the
above difficulties. WNN extends batch normalization (BN)
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) by normalizing the internal hidden
representation using whitening transformation instead of
standardization. Whitening helps regularize each diagonal
block of the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) to be an
1
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology, Shenzhen Institutes of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China 2 Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Ping Luo
<pluo@ie.cuhk.edu.hk>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

approximation of the identity matrix. This is an appealing property, as training WNN using stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) mimics the fast convergence of natural
gradient descent (NGD) (Amari & Nagaoka, 2000). The
whitening transformation also improves generalization. As
demonstrated in (Desjardins et al., 2015), WNN exhibited superiority when being applied to various network
architectures, such as autoencoder and convolutional neural
network, outperforming many previous works including
SGD, RMSprop (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), and BN.
Although WNN is able to reduce the number of training
iterations and improve generalization, it comes with a price
of increasing training time, because eigen-decomposition
occupies large computations. The runtime scales up when
the number of hidden layers that require whitening transformation increases. We revisit WNN by breaking down
its performance and show that its main runtime comes
from two aspects, 1) computing full covariance matrix
for whitening and 2) solving singular value decomposition
(SVD). Previous work (Desjardins et al., 2015) suggests to
overcome these problems by a) using a subset of training
data to estimate the full covariance matrix and b) solving
the SVD every hundreds or thousands of training iterations.
Both of them rely on the assumption that the SVD holds in
this period, but it is generally not true. When this period
becomes large, WNN degenerates to canonical SGD due to
ill conditioning of FIM.
We propose generalized WNN (GWNN), which possesses
the beneficial properties of WNN, but significantly reduces
its runtime and improves its generalization. We introduce
two variants of GWNN, including pre-whitening and postwhitening GWNNs. The former one whitens a hidden
layer’s input values, whilst the latter one whitens the preactivation values (hidden features). GWNN has three appealing characteristics. First, compared to WNN, GWNN
is capable of learning more compact hidden representation, such that the SVD can be approximated by a few
top eigenvectors to reduce computation. This compact
representation also improves generalization. Second, it
enables the whitening transformation to be performed in
a short period, maintaining conditioning of FIM. Third,
by exploiting knowledge of the distribution of the hidden
features, we calculate the covariance matrix in an analytical
form to further improve computational efficiency.

