Adapting Kernel Representations Online Using Submodular Maximization
Matthew Schlegel 1 Yangchen Pan 1 Jiecao Chen 1 Martha White 1

Abstract
Kernel representations provide a nonlinear representation, through similarities to prototypes, but
require only simple linear learning algorithms
given those prototypes. In a continual learning
setting, with a constant stream of observations,
it is critical to have an efficient mechanism for
sub-selecting prototypes amongst observations.
In this work, we develop an approximately submodular criterion for this setting, and an efficient online greedy submodular maximization algorithm for optimizing the criterion. We extend
streaming submodular maximization algorithms
to continual learning, by removing the need for
multiple passes—which is infeasible—and instead introducing the idea of coverage time. We
propose a general block-diagonal approximation
for the greedy update with our criterion, that enables updates linear in the number of prototypes.
We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of
this approximation, in terms of approximation
quality, significant runtime improvements, and
effective prediction performance.

1. Introduction
Kernel representations provide an attractive approach to
representation learning, by facilitating simple linear prediction algorithms and providing an interpretable representation. A kernel representation consists of mapping an input observation into similarity features, with similarities to
a set of prototypes. Consequently, for an input observation, a prediction can be attributed to those prototypes that
are most similar to the observation. Further, the transformation to similarity features is non-linear, enabling nonlinear function approximation while using linear learning
algorithms that simply optimize for weights on these transformed features. Kernel representations are universal func1

Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington. Correspondence to: Martha White
<martha@indiana.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

tion approximators1 and the flexibility in choosing the kernel (similarity function) has enabled impressive prediction performance for a range of settings, including speech
(Huang et al., 2014), computer vision (Mairal et al., 2014),
and object recognition (Lu et al., 2014).
In a continual learning setting, such as in online learning or
reinforcement learning, there is a constant, effectively unending stream of data, necessitating some care when using
kernel representations. The issue arises from the choice of
prototypes. Before the advent of huge increases in dataset
sizes, a common choice was to use all of the training data
as prototypes. This choice comes from the representer theorem, which states that for a broad class of functions, the
empirical risk minimizer is a linear weighting of similarity
features, to a set of prototypes that consists of the training
data. For continual learning, however, the update should be
independent of the the total number of samples— which is
not clearly defined for continual learning. Conversely, we
want to permit selection of a sufficiently large number of
prototypes, to maintain sufficient modeling power. For efficient, continual updating, therefore, we require per-step
prototype selection strategies that are approximately linear
in the number of prototypes.
Currently, most algorithms do not satisfy the criteria for a
continual learning setting. Incremental selection of prototypes has been tackled in a wide range of areas, due to the
fundamental nature of this problem. Within the streaming
community, approaches typically assume that the batch of
data, though large, is accessible and fixed. The most related of these areas2 include active set selection for Gaussian process regression (Seeger et al., 2003), with streaming submodular maximization approaches (Krause et al.,
2008b;a; Badanidiyuru et al., 2014); incremental Nystrom methods within kernel recursive least-squares (KRLS)
1

Radial basis function networks are an example of a kernel
representation, that have been shown to be universal function approximators (Park & Sandberg, 1991). Further, the representer
theorem further characterizes the approximation capabilities under empirical risk minimization for a broad class of functions.
2
Facility location, k-medians and k-centers are three problems
that focus on selecting representative instances from a set (c.f.
(Guha et al., 2003)). The criteria and algorithms are not designed
with the intention to use the instances for prediction and so we do
not consider them further here.

