Innovation Pursuit: A New Approach to the Subspace Clustering Problem

Mostafa Rahmani 1 George Atia 1

Abstract
This paper presents a new scalable approach,
termed Innovation Pursuit (iPursuit), to the problem of subspace clustering. iPursuit rests on a
new geometrical idea whereby each subspace is
identified based on its novelty with respect to the
other subspaces. The subspaces are identified
consecutively by solving a series of simple linear optimization problems, each searching for a
direction of innovation in the span of the data. A
detailed mathematical analysis is provided establishing sufficient conditions for the proposed approach to correctly cluster the data points. Moreover, the proposed direction search approach can
be integrated with spectral clustering to yield
a new variant of spectral-clustering-based algorithms. Remarkably, the proposed approach can
provably yield exact clustering even when the
subspaces have significant intersections. The numerical simulations demonstrate that iPursuit can
often outperform the state-of-the-art subspace
clustering algorithms – more so for subspaces
with significant intersections – along with substantial reductions in computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a popular and efficient procedure to approximate the data with a single low
dimensional subspace (Lerman et al., 2015). Nonetheless,
in numerous contemporary applications the data points
may originate from multiple independent sources, in which
case a union of subspaces can better model the data (Vidal,
2011). The problem of subspace clustering is concerned
with learning these low-dimensional subspaces and clustering the data points to their respective subspaces, generally
without prior knowledge about the number of subspaces
and their dimensions, nor the membership of the data points
1
University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA. Correspondence to: Mostafa Rahmani <mostafa@knights.ucf.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

to these subspaces. Subspace clustering naturally arises
in many machine learning and data analysis problems, including computer vision (e.g. motion segmentation (Vidal
et al., 2008), face clustering (Ho et al., 2003)), image processing (Yang et al., 2008) and system identification (Vidal
et al., 2003). Numerous approaches for subspace clustering
have been studied in prior work, including statistical-based
approaches (Yang et al., 2006; Rao et al., 2010), spectral clustering (Soltanolkotabi et al., 2012; Von Luxburg,
2007; Dyer et al., 2013; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013; Heckel
& Bölcskei, 2013; Liu et al., 2013; Chen & Lerman, 2009),
the algebraic-geometric approach (Vidal et al., 2005) and
iterative methods (Bradley & Mangasarian, 2000). We refer the reader to (Vidal, 2011) for a comprehensive survey
on the topic.
This paper aims to advance the state-of-the-art research on
subspace clustering on several fronts. First, the proposed
approach – termed iPursuit – rests on a novel geometrical
idea whereby one subspace is identified at a time based on
its novelty with respect to (w.r.t.) the other subspaces. Second, the proposed method is a provable and scalable subspace clustering algorithm – the computational complexity of iPursuit only scales linearly in the number of subspaces and quadratically in their dimensions (c.f. Section
2.5). In contrast to the spectral-clustering-based algorithms
such as (Dyer et al., 2013; Elhamifar & Vidal, 2013; Liu
et al., 2013), which need to solve an M22 -dimensional optimization problem to build the similarity matrix (where
M2 is the number of data points), the proposed method
requires solving few M2 -dimensional linear optimization
problems. This feature makes iPursuit remarkably faster
than the state-of-the-art algorithms. Third, innovation pursuit in the data span enables superior performance when the
subspaces have considerable intersections in comparison to
the state-of-the-art subspace clustering algorithms.
1.1. Notation and definitions
Given a matrix A, kAk denotes its spectral norm. For a
vector a, kak denotes its `2 -norm and kak1 its `1 -norm.
Given matrices {Ai }ni=1 with equal number of rows, we
n

use the union symbol ∪ to define the matrix ∪ Ai :=
i=1

[A1 A2 ... An ] as the concatenation of the matrices
{Ai }ni=1 . For a matrix D, we overload the set member-

