Delta Networks for Optimized Recurrent Network Computation

Daniel Neil 1 Jun Haeng Lee 2 Tobi Delbruck 1 Shih-Chii Liu 1

Abstract
Many neural networks exhibit stability in their
activation patterns over time in response to inputs from sensors operating under real-world
conditions. By capitalizing on this property of
natural signals, we propose a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) architecture called a delta network in which each neuron transmits its value
only when the change in its activation exceeds
a threshold. The execution of RNNs as delta networks is attractive because their states must be
stored and fetched at every timestep, unlike in
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). We show
that a naive run-time delta network implementation offers modest improvements on the number of memory accesses and computes, but optimized training techniques confer higher accuracy
at higher speedup. With these optimizations, we
demonstrate a 9X reduction in cost with negligible loss of accuracy for the TIDIGITS audio
digit recognition benchmark. Similarly, on the
large Wall Street Journal (WSJ) speech recognition benchmark, pretrained networks can also be
greatly accelerated as delta networks and trained
delta networks show a 5.7X improvement with
negligible loss of accuracy. Finally, on an endto-end CNN-RNN network trained for steering
angle prediction in a driving dataset, the RNN
cost can be reduced by a substantial 100X.

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have achieved tremendous progress in recent years, with the increased availability of large datasets, more powerful computer resources
such as GPUs, and improvements in their training algorithms. These combined factors have enabled break1
Institute of Neuroinformatics, UZH and ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland 2 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics, Suwon-Si, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Daniel Neil, Shih-Chii Liu <dneil,shih@ini.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

throughs in the use of RNNs for processing of temporal sequences. Applications such as natural language processing
(Mikolov et al., 2010), speech recognition (Amodei et al.,
2015; Graves et al., 2013), and attention-based models for
structured prediction (Yao et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015)
have showcased the advantages of RNNs. The introduction
of gating units such as long short-term memory (LSTM)
units (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and gated recurrent units (GRU) (Cho et al., 2014) has greatly improved
the training process with these networks. However, RNNs
require many matrix-vector multiplications per layer to calculate the updates of neuron activations over time.
RNNs also require a large weight memory storage that is
expensive to allocate to on-chip static random access memory (SRAM). In a 45nm technology, the energy cost of an
off-chip 32-bit dynamic DRAM access is about 2nJ and the
energy for a 32-bit integer multiply is about 3pJ, so memory access is about 700 times more expensive than arithmetic (Horowitz, 2014). Architectures can benefit from
minimizing the use of this external memory. Previous work
focused on a variety of algorithmic optimizations for reducing compute and memory access requirements for deep
neural networks. These methods include reduced precision
for hardware optimization (Courbariaux et al., 2015; Stromatias et al., 2015; Courbariaux & Bengio, 2016; Esser
et al., 2016; Rastegari et al., 2016); weight encoding, pruning, and compression (Han et al., 2015; 2016); and architectural optimizations (Iandola et al., 2016; Szegedy et al.,
2015; Huang et al., 2016). However these studies did not
consider the temporal properties of the data.
Natural inputs to a neural network tend to have a high
degree of temporal autocorrelation, resulting in slowlychanging network states. This slow-changing activation
feature is also seen within the computation of RNNs processing audio inputs, for example, speech (Fig. 1).
Delta networks, as introduced here, exploit the temporal
stability of both the input stream and the associated neural representation to reduce memory access and computation without loss of accuracy. By caching neuron activations, computations can be skipped where inputs change
by a small amount from the previous update. Because
each neuron that is not updated will save fetches of entire columns of several weight matrices, determining which

