Guarantees for Greedy Maximization of
Non-submodular Functions with Applications
Andrew An Bian 1 Joachim M. Buhmann 1 Andreas Krause 1 Sebastian Tschiatschek 1

Abstract

where V = {v1 , . . . , vn } is the ground set. Specifically,
in experimental design, the goal is to select a set of experiments to perform such that some statistical criterion is optimized. This problem arises naturally in domains where performing experiments is costly. In sparse modeling, the task
is to identify sparse representations of signals, enabling interpretability and robustness in high-dimensional statistical
problems—properties that are crucial in modern data analysis.

We investigate the performance of the standard
G REEDY algorithm for cardinality constrained
maximization of non-submodular nondecreasing
set functions. While there are strong theoretical
guarantees on the performance of G REEDY for
maximizing submodular functions, there are few
guarantees for non-submodular ones. However,
G REEDY enjoys strong empirical performance
for many important non-submodular functions,
e.g., the Bayesian A-optimality objective in experimental design. We prove theoretical guarantees supporting the empirical performance. Our
guarantees are characterized by a combination
of the (generalized) curvature ↵ and the submodularity ratio . In particular, we prove that
G REEDY enjoys a tight approximation guarantee
of ↵1 (1 e ↵ ) for cardinality constrained maximization. In addition, we bound the submodularity ratio and curvature for several important
real-world objectives, including the Bayesian Aoptimality objective, the determinantal function
of a square submatrix and certain linear programs
with combinatorial constraints. We experimentally validate our theoretical findings for both
synthetic and real-world applications.

Frequently, the standard G REEDY algorithm (Alg. 1) is
used to (approximately) solve (P). For the case that F (S)
Algorithm 1: The G REEDY Algorithm
Input: Ground set V, set function F : 2V ! R+ , budget K
S0
;
for t = 1, . . . , K do
v⇤
arg maxv2V\S t 1 F (S t 1 [ {v}) F (S t 1 )
t
S
S t 1 [ {v ⇤ }
Output: S K

1. Introduction
Many important problems, such as experimental design
and sparse modeling, are naturally formulated as a subset
selection problem, where a set function F (S) over a Kcardinality constraint is maximized, i.e.,
max

S✓V,|S|K

F (S),

(P)

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. Correspondence to: Joachim M. Buhmann <jbuhmann@inf.ethz.ch>, Andreas Krause <krausea@ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

is a monotone nondecreasing submodular set function1 ,
the G REEDY algorithm enjoys the multiplicative approximation guarantee of (1 1/e) (Nemhauser et al., 1978;
Vondrák, 2008; Krause & Golovin, 2014). This constant
factor can be improved by refining the characterization of
the objective using the curvature (Conforti & Cornuéjols,
1984; Vondrák, 2010; Iyer et al., 2013), which informally
quantifies how close a submodular function is to being
modular (i.e., F (S) and F (S) are submodular).
However, for many applications, including experimental
design and sparse Gaussian processes (Lawrence et al.,
2003), F (S) is in general not submodular (Krause et al.,
2008) and the above guarantee does not hold. In practice,
however, the standard G REEDY algorithm often achieves
very good performance on these applications, e.g., in subset selection with the R2 (squared multiple correlation) ob1

F (·) is monotone nondecreasing if 8A ✓ V, v 2 V, F (A [
{v}) F (A). F (·) is submodular iff it satisfies the diminishing
returns property F (A [ {v}) F (A)
F (B [ {v}) F (B)
for all A ✓ B ✓ V \ {v}. Assume wlog. that F (·) is normalized,
i.e., F (;) = 0.

