Combining Model-Based and Model-Free Updates for Trajectory-Centric
Reinforcement Learning
Yevgen Chebotar* 1 2 Karol Hausman* 1 Marvin Zhang* 3 Gaurav Sukhatme 1 Stefan Schaal 1 2 Sergey Levine 3

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms for realworld robotic applications must be able to handle complex, unknown dynamical systems while
maintaining data-efficient learning. These requirements are handled well by model-free and
model-based RL approaches, respectively. In this
work, we aim to combine the advantages of these
approaches. By focusing on time-varying linearGaussian policies, we enable a model-based algorithm based on the linear-quadratic regulator
that can be integrated into the model-free framework of path integral policy improvement. We
can further combine our method with guided policy search to train arbitrary parameterized policies such as deep neural networks. Our simulation and real-world experiments demonstrate that
this method can solve challenging manipulation
tasks with comparable or better performance than
model-free methods while maintaining the sample efficiency of model-based methods.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to enable automatic acquisition of behavioral skills, which can be crucial for
robots and other autonomous systems to behave intelligently in unstructured real-world environments. However,
real-world applications of RL have to contend with two
often opposing requirements: data-efficient learning and
the ability to handle complex, unknown dynamical systems
that might be difficult to model. Real-world physical systems, such as robots, are typically costly and time consuming to run, making it highly desirable to learn using the
lowest possible number of real-world trials. Model-based

Figure 1. Real robot tasks used to evaluate our method. Left: The
hockey task which involves discontinuous dynamics. Right: The
power plug task which requires high level of precision. Both of
these tasks are learned from scratch without demonstrations.

methods tend to excel at this (Deisenroth et al., 2013), but
suffer from significant bias, since complex unknown dynamics cannot always be modeled accurately enough to
produce effective policies. Model-free methods have the
advantage of handling arbitrary dynamical systems with
minimal bias, but tend to be substantially less sampleefficient (Kober et al., 2013; Schulman et al., 2015). Can
we combine the efficiency of model-based algorithms with
the final performance of model-free algorithms in a method
that we can practically use on real-world physical systems?

Equal contribution 1 University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany 3 University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yevgen Chebotar <ychebota@usc.edu>.

As we will discuss in Section 2, many prior methods that
combine model-free and model-based techniques achieve
only modest gains in efficiency or performance (Heess
et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2016). In this work, we aim to
develop a method in the context of a specific policy representation: time-varying linear-Gaussian controllers. The
structure of these policies provides us with an effective option for model-based updates via iterative linear-Gaussian
dynamics fitting (Levine & Abbeel, 2014), as well as a simple option for model-free updates via the path integral policy improvement (PI2 ) algorithm (Theodorou et al., 2010).

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Although time-varying linear-Gaussian (TVLG) policies
are not as powerful as representations such as deep neural
networks (Mnih et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2016) or RBF

*

