Distributed Mean Estimation with Limited Communication
Ananda Theertha Suresh 1 Felix X. Yu 1 Sanjiv Kumar 1 H. Brendan McMahan 2

Abstract

the means of all clusters in each update step. Similarly, for
PCA, if data samples are distributed across several clients,
then for the power-iteration method, the server needs to average the output of all clients in each step.

Motivated by the need for distributed learning
and optimization algorithms with low communication cost, we study communication efficient
algorithms for distributed mean estimation. Unlike previous works, we make no probabilistic assumptions on the data. We first show that for d
dimensional data with n clients, a naive stochastic rounding approach yields a mean squared error (MSE) of ⇥(d/n) and uses a constant number of bits per dimension per client. We then extend this naive algorithm in two ways: we show
that applying a structured random rotation before
quantization reduces the error to O((log d)/n)
and a better coding strategy further reduces the
error to O(1/n). We also show that the latter
coding strategy is optimal up to a constant in the
minimax sense i.e., it achieves the best MSE for
a given communication cost. We finally demonstrate the practicality of our algorithms by applying them to distributed Lloyd’s algorithm for kmeans and power iteration for PCA.

Recently, algorithms involving distributed mean estimation
have been used extensively in training large-scale neural
networks and other statistical models (McDonald et al.,
2010; Povey et al., 2014; Dean et al., 2012; McMahan et al.,
2016; Alistarh et al., 2016). In a typical scenario of synchronized distributed learning, each client obtains a copy
of a global model. The clients then update the model independently based on their local data. The updates (usually
in the form of gradients) are then sent to a server, where
they are averaged and used to update the global model. A
critical step in all of the above algorithms is to estimate the
mean of a set of vectors as in Eq. (1).

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
def

Given n vectors X n = X1 , X2 . . . , Xn 2 Rd that reside
on n clients, the goal of distributed mean estimation is to
estimate the mean of the vectors:
def

X̄ =

n

1X
Xi .
n i=1

(1)

This basic estimation problem is used as a subroutine in
several learning and optimization tasks where data is distributed across several clients. For example, in Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd, 1982) for k-means clustering, if data is distributed across several clients, the server needs to compute
1

Google Research, New York, NY, USA 2 Google Research,
Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Ananda Theertha Suresh
<theertha@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

One of the main bottlenecks in distributed algorithms is the
communication cost. This has spurred a line of work focusing on communication cost in learning (Tsitsiklis &
Luo, 1987; Balcan et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013; Arjevani & Shamir, 2015; Chen et al., 2016). The communication cost can be prohibitive for modern applications, where
each client can be a low-power and low-bandwidth device
such as a mobile phone (Konečnỳ et al., 2016). Given such
a wide set of applications, we study the basic problem of
achieving the optimal minimax rate in distributed mean estimation with limited communication.
We note that our model and results differ from previous
works on mean estimation (Zhang et al., 2013; Garg et al.,
2014; Braverman et al., 2016) in two ways: previous works
assume that the data is generated i.i.d. according to some
distribution; we do not make any distribution assumptions
on data. Secondly, the objective in prior works is to estimate the mean of the underlying statistical model; our goal
is to estimate the empirical mean of the data.
1.2. Model
Our proposed communication algorithms are simultaneous
and independent, i.e., the clients independently send data
to the server and they can transmit at the same time. In any
independent communication protocol, each client transmits
a function of Xi (say f (Xi )), and a central server estimates
the mean by some function of f (X1 ), f (X2 ), . . . , f (Xn ).

