An Adaptive Test of Independence with Analytic Kernel Embeddings

Wittawat Jitkrittum 1 Zoltán Szabó 2 Arthur Gretton 1

Abstract
A new computationally efficient dependence measure, and an adaptive statistical test of independence,
are proposed. The dependence measure is the difference between analytic embeddings of the joint distribution and the product of the marginals, evaluated at
a finite set of locations (features). These features are
chosen so as to maximize a lower bound on the test
power, resulting in a test that is data-efficient, and
that runs in linear time (with respect to the sample
size n). The optimized features can be interpreted
as evidence to reject the null hypothesis, indicating
regions in the joint domain where the joint distribution and the product of the marginals differ most.
Consistency of the independence test is established,
for an appropriate choice of features. In real-world
benchmarks, independence tests using the optimized
features perform comparably to the state-of-the-art
quadratic-time HSIC test, and outperform competing
O(n) and O(n log n) tests.

1. Introduction
We consider the design of adaptive, nonparametric statistical
tests of dependence: that is, tests of whether a joint distribution Pxy factorizes into the product of marginals Px Py
with the null hypothesis that H0 : X and Y are independent. While classical tests of dependence, such as Pearson’s
correlation and Kendall’s τ , are able to detect monotonic
relations between univariate variables, more modern tests
can address complex interactions, for instance changes in
variance of X with the value of Y . Key to many recent
tests is to examine covariance or correlation between data
features. These interactions become significantly harder to
detect, and the features are more difficult to design, when
the data reside in high dimensions.
Zoltán Szabó’s ORCID ID: 0000-0001-6183-7603. Arthur Gretton’s ORCID ID: 0000-0003-3169-7624. 1 Gatsby Unit, University College London, UK. 2 CMAP, École Polytechnique, France.
Correspondence to: Wittawat Jitkrittum <wittawatj@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

A basic nonlinear dependence measure is the HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC), which is the
Hilbert-Schmidt norm of the covariance operator between
feature mappings of the random variables (Gretton et al.,
2005; 2008). Each random variable X and Y is mapped
to a respective reproducing kernel Hilbert space Hk and
Hl . For sufficiently rich mappings, the covariance operator
norm is zero if and only if the variables are independent. A
second basic nonlinear dependence measure is the smoothed
difference between the characteristic function of the joint
distribution, and that of the product of marginals. When
a particular smoothing function is used, the statistic corresponds to the covariance between distances of X and Y variable pairs (Feuerverger, 1993; Székely et al., 2007; Székely
& Rizzo, 2009), yielding a simple test statistic based on
pairwise distances. It has been shown by Sejdinovic et al.
(2013) that the distance covariance (and its generalization
to semi-metrics) is an instance of HSIC for an appropriate
choice of kernels. A disadvantage of these feature covariance statistics, however, is that they require quadratic time
to compute (besides in the special case of the distance covariance with univariate real-valued variables, where Huo &
Székely (2016) achieve an O(n log n) cost). Moreover, the
feature covariance statistics have intractable null distributions, and either a permutation approach or the solution of
an expensive eigenvalue problem (e.g. Zhang et al., 2011) is
required for consistent estimation of the quantiles. Several
approaches were proposed by Zhang et al. (2017) to obtain
faster tests along the lines of HSIC. These include computing HSIC on finite-dimensional feature mappings chosen as
random Fourier features (RFFs) (Rahimi & Recht, 2008),
a block-averaged statistic, and a Nyström approximation
to the statistic. Key to each of these approaches is a more
efficient computation of the statistic and its threshold under
the null distribution: for RFFs, the null distribution is a
finite weighted sum of χ2 variables; for the block-averaged
statistic, the null distribution is asymptotically normal; for
Nyström, either a permutation approach is employed, or
the spectrum of the Nyström approximation to the kernel
matrix is used in approximating the null distribution. Each
of these methods costs significantly less than the O(n2 ) cost
of the full HSIC (the cost is linear in n, but also depends
quadratically on the number of features retained). A potential disadvantage of the Nyström and Fourier approaches is
that the features are not optimized to maximize test power,

