Statistical Inference for Incomplete Ranking Data:
The Case of Rank-Dependent Coarsening

Mohsen Ahmadi Fahandar 1 Eyke Hüllermeier 1 Inés Couso 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of statistical inference
for ranking data, specifically rank aggregation, under the assumption that samples are incomplete in
the sense of not comprising all choice alternatives.
In contrast to most existing methods, we explicitly
model the process of turning a full ranking into
an incomplete one, which we call the coarsening
process. To this end, we propose the concept of
rank-dependent coarsening, which assumes that
incomplete rankings are produced by projecting
a full ranking to a random subset of ranks. For a
concrete instantiation of our model, in which full
rankings are drawn from a Plackett-Luce distribution and observations take the form of pairwise
preferences, we study the performance of various
rank aggregation methods. In addition to predictive accuracy in the finite sample setting, we
address the theoretical question of consistency, by
which we mean the ability to recover a target ranking when the sample size goes to infinity, despite
a potential bias in the observations caused by the
(unknown) coarsening.

1. Introduction
The analysis of rank data has a long tradition in statistics,
and corresponding methods have been used in various fields
of application, such as psychology and the social sciences
(Marden, 1995). More recently, applications in information
retrieval and machine learning have caused a renewed interest in the analysis of rankings and topics such as “learningto-rank” (Liu, 2011) and preference learning (Fürnkranz &
Hüllermeier, 2011).
In most applications, the rankings observed are incomplete
or partial in the sense of including only a subset of the
underlying choice alternatives (subsequently referred to as
1
Paderborn University, Germany 2 University of Oviedo, Spain.
Correspondence to: Eyke Hüllermeier <eyke@upb.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

“items”), whereas no preferences are revealed about the remaining ones—pairwise comparisons can be seen as an
important special case. Somewhat surprisingly, most methods for learning from ranking data, including methods for
rank aggregation, simply ignore the process of turning a full
ranking into an incomplete one. Or, they implicitly assume
that the process is unimportant from a statistical point of
view, because the subset of items observed is independent
of the underlying ranking.
Obviously, this assumption is often not valid, as shown by
practically relevant examples such as top-k observations.
Motivated by examples of this kind, we propose the concept
of rank-dependent coarsening, which assumes that incomplete rankings are produced by projecting a full ranking to
a random subset of ranks. The notion of “coarsening” is
meant to indicate that an incomplete ranking can be associated with a set of complete rankings, namely the set of its
consistent extensions—set-valued data of that kind is also
called “coarse data” in statistics (Heitjan & Rubin, 1991;
Gill et al., 1997). The idea of coarsening is similar to the interpretation of partial rankings as “censored data” (Lebanon
& Mao, 2008). The assumption of rank-dependent coarsening can be seen as orthogonal to standard marginalization,
which acts on items instead of ranks (Rajkumar & Agarwal,
2014; Sibony et al., 2015).
In addition to introducing a general statistical framework for
analyzing incomplete ranking data (Section 3), we outline
several problems and learning tasks to be addressed in this
framework. Learning of the entire model will normally not
be feasible, even under restrictive assumptions on the coarsening. A specifically interesting question, therefore, is to
what extent and in what sense successful learning is possible for methods that are agnostic of the coarsening process.
We investigate this question, both practically (Section 6)
and theoretically (Section 7), for several ranking methods
(Section 5) and a concrete instantiation of our framework, in
which full rankings are drawn from a Plackett-Luce distribution and observations take the form of pairwise preferences
(Section 4). In particular, we are interested in the property
of consistency, by which we mean the ability to recover a
target ranking when the sample size goes to infinity, despite
a potential bias in the observations caused by the coarsening.

