On Kernelized Multi-armed Bandits
Sayak Ray Chowdhury 1 Aditya Gopalan 1

Abstract
We consider the stochastic bandit problem with
a continuous set of arms, with the expected reward function over the arms assumed to be fixed
but unknown. We provide two new Gaussian
process-based algorithms for continuous bandit
optimization – Improved GP-UCB (IGP-UCB)
and GP-Thomson sampling (GP-TS), and derive
corresponding regret bounds. Specifically, the
bounds hold when the expected reward function
belongs to the reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) that naturally corresponds to a Gaussian process kernel used as input by the algorithms. Along the way, we derive a new selfnormalized concentration inequality for vectorvalued martingales of arbitrary, possibly infinite,
dimension. Finally, experimental evaluation and
comparisons to existing algorithms on synthetic
and real-world environments are carried out that
highlight the favorable gains of the proposed
strategies in many cases.

1. Introduction
Optimization over large domains under uncertainty is an
important subproblem arising in a variety of sequential decision making problems, such as dynamic pricing in economics (Besbes & Zeevi, 2009), reinforcement learning
with continuous state/action spaces (Kaelbling et al., 1996;
Smart & Kaelbling, 2000), and power control in wireless
communication (Chiang et al., 2008). A typical feature of
such problems is a large, or potentially infinite, domain of
decision points or covariates (prices, actions, transmit powers), together with only partial and noisy observability of
the associated outcomes (demand, state/reward, communication rate); reward/loss information is revealed only for
decisions that are chosen. This often makes it hard to bal1
Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 560012, India.
Correspondence to:
Sayak Ray Chowdhury <srchowdhury@ece.iisc.ernet.in>.
th

Proceedings of the 34 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

ance exploration and exploitation, as available knowledge
must be transferred efficiently from a finite set of observations so far to estimates of the values of infinitely many
decisions. A classic case in point is that of the canonical
stochastic MAB with finitely many arms, where the effort
to optimize scales with the total number of arms or decisions; the effect of this is catastrophic for large or infinite
arm sets.
With suitable structure in the values or rewards of arms,
however, the challenge of sequential optimization can be
efficiently addressed. Parametric bandits, especially linearly parameterized bandits (Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis, 2010), represent a well-studied class of structured decision making settings. Here, every arm corresponds to a
known, finite dimensional vector (its feature vector), and
its expected reward is assumed to be an unknown linear
function of its feature vector. This allows for a large, or
even infinite, set of arms all lying in space of finite dimension, say d, and a rich line of work gives algorithms that
attain sublinear regret with a polynomial dependence on
the dimension, e.g., Confidence Ball (Dani et al., 2008),
OFUL (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) (a strengthening of
Confidence Ball) and Thompson sampling for linear bandits (Agrawal & Goyal, 2013)1 The insight here is that even
though the number of arms can be large, the number of unknown parameters (or degrees of freedom) in the problem
is really only d, which makes it possible to learn about the
values of many other arms by playing a single arm.
A different approach to modelling bandit problems with a
continuum of arms is via the framework of Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). GPs are
a flexible class of nonparametric models for expressing
uncertainty over functions on rather general domain sets,
which generalize multivariate Gaussian random vectors.
GPs allow tractable regression for estimating an unknown
function given a set of (noisy) measurements of its values
at chosen domain points. The fact that GPs, being distributions on functions, can also help quantify function uncertainty makes it attractive for basing decision making strategies on them. This has been exploited to great advantage to
1

Roughly, for rewards bounded
in [−1, 1], these algorithms
√ 
achieve optimal regret Õ d T , where Õ (·) hides polylog(T )
factors.

