Just Sort It! A Simple and Effective Approach to Active Preference Learning

Lucas Maystre 1 Matthias Grossglauser 1

Abstract
We address the problem of learning a ranking
by using adaptively chosen pairwise comparisons.
Our goal is to recover the ranking accurately but
to sample the comparisons sparingly. If all comparison outcomes are consistent with the ranking,
the optimal solution is to use an efficient sorting
algorithm, such as Quicksort. But how do sorting
algorithms behave if some comparison outcomes
are inconsistent with the ranking? We give favorable guarantees for Quicksort for the popular
Bradley–Terry model, under natural assumptions
on the parameters. Furthermore, we empirically
demonstrate that sorting algorithms lead to a very
simple and effective active learning strategy: repeatedly sort the items. This strategy performs as
well as state-of-the-art methods (and much better
than random sampling) at a minuscule fraction of
the computational cost.

1

Introduction

The problem of recovering a ranking over n items from
noisy outcomes of pairwise comparisons has attracted, in the
last century, much research interest, driven by applications
in sports (Elo, 1978), social sciences (Thurstone, 1927; Salganik & Levy, 2015) and—more recently—recommender
systems (Houlsby et al., 2012). Whereas pairwise comparison models and related inference algorithms have been
extensively studied, the issue of which pairwise comparisons to sample, also known as active learning, has received
significantly less attention. To understand the potential benefits of adaptively selecting samples, consider the case where
comparison outcomes are noiseless, i.e., consistent with a
linear order on a set of n items. If pairs of items are selected
at random, it is necessary to collect Ω(n2 ) comparisons
to recover the ranking (Alon et al., 1994). In contrast, by
using an efficient sorting algorithm, O(n log n) adaptively
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Lucas Maystre <lucas.maystre@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

chosen comparisons are sufficient. In this work, we demonstrate that sorting algorithms can also be helpful in the noisy
setting, where some comparison outcomes are inconsistent
with the ranking: despite errors, sorting algorithms tend to
select informative samples. We focus on the Bradley–Terry
(BT) model, a widely-used probabilistic model of comparison outcomes. In this model, each item is associated with a
parameter on the real line, and the probability of observing
an incorrect outcome decreases as the distance between the
items’ parameters increases.
First, we study the output of a single execution of Quicksort
when comparison outcomes are generated from a BT model,
under the assumption that the distance between adjacent
parameters is (stochastically) uniform across the ranking.
We measure the quality of a ranking estimate by its displacement with respect to the ground truth, i.e., the sum of
rank differences. We show that Quicksort’s output is a good
approximation to the ground-truth ranking: no method comparing every pair of items at most once can do better (up to
constant factors). Furthermore, we show that by aggregating
O(log5 n) independent runs of Quicksort, it is possible to
recover the exact rank for all but a vanishing fraction of
the items. These theoretical results suggest that adaptive
sampling is able to bring a substantial acceleration to the
learning process.
Second, we propose a practical active-learning (AL) strategy
that consists of repeatedly sorting the items. We evaluate
our sorting-based method on three datasets and compare it
to existing AL methods. We observe that all the strategies
that we consider lead to better ranking estimates noticeably faster than random sampling. However, most strategies
are challenging to operate and computationally expensive,
thus hindering wider adoption (Schein & Ungar, 2007). In
this regard, sorting-based AL stands out, as a) it is computationally-speaking as inexpensive as random sampling,
b) it is trivial to implement, and c) it requires no tuning of
hyperparameters.
1.1

Preliminaries and Notation

We consider n items that are represented by consecutive
integers [n] = {1, . . . , n}. Without loss of generality, we

