Magnetic Hamiltonian Monte Carlo

Nilesh Tripuraneni 1 Mark Rowland 2 Zoubin Ghahramani 2 3 Richard Turner 2

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) exploits
Hamiltonian dynamics to construct efficient proposals for Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
In this paper, we present a generalization of
HMC which exploits non-canonical Hamiltonian
dynamics. We refer to this algorithm as magnetic
HMC, since in 3 dimensions a subset of the dynamics map onto the mechanics of a charged particle coupled to a magnetic field. We establish
a theoretical basis for the use of non-canonical
Hamiltonian dynamics in MCMC, and construct
a symplectic, leapfrog-like integrator allowing
for the implementation of magnetic HMC. Finally, we exhibit several examples where these
non-canonical dynamics can lead to improved
mixing of magnetic HMC relative to ordinary
HMC.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic inference in complex models generally requires the evaluation of intractable, high-dimensional integrals. One powerful and generic approach to inference is to
use Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to generate asymptotically exact (but correlated) samples from a
posterior distribution for inference and learning. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987; Neal, 2011)
is a state-of-the-art MCMC method which uses gradient information from an absolutely continuous target density to
encourage efficient sampling and exploration. Crucially,
HMC utilizes proposals inspired by Hamiltonian dynamics
(corresponding to the classical mechanics of a point particle) which can traverse long distances in parameter space.
HMC, and variants like NUTS (which eliminates the need
to hand-tune the algorithm’s hyperparameters), have been
successfully applied to a large class of probabilistic inference problems where they are often the gold standard for
1

UC Berkeley, USA 2 University of Cambridge, UK
Uber AI Labs, USA. Correspondence to: Nilesh Tripuraneni
<nileshtrip@gmail.com>.
3

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

(asymptotically) exact inference (Neal, 1996; Hoffman &
Gelman, 2014; Carpenter et al., 2016).

Figure 1. Example sample paths for standard HMC (left) and
MHMC (right) for an isotropic Gaussian target distribution.

In this paper, we first review important properties of Hamiltonian dynamics, namely energy-preservation, symplecticity, and time-reversibility, and derive a more general class
of dynamics with these properties which we refer to as noncanonical Hamiltonian dynamics. We then discuss the relationship of non-canonical Hamiltonian dynamics to wellknown variants of HMC and propose a novel extension of
HMC. We refer to this method as magnetic HMC (see Algorithm 1) since it corresponds to a particular subset of the
non-canonical dynamics that in 3 dimensions map onto to
the mechanics of a charged particle coupled to a magnetic
field – see Figure 1 for an example of these dynamics. Furthermore, we construct an explicit, symplectic, leapfroglike integrator for magnetic HMC which allows for an efficient numerical integration scheme comparable to that of
ordinary HMC. Finally, we evaluate the performance of
magnetic HMC on several sampling problems where we
show how its non-canonical dynamics can lead to improved
mixing. The proofs of all results in this paper are presented
in the corresponding sections of the Appendix.

2. Markov chain Monte Carlo
Given an unnormalized target density ρ(θ) defined on Rd ,
an MCMC algorithm constructs an ergodic Markov chain
(Θn )n∈N such that the distribution of Θn converges to ρ
(e.g. in total variation) (Robert & Casella, 2004). Often, the
transition kernel of such a Markov chain is specified by the
Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm which (i) given the

