On orthogonality and learning recurrent networks with long term dependencies

Eugene Vorontsov 1 2 Chiheb Trabelsi 1 2 Samuel Kadoury 1 3 Chris Pal 1 2

Abstract
It is well known that it is challenging to train
deep neural networks and recurrent neural networks for tasks that exhibit long term dependencies. The vanishing or exploding gradient problem is a well known issue associated with these
challenges. One approach to addressing vanishing and exploding gradients is to use either soft
or hard constraints on weight matrices so as to
encourage or enforce orthogonality. Orthogonal matrices preserve gradient norm during backpropagation and may therefore be a desirable
property. This paper explores issues with optimization convergence, speed and gradient stability when encouraging or enforcing orthogonality.
To perform this analysis, we propose a weight
matrix factorization and parameterization strategy through which we can bound matrix norms
and therein control the degree of expansivity induced during backpropagation. We find that hard
constraints on orthogonality can negatively affect the speed of convergence and model performance.

1. Introduction
The depth of deep neural networks confers representational
power, but also makes model optimization more challenging. Training deep networks with gradient descent based
methods is known to be difficult as a consequence of the
vanishing and exploding gradient problem (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997). Typically, exploding gradients are
avoided by clipping large gradients (Pascanu et al., 2013)
or introducing an L2 or L1 weight norm penalty. The latter
has the effect of bounding the spectral radius of the linear
transformations, thus limiting the maximal gain across the
transformation. Krueger & Memisevic (2015) attempt to
1
École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Montréal, Canada
3
CHUM Research Center, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Eugene Vorontsov <eugene.vorontsov@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

stabilize the norm of propagating signals directly by penalizing differences in successive norm pairs in the forward
pass and Pascanu et al. (2013) propose to penalize successive gradient norm pairs in the backward pass. These regularizers affect the network parameterization with respect to
the data instead of penalizing weights directly.
Both expansivity and contractivity of linear transformations can also be limited by more tightly bounding their
spectra. By limiting the transformations to be orthogonal,
their singular spectra are limited to unitary gain causing
the transformations to be norm-preserving. Le et al. (2015)
and Henaff et al. (2016) have respectively shown that identity initialization and orthogonal initialization can be beneficial. Arjovsky et al. (2015) have gone beyond initialization, building unitary recurrent neural network (RNN)
models with transformations that are unitary by construction which they achieved by composing multiple basic unitary transformations. The resulting transformations, for
some n-dimensional input, cover only some subset of possible n × n unitary matrices but appear to perform well on
simple tasks and have the benefit of having low complexity
in memory and computation.
The entire set of possible unitary or orthogonal parameterizations forms the Stiefel manifold. At a much higher
computational cost, gradient descent optimization directly
along this manifold can be done via geodesic steps (Nishimori, 2005; Tagare, 2011). Recent work (Wisdom et al.,
2016) has proposed the optimization of unitary matrices
along the Stiefel manifold using geodesic gradient descent.
To produce a full-capacity parameterization for unitary matrices they use some insights from Tagare (2011), combining the use of canonical inner products and Cayley transformations. Their experimental work indicates that full capacity unitary RNN models can solve the copy memory problem whereas both LSTM networks and restricted capacity
unitary RNN models having similar complexity appear unable to solve the task for a longer sequence length (T =
2000). (Harandi & Fernando, 2016) also find that the use of
fully connected “Stiefel layers” improves the performance
of some convolutional neural networks.
We seek to gain a new perspective on this line of research by exploring the optimization of real valued matrices within a configurable margin about the Stiefel mani-

