Combined Group and Exclusive Sparsity for Deep Neural Networks

Jaehong Yoon 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1 2

Abstract
The number of parameters in a deep neural network is usually very large, which helps with its
learning capacity but also hinders its scalability and practicality due to memory/time inefficiency and overfitting. To resolve this issue,
we propose a sparsity regularization method that
exploits both positive and negative correlations
among the features to enforce the network to be
sparse, and at the same time remove any redundancies among the features to fully utilize the
capacity of the network. Specifically, we propose to use an exclusive sparsity regularization
based on (1, 2)-norm, which promotes competition for features between different weights, thus
enforcing them to fit to disjoint sets of features.
We further combine the exclusive sparsity with
the group sparsity based on (2, 1)-norm, to promote both sharing and competition for features
in training of a deep neural network. We validate our method on multiple public datasets, and
the results show that our method can obtain more
compact and efficient networks while also improving the performance over the base networks
with full weights, as opposed to existing sparsity
regularizations that often obtain efficiency at the
expense of prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown tremendous success
in recent years, achieving near-human performances on
tasks such as visual recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016). One of the key factors in this success of deep network is its expressive power,
which is made possible by multiple layers of non-linear
transformations. However, this expressive power comes
at a cost: increased number of parameters. Due to large
1
UNIST, Ulsan, South Korea 2 AITrics, Seoul, South Korea.
Correspondence to: Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang@unist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

number of parameters, deep networks require large amount
of memory and computation power to train. Further, large
number of parameters also mean that the model is highly
susceptible to overfitting as well, if trained with insufficient data. To resolve such issues, researchers have sought
ways to make the model more compact and lightweight by
parameter reduction, via model compression (Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2014), or removing unnecessary
weights either by pruning (Reed, 1993; Han et al., 2015)
and `1-regularization (Collins & Kohli, 2014). However,
one of the main problems of these methods is that they often achieve such efficiency at the expense of accuracy.
How can we then obtain a compact deep network without
sacrificing the prediction accuracy? One way to achieve
this goal is better utilizing the capacity of the network, by
reducing redundancies in the model parameters. In the optimal case, the weights at each layer will be fully orthogonal to each other, and thus forming an orthogonal basis
set. However, since this is a difficult constraint to satisfy, in practice, such constraint is given only at the initialization stage (Saxe et al., 2014), or enforced implicitly
through regularizations such as dropout (Srivastava et al.,
2014) that prevents feature co-adaption. Contrary to these
existing approaches, we propose to impose an explicit regularization to reduce redundancies. Our idea is to enforce
network weights at each layer to fit to different sets of input
features as much as possible. This exclusive feature learning is implemented by the exclusive sparsity regularization
based on (1, 2)-norm (Zhou et al., 2010; Kong et al., 2014),
which basically promotes network weights at each layer to
compete for few meaningful features from the lower layer.
However, it is not practical nor desirable to restrict each
weight to be completely disjoint from others as some features still need to be shared. For example, if the lowerlayer feature is a wheel, and the upper layer weights are
features describing car and bicycle respectively, then the
two upper layer weights should share the common feature
that describes the wheel. Thus, we also allow for sharing
of some important features, by introducing an additional
group sparsity regularizer based on (2, 1)-norm and combine the two regularization terms, balancing their effect at
each layer of the network to adjust the degree of feature
sharing and competition.

