Analysis and Optimization of Graph Decompositions by Lifted Multicuts

Andrea Horňáková * 1 Jan-Hendrik Lange * 1 Bjoern Andres 1

Abstract
We study the set of all decompositions (clusterings) of a graph through its characterization as
a set of lifted multicuts. This leads us to practically relevant insights related to the definition
of classes of decompositions by must-join and
must-cut constraints and related to the comparison of clusterings by metrics. To find optimal
decompositions defined by minimum cost lifted
multicuts, we establish some properties of some
facets of lifted multicut polytopes, define efficient
separation procedures and apply these in a branchand-cut algorithm.

1. Introduction
This article is about the set of all decompositions (clusterings) of a graph. A decomposition of a graph G = (V, E)
is a partition Π of the node set V such that, for every subset
U ∈ Π of nodes, the subgraph of G induced by U is connected. An example is depicted in Fig. 1. Decompositions
of a graph arise in practice, as feasible solutions of clustering problems, and in theory, as a generalization of partitions
of a set, to which they specialize for complete graphs.
We study the set of all decompositions of a graph through
its characterization as a set of multicuts. A multicut of G is
a subset M ⊆ E of edges such that, for every (chordless)
cycle C ⊆ E of G, we have |M ∩ C| 6= 1. An example is
depicted in Fig. 1. For any graph G, a one-to-one relation
exists between the decompositions and the multicuts of G.
The multicut induced by a decomposition is the set of edges
that straddle distinct components. Multicuts are useful in
the study of decompositions as the characteristic function
x ∈ {0, 1}E of a multicut x−1 (1) of G makes explicit, for
every pair {v, w} ∈ E of neighboring nodes, whether v and
w are in distinct components. To make explicit also for nonneighboring nodes, specifically, for all {v, w} ∈ E 0 with
*

Equal contribution 1 Max Planck Institute for Informatics,
Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Bjoern Andres
<andres@mpi-inf.mpg.de>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

Figure 1. A decomposition of a graph is a partition of the node
set into connected subsets. Above, one decomposition is depicted
in green. Any decomposition is characterized by the set of those
edges (depicted as dotted lines) that straddle distinct components.
Such edge sets are precisely the multicuts of the graph.


E ⊆ E 0 ⊆ V2 , whether v and w are in distinct components,
we define a lifting of the multicuts of G to multicuts of
G0 = (V, E 0 ). The multicuts of G0 lifted from G are still in
one-to-one relation with the decompositions of G. Yet, they
are a more expressive model of these decompositions than
the multicuts of G. We apply lifted multicuts in three ways:
Firstly, we study problems related to the definition of a class
of decompositions by must-cut or must-join constraints (Section 4). Such constraints have applications where defining
a decomposition totally is an ambiguous and tedious task,
e.g., in the field of image segmentation. The first problem
is to decide whether a set of such constraints is consistent,
i.e., whether a decomposition of the given graph exists that
satisfies the constraints. We show that this decision problem is NP-complete in general and can be solved efficienty
for a subclass of constraints. The second problem is to
decide whether a consistent set of must-join and must-cut
constraints is maximally specific, i.e., whether no such constraint can be added without changing the set of decompositions that satisfy the constraints. We show that this decision
problem is NP-hard in general and can be solved efficienty
for a subclass of constraints. This finding is relevant for
comparing the classes of decompositions definable by mustjoin and must-cut constraints by certain metrics, which is
the next topic.
As a second application of lifted multicuts, we study the
comparison of decompositions and classes of decompositions by metrics (Section 5). To obtain a metric on the set of
all decompositions of a given graph, we define a metric on a
set of lifted multicuts that characterize these decompositions.

