Deep Voice: Real-time Neural Text-to-Speech
Sercan Ö. Arık * 1 Mike Chrzanowski * 1 Adam Coates * 1 Gregory Diamos * 1 Andrew Gibiansky * 1
Yongguo Kang * 2 Xian Li * 2 John Miller * 1 Andrew Ng * 1 Jonathan Raiman * 1 Shubho Sengupta * 1
Mohammad Shoeybi * 1

Abstract
We present Deep Voice, a production-quality
text-to-speech system constructed entirely from
deep neural networks. Deep Voice lays the
groundwork for truly end-to-end neural speech
synthesis.
The system comprises five major building blocks: a segmentation model for
locating phoneme boundaries, a grapheme-tophoneme conversion model, a phoneme duration
prediction model, a fundamental frequency prediction model, and an audio synthesis model.
For the segmentation model, we propose a novel
way of performing phoneme boundary detection
with deep neural networks using connectionist
temporal classification (CTC) loss. For the audio synthesis model, we implement a variant
of WaveNet that requires fewer parameters and
trains faster than the original. By using a neural network for each component, our system is
simpler and more flexible than traditional text-tospeech systems, where each component requires
laborious feature engineering and extensive domain expertise. Finally, we show that inference
with our system can be performed faster than real
time and describe optimized WaveNet inference
kernels on both CPU and GPU that achieve up to
400x speedups over existing implementations.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing artificial human speech from text, commonly
known as text-to-speech (TTS), is an essential component
in many applications such as speech-enabled devices, navigation systems, and accessibility for the visually-impaired.
*

Listed alphabetically 1 Baidu Silicon Valley Artificial Intelligence Lab, 1195 Bordeaux Dr. Sunnyvale, CA 94089 2 Baidu
Corporation, No. 10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing 100193,
China. Correspondence to: Andrew Gibiansky <gibianskyandrew@baidu.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Fundamentally, it allows human-technology interaction
without requiring visual interfaces. Modern TTS systems
are based on complex, multi-stage processing pipelines,
each of which may rely on hand-engineered features and
heuristics. Due to this complexity, developing new TTS
systems can be very labor intensive and difficult.
Deep Voice is inspired by traditional text-to-speech
pipelines and adopts the same structure, while replacing all
components with neural networks and using simpler features: first we convert text to phoneme and then use an
audio synthesis model to convert linguistic features into
speech (Taylor, 2009). Unlike prior work (which uses
hand-engineered features such as spectral envelope, spectral parameters, aperiodic parameters, etc.), our only features are phonemes with stress annotations, phoneme durations, and fundamental frequency (F0). This choice of
features makes our system more readily applicable to new
datasets, voices, and domains without any manual data annotation or additional feature engineering. We demonstrate
this claim by retraining our entire pipeline without any hyperparameter changes on an entirely new dataset that contains solely audio and unaligned textual transcriptions and
generating relatively high quality speech. In a conventional
TTS system this adaptation requires days to weeks of tuning, whereas Deep Voice allows you to do it in only a few
hours of manual effort and the time it takes models to train.
Real-time inference is a requirement for a productionquality TTS system; without it, the system is unusable for
most applications of TTS. Prior work has demonstrated that
a WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016) can generate close to
human-level speech. However, WaveNet inference poses a
daunting computational problem due to the high-frequency,
autoregressive nature of the model, and it has been hitherto
unknown whether such models can be used in a production system. We answer this question in the affirmative and
demonstrate efficient, faster-than-real-time WaveNet inference kernels that produce high-quality 16 kHz audio and
realize a 400X speedup over previous WaveNet inference
implementations (Paine et al., 2016).

