ChoiceRank: Identifying Preferences from Node Traffic in Networks

Lucas Maystre 1 Matthias Grossglauser 1

Abstract
Understanding how users navigate in a network
is of high interest in many applications. We consider a setting where only aggregate node-level
traffic is observed and tackle the task of learning edge transition probabilities. We cast it as
a preference learning problem, and we study a
model where choices follow Luce’s axiom. In
this case, the O(n) marginal counts of node visits
are a sufficient statistic for the O(n2 ) transition
probabilities. We show how to make the inference
problem well-posed regardless of the network’s
structure, and we present ChoiceRank, an iterative
algorithm that scales to networks that contains billions of nodes and edges. We apply the model to
two clickstream datasets and show that it successfully recovers the transition probabilities using
only the network structure and marginal (nodelevel) traffic data. Finally, we also consider an
application to mobility networks and apply the
model to one year of rides on New York City’s
bicycle-sharing system.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of estimating click probabilities for
links between pages of a website, given a hyperlink graph
and aggregate statistics on the number of times each page
has been visited. Naively, one might expect that the probability of clicking on a particular link should be roughly
proportional to the traffic of the link’s target. However, this
neglects important structural effects: a page’s traffic is influenced by a) the number of incoming links, b) the traffic at
the pages that link to it, and c) the traffic absorbed by competing links. In order to successfully infer click probabilities,
it is therefore necessary to disentangle the preference for
a page (i.e., the intrinsic propensity of a user to click on a
link pointing to it) from the page’s visibility (the exposure
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL,
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Lucas Maystre <lucas.maystre@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

it gets from pages linking to it). Building upon recent work
by Kumar et al. (2015), we present a statistical framework
that tackles a general formulation of the problem: given a
network (representing possible transitions between nodes)
and the marginal traffic at each node, recover the transition
probabilities. This problem is relevant to a number of scenarios (in social, information or transportation networks)
where transition data is not available due to, e.g., privacy
concerns or monitoring costs.
We begin by postulating the following model of traffic. Users
navigate from node to node along the edges of the network
by making a choice between adjacent nodes at each step,
reminiscent of the random-surfer model introduced by Brin
& Page (1998). Choices are assumed to be independent and
generated according to Luce’s model (Luce, 1959): each
node in the network is chararacterized by a latent strength
parameter, and (stochastic) choice outcomes tend to favor
nodes with greater strengths. In this model, estimating the
transition probabilities amounts to estimating the strength
parameters. Unlike the setting in which choice models are
traditionally studied (Train, 2009; Maystre & Grossglauser,
2015; Vojnovic & Yun, 2016), we do not observe distinct
choices among well-identified sets of alternatives. Instead,
we only have access to aggregate, marginal statistics about
the traffic at each node in the network. In this setting, we
make the following contributions.
1. We observe that marginal per-node traffic is a sufficient
statistic for the strength parameters. That is, the parameters can be inferred from marginal traffic data without
any loss of information.
2. We show that if the parameters are endowed with a
prior distribution, the inference problem becomes wellposed regardless of the network structure. This is a
crucial step in making the framework applicable to
real-world datasets.
3. We show that model inference can scale to very
large datasets. We present an iterative EM-type inference algorithm that enables a remarkably efficient
implementation—each iteration requires the computational equivalent of two iterations of PageRank.
We evaluate two aspects of our framework using real-world
networks. We begin by demonstrating that local preferences

