Robust Guarantees of Stochastic Greedy Algorithms

Avinatan Hassidim 1 Yaron Singer 2

Abstract
In this paper we analyze the robustness of
stochastic variants of the greedy algorithm for
submodular maximization. Our main result
shows that for maximizing a monotone submodular function under a cardinality constraint, iteratively selecting an element whose marginal contribution is approximately maximal in expectation is a sufficient condition to obtain the optimal approximation guarantee with exponentially
high probability, assuming the cardinality is sufficiently large. One consequence of our result is
that the linear-time S TOCHASTIC -G REEDY algorithm recently proposed in (Mirzasoleiman et al.,
2015) achieves the optimal running time while
maintaining an optimal approximation guarantee. We also show that high probability guarantees cannot be obtained for stochastic greedy algorithms under matroid constraints, and prove an
approximation guarantee which holds in expectation. In contrast to the guarantees of the greedy
algorithm, we show that the approximation ratio
of stochastic local search is arbitrarily bad, with
high probability, as well as in expectation.

1. Introduction
In this paper we study the guarantees of stochastic optimization algorithms for submodular maximization. A function f : 2N → R is submodular if it exhibits a diminishing
returns property. That is, for any S ⊆ T ⊆ N and any
a∈
/ T , the function respects:
fS (a) ≥ fT (a)
where fH (x) denotes the marginal contribution of an element x ∈ N to a set H ⊆ N , i.e. fH (x) = f (H ∪ x) −
*

1
Equal contribution
Bar Ilan University and
Google 2 Harvard University.
Correspondence to:
Avinatan Hassidim <avinatan@cs.biu.ac.il>, Yaron Singer
<yaron@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

f (H). Many fundamental measures such as entropy, diversity, and clustering can be modeled as submodular functions, and as a result submodular optimization is heavily
studied in machine learning for well over a decade now.
It is well known that for the problem of maximizing a
monotone (S ⊆ T =⇒ f (S) ≤ f (T )) submodular function under a cardinality constraint, the celebrated greedy algorithm which iteratively adds the element whose marginal
contribution is maximal, obtains an approximation guarantee of 1 − 1/e (Nemhauser et al., 1978). This is optimal unless P=NP (Feige) or alternatively, assuming polynomiallymany function evaluations (Nemhauser & Wolsey, 1978).
In recent years, there have been various adaptations of
the classic greedy algorithm to allow for scalable, distributed, and noise-resilient optimization. Most notably,
the S TOCHASTIC -G REEDY algorithm recently proposed
by (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015) is a linear-time algorithm
which at every step takes an element, which approximates
in expectation the element with the maximal marginal contribution. Mirzasoleiman et al. show that S TOCHASTIC G REEDY gives an approximation guarantee which is arbitrarily close to 1 − 1/e in expectation, and does very well
in practice (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2015; Lucic et al., 2016).
Variants of this algorithm are used in clustering (Malioutov
et al., 2016), sparsification (Lindgren et al., 2016), Gaussian RBF kernels (Sharma et al., 2015), sensing (Li et al.,
2016), and social data analysis (Zhuang et al., 2016).
More generally, a greedy algorithm that iteratively adds elements that are only approximately maximal in expectation, may not necessarily be due to a design decision, but
rather an artifact of its application on large and noisy data
sets (see e.g. (Azaria et al., 2013)). One can model this
uncertainty with a probability distribution D: at every iteration, a value ξ ∼ D is being sampled, and the greedy
algorithm adds an element whose marginal contribution is
a ξ-approximation to the maximal marginal contribution.
In general, we refer to an algorithm that iteratively adds an
element whose marginal contribution is approximately optimal in expectation as a stochastic greedy algorithm. It is
easy to show that stochastic greedy algorithms give an approximation ratio of 1 − 1/eµ in expectation, where µ is
the mean of the distribution modeling the uncertainty. This
however is a weak guarantee as it leaves a non-negligible

