The Shattered Gradients Problem:
If resnets are the answer, then what is the question?
David Balduzzi 1 Marcus Frean 1 Lennox Leary 1 JP Lewis 1 2 Kurt Wan-Duo Ma 1 Brian McWilliams 3

Abstract
A long-standing obstacle to progress in deep
learning is the problem of vanishing and exploding gradients. Although, the problem has
largely been overcome via carefully constructed
initializations and batch normalization, architectures incorporating skip-connections such as
highway and resnets perform much better than
standard feedforward architectures despite wellchosen initialization and batch normalization. In
this paper, we identify the shattered gradients
problem. Specifically, we show that the correlation between gradients in standard feedforward networks decays exponentially with depth
resulting in gradients that resemble white noise
whereas, in contrast, the gradients in architectures with skip-connections are far more resistant to shattering, decaying sublinearly. Detailed
empirical evidence is presented in support of the
analysis, on both fully-connected networks and
convnets. Finally, we present a new “looks linear” (LL) initialization that prevents shattering,
with preliminary experiments showing the new
initialization allows to train very deep networks
without the addition of skip-connections.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved outstanding performance (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015; He
et al., 2016b). Reducing the tendency of gradients to vanish or explode with depth (Hochreiter, 1991; Bengio et al.,
1994) has been essential to this progress.
Combining careful initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010;
*

1
Equal contribution
Victoria University of Welling2
ton, New Zealand SEED, Electronic Arts 3 Disney Research, Zürich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: David
Balduzzi <dbalduzzi@gmail.com>,
Brian McWilliams
<brian@disneyresearch.com>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

He et al., 2015) with batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy,
2015) bakes two solutions to the vanishing/exploding gradient problem into a single architecture. The He initialization ensures variance is preserved across rectifier layers, and batch normalization ensures that backpropagation
through layers is unaffected by the scale of the weights
(Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015).
It is perhaps surprising then that residual networks (resnets)
still perform so much better than standard architectures
when networks are sufficiently deep (He et al., 2016a;b).
This raises the question: If resnets are the solution, then
what is the problem? We identify the shattered gradient
problem: a previously unnoticed difficulty with gradients
in deep rectifier networks that is orthogonal to vanishing
and exploding gradients. The shattering gradients problem
is that, as depth increases, gradients in standard feedforward networks increasingly resemble white noise. Resnets
dramatically reduce the tendency of gradients to shatter.
Our analysis applies at initialization. Shattering should decrease during training. Understanding how shattering affects training is an important open problem.
Terminology. We refer to networks without skip connections as feedforward nets—in contrast to residual nets
(resnets) and highway nets. We distinguish between the
real-valued output of a rectifier and its binary activation:
the activation is 1 if the output is positive and 0 otherwise.
1.1. The Shattered Gradients Problem
The first step is to simply look at the gradients of neural networks. Gradients are averaged over minibatches, depend
on both the loss and the random sample from the data, and
are extremely high-dimensional, which introduces multiple
confounding factors and makes visualization difficult (but
see section 4). We therefore construct a minimal model
designed to eliminate these confounding factors. The minimal model is a neural network fW : R ! R taking scalars
to scalars; each hidden layer contains N = 200 rectifier
neurons. The model is not intended to be applied to real
data. Rather, it is a laboratory where gradients can be isolated and investigated.
We are interested in how the gradient varies, at initializa-

