Minimizing Trust Leaks for Robust Sybil Detection
János Höner 1 2 Shinichi Nakajima 2 3 Alexander Bauer 2 3 Klaus-Robert Müller 2 3 4 5 Nico Görnitz 2

Abstract
Sybil detection is a crucial task to protect online
social networks (OSNs) against intruders who
try to manipulate automatic services provided by
OSNs to their customers. In this paper, we first
discuss the robustness of graph-based Sybil detectors SybilRank and Integro and refine theoretically their security guarantees towards more realistic assumptions. After that, we formally introduce adversarial settings for the graph-based
Sybil detection problem and derive a corresponding optimal attacking strategy by exploitation of
trust leaks. Based on our analysis, we propose
transductive Sybil ranking (TSR), a robust extension to SybilRank and Integro that directly
minimizes trust leaks. Our empirical evaluation
shows significant advantages of TSR over stateof-the-art competitors on a variety of attacking
scenarios on artificially generated data and realworld datasets.

1. Introduction
The sheer number and variety of online social networks
(OSN) today is staggering. Although the purpose and the
shaping of these networks vary generously, the majority of
them has one aspect in common: the value of most OSNs
is in its user data and the information that one can infer
from the data. This, unfortunately, results in a big incentive for culprits to intrude OSNs and manipulate their data.
One popular method of intruding and attacking an OSN
is referred to as Sybil attack, where the intruder creates a
whole bunch of fake (Sybil) accounts that are all under the
attacker’s control. The intruder’s influence over the OSN
1
MathPlan, 10587 Berlin, Germany 2 Machine Learning Group,
Berlin Institute of Technology, 10587 Berlin, Germany 3 Berlin
Big Data Center 4 Max Planck Society 5 Korea University.
Correspondence to: János Höner <janos.hoener@campus.tuberlin.de>, Nico Görnitz <nico.goernitz@tu-berlin.de>, KlausRobert Müller <klaus-robert.mueller@tu-berlin.de>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

is multiplied by the number of accounts created, which
opens possibilities of manipulation typically for gaining
some monetary advantage in the end.
The term, Sybil attack, was coined by Douceur (2002) who
showed that this kind of attack will be always possible unless a trusted agency certifies identities. Unfortunately, this
approach is orthogonal to how OSNs grow. The threshold of registration must be as low as possible to attract as
many new users as possible. On the other hand, Sybil attacks can damage the value of OSNs significantly, which
has been proved by the fact that Facebook shares dropped
in 2012 after the company revealed that a significant share
of its network is made up by Sybil accounts (The Associated Press, 2012).
There exists a number of “classic” feature-based solutions
(Stein et al., 2011; Cao et al., 2012; Stringhini et al., 2010;
Yang et al., 2014). However, up until now, it remains an unsolved problem as those methods can be evaded by cleverly
designed attacking schemes (Bilge et al., 2009; Boshmaf
et al., 2011; Wagner et al., 2012; Lowd & Meek, 2005) and
manual detection is too expensive, time consuming, and
simply unfeasible in large OSNs (Cao et al., 2012).
More recent graph-based Sybil detection methods assume
that honest (non-Sybil) nodes form a strongly connected
subgraph and attackers can establish a limited amount of
edges which leads to a sparse cut between the honest subraph and the Sybil nodes. The majority of the graph-based
methods define trusted nodes, which the defender is sure to
be honest, and use random walks (Yu et al., 2010; Danezis,
2009; Cao et al., 2012) or other typical graph-based algorithms like breadth-first-search (Tran et al., 2011) and belief propagation (Gong et al., 2014) to convey trust from the
trusted nodes. A node is identified as Sybil if sufficient ammount of trust is not delivered to it. Among random-walk
based approaches, SybilRank is known to be the state-ofthe-art, of which the performance is theoretically guaranteed (Cao et al., 2012). However, the theory holds only
under unrealistic topological assumptions of the network.
In this paper, we show that the same theoretical guarantee
can be obtained under more realistic situations.
We further dicuss the robustness of the random walk approach against adversarial strategies. To this end, we formally introduce adversarial settings for graph-based Sybil

