Efficient Regret Minimization in Non-Convex Games

Elad Hazan 1 Karan Singh 1 Cyril Zhang 1

Abstract
We consider regret minimization in repeated
games with non-convex loss functions. Minimizing the standard notion of regret is computationally intractable. Thus, we define a natural notion of regret which permits efficient optimization and generalizes offline guarantees for convergence to an approximate local optimum. We
give gradient-based methods that achieve optimal
regret, which in turn guarantee convergence to
equilibrium in this framework.

1. Introduction
Repeated games with non-convex utility functions serve to
model many natural settings, such as multiplayer games
with risk-averse players and adversarial (e.g. GAN) training. However, standard regret minimization and equilibria
computation with general non-convex losses are computationally hard. This paper studies computationally tractable
notions of regret minimization and equilibria in non-convex
repeated games.
Efficient online learning algorithms are intimately connected to convexity. This connection is natural, since in
a very broad sense1 , convexity captures efficient computation in continuous mathematical optimization.
The recent success of non-convex learning models, notably deep neural networks, motivates the need for efficient non-convex optimization. Since the latter is NP-hard
in general, efficient optimization methods for non-convex
optimization are designed to find local minima of varied
quality. Stochastic gradient-based methods for non-convex
optimization are currently state-of-the-art in training nonconvex machines.
1
Computer Science, Princeton University.
Correspondence to:
Elad Hazan <ehazan@princeton.edu>,
Karan Singh <karans@princeton.edu>,
Cyril Zhang
<cyril.zhang@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
1
Though by no means exclusively, PCA and other spectral
methods being a notable exception.

In this paper we investigate the generalization of the nonconvex statistical, or batch, learning model to online learning. The main question we ask is what kind of guarantees can be obtained efficiently in an adversarial non-convex
scenario.
After briefly discussing why standard regret is not a suitable metric of performance, we introduce and motivate local regret, a surrogate for regret to the non-convex world.
We then proceed to give efficient algorithms for nonconvex online learning with optimal guarantees for this new
objective. In analogy with the convex setting, we discuss
the way our framework captures the offline and stochastic
cases. In the final section, we describe a game-theoretic solution concept which is intuitively appealing, and, in contrast to Nash equilibria, efficiently attainable by simple algorithms.
1.1. Related work
The field of online learning is by now rich with a diverse
set of algorithms for extremely general scenarios, see e.g.
(Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006). For bounded cost functions over a bounded domain, it is well known that versions
of the multiplicative weights method gives near-optimal regret bounds (Cover, 1991; Vovk, 1990; Arora et al., 2012).
Despite the tremendous generality in terms of prediction,
the multiplicative weights method in its various forms
yields only exponential-time algorithms for these general
scenarios. This is inevitable, since regret minimization implies optimization, and general non-convex optimization is
NP-hard. Convex forms of regret minimization have dominated the learning literature in recent years due to the fact
that they allow for efficient optimization, see e.g. (Hazan,
2016; Shalev-Shwartz, 2011).
Non-convex mathematical optimization algorithms typically find a local optimum. For smooth optimization,
gradient-based methods are known to find a point with gradient of squared norm at most ε in O( 1ε ) iterations (Nesterov, 2004).2 A rate of O( ε12 ) is known for stochastic
2
We note here that we measure the squared norm of the
gradient, since it is more compatible with convex optimization.
The mathematical optimization literature sometimes measures the
norm of the gradient without squaring it.

