Online Learning with Local Permutations and Delayed Feedback

Ohad Shamir * 1 Liran Szlak * 1

Abstract
We propose an Online Learning with Local Permutations (OLLP) setting, in which the learner
is allowed to slightly permute the order of the
loss functions generated by an adversary. On one
hand, this models natural situations where the exact order of the learner’s responses is not crucial,
and on the other hand, might allow better learning and regret performance, by mitigating highly
adversarial loss sequences. Also, with random
permutations, this can be seen as a setting interpolating between adversarial and stochastic
losses. In this paper, we consider the applicability of this setting to convex online learning with
delayed feedback, in which the feedback on the
prediction made in round t arrives with some delay τ . With such delayed feedback, the best
√ possible regret bound is well-known to be O( τ T ).
We prove that by being able to permute losses by
a distance of at most M√(for M ≥
pτ ), the regret
can be improved to O( T (1 + τ 2 /M )), using a Mirror-Descent based algorithm which can
be applied for both Euclidean and non-Euclidean
geometries. We also prove a lower bound, showing that for M <√τ /3, it is impossible to improve
the standard O( τ T ) regret bound by more than
constant factors. Finally, we provide some experiments validating the performance of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Online learning is traditionally posed as a repeated game
where the learner has to provide predictions on an arbitrary sequence of loss functions, possibly even generated
adversarially. Although it is often possible to devise algorithms with non-trivial regret guarantees, these have to cope
with arbitrary loss sequences, which makes them conserva*

Equal contribution 1 Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
Correspondence to:
Liran Szlak <liran.szlak@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

tive and in some cases inferior to algorithms not tailored to
cope with worst-case behavior. Indeed, an emerging line of
work considers how better online learning can be obtained
on “easy” data, which satisfies some additional assumptions. Some examples include losses which are sampled
i.i.d. from some distribution, change slowly in time, have
a consistently best-performing predictor across time, have
some predictable structure, mix adversarial and stochastic
losses, etc. (e.g. (Sani et al., 2014; Karnin and Anava,
2016; Bubeck and Slivkins, 2012; Seldin and Slivkins,
2014; Hazan and Kale, 2010; Chiang et al., 2012; Steinhardt and Liang, 2014; Hazan and Kale, 2011; Rakhlin and
Sridharan, 2013; Seldin and Slivkins, 2014)).
In this paper, we take a related but different direction:
Rather than explicitly excluding highly adversarial loss sequences, we consider how slightly perturbing them can mitigate their worst-case behavior, and lead to improved performance. Conceptually, this resembles smoothed analysis (Spielman and Teng, 2004), in which one considers the
worst-case performance of some algorithm, after performing some perturbation to their input. The idea is that if the
worst-case instances are isolated and brittle, then a perturbation will lead to easier instances, and better reflect the
attainable performance in practice.
Specifically, we propose a setting, in which the learner
is allowed to slightly reorder the sequence of losses generated by an adversary: Assuming the adversary chooses
losses h1 , . . . , hT , and before any losses are revealed, the
learner may choose a permutation σ on {1, . . . , T }, satisfying maxt |t − σ(t)| ≤ M for some parameter M ,
and then play a standard online learning game on losses
hσ(1) , . . . , hσ(T ) . We denote this as the Online Learning
with Local Permutations (OLLP) setting. Here, M controls
the amount of power given to the learner: M = 0 means
that no reordering is performed, and the setting is equivalent to standard adversarial online learning. At the other
extreme, M = T means that the learner can reorder the
losses arbitrarily. For example, the learner may choose to
order the losses uniformly at random, making it a quasistochastic setting (the only difference compared to i.i.d.
losses is that they are sampled without-replacement rather
than with-replacement).
We argue that allowing the learner some flexibility in the

