On Context-Dependent Clustering of Bandits

Claudio Gentile 1 Shuai Li 2 Purushottam Kar 3 Alexandros Karatzoglou 4 Giovanni Zappella 5 Evans Etrue 1

Abstract
We investigate a novel cluster-of-bandit algorithm CAB for collaborative recommendation
tasks that implements the underlying feedback
sharing mechanism by estimating user neighborhoods in a context-dependent manner. CAB
makes sharp departures from the state of the art
by incorporating collaborative effects into inference, as well as learning processes in a manner
that seamlessly interleaves explore-exploit tradeoffs and collaborative steps. We prove regret
bounds for CAB under various data-dependent
assumptions which exhibit a crisp dependence on
the expected number of clusters over the users,
a natural measure of the statistical difficulty of
the learning task. Experiments on production and
real-world datasets show that CAB offers significantly increased prediction performance against
a representative pool of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In many prominent applications of bandit algorithms, such
as computational advertising, web-page content optimization and recommendation systems, one of the main sources
of information is embedded in the preference relationships
between users and the items served. Preference patterns,
emerging from clicks, views or purchase of items, are typically exploited through collaborative filtering techniques.
In fact, it is common knowledge in recommendation systems practice, that collaborative effects carry more information about user preferences than say, demographic metadata (Pilaszy & Tikk, 2009). Yet, as content recommendation functionalities are incorporated in diverse online services, the requirements differ vastly too. For instance, in a
1

DiSTA, University of Insubria, Italy 2 University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 3 IIT Kanpur, India 4 Telefonica Research, Spain 5 Amazon Dev Center, Germany (work done while
at the University of Milan, Italy). Correspondence to: Claudio
Gentile <claudio.gentile@uninsubria.it>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

movie recommendation system, where the catalog is relatively static and ratings for items accumulate, one can easily deploy collaborative filtering methods such as matrix
factorization or restricted Boltzmann machines. However,
the same methods become practically impossible to use in
more dynamic environments such as in news or YouTube
video recommendation, where one has to deal with a nearcontinuous stream of new items to be recommended, along
with new users to be served. These dynamic environments
pose a dual challenge to recommendation methods: 1) How
to present the new items to the users (or, vice versa, which
items to present to new users), in order to optimally gather
preference information on the new content (exploration),
and 2) How to use all the available user-item preference information gathered so far (exploitation). Ideally, one would
like to exploit both the content information but also, and
more importantly, the collaborative effects that can be observed across users and items.
When the users to serve are many and the content universe
(or content popularity) changes rapidly over time, recommendation services have to show both strong adaptation
in matching user preferences and high degree of algorithmic scalability/responsiveness so as to allow effective online deployment. In typical scenarios like social networks,
where users are engaged in technology-mediated interactions influencing each other’s behavior, it is often possible
to single out a few groups or communities made up of users
sharing similar interests and/or behavior. Such communities are not static over time and, more often than not, are
clustered around specific content types, so that a given set
of users can in fact host a multiplex of interdependent communities depending on specific content items, which can
change dramatically on the fly. We call this multiplex of
interdependent clusterings over users induced by the content universe, a context-dependent clustering. In addition
to the above, the set of users itself can change over time,
for new users get targeted by the service, others may sign
out or unregister. Thus, a recommendation method has to
readily adapt to a changing set of both users and items.
In this paper, we introduce and analyze the CAB (ContextAware clustering of Bandits) algorithm, a simple and flexible algorithm rooted in the linear contextual bandit framework that does the above by incorporating collaborative effects which traditional approaches to contextual bandits ig-

