Unifying Task Specification in Reinforcement Learning
Martha White 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning tasks are typically specified as Markov decision processes. This formalism has been highly successful, though specifications often couple the dynamics of the environment and the learning objective. This lack of modularity can complicate generalization of the task
specification, as well as obfuscate connections
between different task settings, such as episodic
and continuing. In this work, we introduce the
RL task formalism, that provides a unification
through simple constructs including a generalization to transition-based discounting. Through a
series of examples, we demonstrate the generality
and utility of this formalism. Finally, we extend
standard learning constructs, including Bellman
operators, and extend some seminal theoretical
results, including approximation errors bounds.
Overall, we provide a well-understood and sound
formalism on which to build theoretical results
and simplify algorithm use and development.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning is a formalism for trial-and-error
interaction between an agent and an unknown environment.
This interaction is typically specified by a Markov decision
process (MDP), which contains a transition model, reward
model, and potentially discount parameters specifying a
discount on the sum of future values in the return. Domains
are typically separated into two cases: episodic problems
(finite horizon) and continuing problems (infinite horizon).
In episodic problems, the agent reaches some terminal state,
and is teleported back to a start state. In continuing problems, the agent interaction is continual, with a discount to
ensure a finite total reward (e.g., constant < 1).
This formalism has a long and successful tradition, but is
limited in the problems that can be specified. Progressively
there have been additions to specify a broader range of ob1
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University. Correspondence to: Martha White <martha@indiana.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017 by
the author(s).

jectives, including options (Sutton et al., 1999), state-based
discounting (Sutton, 1995; Sutton et al., 2011) and interest functions (Reza and Sutton, 2010; Sutton et al., 2016).
These generalizations have particularly been driven by offpolicy learning and the introduction of general value functions for Horde (Sutton et al., 2011; White, 2015), where
predictive knowledge can be encoded as more complex prediction and control tasks. Generalizations to problem specifications provide exciting learning opportunities, but can also
reduce clarity and complicate algorithm development and
theory. For example, options and general value functions
have significant overlap, but because of different terminology and formalization, the connections are not transparent.
Another example is the classic divide between episodic and
continuing problems, which typically require different convergence proofs (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996; Tsitsiklis
and Van Roy, 1997; Sutton et al., 2009) and different algorithm specifications.
In this work, we propose a formalism for reinforcement
learning task specification that unifies many of these generalizations. The focus of the formalism is to separate the specification of the dynamics of the environment and the specification of the objective within that environment. Though
natural, this represents a significant change in the way tasks
are currently specified in reinforcement learning and has
important ramifications for simplifying implementation, algorithm development and theory. The paper consists of two
main contributions. First, we demonstrate the utility of this
formalism by showing unification of previous tasks specified in reinforcement learning, including options, general
value functions and episodic and continuing, and further
providing case studies of utility. We demonstrate how to
specify episodic and continuing tasks with only modifications to the discount function, without the addition of states
and modifications to the underlying Markov decision process. This enables a unification that significantly simplifies
implementation and easily generalizes theory to cover both
settings. Second, we prove novel contraction bounds on the
Bellman operator for these generalized RL tasks, and show
that previous bounds for both episodic and continuing tasks
are subsumed by this more general result. Overall, our goal
is to provide an RL task formalism that requires minimal
modifications to previous task specification, with significant
gains in simplicity and unification across common settings.

