Optimal Densification for Fast and Accurate Minwise Hashing

Anshumali Shrivastava 1

Abstract
Minwise hashing is a fundamental and one of
the most successful hashing algorithm in the literature. Recent advances based on the idea of
densification (Shrivastava & Li, 2014a;c) have
shown that it is possible to compute k minwise hashes, of a vector with d nonzeros, in
mere (d + k) computations, a significant improvement over the classical O(dk). These advances have led to an algorithmic improvement
in the query complexity of traditional indexing
algorithms based on minwise hashing. Unfortunately, the variance of the current densification
techniques is unnecessarily high, which leads to
significantly poor accuracy compared to vanilla
minwise hashing, especially when the data is
sparse. In this paper, we provide a novel densification scheme which relies on carefully tailored
2-universal hashes. We show that the proposed
scheme is variance-optimal, and without losing
the runtime efficiency, it is significantly more accurate than existing densification techniques. As
a result, we obtain a significantly efficient hashing scheme which has the same variance and
collision probability as minwise hashing. Experimental evaluations on real sparse and highdimensional datasets validate our claims. We believe that given the significant advantages, our
method will replace minwise hashing implementations in practice.

speech, and text are quite popular (Broder, 1997; Fetterly
et al., 2003). Enriching features with co-occurrence information leads to blow up in the dimensionality. 5-grams
are common for text representations. With vocabulary
size of 106 , 5-grams representation requires dimensionality of 1030 . Representing genome sequences with features
consisting of 32-contiguous characters (or higher) (Ondov
et al., 2016) leads to around 432 = 264 dimensions.
To deal with the overwhelming dimensionality, there is an
increased emphasis on the use of hashing algorithms, such
as minwise hashing. Minwise hashing provides a convenient way to obtain a compact representation of the data,
without worrying about the actual dimensionality. These
compact representations are directly used in large scale
data processing systems for a variety of tasks.
Minwise hashing is defined for binary vectors. Binary vectors can also be equivalently viewed as sets, over the universe of all the features, containing only attributes corresponding to the non-zero entries. Minwise hashing belongs
to the Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) family (Broder
et al., 1998; Charikar, 2002). The method applies a random permutation (or random hash function) π : Ω → Ω,
on the given set S ⊂ Ω, and stores the minimum value after
the permutation mapping. Formally,
hπ (S) = min(π(S)).

Given sets S1 and S2 , it can be shown by elementary probability arguments that
P r(hπ (S1 ) = hπ (S2 )) =

1. Introduction and Motivation
Recent years have witnessed a dramatic increase in the dimensionality of modern datasets. (Weinberger et al., 2009)
show dataset with 16 trillion (1013 ) unique features. Many
studies have shown that the accuracy of models keeps
climbing slowly with exponential increase in dimensionality. Large dictionary based representation for images,
1
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Anshumali Shrivastava <anshumali@rice.edu>.

Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

(1)

|S1 ∩ S2 |
= R.
|S1 ∪ S2 |

(2)

The quantity
R=

|S1 ∩ S2 |
a
=
,
|S1 ∪ S2 |
f1 + f2 − a

(3)

is the well known Jaccard Similarity (or resemblance) R
which is the most popular similarity measure in information retrieval applications (Broder, 1997).
The probability of collision (equality of hash values), under minwise hashing, is equal to the similarity of interest
R. This particular property, also known as the LSH property (Indyk & Motwani, 1998; Charikar, 2002), makes minwise hash functions hπ suitable for creating hash buckets,

