Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks
Martin Arjovsky 1 Soumith Chintala 2 Léon Bottou 1 2

Abstract
We introduce a new algorithm named WGAN,
an alternative to traditional GAN training. In
this new model, we show that we can improve
the stability of learning, get rid of problems like
mode collapse, and provide meaningful learning
curves useful for debugging and hyperparameter
searches. Furthermore, we show that the corresponding optimization problem is sound, and
provide extensive theoretical work highlighting
the deep connections to different distances between distributions.

1. Introduction
The problem this paper is concerned with is that of unsupervised learning. Mainly, what does it mean to learn a
probability distribution? The classical answer to this is to
learn a probability density. This is often done by defining
a parametric family of densities (Pθ )θ∈Rd and finding the
one that maximized the likelihood on our data: if we have
real data examples {x(i) }m
i=1 , we would solve the problem
m

1 X
log Pθ (x(i) )
θ∈Rd m
i=1
max

If the real data distribution Pr admits a density and Pθ is the
distribution of the parametrized density Pθ , then, asymptotically, this amounts to minimizing the Kullback-Leibler
divergence KL(Pr kPθ ).
For this to make sense, we need the model density Pθ to
exist. This is not the case in the rather common situation
where we are dealing with distributions supported by low
dimensional manifolds. It is then unlikely that the model
manifold and the true distribution’s support have a nonnegligible intersection (see (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017)),
and this means that the KL distance is not defined (or simply infinite).
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NY 2 Facebook
AI Research, NY. Correspondence to: Martin Arjovsky <martinarjovsky@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

The typical remedy is to add a noise term to the model distribution. This is why virtually all generative models described in the classical machine learning literature include
a noise component. In the simplest case, one assumes a
Gaussian noise with relatively high bandwidth in order to
cover all the examples. It is well known, for instance, that
in the case of image generation models, this noise degrades
the quality of the samples and makes them blurry. For example, we can see in the recent paper (Wu et al., 2016)
that the optimal standard deviation of the noise added to
the model when maximizing likelihood is around 0.1 to
each pixel in a generated image, when the pixels were already normalized to be in the range [0, 1]. This is a very
high amount of noise, so much that when papers report the
samples of their models, they don’t add the noise term on
which they report likelihood numbers. In other words, the
added noise term is clearly incorrect for the problem, but is
needed to make the maximum likelihood approach work.
Rather than estimating the density of Pr which may not exist, we can define a random variable Z with a fixed distribution p(z) and pass it through a parametric function
gθ : Z → X (typically a neural network of some kind)
that directly generates samples following a certain distribution Pθ . By varying θ, we can change this distribution and
make it close to the real data distribution Pr . This is useful in two ways. First of all, unlike densities, this approach
can represent distributions confined to a low dimensional
manifold. Second, the ability to easily generate samples is
often more useful than knowing the numerical value of the
density (for example in image superresolution or semantic
segmentation when considering the conditional distribution
of the output image given the input image). In general, it
is computationally difficult to generate samples given an
arbitrary high dimensional density (Neal, 2001).
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2013) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) are well known examples of this
approach. Because VAEs focus on the approximate likelihood of the examples, they share the limitation of the standard models and need to fiddle with additional noise terms.
GANs offer much more flexibility in the definition of the
objective function, including Jensen-Shannon (Goodfellow
et al., 2014), and all f -divergences (Nowozin et al., 2016)
as well as some exotic combinations (Huszar, 2015). On

