Theoretical Properties for Neural Networks with Weight Matrices of Low
Displacement Rank

Liang Zhao 1 Siyu Liao 1 Yanzhi Wang 2 Zhe Li 2 Jian Tang 2 Bo Yuan 1

Abstract
Recently low displacement rank (LDR) matrices, or so-called structured matrices, have been
proposed to compress large-scale neural networks. Empirical results have shown that neural networks with weight matrices of LDR matrices, referred as LDR neural networks, can
achieve significant reduction in space and computational complexity while retaining high accuracy. We formally study LDR matrices in deep
learning. First, we prove the universal approximation property of LDR neural networks with
a mild condition on the displacement operators.
We then show that the error bounds of LDR neural networks are as efficient as general neural networks with both single-layer and multiple-layer
structure. Finally, we propose back-propagation
based training algorithm for general LDR neural
networks.

1. Introduction
Neural networks, especially large-scale deep neural networks, have made remarkable success in various applications such as computer vision, natural language processing, etc. (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)(Sutskever et al., 2014).
However, large-scale neural networks are both memoryintensive and computation-intensive, thereby posing severe challenges when deploying those large-scale neural network models on memory-constrained and energyconstrained embedded devices. To overcome these limitations, many studies and approaches, such as connection
pruning (Han et al., 2015)(Gong et al., 2014), low rank approximation (Denton et al., 2014)(Jaderberg et al., 2014),
sparsity regularization (Wen et al., 2016)(Liu et al., 2015)
Co-first authors: Liang Zhao and Siyu Liao. 1 The City University of New York, New York, New York, USA 2 Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Yuan
<byuan@ccny.cuny.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).

Figure 1. Examples of commonly used LDR (structured) matrices, i.e., circulant, Cauchy, Toeplitz, Hankel, and Vandermonde
matrices.

etc., have been proposed to reduce the model size of largescale (deep) neural networks.
LDR Construction and LDR Neural Networks: Among
those efforts, low displacement rank (LDR) construction is
a type of structure-imposing technique for network model
reduction and computational complexity reduction. By regularizing the weight matrices of neural networks using the
format of LDR matrices (when weight matrices are square)
or the composition of multiple LDR matrices (when weight
matrices are non-square), a strong structure is naturally imposed to the construction of neural networks. Since an
LDR matrix typically requires O(n) independent parameters and exhibits fast matrix operation algorithms (Pan,
2001), an immense space for network model and computational complexity reduction can be enabled. Pioneering
work in this direction (Cheng et al., 2015)(Sindhwani et al.,
2015) applied special types of LDR matrices (structured
matrices), such as circulant matrices and Toeplitz matrices,
for weight representation. Other types of LDR matrices exist such as Cauchy matrices, Vandermonde matrices, etc.,
as shown in Figure 1.
Benefits of LDR Neural Networks: Compared with other
types of network compression approaches, the LDR construction shows several unique advantages. First, unlike
heuristic weight-pruning methods (Han et al., 2015)(Gong
et al., 2014) that produce irregular pruned networks, the
LDR construction approach always guarantees the strong
structure of the trained network, thereby avoiding the stor-

